Christ's Tears FOR JERUSALEMS UNBELIEF AND RUIN.

NOW Humbly recommended to England's Consideration in this her day of Trial and
Danger.

By (...) Reverend and Learned Divine Mr. THEOPHILUS GALE.

LONDON, Printed for M. Widows at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

Preface.
IT is the Supreme Wisdom, Interest, and Perfection of Man, who is an
intelligent Being, to understand, and adhere unto his last End, and whatever
means conduce thereto: This is styled, Luke 19. 42. To know the things that
belong unto our peace. And the supreme end of our Great Lord, in espousing
Human Nature, was, to acquaint Sinners with the things that belong to their
peace, and bring them into an immediate Capacity for the Fruition of them. Is
it not then the highest piece of Folly, and Madness, for rational Creatures,
to shut their Eyes, and Hearts against that, which is their supreme Happiness?
Is there so much Beauty in the Deformity of Sin? So much Pleasure in the
Chains and Fetters of Satan? So much Liberty in the Vassalage, and Bondage of
Lusts? So much Content in the embraces of an heart-distracting World? So much
peace and ease in the stings, and troubles of a tormented Conscience? So much
life in the death of Sin, and Hell torments, as to make a rational soul amorous
of, and in love with them? If not, how comes it to pass, that men mind not
more the things that belong unto their peace? Was it ever known that any, but
mad men, would take delight to see their own heart-bloud gush out? Would any
but blind fools spurn at food, the most delicious, satisfying food, when
offered to their famished souls? May we not count such bewitched Sots, who
plot, and contrive, by all means possible, to ruin themselves? And yet, Lo! is
not this the Case of al such, who will not know, and embrace the things that
belong unto their peace, when offered to them? Alas! What a world of such mad,
and blind fools are there? Yea, how many great Professors, yea how many
Churches, fall under this black brand of Folly and Madness? Was not this
Jerusalem's sin and folly, for which she has paid so dear, for 1600 years? And
has Jerusalem been alone in this sin? Has not England also drank very deep of
this venomous, intoxicating Cup? And what may we expect but Jerusalem's
prodigious Ruins, unless we al make haste, to know and embrace the things
that belong unto our peace, before they are hid from our eyes?

The design therefore of this ensuing Discourse, is to awaken, and provoke
secure Unbelievers, and slumbering Professors, deeply to consider, and
cheerfully to embrace Evangelic offers of Life, and Grace, before it be too
late. And our First Book is wholly spent in the explication of our Lords
doleful Lamentation, Luke 19, 41. over Jerusalems Sins and Ruins. Wherein we
have endeavored to explicate, What were Jerusalem's Church-wasting Sins, and
Ruins, which our Lord here laments; in order to a Conviction of, and
Lamentation over our own Sins, and approaching Ruins, if not prevented by a
timous Repentance, and closing with the things of our peace.

And because Jerusalem's main Sin was Infidelity, this therefore is the chief
subject of what follows Book 2. Wherein we have endeavored to explicate the
black and prodigious Nature of Unbelief, in the several parts thereof; and that
in opposition to Faith, whereof it is a Privation. Wherein we have also opened
the Nature, and main essential Ingredients of Faith: which indeed comprehends
the chief vitals of Christianity; and therefore requires our most diligent
Attention, and curious Inquisition.

The next great and commun Head to be explicated is the Causes of Infidelity:
which will open to us, what a great Mystery of Iniquity lies at the Root of
Unbelief. Hence we are to proceed to its Aggravations, which will discover to us
the monstrous Magnitude of this sin. And thence follows the severe Punishment,
and Vengeance, which the righteous God inflicteth for this Sin of Infidelity.
These things will, if Providence favor, and assist our desires, be the subject
of several Discourses. Only, that I might not at present wholly frustrate the
Readers expectations, I have in the Corollaries, and Uses of the Second Book
given some Hints and Intimations of the chief Particulars, which I intend to
discourse of under the following Heads. As for the Form of the Discourse, I
think I may with Sincerity say, I have endeavored to suit it to my Matter. I
would hate sinful Affectation of Words, or Things, merely to please itching
curious spirits, as much as Hell. Yet if any words occur that may give luster
and efficace to the Truths discoursed of, I cannot think myself obliged to
reject them, because not so vulgar, as other words less proper are. Only, if
thou meet with any word beyond thy capacity to apprehend, remember that the
following word usually explains the same.

A TABLE OF CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem.
CHAP. I. An Explication of Luke 19. 41. Page 1 THe Contexture of the words,
Page 2. And when he was come near, 3. He beheld the City, 4, 5. And wept over
it. 6, 7, 8. Chap. 2. The most solemn Profession without Sincerity will not
satisfy Christ, 9 -- 13. Chap. 3. Previous, and General Observations, 13.
Chap. 4. Church-sins bring Church-ruines, 17. Evil of doing brings the evil of
suffering, 18. Sin in itself the worst evil. 19. Chap. 5. A numeration of
Jerusalem 's sins, 22. 1. Unbelief a Church-ruinating Sin, Ibid. 2. Carnal
Presumtion, 24. 3. Spiritual Pride, 27. 4. Carnal Security, 29-31. 5. Carnal
Confidence, 32. 6. Earthly-mindednes, Page 33. 7. Unfruitfulness, 34. 8.
Persecution of the Prophets, 35. 9. Want of Reformation, 36. 10. Impenitence,
37. 11. Apostasy, 38. Chap. 6. Divine wrath the effective Cause of Jerusalem
's Ruins. 40. The effects of Divine wrath on Jerusalem, 43. 1. Temporal
jugements, Ibid. 2. Spiritual jugements, 45, 46. Chap. 7. 1. The Qualities of
Christ's tears, 47. (1.) They are Divine, Ibid. (2.) Rational. (3.) Free. (4.)
Sincere, 48, 49. (5.) Spiritual. (6.) Generous. (7.) Humble, 49-51. (8.)
Pathetic. (9.) Sympathetic, 52, 53. (10.) Seasonable. (11.) Public, 54. 2. The
efficaces of Christ's Tears, 55. (1.) Prophetic. (2.) Instructive. (3.)
Exhortative. ib. (4.) Threatening. (5.) Intercessorie, 56. (6.) Influential.
(7.) Exemplary, 57, 58. Chap. 8. The Motives of Christ's Tears, 59. (1.) As a
Father. (2.) As an Husband, ibid. 60. (3.) As her Lord. (4.) As a Minister, 61,
62. (5.) Christ's natural relation to Jerusalem, 64. Chap. 9. Doctrinal
Corollaries, ibid. 1. Christ's Affections relative, ibid. 2. Christ's Affections
most pure, 65. 3. Christ's real Will to save sinners, ibid. 4. The Aggravations
of such as refuse Christ, 67 5. Man's Ruin from himself, 68. Use 1. Advice to
study Englands Sins, 69. Use 2. Mourn over Englands Sins and Miseries, 71.
Use 3. Caution against Church-sins, Page 74.
BOOK II. Wherein the Nature of Infidelity consists?
Chap. 1. The Explication of Luke 19. 42. 76. Chap. 2. Eighteen general
Observations drawn from Luke 19. 42. 86-98. Chap. 3. What the things of our
peace are, which men disbelieve, 99. 1. Unbelief as to the Scriptures in
general, 100. 2. Unbelief as to the Gospel, 104. 1. As to matters of Grace, 105.
(1.) The Realitie of Evangelic offers, 106. (2.) The freedom of the Covenant,
107. (3.) The Universality of its offers. 108. (4.) The Riches of Grace in the
Covenant, 109. (5.) The Immutabilitie of the Covenant, 111. 2. Unbelief as to
matters of Providence, 112-115. 3. Unbelief as to future Glory, ibid. The
formal object of Unbelief, 117. Chap. 4. Unbelief as opposed to the Assent of
Faith, 119. 1. Rejection of Divine Truths, 120. 2. Non-Attention to sacred
Notions, ibid. 3. Implicit Assent is Unbelief, 121. 4. When Assent is not
supernatural, 123. 5. When Assent is only superficial, 125. 6. When Assent is
not real, 126. 7. When Assent is not Spiritual, 128. 8. A general confused
Assent, 129. 9. A suspense douting Assent, 130-133. 10. An inevident, obscure
Assent, 133. 11. A legal Assent, 134. 12. A forced Assent, 135. 13. A
fluctuating Assent, 138. 14. An undervaluing Assent. 140. 15. A barren Assent.
141. Chap. 5. The real Objects of Infidelity, 142. Infidelity strikes at (1.)
God himself, 143. (2.) His Divine Attributes, Soveraintie, etc. 144. (3.)
Divine Providence. (4.) Ordinances, ib. Unbelief rejects Christ, 145. Unbelief
rejects Heaven, 146. The Acts of Unbelief. 1. Rejection of Christ, 147. (1.) By
open opposition of him, 148. (2.) By Dislikes of him, 149. (3.) By heart-Cavils
against him, 150. (4.) By not approving the reports of Christ, 151. (5.) By
Delays, as to a closure with him, 153. Chap. 6. The Wills defective reception of
Christ. 156. 1. As to the Object 1. in receiving a false Christ, 158. (1.) A
compound Christ, Ibid. (2.) A Divided Christ, 160. 2. The true Christ under
false respects, 163. (1.) In regard of Motives, Ibid. (2.) In regard of Christ's
Grandeur, 164. (3.) When Christ is not received as offered, 165. 2. The Defects
of the subject. (1.) When the Will is rotten, 166. (2.) When the Will is languid
and faint, 167. (3.) When the Will is only terrified, 169. Chapter 7. 3. Unbelief as
opposed to Adherence, 174. 4. Diffidence and Distrust, Page 178. 5.
Dissatisfaction of heart, 182. 6. The Disobedience of Unbelief, 185. 7.
Non-application of Christ's Grace, 189. 8. Putting far off Christ's coming, 190.
Chap. 8. Doctrinal Corollaries. Cor. 1. Almost-Believers may proceed very far,
and yet remain Infidels, 195. (1.) How far as to Assent, 196. (2.) How far as
to Consent, 197. Cor. 2. There is a boundless difference betwixt Saving Faith,
and Commun: As to 199. (1.) Knowledge, 200. (2.) Self-denial, 201. (3.) A legal
and evangelic spirit, 202. (4.) The Bent of the will toward Christ, 204. (5.)
Purifying the heart from Sin, 206. (6.) Transformation of the heart into the
Image of Christ, 207. (7.) The use of means, 208. (8.) The Foundation, 209.
(9.) The End and Rule, Ibid. (10.) Gods Faithfulness, ibid. Cor. 3. No middle
'twixt Faith and Unbelief, ib. Cor. 4. Saving Faith most rare, but Commun faith
most cheap. 211. Cor. 5. Believers have much Unbeief, 214. Cor. 6. Unbelief is
the greatest Sin, 217. Cor. 7. This justifies God in his greatest severitie
against Unbelievers, 221. Chap. 9. Practic Uses. Use, 1. Study the Mystery of
Infidelity, 224. Study the Causes of Infidelity, 227. (1.) Spiritual
darkness. (2.) Carnal reason, 228. (3.) Carnal Security. (4.) Self-love,
ibid. (5.) Spiritual Pride. (6.) Short-spiritednesse, 229. (7.) Beloved lusts,
Ibid. Use, 2. Of Lamentation and Humiliation for the prevalence of Infidelity,
230. Motives to humble our selves for Unbelief, 232. Use, 3. Of Examination,
whether our Faith be saving, or only commun; also how far we fall under
Infidelity, 233. Heart-examens by way of Soliloquie, 236. Use 4. Of
Exhortation to deal with Infidelite, as our worst enemy, 238. Use 5. Pursue
after Faith, as the most excellent and useful Grace, 245. The excellent effects
of Faith, 246. The opposite Qualities of Faith and Unbelief. 249
Scriptures Explicated.
Chap. Ver. Page. Genesis. 4. 7. 19. Deuteronomie. 10. 20. 174. 32. 34, 45. 38.
2 Samuel. 23. 5. 111. 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. 37. Job. 1. 20. 185. Psalms. 37.
1, 7. 187. 37. 5. 179. 63. 8. 175. 78. 34. 171. 78. 37. 178. 119. 11. 139. 119.
16. 138. Esaias. 2. 10. 32. 30. 13. 22. 42. ^^ 30. Jeremie. 3. 10. 169. 7. 4.
25. 8. 14, 15. 32. 31. 32. 61. Lamentations. 1. 9. 30. 1. 15. 41. 2. 1. 42. 2.
14. 26. 4. 16. 42. Hosea. 4. 16. 161. 11. 7. 178. Matthew. 6. 30, 31, 32. 113.
11. 6. 149. 19. 20, 21, 22. 159. Luke. 7. 29, 30. 152. 11. 41. 182. 12. 22-29.
114. 12. 29. 132, 14. 26, 33. 185. Luke. 19. 6. 171. 19. 41. 3, etc. 19. 42.
76, etc. 19. 44. 44. 20. 5. 151. 24. 45. 124. John. 1. 11. 61, 161. 3. 36. 286.
5. 38. 139. 5. 39. 129. 7. 28. 141. 10. 24. 132. 12. 12, 13. 10. Acts. 2. 41.
135. 17. 11. 137. Romans. 2. 17-20. 126. 4. 19, 20, 21. 131. 5. 20. 110. 10.
15, 16. 106. 1 Corinthians. 2. 14. 128. Galatians. 4. 9, 21. 184. Ephesians. 1.
13, 14. 191. Philippians. 3. 3. 183. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 117. Hebrews. 3.
12, 14. 175, 176. 4. 2. 135. 11. 1. 116. 12. 38, 39. 177. James. 2. 26. 142. 2
Peter 1. 9. 139.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 5. read pretensions.

P. 12. running title, r. without.

P. 23. l. 2. for ying r. lying.

P. 37. l. 28. r. (...).

P. 62. l. 1. after his own, put a Colon.

P. 78. l. 7. r. particle

P. 85. l. 21. for thenc r. thence.

P. 111. l. 21. r. whereon.

P. 144. l. 18. after under add the.

P. 178. l. 18. for me r. him.

P. 179. l. 11. r. (...)

P. 191. l. 7. r. (...): l. 16. r. (...).

P. 192. l. 2. r. (...).

P. 193. l. 1. for has leaning, read hastening.

BOOK I. A general account of Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem.
Luke 19. 41. And when he was come near he beheld the city, and wept over it.
CHAP. I. An Explication of the Text, Luke 19. 41.
AS Isreal's Temporal Benedictions were Symbolic Images, or Types of Spiritual
blessings, promissed to the believing seed of Abraham; so her Temporal
Jugements, were also Symbols, or Typic Shadows, of Spirtual Jugements,
threatened to, and inflicted on Evangelic Unbelievers.

And to confirm this, it is worth our observation, that most, if not al of
those expressions in Scripture, whereby See Mede on Prove. 21. 16. page 91.
Diatr. 1.
the place of eternal punishment is represented, relate, and allude to some
places, or stories, remarquable for Gods exemplary vengeance, executed on
sinners, under the old Testament. Yea, the last Destruction of Jerusalem by
Titus, here foretold, and lamented by our Lord, is, by a Jackson of the Script.
for. 91.
learned Author styled a Map of Hell. The (...) our ensuing Discourse, touching
the Nature, Aggravations, and Punishment of Unbelief. And I no way dout, but
that it will appear, in the sequel, to be a truth, beyond al question, that our
blessed Lord, in this his sad Lamentation over unbelieving Jerusalem, had no
small regard to Evangelic Unbelievers, who should despise the things that belong
unto their peace, in these last days. For it is a golden rule, given us, by a
great Sir Francis Bacon.
Master of wisdom, That the Word of God has various complements, or
fulfillings, in successive periods, and Ages of the Church. And that this text
in particular, may not be confined to the Judaic Church; but also justly be
applied to Evangelic Unbelievers in all Ages; and particularly in this, will
appear by what follows, in the parallel, or proportion between one and the other.

As for the Contexture, or coherence of our The contexture of the words.
Text, with the precedent discourse, it deserves a particular Remarque, as it
lies couched in the first particle, And; as also in that following expression,
when he was come near: which evidently connecteth this history with what
precedes. Our Evangelist had hitherto declared with what joyous Acclamations,
and Congratulations, the vulgar Jews welcomed their promissed Messiah; How
cheerfully they recognized him as their soverain Lord, and King; What loud
Hosanna's, and Psalms of praise they sang unto him: He now procedes to
expound, with what a triste and pensive mind; with what a bleeding and melted
Heart; with what a mournful and weeping countenance Christ received them. They
rejoice in their newfound Messiah, and King; but he weeps over them: They seem
to Instal him, and lift him on his Throne; but he with tears laments their
final Unbelief, Contumacie, and Ruin not far off. This seems to be the natural
connection of the words, as it will further appear by what follows.

As for the explication of the words, we shall The Explication.
be as brief as our matter will permit.

That first particle (...), And, is usually taken And.
copulatively, as it connects the following discourse with what precedes: and
so it describes to us a considerable Circumstance, of this History, namely the
Time of Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem; which was immediately after their
solemn Acclamations of joy, and Hosanna's to him, as their Messiah.

Hence it follows, When he was come near. When he was come near.
This gives us another great circumstance of Christ's Lamentation; and that is
the place; which was the Mount of Olives; from whence Christ, being now in his
descent, had a direct, and full prospect of Jerusalem offered to his eye; which,
amidst all the peoples joyous Salutations, so far pierced, and affected his
heart, as it brake forth into this doleful Lamentation. It is natural to the
spirit of a man to break forth into a passion of grief, at the approach, and
view of any grievous and displeasing object. And that which makes this place
the more remarquable is, that here it was that David, the Type of Christ,
bewailed the rebellion of his son Absolon; as 2 Samuel 15. 30. And David went up
by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, etc. David, at every
ascent, poured out a quantity of tears, in lamenting the contumacie of his
natural son Absolon; so Christ, the celestial David, at every descent, sends
forth many tears, in bewailing the contumacie of his federal sons, of
Jerusalem. And that which yet further aggravates this circumstance of place is,
that (which Christ foresaw) on this very mount of Olives, where Christ now
laments the sin and ruins of Jerusalem, the Romans in their first siege
against this City, began to pitch their tents, as Josephus, in his 6 Book of
the Jewish war, Chap. 9. observes. So that well might our blessed Lord make this
place the seat of his Lamentation, which he foresaw would be the first seat of
their National ruin. But it follows:

He beheld] The participle (...), wants not He beheld.
its peculiar Emphase, in that it denotes a certain person, viz. Christ; which
gives us another notable circumstance, much conducing to the explication of the
whole. O! What a Great, Illustrious HE is here? What Wonders of Wonders lie
wrapped up in this HE? What tongue, or thought, of Men, or Angels, can express,
or conceive, the infinite Dimensions of this little Pronoun? Who can declare
his Generation? Is not this HE, he that first gave Being, and Welbeing to
Jerusalem, as to althings else? Did not this HE, bring her out of Egypt, that
house of Bondage? Was not this Noble HE her Protector, and Conductor in the
Wilderness? Was not this Soverain HE, her King and Lawgiver in Canaan? Did not
this Infinite Eternal HE, descend down into the womb of a virgin, and espouse
human Nature, thereby to put himself into an apt Capacity, to be Jerusalem's
Savior? Who was this Celebrious HE, but the Messiah, a borne Jew, who had
Judaic blood running in his veins, a Judaic heart to pity, Judaic eyes to weep
over, a Judaic tongue to plead with, importune, and beseech impenitent
unbelieving Jerusalem, to accept of the things that did belong unto her peace?
This was that Heroic, Generous, and Illustrious HE, who here Beheld, not only
with the eyes of his body, but also with the eye of his Omniscient Divinity,
the present impenitent, contumacious, unbelieving; and the future miserable,
ruinous and desolate state of Jerusalem: for so it follows.

(...), THE Citie] with an Emphase; For the Article here points out a certain
City, and that with a remarque, and accent.

THE City, which was his first Bride; but The City
now an Adultresse; who plotted, how she might embrew her hands in her husbands
blood: THE City, wherein the Oracles of God, and Gracious Tokens of his
presence were first loged, Romans 3. 1. THE City, which did once oblige herself,
by a firm Covenant, or oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, to submit to him, as
her crowned King, and Lawgiver; but now turns her back upon him, and cries up
no king but Caesar; who ere long would be her ruin. THE City which was
sometimes the Beauty of Holiness, and Seat of Divine Worship; but now is
become the Sink of al vices, and Satan's Throne, or Synagogue. Lastly THE
City, to which he had in person preached the joyful sound, and glad tidings of
Salvation; to which he had offered the first handsel of evangelic love, and
Free grace; which he had been so long wooing, and courting to be happy in the
embracement of himself, and al other things, that did belong unto her peace:
But she would not. And what follows?

And wept.] What? the Lord of Glory Weep! he that was God blessed for evermore
drop tears! how comes this to pass? what a strange Accident is here? whence
spring these Divine Tears? Surely it must be some prodigigious Cause, that
draws this holy water, from those sacred eyes of God-Man. (...) etc. Some
(otherwise) Orthodox, took away the word, [wept] not understanding its force
and strength. Epiphanius in Ancorato.
Some of the Ancients, otherwise orthodoxe, were so far struck with the sense
of this prodigy, as that they thought it incredible, that the Son of God
should weep: and therefore, not understanding the sense, force, and efficace of
these Divine tears, they left out this word, wept. But that Christ, God-man,
was capable of weeping, is evident by the like passion elsewhere; as at his
friend Lazarus's grave, John 11. 35. and on the cross, or in the garden, as
Hebr. 5. 7. But yet the raritie of this, or any other passionate emotion in
Christ, argues some stupendous, and strange ground, or occasion thereof.
Certainly nothing ordinary came from Christ: his commun words, and actions were
not ordinary: much less may we conceive his tears, which so rarely dropped from
him, to be of an ordinary tincture, and origin. No, they were the Tears of
God, and therefore must have much of Divinity in them, both as to their Rise,
Matter, End, Occasion, etc. They were wise, judicious Tears, not foolish, as
ours usually are: They were spontaneous and free, not forced, and strained, as
ours often are: They were not sullen and pettish tears, as ours; but meek, the
tears of the Lamb of God: They were not selfish and private tears; but
generous, and public, for National sin, and misery. These Tears were
spiritual, not carnal; regular not inordinate: they had not so much of passion,
as of compassion, and commiseration in them: Our tenderhearted Lord seems to
forget his own Passion, which was near, whiles his bowels rolled with
Compassions, toward an impenitent ungrateful City. They are the tears, of an
affectionate Physician, bleeding over the wounds of his self-murdering Patient;
of a gracious, generous Prince, bewailing the wilful Rebellion of his dying
Subjects. In short, these Tears are very Amorous, precious, and efficacious;
inviting weary and heavy-laden sinners to accept of rest; forewarning the
obstinate and impenitent of their danger; instructing the ignorant and weak in
their duty, of believing on him; encouraging the scrupulous and douting soul,
to come unto him, and finally, interceding for such as belonged to the Election
of Grace, though at present enemies to him. Such were the noble Qualities, and
Divine efficaces of these sacred tears, as it will appear by what follows.

(...), over it] or, for it; or by reason Over it
of it; which connotes, or hints to us the Aggravation, or Weight of the
impulsive cause; what it was that excited, or drew forth this sacred passion;
namely Jerusalems present sin, and coming misery. As for her sin it lay
chiefly in this: Our blessed Lord being ordained and commissionated, by God the
Father, to gather in the lost sheep, of the house of Israel, nothing was more
deeply fixed in his heart, than the execution of this his commission and
office: Now drawing near to Jerusalem, and having a view of it in his eye, it
could not but melt, and break his heart, to consider, that she, who was the
sacred Seat of the Covenant; wherein the Divine Majesty had so long resided,
with many significant Symbols and tokens of his presence; I say, that she
should reject her Lord, and Husband, after so many importunate wooings,
invitations, and offers made of the things that did belong unto her peace. As
for her approaching Misery, that also was matter of sad lamentation; and that in
many regards.

1. That henceforward all the great things of her peace should be, as a sealed
book, hid from her eyes. 2. That she, who was the Beauty and Glory of al
Nations, should, within a few years, lie buried in her own ruins. 3. That
(which is the worst of al) al her plagues and jugements, were sealed and
subscribed by Divine wrath, and Vengeance. Oh! this was sad indeed, that al her
Woes, must stand sealed with the Mediators black curse.

No wonder then, that her crowned King, and Mediator, who was a borne Jew, and
Minister of the Covenant, does here, by virtue of his place and office; and
also by reason of his near Alliance to Jerusalem, deplore and lament over her
sinful forlorn state. Thus much for the explication of the Lamentation it
self. Before we proceed to the matter of Christ's Lamentation, mentioned in the
following words, we shall make some brief Reflections on, Observations from, and
Useful Improvements of the words explicated.

CHAP. II. The most solemn profession without sincerity will not satisfy
Christ.
FRom the contexture of this v. 41. with the precedent discourse, by comparing
Christ's posture toward them, with their posture toward him, we may Observe,
That the most solemn Doct. 1.
profession of Honor and Subjection unto Christ, will not satisfy him, without
real Affection, and Performance.

These awakened, convinced Jews welcome Christ with the highest profession of
Joy, and the most solemn Rites, due to him as their Messiah, v. 37, 38. where
it is said, The whole multitude of the Disciples, began to rejoice, and praise
God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen; saying,
blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord, peace in Heaven, and
glory in the highest. If we compare this acclamation, with the same mentioned
John 12. 12. 13.
John 12. 12, 13. We shall find many considerable circumstances, which confirm
our observation. For (1) it is said, John 12. 12, 13. that the Multitude of
Disciples, which sung Hosannas to Christ, came from Jerusalem to meet him:
which argues, they were but a mixed multitude, who being struck with a sense of
his mighty works, could not but recognize him, as their crowned King and
Savior: albeit many of them, as it is most likely, within a few days cry, with
as loud a voice, Crucify, crucisie him. (2) Its said, John 12. 13. that these
awakened Jews, took branches of palme-trees in their hands, (...)] signum
laetitiae. Grot.
which was a Symbol of their joy, as Luke 19. 37. Oh! how much were they
overjoyed to see their long waited for Messiah? Thence it follows, (3) and they
cried Hosanna, (i. e. Save now, as Psalm. 118. 25.) blessed is the King that
comes in the name of the Lord. This last clause is taken from Ps. 118. 26. and
is apparently a solemn Rite or Ceremony used for the inaugurating of their
promissed Messiah, Thus we see what solemn acclamations of joy, Titles of
Honor, and profession of subjection they give to Christ as their Messiah. But
does all this satisfy Christ? Does he fully acquiesce, in these visible
Apparances of their professed obedience to him? No surely; notwithstanding al
their seeming joy in him, yet he weeps over the most of them, with the rest of
their brethren, as those in whom he fulwel saw (by the omniscient eye of his
Divinity) there was not any one dram of saving faith or love toward him.
Hence it is apparent, that Pretentons of Honor, Love, and Friendship to Christ
satisfy not him, without real Intentions of the same: Verbal Profession, and
superficial transient Affection signify nothing in Christ's account, without a
deliberate, resolute, complete, ponderous, deep, and inviolable Bent of will
toward him. Christ's omniscient eye pierces through our very Natures, and is
more intimate to us, than the most intimate part of our selves; and therefore,
albeit we may delude others, yea, our selves also, with the vizard, and masque
of an hypocritic Profession; yet we cannot delude Christ: He sees that the
first principle of such feigned profession is but some commun Illumination, or
languid Affection: He knows who they are that cry him up in profession, and
yet despise, or cry him down in heart, and prevalent Affection: He considers
that such men's forced subjection to him, procedes only from legal principles,
and therefore will ere long degenerate into secret, if not open Rebellion
against him. He sees such men's light is a burden to them; their faith lies
level with the Interest of self; their starcht holiness is but an artificial,
Pharisaic sanctity, or at best, but some light touches, or superficial
Impresses of the Spirit of Grace. In brief, Christ has, as Isai. 11. 3. a quick
sent, to distinguish betwixt commun illuminations, and the saving light of
life; between legal Humiliation, and evangelic Repentance; betwixt painted
watered holiness, and sincere Grace: and therefore many Almost-Christians, who
pass for Sheep in their own, and the worlds eyes, are but altogether Swine in
Christ's eye.

Hence we may learn, That awakened sinners Use 1.
may proceed very far in the owning of Christ, and yet bedisowned by him: They
may, as these poor souls here, embrace him with much seeming joy; submit to him
as their King, with much pretended chearfulnes; cry Hosanna, (i. e. save now)
with much seeming Faith and Dependence on him as their Savior; and yet all this
while Christ not own them as his loyal Subjects.

This also teaches us, That there is a vast Use 2.
difference between man's jugement and Christ's. Alas! how many are justified by
us, as also in their own consciences; and yet condemned by Christ? As on the
contrary, how many are condemned by the World, and peradventure by their own
Consciences as Hypocrites; who yet are justified by Christ?

This further instructs us, That a christians Use 3.
main work is to approve himself to Christ. It matters not who condemns, if
Christ justifies; who curses, if he blesses; who kills, if he makes alive; who
troubles, if he speak peace.

As Christ does curse the Blessings; so also he does bless the Curses of the
wicked, when unjustly pronounced, against the Godly. Wherefore Christians
should mind more, how they may approve themselves to Christ, than what may
commend them to the world.

This also admonishes us; mostly to intend, Use 4.
and look well to Heart-work. For it is the sincerity of the heart only that
commends us unto Christ. Externe forms, and Apparences of piety commend us to
the Church, but unless there be an inward Power and Realitie of Grace in the
Heart, al our visible forms do but render us more sly, cunning Hypocrites,
and so more loathsome and abominable in the eye of Christ.

Lastly, this discovers to us, the desperate curse and plague that abides on
self-deluding sinners; Use 5.
Such as extol Christ in profession, but yet continue enemies to him in
Affection; such as go forth with their Palme-branches of seeming joy, to
welcome Christ, and yet secretly in their hearts crucify him, such as sing
Hosanna's to him, as their crowned King; and yet reserve the Bent of their
hearts as a throne for some base lust. Certainly, such Almost-Christians, are
no better than Almost-Devils: the whiteness of their fair, but false pretenses
of honor to Christ, does but aggravate the blacknes of of their sin in
rejecting of him: the masque of their profession, serves but to concele a
rotten heart: Their seeming Godliness serves but more effectually to oppose that
which is such in truth.

CHAP. III. Previous, and general Observations from the Text.
WE now proceed to the body of our Text, and therein the first thing that
occurs, is the circumstance of place, wherein our blessed Lord made this his
doleful Lamentation over Jerusalem, contained in that expression, [And when he
was come near]. Whence observe, That the And when he was come near. Doc. 2.
approach of any afflictive, or miserable object draws forth grief and pity,
from a christian and gracious spirit.

What is grief, but the emotion or rolling of the bowels at the presence of
some grievous object? and the nearer the object is to us, either by Natural,
Civil, or, Religious bonds, the greater will our grief be, at the approach
thereof. Jerusalem was allied to Christ by the most intimate, and essential
bonds both of Nature, and Religion: he was borne of a Jewish Womb, educated in
the Jewish Land, the crowned King of Jerusalem; which was a federate City,
allied to him by all manner of Civil and Religious obligations; and therefore
approaching near it, his bowels melt and turn within him, to think, that this
City, so near and dear unto him, should not understand, or embrace the things
that appertain to her peace; but on the contrary, be at this very very time
meditating and contriving his death, and her own ruin. But this will come under
further consideration in what follows.

We pass on to the Act of Christ, which ushered in, and opened the door to
this his sad Lamentation, [He beheld,] Hence observe 1. That the Lord of Glory
did so far condescend He Beheld Doct. 3.
to sinners, as to clothe himself with human Nature, and Organs, thereby the
more feelingly to commiserate and pity them. And oh! What an infinite Ocean of
condescendent grace is here? What unparalled Dimensions of eternal Love and
Mercy, are there in the bowels of this tenderhearted Redemer? What? Was he
indeed content to assume a man's heart, to bleed over sinners; a man's tongue to
plead with and persuade sinners to be happy; a man's eyes, to water his
exhortations with tears; yea, a man's soul and body to die for sinners? O! what
wonders of superlative love, and condescendent pity are here? Who would ever
question the affectionate regard of such a compassionate Redemer? How comes it
to pass that the blessed Lord, should borrow human eyes to behold and pity
sinners, and yet they want an eye of faith to behold their Savior? O! what
monstrous ingratitude is this, that the King of Sion, should stand gazing on
sinners, 'til his heart dissolve into tears; and yet they stand amusing
themselves with Idols of clay, and never mind the gracious Regards of their
Lord? Fie, fie on such blind, Idol-lovers!

2. From this Act, He beheld, we may further observe, That Christ's eye affects
his heart; Doct. 4.
his sight moves his compassions. There are no sterile, jejune, or barren
speculations in Christ's eye; but al his contemplations are warm, and
heart-melting: they break forth into Affection, and end in Operation. Christ's
eye is not dull or sleepy, but vigilant and watchful: He watches over sinners,
when they sleep over him: He beholds them with an eye of pity and compassion,
when they behold him, with an eye of blood, and revenge: He casts a wist eye of
sympathy, and lamentation toward Jerusalem, whiles she is looking and
considering how she may pull out his eyes and heart. O! what a compassionate eye
is this?

Hence follows the object of Christ's contemplation; and that is [THE Citie] i.
e. The THE City
City, which was so nearly related, and yet so vastly opposite to him: The
City which was his first Bride, and yet now a commun Harlot for Idol-lovers:
the City, which was the Seat of his Glorious presence; but now a den of
thieves and robbers: The City, which had been the Glory of al Nations, but
was now next door to ruin.

Hence observe, That the prevision, or contemplation of imminent danger
occurring to a Doct. 5.
place or people, nearly related to us, does much affect a serious,
compassionate heart. Al Relations call for Affections: And there is no Affection
more proper for Relates under present, or impendent misery, than compassion.
That mother must needs have the heart of a Tiger, who seeing her child boiling
in a Caldron of lead, has no emotion of bowels for it. Christ here, whiles he
beheld the City with the eyes of his body, did at the same time, with the eye
of his omniscience, behold all the sins, and future miseries of Jerusalem; al
her contemt of his Evangelic offers, Love, and Grace; al her covenant breaking,
and Apostasies from him; al her bloody and mischievous designs against his
Person, Crown, and Dignity; with all the curses, plagues, and shours of Divine
wrath, which would ere long pour down, as a Deluge, on her. This could not but
melt his heart into tears, and draw from him the doleful Lamentation which
follows. To see a deluge of sin, exhaled or drawn up into clouds of Divine
wrath, ready to burst asunder, and fall down in shours of vengeance, on a
professing City, or people nearly allied to us, cannot but dissolve an
affectionate gracious heart, into shours of tears, and christian Lamentations.
That must needs be an heart desperately obdurate and hard, that is not affected
and moved at such a sight. But more of this in what ensues.

CHAP. IV. Church-sins the moral Causes of Church-Ruines, and therefore the
chief matter of our lamentation.
WE now come to the Lamentation it self, expressed in those terms [And wept
over it] Which we may form into this Proposition, or Doctrine, That nothing
was matter of greater Lamentation unto Christ, and Doct. 6.
ought to be such unto us, than to behold the Ruins, of a professing City or
Church, which has been long the Seat of Gods gracious Presence and Worship.
This Proposition, which takes in the spirit and mind of the whole verse, I
intend, with the Lords assistance, to insist somewhat more largely on. And for
the explication hereof three Questions occur, as fit to be examined by us: (1.)
Touching the Object or matter of this Lamentation, What Christ here does, and
what we ought to lament? (2.) As to the Act, what Christ's weeping here implies?
(3.) As to the motives of this Lamentation, What it was that moved Christ to
lament over the Ruins of this professing City, or Church of Jerusalem?

1. Q. What Christ here does, and what we ought to lament, in the ruins of a
professing City, or Church, which has been long the Seat of Gods gracious
Presence and Worship? For the Resolution of this Question, we may consider the
Ruins of a professing City or Church, (1.) In their Causes, (2.) In the
Effects of those Causes. (1.) As for the Causes of these Ruins, they are
either Moral, and Meritorious; or, (2.) Physical, and Productive.

1. The moral, or meritorious cause of Jerusalems, The moral cause of
Church-ruines is Sin.
as also of al other Church-ruins, is Sin. Sin is the fuel of Divine wrath:
eternal vengeance flameth out of guilt: Physical or natural evil, is but the
consequent of Moral: the evil of Passion, or Suffering, is but the effect of
the evil of Action, or Doing. Yea, Sin is in it self the worst evil: He that
departes from God, executes on himself his last doom. The soul that loses God,
loses its way, Life, and self; and the further it departs from God, the more
it is envelopped, and entangled in eternal chains of darkness and misery. No
sin is so pleasing in the committing, as it is bitter in the issue Maximum
scelerum supplicium in ips^s est. Seneca.
. There is an inseparable connection betwixt sin and punishment; and nothing can
dissolve it but the blood of Christ: Every sin carries Hell in its womb: Lust is
a pregnant mother with child of Death, and torments: Thus Genesis 4. 7. And if
thou do Genesis 4. 7.
not well, sin lies at the door. Sin, (...), by which some R. Salomo and
Aben-Ezra.
Hebrew Doctors understand the punishment of sin: So Genesis 19. 15. as elsewhere,
Sin is used for punishment, by reason of that individual connection that is
between them. Hence the Greek Atee; which they feigned to be a woman cast out
of Heaven, pernicious and hurtful to al. Oh! what an enemy is sin?

[Lieth,] (...), coucheth, a word usually given to Brutes, but applied
sometimes to men, Job 11. 19. and here to Sin, which, as a hurtful beast, lies
in wait, ready to devour. What a sly Fox is sin! Hence it follows, [At the
dore] i. e. (1.) near at hand: for to lie at the door, is to be near at hand,
so Deuteronomy. 29. 30. the curses are said to lie, or couch on the Sinner. Or (2.) at
the door, may implie such a a certain place, in which it may be easily excited;
just like a chained Mastive, that lies at the door, and albeit he seems to
sleep; yet suddenly starts up, and sets upon such as are about to enter in:
thus Sin, or the punishment of sin, lies at the door.

That Sin is in it self the worst evil, is evident; because (1.) it was the
First evil, and so the mesure of al evil: for, the first in every kind, is the
mesure of al in that kind. Again, (2.) As sin was the first evil, so also the
first moral cause of al other evils: Now a bad cause is worse than its effects:
as a good cause is more noble, and perfect than its effects. It was Sin that
opened the door, and let in all other evils into the world, and therefore it
must needs be the worst evil. (3.) Sin contains in it all the malignitie,
venime, poison, stings, curses, and plagues of evil: all the degrees of evil lie
wrapped up in sin: (4.) The worst part of hell lies in sin: a sinlesse Hell would
be comparatively, an easy Hell, to a rectified Soul: our blessed Lord suffered a
sinlesse Hell, and yet was, at the same time, infinitely happy, as to his
essential Beatitude. By which it is most evident, that sin is in it self the
worst evil and Hell.

Hence it naturally follows, That the first great Object, or Matter of our
blessed Lords Lamentation, was Jerusalem's sins; which were her worst evil, and
the main cause of al her other evils. Thus the Prophets, and People of God of
old, in all their Lamentations over Church-ruines, they had a particular eye on
their Church-sins as the procuring cause thereof. So Jeremie, in his
Lamentations, lays the greatest accent on their sins, which were the
meritorious cause of al their sufferings. Thus Lament. 1. 5. For the multitude
of her transgressions, her children are gone into captivity, before the
enemy. Oh! here lies the sting of al Isreal's sufferings, that the multitude of
her transgressions drew them on her: This was that which most deeply wounded,
and pierced the heart of this holy man. So v. 8. Jerusalem has grievously
sinned, therefore she is removed, [as an unclean, loathsome thing] all that
honored her despise her; because they have seen her nakedness [i. e, her lewdnes
and abominations] yea, she sigheth, and turns backward, v. 9. Her filthiness
is in her skirts, etc. The like v. 14, 18. and Chap. 2. 14. Thus our blessed
Lord here, in his Lamentation, the first thing he has in his eye, and that
which did most deeply pierce, and wound his heart, was Jerusalems sin: Christus
interiora ejus in^u etur, and* vidit came esse sentinam omnium flag^^orum.
He saw her to be a cage of al unclean birds, a sink of al manner of
abominations; which would unavoidably involve her in ruin: this makes his
heart to bleed, and his eyes to gush forth with salt tears over her. And this
is the genuine Character of a true Christian heart, to mourn more for the Evil
of doing, than for the evil of suffering; and for the latter only as the fruit
and effect of the Gerard. ex Egesi^^i. l. 4. c. 6.
former. A Cain or Judas can lament and groan under the strokes of the rod; but
a Peter, or a Christian mournes under the offense, that procured those strokes:
without dout an hard-hearted Jew could not but lament to see Jerusalem sacked,
and the Temple in flames about his ears; ay, but 'twas the Christian only that
mourned kindly for the sins of Jerusalem, which were the fuel of those
prodigious flames of Divine wrath. To lament over the Ruins of a renowned
City, or Church, is facile; because natural to an ingenuous, affectionate
spirit: but to bleed over and bewail those sins, which were the cause of those
Ruins, none can, in any mesure of evangelic sincerity, perform, but Christ,
and such as are animated and influenced by his Spirit.

But we proceed to particulars; to explicate, what those Church-Sins are, which
exposed Jerusalem, and so by a paritie of reason, will expose any other
professing City or People, to Church-ruines; and therefore ought to be matter
of Lamentation.

CHAP. V. A particular enumeration of Jerusalems Sins; which were the moral
causes of her Ruin; and so a chief matter of our Lords Lamentation.
1. THe first great Church-sin, which our Unbelief.
blessed Lord here laments, as the moral cause of Jerusalem's Church-ruine, is
her Unbelief; or, Rejection of the things that did belong unto her peace. This
indeed is a prodigious Church-wasting Sin, that which ever cost Israel very
dear, even from her infant-state. Israel had signal tokens of Christ's conduct,
care, and providence, in the Wilderness; yet what passions of discontent; what
disingenuous murmurs; what fits of Unbelief, does she ever and anon, on the
least approach of danger, fall into? How does her spirit sink, and despond under
the least difficulty? This is evident from Number. 13. 30, 33. and 14. 1, 14,
etc. For which all that generation, save Caleb and Josua, who were of another
spirit, perished in the Wilderness. Thus also before their Babylonian
Captivity, the great Sin, the Israelites were guilty of, and that which
opened the door to al their following Misery, was their Unbelief, or contemt
of Gods word. So Isa. ^^* 8. Now Isa. 30. 8, 13.
go write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for
the time to come, for ever and ever. v. 9. That this is a Rebellious people,
ying Children, that will not hear the Law of the Lord. Now wherein lay this
their Rebellion? Why, chiefly in their Unbelief, or despising of Gods word, as
v. 12. Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression, etc. Here lies
their main sin: and what follows? v. 13. Therefore this iniquity shall be as a
breach ready to fall; swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking comes Repent
momento veniet fractura ejus] h. e. maxim subito, and repent. Adverbiorum
Synonymorum conjunctio emphatice fit. Glass. Gram. S.
suddenly, at an instant, i. e. exceeding, exceeding suddenly: for these two
Synonymous Adverbs joined together, are very emphatic, and argue, that this
their ruin should be extreme sudden, as also great. Great Unbelief brings
great, and swift ruin to the most glorious Churches, if Repentance follow not.
When Christ comes with Offers and Acts of Grace toward his Church, then for
her to despise his word, turn her back on al his gracious offers, Yea, trample
on them, this exposes the most flourishing Churches to sudden, and inevitable
Destruction. This God threatens Israel withal in her first Church-constitution,
Lev. 26. 14, 15, 16, etc. this also we find threatened, and executed on her, in
her last Church-destruction, Mat. 23. 37, 38. This therefore is the first, and
as we may phrase it, the original sin of Jerusalem, which our blessed Lord here
bewails, as the womb of al her misery.

Oh! what a world of misery has Unbelief brought on many flourishing
Churches? When a professing people reject the Gospel of Christ, is it not just
with Christ to reject them? What a Hell of plagues, both spiritual and temporal,
does a despised Gospel bring on Professors? how often does Christ cut off his own
vovenant people from promissed, and expected mercies for their unbelief? what
sore jugements does unbelief expose men unto? Whence sprang that deluge of
confusion, and Barbarism, which drowned the Eastern Churches, but from their
contemt of the Gospel? Yea, had not the flood of Antichristianisme, which has
so long overwhelmed these Western Churches, its rise from this envenimed
spring of Unbelief? this is evident from 2 These. 2. 10. Because they received
not the love of the truth, etc. And 'twas a prophetic persuasion of a great
divine, That God would shortly take away peace from the whole World, for
despising the peace of the Gospel. This Conclusion we no way dout but to make
good, That all the great plagues, and jugements of God upon the professing World
or Churches, have been for the contemt of his Word by unbelief. For albeit
other sins have had their share, yet this of Unbelief has been the main spring
of al Church-ruines. But this will be the subject of our following discourse.

2. Another prodigious, Church-wasting sin, 2. Carnal presumtion.
which Jerusalem was notoriously guilty of, is groundless Presumtions, and
self-flatterie: Self-flatterie, wherever it is predominant, brings self-ruine:
A mere form of godliness without the power, is a gross delusion, which carries
millions of souls to destruction, in a golden dream: A fond presumtion of being
a true Church, or member of Christ, is the greatest delusion. This was ever the
great sin of Jerusalem, in her declining state, and that which exposed her to
great ruins, and calamities. Thus before the Babylonian Captivity, Jer. 7. 4.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, the Temple Jer. 7. 4.
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. As if
Jerusalem had said: Alas! why do thou threaten us, with Captivity and
ruin? Have we not the Temple of God amongst us? And are we not, upon this
account, his federate people, his darlings and chosen ones? Is not the
Shekinah, or presence of the Divine Majesty seated amongst us? Are not all the
Promises appendant to this Temple? May we imagine that the holy, and faithful
God will quit the place of his Residence, and glorious rest? May we not then
groundedly assure our selves, that our faithful Lord will conserve and maintain
his own Temple, and People that worship him therein? Thus they trusted in lying
words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. Junius and
Glassius
Some refer the last word (...) These, to the works of the Jews, relating to
the externe worship of God; and so they render, the Temple in the Genitive
Case, These are the works of the Temple of Jehovah: As if they had said: What
do thou reprehend, O Prophet, in our works? or, Why do thou call in
question the most constant promises of God? We are so greatly confirmed
concerning al these things, which thou allegest against us, as of nothing more:
For, are not these our works of Jehovah's Temple, commanded by his Law? As for
the Promises, are they not appendant to this Temple? And thence are they not
as firm, and constant toward us, as the Temple is firm? This Temple is Gods
resting place for ever, Psalm. 132. 14. Wherefore we are most confident, that
the faithful God, will, for his own Temple sake, conserve our Country, and we
his worshipers. Which ever way we take the words, it comes much to one; and
clearly discovers to us the fond presumtions, and foolish self-flatteries of
this people, grounded on their commun Church-privileges. And therefore this
holy Prophet puts this their groundless presumtion, as a main ingredient into
his Lamentations over the Ruins of Jerusalem. So Lament. 2. 14. Thy prophets
have seen vain and foolish things for Lam. 2. 14
thee, and they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy
captivity; but have seen for thee false burdens, and causes of banishment.
Jerusalem's false prophets soothed her up in groundless presumtions of peace
and quietude, which proved the cause of her captivity. That which we read,
causes of Banishment, is in the original, (...) Expulsions, or banishments, i.
e, they have proposed to thee such glavering Doctrines, and presumtuous
persuasions of good times, as have been the cause of thy ruin and banishment:
where, the effect being put for the efficient cause, or action, it gives us the
true rise of their Captivity, namely those fond presumtions, and false
persuasions of peace, which their false prophets had infused into their hearts.
This the Prophet sadly laments. And was it not thus also in our blessed Lords
days? Is not this one chief ingredient of his Lamentation over Jerusalem, that,
she did not know, in that her day, the things which did belong unto her peace?
What does that import? Surely, in part, thus much; she flattered herself into a
fools paradise, of being Abraham's seed, and thence under the Messias's Wing;
and this her self-flatterie was the greatest obstacle and bar to her closing
with him, the true Savior, and alone foundation of her peace. Thus much also
our Lord declares, John 8. 39, 44. where he endeavors, to beat them out of
their fond presumtion, and groundless persuasion, of being Abraham's seed;
whereas indeed they were, as he tells them, v. 44. Children of the Devil, and
near to ruin. And certainly this is matter of sad lamentation, to see persons
or churches, lift up to Heaven in their own presumtuous conceits, and yet
dropping down to Hell in realitie: such violent presumtions, if not cured by
medicinal Grace, bring inevitable ruin, to the most flourishing Churches. So
Rev. 3. 17, 18. Because thou say I am rich, etc.

3. Another Church-sin, which was a great moral cause of Jerusalems ruin, is
spiritual 3 Spiritual pride.
Pride: This indeed is a proper Church-sin, arising out of Church-privileges,
or other spiritual excellences vouchsafed by Christ. Thus it was with
Jerusalem, in the days of old, which God promises to cure, Zeph. 3. 11. I will
take away out of the midst of thee, them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou
shall no more be haughty because of my holy mountain. It seems there were a
people who did much pride themselves, and grew very haughty, by reason of the
holy Mountain, which was a visible Symbol, or token of Gods presence: ay, but
God promises, in evangelic days, to cure this tumor and Tympanie. As it is
with single persons, so with whole Churches; there are some sins of infirmity,
which God connives at, and will pass over, upon a general Repentance; but this
sin of spiritual pride, is of such a deep tincture, malignitie, and antipathie
against God, as that, if it be not timely repented of, and turned from, 'twil
prove the Gangrene, and bane of the most flourishing Churches. There is no sin
so opposite to our receiving Grace from Christ, as spiritual pride: Oh! What a
burden is this to Christ, that they who are nothing, have nothing, can do
nothing of themselves, should be proud of what they have received from him? As
they who are most abased in themselves, are most exalted by God, and nearest to
him; so they who most exalt themselves, are most abased by, and estranged from
God, Luke 18. 14. For every one that exalts himself shall be abased: and he
that humbles himself shall be exalted. Pride, it is the cancer of parts, the
moth of privileges, the rust of comforts, the poison of duties, the sting of
crosses, the reproach of Professors. None so much favored, and enriched with
grace and comfort by Christ, as humble souls, and Churches; but he resists
the proud, Jam. 4. 6. and Psalm. 138. 6. God knows the proud afar off: i. e,
God knows him as an enemy, and loves not to come near him. God has an old
grudge against spiritual pride, as one of his most ancient inveterate enemies,
borne in Heaven, in the bosom of Angels, and therefore resists it most. Well
therefore might our Lord weep over this sin, as a cause of Jerusalems ruin.

4. Another Sin, which morally hastened Jerusalems ruin, was her carnal
Security. 4 Carnal security.
This seems evidently comprised in Christ's following Bil of Indictment, v. 42.
If thou had known, i. e, considered. Our gracious Lord makes loud, and
solemn Proclamations of peace; but Jerusalem was fast asleep. Again he
threatens vengeance and wrath; but she has no ears to hear. At last, flames of
divine wrath break forth upon her; but all this while she (...) He bewails
therefore the insensibility of Jerusalem Theophylact. in locum.
awakes not, 'til scorched and burned to ashes. So that the great sin Christ
bewails is her security. Ah! what a cursed sin is security? This desperate
security of Jerusalem our Lord also foretells, Luke 17. 26, 30. And as it was
in the days of Noah; so shall it be also in the days of the son of man; they did
eat and drink, etc. Here Christ foretells what wretched security should seize
on carnal professors, at the coming of the Son of man; whereby we may
understand, not only his final coming to jugement, but also his coming to judge
Jerusalem; which was but a prologue, and preamble to the last jugement; and
therefore we find them both promiscuously inserted in this Chapter. The same is
mentioned, Mat. 24. 37, 38. Our blessed Lord considering how stupid and secure
Jerusalem was, notwithstanding the near approach of her ruin, it made his
heart dissolve into a passion of tears. This was Jerusalems sin of old, and
that which had a great influence on her first captivity. So Isai. 42. 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Where he shows, how blind Isa. 42. 25.
and deaf they were both Priests and People: and then concludes, ver. 25.
Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle; and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart. What a strange, prodigious security is here?
Divine wrath flames about his ears, like an old house, and yet he knew it not;
yea, it burned him, lying asleep on the bed of carnal security, and yet he
laid it not to heart. Oh! what a dead sleep is this? how inevitably does ruin
follow such dead sleeps? That this was a main cause of Jerusalems first
Captivity is evident from Jeremies Lamentation over it, Lam. 1. 9. Her
filthiness Lam. 1. 9.
is in her skirts, she remembers not her last end: she was grown wilfully
blind, and sottishly secure; notwithstanding al Gods Divine Admonitions and
threats, she dreamt of nothing but peace and prosperity. Her approaching ruin
was not laid to heart. And what follows? Therefore she came down wonderfully.
Descendet mirabilibus] i. e. mirabiliter, q. d. multorum cum admiratione, etc.
Glassius Gram. s.
There is a great elegance in the original, (...) with wonders, i. e,
wonderfully: as if he had said, she came down with the admiration of many, who
cannot find out the reason of her being thus cast down. We have here a
Substantive, which being added to a Verb, is, and that not without an emphase,
put for an Adverb. Oh! what a wonder was it, that Jerusalem should thus descend
into captivity? But yet he that considers what filthiness was in her skirts,
and how extremely secure she was, may not wonder at it. Thus Jerentie puts in
this her security, as a main ingredient of his Lamentation, over fallen
Jerusalem. Yea, this sin of carnal security is that, which our blessed Lord
foretells would happen to virgin-churches, in these last evangelic times, Mat.
25. 5. While the bridegroom tarried, they al slumbered, and slept: not only the
foolish, but also the wise virgins are said to sleep: which argues that carnal
security is the great universal sin of Virgin-churches, in these evangelic
last times. And surely, it is not so much the forces of foreign, professed
enemies, as the venime and malignitie of this domestic sin, that brings
desolation to Virgin-churches. The sleeping Devil does more mischief in the
Church of Christ, than the roaring Devil. To sleep in Satan's lap, is much worse
than to rore in Egypts, or Babylons furnace. While Jerusalem sleeps, her
jugement sleeps not: her carnal security determines in dreadful awakenings:
How easily does she fall into the Romans hands; yea, into the fire of Divine
wrath, while she is asleep in her sin? Did not Jael, a poor silly woman, pierce
through great Sisera's head, when he was asleep? And may not, in like manner,
small tentations bring ruin to the most flourishing Churches, when asleep, on
the bed of carnal security? This therefore is great matter of Lamentation.

5. Another Church-sin, that exposed Jerusalem 5. Carnal confidence.
to Church-ruine, was her self-fulnesse, and carnal confidence. She was full of
her self; her own Contrivements, Sufficiences, and Dependences; wherefore no
wonder if she reject her Messiah, and al his offers of peace. This Christ every
where upbraids the unbelieving Jews with, as the main spring of their ruin,
Luke 18. 9-14. Was not this also the great sin, that brought old Jerusalem
under the Babylonian captivity? Does not the Prophet Isaias, by a witty
Sarcasme, upbraid her with this sin, as the cause of her ruin? Isa. 2. 10.
Enter Isa. 2. 10.
into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, etc. The
Prophet here, by a Sarcasme, does aggravate the proud confidence of this
people, from the consideration of Gods inevitable jugements: as if he had said:
Fly, if thou can, the terrible aspect, and severe hand of thy God: but al
thine attemts shall prove abortive: al thy proud confidences are insignificant.
The like Jerem. 8. 14, 15. Why do we sit still? assemble your selves, and let us
enter into the defenced Jerem. 8. 14, 15.
Cities, and let us be silent there: Here you have the vain confidence of the
Jews: they thought to secure themselves against Divine wrath, in their fenced
Cities: What follows? For [or rather, But] the Lord our God has put us to
silence, and given us the waters of gal to drink; because we have sinned. This
is an Ironic answer of the Prophet, as a rebuke to their carnal confidence: and
oh! what an Hell lies in it? They boast of securing themselves, and obtaining
rest in their fenced Cities: Yes, says the Prophet Ironicly, you shall be
secure, and quiet: but how? not, as you dream, in your fenced Cities; but in
being made drunk with the Lords waters of Gal, (or rather poison) whereby you
shall be deprived of al counsel, and exposed to violent Destruction: this is the
silence the Lord will give you, as the reward of your carnal confidence. So Hos.
12. 1. Ephraim Hos. 12. 1.
feeds on the wind, and follows the eastwind^ he daily increases lies, and
desolation. The later is the effect of the former; his Desolation is but the
fruit of his lying confidences: Ephraim by multiplying lies, i. e. carnal
confidence in the Assyrians, and Egyptians, does but multiply Desolation. When
ever any professing People, or Church, begin to be self-strong, or confident in
an arm of flesh, they are the next door to some great danger. What ever we
make the bottom of our confidence, that we make our God: and our jelous God
will never bear it, that we place an Idol in his room: if he intend mercy to
us, he will break al such Images of jelousie, which would otherwise break us.

6. Another great sin, which promoted Jerusalem's 6 Earthly-mindedness.
ruin, was her Earthly-mindednesse. She preferred her clay-Gods, and temporal
Interest before her Messiah and the great concerns of eternity: State-peace
was more regarded by her than peace with God: Cesar's crown was more adored by
her than Christ's; and therefore deservedly did she perish by Cesar's hand. How
justly did our Soverain Lord suffer Jerusalem to fall by Cesar's sword, when as
she preferred Caesar before her Lord? She, forsooth, would have no King but
Caesar: Was it not just then with God, to suffer her to perish by no hand but
Cesars, whom she preferred before her Messiah? This was also the temper of the
Gadarenes, (a company of Apostate Jews:) who preferred their swine before their
Messiah, and his spiritual offers of peace, Luke 8. 37. And is not this matter
of sad lamentation, to see Professors prefer back and belly, externe Pomp and
Grandeur, before Christ and his Gospel? Surely such swinish Gospellers are not
far from ruin, if timous Repentance prevent it not.

7. Again, Unfruitfulness and barrennes under al 7 Unfruitfulness.
gracious Influences, Vouchsafements and Indulgences, was a pregnant cause of
Jerusalems ruin, and so further matter of Christ's Lamentation. This is evident
from that Parable of Christ, Mat. 21. 33, 43. where Christ having proposed, and
represented the barren condition of the Jews, by the Parable of certain idle
Husbandmen, who had received a Vineyard to dress and til; but instead of
rendering the Lord fruits in their season, they took his servants, and abused
some, and killed others; yea, at last killed the Heir: Our blessed Lord gives
us the Reddition, or application of this Parable, v. 43. Therefore I say unto
you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation,
bringing forth the fruits thereof. Where he plainly shows, that their
Unfruitfulnes, together with their Rejection of Christ, was the main cause of
their Rejection by God. The same is confirmed by the foregoing Parable of the
Figtree, v. 19. And when he saw a figtree in the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only; and he said unto it, Let not fruit grow on
thee henceforward for ever. And presently the figtree withered away. This
infructuous Fig Tree was an Emblem of the unfruitful Jewish Church, which was
near unto cursing. This also was the sin of the Judaic Church, before their
Babylonian captivity, as we find it mentioned by Esaias, Chap. 5. v. 1-7.
touching Gods unfruitful vineyard, which was situated on a fruitful hill, under
the warm Influences of the Sun, and planted with the choicest Vine, etc. But
when he looked it should bring forth Grapes, it brought forth nothing but wild
grapes: Wherefore he lays it wast, etc. v. 4, 5, 6. Fructification is the last
end of a vineyard; and therefore if this fail; for what use serve the trees,
but to be cast into the fire? Unfruitful Churches, or Professors, serve for no
other use, but to make fuel for divine wrath to feed upon.

8. Another Church-sin, which greatly advanced 8 Persecution of the Prophets,
etc.
Jerusalems ruin, was her continued Persecution of Gods Prophets, and
Apostles, sent time after time unto her. This our blessed Lord expressly
mentions in that forecited Parable, Mat. 21. 35, 41. where it is said, They took
his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another: yea, at
last, they took the heir and killed him. And what follows, but the miserable
destruction of these wicked men, v. 41? The like we find, Mat. 22. 1, 8. in the
parable of the Mariage-feast, which the King made for his son: where it is said
v. 6. And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and
slew them. This remnant were the unbelieving Jews, who took the Apostles, and
Messengers of Christ, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them. And what
follows? v. 7. But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth
his armies, and destroyed these murderers, and burnt up their city. Oh! how
deservedly do such perish, by the hand of Christ, who take his Ministers and
Messengers of peace, and entreat them spitefully, and lay violent bloody hands
on them? All this our blessed Lord pronounces in plain naked terms, Mat. 23.
37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest
them that are sent unto thee -- Behold your house is left unto you desolate,
etc. For a professing City to stone the Prophets and Christ's Messengers of
peace, is that which brings swift destruction.

9. Further, Want of Reformation is a great 9 Want of Reformation.
Church-sin, which had a mighty influence on Jerusalem's ruin. Christ had
given her many serious Admonitions, and forewarnings of her approaching misery
unless she did reform: but al would not avail, and therefore now he mournes
over her obstinate perseverance in her sin. God lays in a provision of threats
against this sin, in the first constitution of the Judaic Church, Lev. 26. 23,
24. And if ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto
me: Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times
for your sins, etc. Want of Reformation in Churches is that which puts a bar to
al Church-Deliverance, and opens the door to al Church-miseries. This was the
great challenge, which Christ had against the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2. 14.
15. as also against the Church of Thyatira, v. 20. for which he threatens them
with great Tribulations, if they reformed not speedily.

10. Impenitence, and want of Humiliation 10. Impenitence.
under al Church-provocations, was a sin that much conduced to Jerusalem's
Church-ruine. Jerusalem was not only defective in point of Reformation, but
grown obdurate, contumacious, and hardened in her sin; so that neither Christ's
gracious, nor his severe visitations did any way move, or affect her.
Impenitence adds a Seal unto al other sins, and miseries: impenitent hearts
are incurable: When Professors, or Churches go on to sin with an high hand,
notwithstanding al Gods Chastisements, and kind Admonitions, what can be
expected but speedy ruin? Thus it was with Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. And in the
time of his distress 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
did he trespass yet more against the Lord. This is that king Ahaz. (...)
THAT; Here is a Demonstrative Pronoun, subjoined to a Noun, instead of a Verb
Substantive, which carries in it a singular Elegance. That King Ahaz, i. e.
Such a Monstre as cannot be melted by the furnace of Divine wrath.

11. The last Church-sin, I shall mention, as that which had a malignant
influence on Jerusalems Destruction, was her open Apostasy 11 Apostasy.
from, and Rebellion against God. This is a sin of such a deep tincture and
guilt, as that it inevitably brings ruins on the most flourishing Churches, if
long continued in. This was Jesuruns sin, Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 16, 17, 18. Jesurun
Deuteronomy. 32. 34, 35.
(or Israel) waxed fat and kicked -- They sacrificed to Devils, and forgot God,
etc. What follows? v. 34, 35. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed
up among my treasures? to me belongs vengeance and recompense, their foot
shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, etc. Gods
treasures v. 34. are to be understood of his vindictive wrath, and vengeance:
For so it follows v. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense. Whereby is
denoted, (1.) The justice of God: for Gods Treasures of wrath, are but the
effect, and due recompense of Men's treasures of Sin: whence its called here
Recompense: which is explicated Romans 2. 5. But after thine hardness, and
impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous jugement of God. The Treasures of wrath are but the
revelation of the righteous jugement of God, against the treasures of sin;
which impenitent sinners lay up. (2.) By Gods Treasures here, may be understood
the certitude of Divine wrath: For what is laid up in store with God, as in a
Treasure, and moreover secured with a Seal, is most certain. All the wits and
forces of Heaven, and Earth cannot break open this Divine Seal, or make void
Gods Treasures of wrath. (3.) Hereby also is intimated Gods Longanimitie, or
Long sufferance: for what is laid up in a treasure, is not of present use, but
for the future, (...).
So the Greek Verb to treasure up, signifies to lay up for to morrow. So it
follows v. 35. their foot shall slide in due time. The Lord forbears long, til
sinners have filled up their mesure; and then opens his treasure of wrath. (4.)
These treasures of wrath implie Gods severitie at last against impenitent
sinners, which go on in ways of Apostasy and Rebellion. The longer God waits
for Jesurun's return to him, the more fierce will his indignation be against
her, if she return not: patience abused turns into multiplicated fury. When
God comes to open his sealed treasures of Indignation, against contumacious,
rebellious Jerusalem; Oh! what floods of wrath break forth against her? Thus
Psalm. 106. 39. Thus were they desiled with their own works, and went a whoring
with their own inventions. Here you have Jesuruns Apostasy from God: and then
follows Gods severitie against Jesurun, v. 40. Therefore was the wrath of the
Lord kindled against his people; insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.
When a professing People or Church begin to grow weary of God, He begins to
abhor them, as as an unclean thing, or that which is abominable.

Thus I have dispatched the Church-sins, which brought ruin on Jerusalem, and
therefore were the chief matter of our blessed Lords Lamentation: and I have
insisted the more largely and particularly hereon, that so, by having a view of
those Church-sins, that usually bring Church-ruines, we may, so far as we are
guilty, lament over the same, and reform for the future; lest we, in lik
emanner fall under Jerusalems condemnation, and ruins.

CHAP. VI. Divine wrath, and the effects theref on Jerusalem, further matter of
Christ's Lamentation.
HAving finished the Moral cause of Jerusalems The wrath of God the effective
cause of Jerusalems ruin.
Ruin, we now proceed to the productive cause thereof; which was chiefly the
wrath of a sin-revenging, jelous God. As sin was the fuel, so Divine wrath was
the fire which consumed Jerusalem. And this was another great, and moving
object, which drew this sad Lamentation from our gracious Lord. Jerusalem was
now in a prosperous, tranquil, or quiet state: Oh! how beautiful and goodly was
her Temple to the eyes of Beholders? Do not Christ's Disciples cry out, Mark 13.
1. Master, Luke 21. 5.
see what manner of stones, and what buildings are here? Very good: Ay, but
what reply does Christ make, Luke 21. 6. As for these things, which ye behold,
the days will come, in which there shall not be left one stone on another, that
shall not be thrown down. Our omniscient Lord saw divine Wrath smoking against
Jerusalem, and this made him to weep over it, whiles others gloried in its
beauty. Our poor shallow apprehensions contemplate Causes in their Effects;
but Christ's omniscient eye saw the Effect in its Causes; and therefore laments
over it, as being actually present to him. And ah! What doleful matter of
Lamentation is here; to see the dreadful fire of Divine wrath flame forth
against Jerusalem, the place of Gods gracious Redsience? A spiritual heart can
see all the plagues and curses of Hell wrapped up in Divine wrath. A carnal heart
can apprehend and feel the effects of Gods wrath, especially such as are more
visible and sensible; as the raging Pestilence, London's prodigious Flames, or
the like: Ay, but how few are there who take notice of that Divine wrath, which
animateth and feeds all those National judgments? Where is that soul, or at
least how rare is he to be found, who laments the fiery indignation and wrath
of God, which spirits al Churchruines? But this was the posture of our
tenderhearted Saviors spirit: the great thing he bewails was the wrath of God,
which hung, by a small thread, over Jerusalem: This was the sword which pierced
his heart, and made his eyes gush forth with tears. The like we find in
Jeremie's Lamentations over captive Jerusalem, Lam. 1. 15. The Lord has trodden
the Lam. 1. 15.
virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a Winepresse. The treading of Judah as in
a Winepresse argues her extreme oppression and affliction, and therefore we
find the same expression of Christ's passion, Isa. 63. 3. But who is it that
treads Judah, as in a Wine Press? He tells you, The Lord has trodden, etc. Here
lies the sting of al: Gods Wrath visible and apparent in their captivity, was
that which mostly wounded his heart. Ah! says Jeremie, it is not so much the
Babylonians fury that touches me, as the Lords indignation which appears in
our sufferings: it is the hand of God that cuts mine heart; it is his wrath that
makes me so sad. So Lam. 2. 1. How has the Lord covered Lam. 2. 1.
the daughter of Sion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven unto
earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his
anger! The Lords obnubilating, or covering with a cloud, the daughter of Sion,
argues his great indignation against her: Some conceive, that the Prophet, by
a tacit Antithesis, alludes to the Cloud of glory, which overshadowed
Jerusalem, at the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kin. 8. 1. But now, alas! a
contrary, dark, calamitous cloud of wrath covers her, which was great matter of
Lamentation. Thus v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. So Lam. 4. 16. The anger Lam. 4. 16.
[or face] of the Lord has Cum dicit dissipatos fuisse a facie Domini, vult ut
nolit amplius ipsos aspice^e. Calv.
divided them, [or, dissipated them] he will no more regard them, [or, he will
not add to regard them,] i, e, he will not give them one favorable regard, one
gracious aspect more. And, oh! What an heavy doom was this? How many Hels lay
wrapped up in these direful tokens of Divine wrath? This therefore was that which
our blessed Lord greatly laments in Jerusalems ruins, that al was the effect
of an angry displeased Deity.

As for the Instrumental Causes of Jerusalems Destruction, there was somewhat
also in these, that gave our compassionate Lord some matter of Lamentation. To
consider that the Roman Caesar, whom the Jews now so much cry up, and prefer
before himself, their only Messiah, should ere long, in his successor, prove
the great instrument of their Desolation; and that he should first pitch his
Tents in this very place, where our Lord now stood; Oh! What abundant matter of
Lamentation did this afford to our tenderhearted Lord, who was so nearly
allied to Jerusalem?

We come now to the effects of Jerusalems Sect. 2. The effects of Gods wrath
against Jerusalem.
sins, and Gods wrath inflamed thereby; which yield fresh matter of lamentation
to our dear Lord. The effects are proportionable to the causes: Sin and wrath
cannot but produce prodigious jugements on Jerusalem. Temporal jugements.
The temporal effects of Gods wrath against Jerusalem were very prodigious and
lamentable. (1.) Is it not a sad and lamentable sight to see Jerusalem, a City
so populous, become desolate and without Inhabitant? as Mat. 23. 38. Behold
your house is left to you desolate: Was not this one great part of Jeremies
Lamentation over old Jerusalem? Lam. 1. 1. How does the City sit solitary,
that was full of people? How is she become as a widow? (2.) Was it not also a
doleful thing, to see Jerusalem, which was the wonder of the world, for
beautiful edifices and structures, laid even with the ground, not a stone
remaining on another? As our Lord foretells, Luke 19. 44. And shall lay thee even
with the ground, and shall not leave in thee one stone upon another. This seems
an hyperbolic expression, denoting extreme destruction. Hag. 2. 15. To lay a
stone upon a stone, signifies to build: Wherefore not to leave a stone upon a
stone, signifies utterly to destroy. And that this prophetic description of
Jerusalems utter ruin, was fulfilled to a tittle, history informs us.
Scaliger in Eusebius. Chro. 194.
Its said, that Jerusalem was so far demolisht by Vespasian, that there was no
footstep of the City left remaining: yea, afterward it was by Musonius the
Prefect plowed up; so that it not only ceased to be a City; but moreover it
was not lawful for any to build on that soil for the future: For, according to
the Roman-law, that City which had a plow passed over it, ceased to be such:
and it was a capital crime for any to build so much as a Cottage in that place.
Such were the miserble ruins of Jerusalem here foretold. And oh! what a sad
contemplation was this to our dear Lord? how did it make his heart to bleed, as
his eye to weep. They who have seen London buried in its own ashes, cannot but
remember what a sad spectacle this is. Ah! who would not lament at such a sight?

(3.) Is it not also a lamentable case, that she, who was the Glory, and
desire of Nations, should become the derision, reproach, and scorn of al? Was
not this also great matter of lamentation to Jeremie, Lamentat. 2. 15. They
hiss, and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, is this the
city, that men call the perfection of Beauty, the joy of the whole earth?

2. But the most dreadful, and lamentable 2. Spiritual jugements.
effects of Divine wrath on Jerusalem, were spiritual jugements; the prevision
whereof greatly afflicted our tenderhearted Lord. (1.) Oh! what a bleeding
contemplation 1. Withdrawment of the means of Grace.
was it to our gracious Lord, to view that dismal breach, which Divine wrath
was about to make on Jerusalems Church State? To consider, that now all the
great things that did belong to her peace, were to be as a sealed book,
altogether hid from her eyes: ah! how does this pierce, and wound the heart of
her Messiah? That she, who had been dignified and adorned with such rich
marquis of Divine favor, beyond al Nations in the world, should now be divested
and stripped naked of al: what an heartbreaking was this to her gracious Lord?
Did not this consideration fill Jeremies heart with sad lamentations over old
Jerusalem? Lam. 1. 4. The ways of Sion do mourn, because none do come to the
solemn feasts, etc. So Lamen. 2. 6, 7. And he has violently taken away his
Tabernacle, as if it were of a garden, he has destroyed his places of the
assembly.

(2.) The withdrawment, not only of the 2. Withdrawment of gracious Influences.
means, and Symbols of Grace, but also of al gracious Influences from
Jerusalem, afforded further matter of sore Lamentation unto her Lord. It is a
dreadful curse to want al special Means and Tokens of Grace: but yet, if in the
want of these the Lord vouchsafes his Grace to improve commun means of Grace,
or particular deprivements of special means, this is no small divine
Benediction: But, alas! our Lord foresaw it would be quite otherwise with
Jerusalem: she was like to be deprived, not only of al special means of Grace;
but also of Grace it self, without which she could not improve commun means, or
her particular deprivements of special means: and, oh! how greatly does this
afflict her compassionate Lord? A Christian, though he be sometimes deprived of
the means of Grace, yet the Lord gives him grace to improve those very
deprivements, in order to his humiliation, spiritual poverty, hunger and
thirst after the means, and a more complete life of faith, and dependence on
Christ. And thus his deprivements of the means of Grace, become a means of
Grace unto him: his want of Ordinances is, as sanctified by Grace, a great
Ordinance to him. Ay, but was it thus with Jerusalem? No; she was not only to
be deprived of al means, and Symbols of Grace; but also of Grace it self,
without which she could not make any improvement of these withdrawments, or be
humbled under them. This Paul sadly laments, 2 Cor. 3. 14. For 'til this day
remains the same veil untaken away, in the reading of the old Testament. He
speaks of the veil on the hearts of the unbelieving Jews.

(3.) Another spiritual jugement, which 3. A spirit of slumber.
Christ laments, as that which hung over Jerusalem, was Gods pouring out on her
a spirit of slumber, and delivering her up to judicial occecation and
obduration, or hardness of heart. So Romans 11. 8. God has given them the spirit
of slumber. And this indeed was the curse of Curses; the Plague of Plagues; the
Hell of Hels; which contains in it al manner of spiritual jugements; as being
left to the plague of their own hearts, 1 King. 8. 38. being given up to the
enchantments of a bewitching world; having al commun mercies and providence
cursed to them, Romans 11. 9, 10. being delivered up to Satan, the god of this
world, 2 Cor. 4. 6. etc. But of these in their proper place.

CHAP. VII. The eminent Qualities, and Efficaces of Christ's sacred Tears.
HAving finished the Object, or Matter of Christ's Lamentation, comprised in that
He wept.
notion [over it,] We now proceed to the Act [Wept.] Wherein we find two
considerables, (1.) The Quality. (2.) The Efficaces of Christ's Tears over
Jerusalem.

Sect. 1. As for the Qualities of these Tears, they are very Rare and
Admirable, clothed 1. The Qualities of Christ's tears.
with many eminences, which render them infinitely more excellent than al other
tears. For (1) they are Divine tears: dropped from the Heart and eyes of him, who
was as truly 1. They are Divine.
God, as man. And oh! What an admirable, yea infinite Perfection does this give
to these Tears, that they flow from the Divinity? What! does the Son of God,
who is eternally blessed, in the beatific Vision and Fruition of his own
Glory, drop tears; and that over an ungrateful, contumacious, rebellious
City? Oh! Who could ever have imagined, that this could be, had we not ocular
and evident demonstration thereof? Surely these Tears must be no vulgar, commun
tears, which have so much of the Divinity in them. Oh! What precious tears
were these, that dropped from God-man? What sweet and delicious wine were these
tears to the Angels that attended on Christ?

(2.) These tears of the Son of God were 2. Rational.
ponderous, weighty, or rational Tears: they were not, as ours usually are,
foolish, irrational tears; but very judicious, and welgrounded. O! What
infinite Reasons, what rational motives had Christ to induce him to weep over
Jerusalem? How often do our tears flow from false imaginations, or some
feebleness of Nature, without any grounded reasons? But was it thus with
Christ? Had he not massy, ponderous Inducements, to induce him unto this
sacred passion? Were not Jerusalem's sins, and approaching Ruins, forcible and
binding reasons of our Lords weeping over her?

(3.) These Tears of Christ were most spontaneous, 3. Spontaneous and free.
or voluntary and free; not forced, and strained, as ours frequently are. Oh!
how naturally did this holy water flow from that sacred fountain, Christ's
eyes? What bleedings of heart, what inward compassions were the main spring of
this sacred passion, vented by his eyes? Christ's tears had a divine Fountain in
the heart, by which they were fed and maintained: they were as the sweat of an
anguished, troubled spirit; as the blood of an heart lively struck with the
sense of Jerusalems coming misery.

(4.) Hence also these Tears of Christ were most Sincere and Cordial. The best
of our 4. Sincere.
Tears, have too deep a tincture of Hypocrisy: Naturalists say, that there is
no pure element of water, to be found in this lower Region: This is most
certain as to our tears; there are none so pure but they have some concretion,
or commixture of Sin and Hypocrisy. But 'twas not so with Christ's tears: every
tear that dropped from him was as pure as Crystal: There was not the least
tincture of guile, or hypocrisy in his tears: Every tear was a lively glass
and image of his heart: There was an exact conformity between the passion of
his eye, and compassion of his soul.

(5.) Again, these Tears of Christ were Spiritual 5. Spiritual and regular.
and Regular; not Carnal, or exorbitant. We seldom weep, but there is much of
carnalitie, and exorbitance in our tears; either in regard of the Motives,
Matter, or Manner of their emanation. But oh! how spiritual as to their Motives;
how regular as to their Matter; and how ordinate and harmonious as to their
Manner were al Christ's tears? Alas! how impossible is it that there should be
any irregular or inordinate passion in Christ, who was a mass of pure Grace?
Our blessed Lord was not a mere Patient, but a wise judicious Agent in all his
passions: Hence that which is expressed by a Passive Verb, John 12. 27. (...),
my soul is troubled, is expressed by an Active, John 11. 33. (...), and he
troubled himself; which clearly shows that Christ's troubled affections were
governed, and influenced by his jugement; every tear that dropped from him was
perfumed with Grace: his eyes were as a fountain of Rose Water; every drop gave
forth a sweet smell of Heaven.

(6.) Christ's tears were generous and noble: 6. Generous.
he seemed to forget and disregard himself, whiles he minded and regarded
Jerusalem. His own crucifixion was very near, yet he seems to overlook that,
and mournes chiefly for Jerusalem's Ruins. Alas! how selfish, private, and
narrow are our tears, for the most part? We often weep for the evils we suffer:
but oh! how rarely do we weep for the evils we commit; or, for those which the
Church suffers? The evils that touch us afflict us; but how little are we
afflicted with the evils that touch the honor of Christ, or his concerns? But
was it thus with our great Lord? Whence sprang his tears? was it from the
provision of his own sufferings? Or, was it not rather from the intuition of
Jerusalem's sins and sufferings? Jerusalem, is at this very time, plotting the
death of her tenderhearted Savior: But lo! what affectionate tears does he
shed over Jerusalem's apprehended Destruction? Oh! what generous and noble
tears are these? how much self-denial is here?

(7.) These tears of Christ were also meek, 7. Meek and humble.
and humble. Our tears, if they have any thing of a noble and generous tincture
in them, then usually they are proud and obstinate: but these tears of our
blessed Lord were not less meek and humble, than great and generous; and oh!
how rare is such a conjunction among men? Some Heroic and generous Romans, have
dropped some tears over their vanquished enemies: but how much pride, how much
triumph, have they discovered therein? But it was not thus with Jerusalems
King: his tears flowed from an humble, contrite, meek, and broken spirit: They
were the tears of the Lamb of God. No proud murmurs; no sullen pettish humors;
no revengeful thoughts were mingled with these his sanctified tears; as usually
there are with ours.

(8.) These tears of Christ were Amorous, 8. Amorous and Pathetic.
and Pathetic. What a great Pathos and emotion of Affection lay wrapped up in
Christ's tears, is evident by his broken and imperfect language, v. 42. Saying,
if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day! etc. How broken and
imperfect is his language? his heart was so full of Affection, as that he wanted
words to give vent thereto: He drops now and then a word, and now and then a
tear: (...), his tears swallowed up and drowned his words; which argues a
mighty pathos and ebullition of Affection. Those who were present at Lazarus's
grave, and saw our blessed Lord to water his grave with tears, conclude, John
11. 36. Behold, how he loved him! And may not we in like manner, from Christ's
tears over Jerusalem, cry out also, Behold, how he loved it? Julius Caesar
beholding the head of Pompey his slain enemy, could not but drop some tears
over it; which was an argument, not only of a generous heroic spirit, but also
of some affection toward Pompey. But oh! what tendernesses of love, what warm
bowels of affection lie wrapped up in the tears of our gracious Lord, over
impenitent and ungrateful Jerusalem? Does it not argue an high degree of love
in those tears of our Lord, that, forgetting all the past injuries done unto
him, and all the future cruelties he was to suffer from this rebellious City,
he could notwithstanding weep over her coming miseries? So amorous and pathetic
were these tears.

(9.) These tears of our affectionate Lord were also Dolorous and Sympathetic:
there was 9. Dolorous and Sympathetic.
not only Love, but also Grief, Sympathy, and Compassion in these tears. This
adds a further excellence to Christ's Lamentation: For grief and sympathy with
others in their afflictions, is an afflictive passion; and therefore rarely
exerted in any eminent degree, but among intimate Confidents and Friends; who
are knit together by such an intimate, essential bond of Amity, as that they
can espouse each others ils, as their own, Sympathy argues an high degree of
Amity: And oh! What Sympathy, Commiseration, and Compassion do Christ's tears
argue? Are they not as the blood of a wounded heart, to use Cyprian's phrase?
Does not the Romans sword, which ere long was to be sheathed in Jerusalem's
bowels, pierce through the very heart of her Messiah? How is his Spirit wounded
by the sword of Divine wrath, that hung over Jerusalem? Al tears are the
Legates, or Ambassadors of Grief; but none argue more grief, than such as are
dropped over our nearest Relates, in deepest misery. And O! what passionate
grief and sympathy was there in Christ's tears, over bleeding Jerusalem? Thus
Theophylact on this Text: (...). Theophyl.
He wept over the City as a man-lover -- He therefore discovered by his
weeping bowels of pity. What a sacred prodigious passion is here? Oh! how
warm and bleeding with compassions are these sacred bowels, which embrace a
City so impenitent, so ungrateful, so full of bloody and mischievous
contrivements against so gracious a Savior? Joseph, when his bowels waxed
warm, could not choose but break forth into a passion of tears, in the
presence of his brethren, who had been so injurious to him: But O! Joseph's
compassions were infinitely short of these in our Lord, toward ungrateful
Jerusalem. Its reported of Scipio Africanus, that when he beheld Carthage mount
up in flames, he could not but weep: which argued some commiseration in this
noble Heroic Spirit, who was an enemy. But, alas! what is this to those
unparalled compassions, which flowed forth from the heart of Christ, together
with his tears over Jerusalem?

(10.) Another Quality appendent to Christ's 10. Seasonable.
tears regards their season, which was a day of public Rejoicing: This sad
Lamentation of Christ, was in a day, wherein they made solemn Acclamations of
joy, and sung Hosanna's unto him. This argues the weight of Christ's tears:
Surely there must needs be some weighty reason and cause of these tears, which
were so plentifully poured out, by our Lord, in a day of such solemn Triumph.
Ay, but our Lord did, by the eye of his omniscient Divinity, discern a world
of Hypocrisy, Unbelief, Ingratitude, and Treachery in their hearts: He
foresaw that some of these very men, who now sang Hosanna's to him, as their
crowned Messiah, would, within few days, cry out, at least in heart and
consent, Crucify, crucify him. He had a clear prevision of al Jerusalems
Treasons, and bloody designs against his Regal Person, Crown, and Dignity,
with all the sad effects hereof; and this sad prospect drew tears from him in
this day of solemn Joy.

(11.) Lastly, These tears of Christ were 11. Public.
public, in the view of al standers-by; which gives some accent to them. Had he
wept in a corner, where no eye could have seen it, surely it had been very
much, for a person of his Quality and Dignity: But oh! to shed tears in such
a public manner, what burning Affections; what a fermentation of boiling
Compassions; what sympathetic Tendernesses does this argue to be in the heart
of our Lord? Thus much for the eminent Qualities of Christ's Tears.

2. We come now to the Efficaces and Influences The efficace of these tears
which were;
of these sacred precious tears; which also admit several Regards. (1.) These
Divine tears of Christ were very Ominous, and Prognostic: they did foretell
dreadful Accidents, 1. Ominous and prophetic.
and prodigious Disasters, which would befall Jerusalem. These tears proceeded
not from a sick brain, or phantastic Imagination of Chimeric, or impossible
dangers; No, they were prophetic tears, issuing from a judicious eye, which had
an hypostatic union with the omniscient Divinity.

(2.) Hence also they were Instructive Tears: 2. Instuuctive.
every tear dropped a lesson; yea, preached a Sermon to impenitent, unbelieving
Jerusalem. Oh! what sacred Instructions, what sage Documents, what deliberate
Counsels, what seasonable Admonitions, what useful Cautions, did every tear
carry in its bowels? How happy might Jerusalem have been, had she but
understood, and entertained the wholesome Doctrines, which these tears preached
to her? Did not every Tear instruct her, what a tenderhearted Savior she had
to deal with? How unwilling he was to reject her? How glad he would be, to
receive her into the bosom of his Grace? What a bloody sin unbelief was? etc.

(3.) These Divine Tears were not only Instructive, 3. Exhortative.
but also exhortative. They carried in them efficacious and binding Arguments,
to persuade impenitent Jerusalem, to mind, and embrace the things that did
belong unto her peace. What more efficacious to prevail on an obstinate wife,
than the tears of her affectionate husband? What more powerful charm may there
be, to win the obedience of a rebellious child, than the tears of affectionate
parents? Can there be a more forcible motive to gain the consent of a sick
patient, than his Physicians tears? What will move the hearts of desperate
Rebels, to return to their liege Lord, if his tears will not do it? And, Lo!
here the King of kings, by his pathetic tears, exhorts, persuades, and invites
his obstinate spouse, his rebellious children, his sick patients, and his
rebellious subjects to return unto him, and embrace the things that belong
unto their peace. So Ezech. 18. 23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked
should die, says the Lord God? etc. More particularly, these tears of Christ
exhort, and invite Jerusalem to Repentance: Christ weeps for her sins, that so
she might thereby be induced to weep for her own sins. Does it not argue an
heart desperately hard, when Christ's tears will not dissolve or soften it? Drops
of rain will in time make a rock hollow: Oh then! how obdurate is the heart of
Jerusalem, when the efficacious tears of the Son of God will not move, or work
upon it, to consider the things that belong unto her peace?

(4.) These Tears of Christ were also comminatorie, 4. Threatening.
or threatening: every tear speaks a curse, and direful threat to the impenitent
Jews. As patience, so tears rejected, or abused, become furious. Those are the
most dreadful curses, which proceed from the Mouth of Blessedness it self. If
Christ's affectionate tears prevail not on sinners to come unto him, and partake
of his blessings; they then fall down in shours of Divine threats and curses.
And oh! what an astonishing curse is this, to be cursed by the Mediators mouth,
which is the fountain of al Blessedness? O! what a deplorable case is Jerusalem
in, when every Tear of her gracious Lord drops a threat, and curse on her? How
has Jerusalem for more than 1600 years layn under this curse here dropped, and
mingled with our Lords tears?

(5.) These sanctified tears of Christ were also Intercessorie: As they
threatened curses on 5. Intercessorie.
the reprobate Jews; so in like manner did they intercede for mercy on the
elect Jews in Jerusalem. Christ's tears, as well as his blood and prayers, were a
part of his Intercession: they had an articulate language and voice, which God
the Father wel-understood. And look as Christ's intercessory prayer for his
Church, Joh. 17, includes also a curse on their enemies; so also these his
tears, albeit they threaten curses to those who persevere in their impenitence;
yet they intercede for mercy on the elect seed.

(6.) These Tears of Christ were very influential 6. Influential.
and fructuous. Every tear dropped Grace into the hearts of Christ's penitent
believing Disciples. Christ's tears, as they were a Deluge of curses on the
impenitent Jews; so also were they a flood of mercies toward his elect seed.
Without dout, those Christ's Disciples, who saw him shed these tears, were not a
little moved, and influenced thereby. Christ's tears were a soverain means to
mollify and soften their rockie, stony hearts: How could they refrain to
mourn, when they see their Lord weep over Jerusalem? What grief and shame might
they well have for their own sins, when they behold their great Lord, thus to
weep over Jerusalem's sins? How much ought these Sympathetic tears of their
Lord move them, to sympathise also with Jerusalem in her miseries?

(7.) Lastly, these sacred tears of our blessed 7. Exemplary.
Lord were also exemplary. Without al peradventure, our blessed Lord intended
these his public tears, not only as a Demonstration of his affectionate regard
toward sinners, but also as a great exemplar, or pattern for his Saints.
Christ, the natural Son of God, hereby gave all the adopted sons of God, a fit
pattern for their tears. Christ wept for Jerusalem's sins, thereby to give us
a pattern of mourning for sin, both in our selves and others: Christ seems to
forget his own sufferings, whiles he laments the sufferings of Jerusalem, now
contriving his death: Oh! what an admirable exemplar is here for Saints to
bleed over the sufferings of others, yea of enemies more than their own? But
how far Christ's tears ought to be imitated by us, we intend to show in the
Application.

CHAP. VIII. The Motives, that induced Christ to weep over Jerusalem, from his
Relations to her.
HAving dispatched the Object and Act of Christ's Lamentation, we now pass on to
our third Question, What it was that moved Christ to weep over Jerusalem? As
for the Motives which refer to the object, they have been sufficiently
explicated, in what precedes, Chap. 4, 5, 6. I shall now only mention such as
lie wrapped up in the Subject, Christ, and his Relation to Jerusalem.

Relations, as we al find by experience, carry The Motives which endued Christ
t^ weep over Jerusalem from his Relations to her.
in them the most moving Considerations: Nothing so efficacious to draw forth
commiseration and pity, toward an object in misery, as our Relation natural
or spiritual to it. The strongest Motives to compassion spring from Relations.
Now our blessed Lord stood in many near relations unto Jerusalem; which greatly
moved him to commiserate her sinful, and ruinous state.

(1.) Christ bore the Relation of a Father to 1. As a Father.
Jerusalem: Israel was his firstborn Church: as Luke 15. 25. where the Jewish
Church is wrapped up in the Parable of an elder son. Now its wel-known what
binding motives to pity lie wrapped up in the bowels of a Father. Was it ever
known, that a Father saw his Child burning in the fire, and yet wanted bowels
of pity for him? Can we imagine, that the heart of our tender Lord, which was
made up of such tendernesses, could forbear to bleed over dying Jerusalem? We
find this lively exemplified, in the movings of Christ affectionate Bowels
toward Ephraim, Jer. 31. 20. Is Ephraim Jer. 31. 20.
my dear son? is he a pleasant child? For since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him. The
bowels are said to be the seat of the most tender Affections: and it is
certain, that in great acts of commiseration the Bowels are most deeply
affected. Though this be spoken of Christ's compassions toward penitent
Ephraim, yet in some proportion it holds good, in respect of backsliding
Jerusalem: For a prodigal rebellious son is a son, and therefore the object of
commiseration, as it appears in the story of the prodigal, Luke 15. 20. Though
Jerusalem was now turned prodigal, yet Christ's bowels could not but melt
toward it, with tender commiseration.

2. Christ's relation to Jerusalem as an Husband, is yet a deeper motive to stir
up his 2. As an Husband.
bowels of pity toward her. Jerusalem was Christ's first-Bride: she got his
first virginlove: she first subscribed with her hand to the conjugal contract;
and thence became Holiness to the Lord. Jer. 2. 2, 3. Go and cry in the ears
of Jerusalem, saying, thus says the Jer. 2. 2, 3.
Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals,
etc. So v. 5. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone
far from me? Ah! this breaks Christ's heart, that Jerusalem, who had, by a
solemn marriage bond, joined herself to him, should now turn her back on him,
as a commun Harlot, and lie in commun for every Idol-lust. How could this
tenderhearted Savior, choose but weep over Jerusalem, his Apostate-Spouse, who
never found iniquity in him, or any just cause for such a grand Apostasy?
Would it not break the heart of a tenderhearted husband to see his wife bid
defiance to him, and lie in commun for every base miscreant? This Christ sadly
laments, Jer. 31. 32. Which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband
Jer. 31. 32.
to them, says the Lord. As if he had said: O! this breaks mine heart, I
cannot bear it, that Israel should break with me, who have been so kind, so
affectionate, so indulgent an husband to her: who could ever have imagined that
Israel, would have dealt so unkindly with me, who have been so kind to her?
What prodigious disloyalty is this, that Jerusalem should prove so false to
me, who have been so faithful an husband to her? Yea, what monstrous folly is
this, that Jerusalem should be so cruel, so bloudie-minded, so much an enemy
to her self, as to reject me, her best friend and husband?

(3.) Christ was nearly allied to Jerusalem as her Lord and Soverain, which
gives him a further 3. As Lord. Joh. 1. 11.
inducement to mourn and weep over her. This we find insisted on, John 1. 11.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not. His own Jerusalem was
Christ's own proper house; a Palace, which he had built, for his own regal
Residence; a Temple, which he had erected and consecrated, for his own Divine
worship: And was it not all the reason in the world, that Christ should be
received as Lord into his own Est autem (...), tanquam in domum suam. Grot.
House and Temple? Docent Juriscon sulti, id maxim naturaliter nostrum esse,
quod nos ut existeret effecimus Grot.
Is there any thing more naturally our own, than that which we give Being and
existence unto? Was not Jerusalem then most properly, yea most naturally
Christ's own, in that he gave Being to her, both in her Politic and Religious
capacity, as a State and Church? And yet, Lo! it follows, and his own
received him not, i. e. as Lord and King: Our blessed Lord comes and knockes at
Jerusalem's Gates; but could not be admitted into his own house. Oh! how
greatly does this pierce and wound his heart? Who could ever have thought, that
the Lord of Glory should have been denied entrance into his own royal Palace?
What stupendous Rebellion is this? Surely, well might this draw tears from our
Lord.

(4.) Christ's Federal Relation to Jerusalem, 4. As Minister of the Covenant.
as Minister of the Covenant brought him under an essential, and deep
obligation to lament over her sinful, and ruinous state. Christ was invested
with an Aptitude and Faculty to preach glad tidings of Salvation unto
Jerusalem: Yea, the Jews, just before this Lamentation, Luke 19. 38. recognize
him as Mediator, and supreme Minister of the Covenant: This touches him to the
quick, to consider that he, who was their alone Mediator, and had, with so much
Fidelity and Affection, preached the everlasting Gospel to Jerusalem; yea was,
by some of them, solemnly avouched to be their Crowned King, should yet be
rejected by them, together with all the great things that did belong to their
peace. Christ tells us, that it was his meat and drink to perform his office as
Mediator, namely to gather in the lost sheep of Israel: Therefore when he
considers their contumacious obstinacy and rejection of him, Oh! how does this
wound his heart? What a doleful contemplation was this unto him? Quatenus ergo
huic populo minister in salutem, pro officii sui ratione illius exitum
deplorat. Calv.
Thus as he was Jerusalems supreme Minister, he does, by virtue of his office,
deplore its wilful impenitence, and approaching Ruin.

Alas! what an heart-bleeding consideration is it, to a faithful
Gospel-Minister, after al his indefatigable and unwearied labors with his
stock, to see them persist in open defiance against God, to the ruin of their
souls? And may we imagine, that our tenderhearted Lord, who was Jerusalem's
chief Bishop, or Minister, and had preached so long, with so much affection to
her, should not be deeply afflicted, at the consideration of her wilful
unbelief, and ensuing misery? Surely the consideration of this his Office and
Relation added much weight to his Lamentation. Would it not grieve a
tenderhearted Physician, to see his Patient to spil his Physic, which alone
can cure him, and so run into desperate courses, which will unavoidably bring
death to him? Just so it was here, Christ was the good Samaritan, Jerusalem's
most affectionate Physician, and therefore it could not but prick him to the
heart, to see her wilfully rejecting all the good things that belonged to her
peace and health; to run her self into inevitable ruin.

(5.) Christ's natural Relation to Jerusalem, 5. Christ's natural relation to
Jerusalem.
as he was a borne Jew, and so her elder brother, added many ingredients to
this his sad Lamentation. Our blessed Lord was borne of a Judaic Mother; he had
a Judaic heart loged within him; Judaic blood running in his veins, Judaic
bowels and compassions; and therefore no wonder that he weeps over his
impenitent brethren, who were on the brink of ruin. But so much may suffice
for the Motives which induced our Lord, thus to weep over Jerusalem.

CHAP. IX. Doctrinal Corollaries, and practic uses, drawn from this Christ's
Lamentation over Jerusalem.
HAving gone through the explication of the Proposition, we come now to the
Improvement Doctrinal Inferences.
thereof; and that first by Doctrinal Inferences.

(1.) Does Christ weep over the Sins and Ruins of impenitent Jerusalem? Hence
then Chrsts Affections Relative.
Infer,, That Christ's Affections are Relative: his sorrow stands in relation to
the sinners misery; as also his joy to the sinners good. Al Christ's
Affections, whiles on earth, were very generous and public: he discovered
little or nothing of private Interest and Passion: Al his Affections, Actions,
and Passions were relative. Yea, the whole of Christ as Mediator, is Relative:
He espoused human Nature not for himself, but for sinners: He lived not for
himself, but for his people: He died not for himself, but for sinners: Thus
here he wept not for himself, but for Jerusalem.

(2.) This also discovers to us, The Heroic, Christ's Affections most pure.
and pure strain, or temperament of Christ's Affections. Does he, indeed, shed
tears over Jerusalem, who is now meditating, how she may shed his blood: Has he
so much pity and bleeding compassion for her, who has so little pity and
compassion for herself? Oh! what incomparable generous Affections are here?
What an unparalled sweet humor is there loged in the heart of this great
Emmanuel? Who could ever have imagined that human Nature had been capable of
such pure, and desinteressed Affections, had we not so real an experiment
thereof in this Soverain Messiah?

(3.) Hence likewise we may collect, How really and cheerfully willing Christ
is to save sinners. Christ's will to save sinners.
Certainly, he that makes such bitter Lamentation over the foreseen Ruins of
Jerusalem, must needs have a very cordial, and unfeigned will and desire of her
salvation. This we find expressed to the life, Mat. 23. 37. O Mat. 23. 37
Jerusalem, Jerusalem -- How often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? What a
pathetic expostulation is here, which carries in it notices of vehement
Affections? Oh! how willing is Christ to give unto sinners the things that
belong unto their peace? Yea, is he not more willing to to bestow great things
than small? Does not his willingness to give, infinitely excede the sinners
willingness to receive? Is not Christ more glad to receive poor and weary
souls, than they are to come unto him? May sinners come too soon to Christ, or
before they are welcome? Has Christ set any bars or rails about his Throne of
Grace? May not whoever will, come and drink freely, and deeply of this living
fountain? Is not every thing about Christ mighty drawing, alluring, and
inviting? How drawing and encouraging is his Gospel? What alluring and inviting
Arguments are there in his blood and passion? Has not Christ removed al
groundless cavils and objections, which foolish sinners are apt to make
against coming to him for life? Does not Jerusalem first break with him, before
he breaks with her? And when that unhappy breach is made, does not his weeping
over her sufficiently argue, how fain he would be reconciled to her? how much
'twould please him to see her but cast half an eye toward him? how much his
heart would leap within him, to behold her, in the Prodigals posture, returning
toward him? Did Christ ever cease to make tenders of Grace to her, 'til she
ceased to accept or desire the tenders of his Grace? Yea, is not Christ's
forwardness to give, beyond the Sinners forwardness to receive? Did Christ
ever refuse to give, til sinners refused to ask what they wanted? Oh! how often
does Christ's kindness overcome the Sinners unkindnesse? Did he not frequently
express great love and pity, when he had the greatest cause to express
severe wrath? Oh! what infinite pleasure and satisfaction does Christ take, in
his gracious effusions and communications to sinners? Does he not think
himself sufficiently paid for what Grace he has given forth, if he may but
obtain the souls desires after more? How industrious is he in seeking sinners,
when they have lost themselves? Oh! what a sad consideration is it, that Christ
should be so boundless and large in his offers, and we so narrow in our
receivings?

(4.) Christ's weeping over Jerusalem instructs The Aggravations of such as
refuse Christ.
us further, What a dreadful sin it is to reject Christ, and al other concerns
of our peace. Christ's gracious invitations unto, long waitings for, and at last
tears over Jerusalem, do greatly aggravate her impenitence, and unbelief
toward him. For the lower Christ condescends to sinners, the nearer he comes
to them, and the more importunate he is in the offers of his Grace; the greater
is their sin in rejecting such gracious and sweet offers. What? does Christ
come unto his own; his own children, spouse, subjects, brethren, and friends?
and will not his own receive him? Does he so freely open his gracious heart to
sinners, and will they shut their hearts against him? Is he so forward to give,
and shall we be so backward to receive? Does Christ offer such great things to
sinners, and shall they prefer such poor toys before them? Yea, is Christ in
himself so incomparably excellent, and will sinners yet so much disdain him, and
so proudly shift themselves of him? Can there be a more heinous sin than this,
to meet Christ's bowels and pity with kicks, and contemt? Oh! study the weight
of this sin.

(5.) This Lamentation of Christ over impenitent Man's ruin from himself.
Jerusalem teaches us also, That man's Ruin is from himself? If after al
Christ's gracious Invitations; al his unwearied forbearances; al his bitter and
salt tears, Jerusalem will still persist in her rebellious contemt of his
gracious offers, how inexcusable is her sin, and inevitable her ruin? What will
prevail upon her, if Christ's Tears, and Entreaties will not prevail? What can
save her, if her Redemers Grace and Mercy save her not? What is it that keeps
Evangelic sinners from being saved? is it any defect in the Object, or its
Revelation? is it mere simple Ignorance, or Impotence in the subject? No; but
it is wilful blindness and impotence: they shut their eyes and will not see;
they bolt their hearts and will not open to Christ, who knocks at the door of
the soul, by many gracious Invitations of his Gospel and Spirit. And do not
such deservedly perish, who electively embrace their own ruin, and wilfully
reject the things that belong to their peace, Mat. 23. 37? Surely this wilful
Impotence, or rather impotent wilfulness evidently demonstrates, That
impenitent sinners frame their own Hell.

(6.) Hence also infer, That the greater privileges, Grand unkindnes.
and marquis of favor Christ does confer on any People or Church, the more
sorely does he resent any unkindnesse from such. The resentment of a small
unkindnesse, from such as have been obliged by special favors, is more
afflictive, than greater unkindnesses from others. For Jerusalem, who lay under
so many, and essential obligations, to reject Christ, and al his gracious
tenders of mercy, Oh! how much does this break his heart? What swords and
spears to pierce through his soul is this? For Jesurun, when she is made fat
with Divine mercies, to kick against those bowels, whence her mercies flowed,
how much does this wound and grieve the heart of Christ?

(7.) Lasty, Hence also we may collect, That Christ's tears the exemplar of ours.
Christ's tears are the best Exemplar, or Pattern of ours. He that will mourn
in a Christian manner, needs no better Idea, or exemple than this Christ's
Lamentation. Al Christ's Affections, Actions, and Passions, so far as they are
imitable by us, deserve a great Remarque: But nothing calls for a more exact
imitation from us, than this Christ's Lamentation: Every branch thereof deserves
great Consideration, Admiration, and Imitation. Use 1. Advice to study
Englands sins, etc.


1. We proceed now to some more practic Application of our Proposition; and
that first by way of Admonition, and Advice, That we al study well, and
consider deeply Jerusalems Church-wasting sins, how far they may be found
amongst us. Was Jerusalem guilty of rejecting Christ, and the things that did
belong unto her peace? And have not we been, in an high mesure, guilty of the
same? Does not this sin lie involved in Londons Ashes and Ruins, as well as in
Jerusalems? Did Jerusalem fondly flatter herself, and ungroundedly presume of
peace, when Christ threatened nothing but Wars and Desolations? And has not this
also been Englands Sin? Do not men cry Peace, Peace, when God speaks nothing
but Wrath? Was Jerusalem puffed up with Spiritual pride, and Carnal confidence
in her Church-privileges, and the tokens of Gods presence? And have not English
Professors been notoriously guilty of the same sins? Did Jerusalem sleep
securely under al Christ's Divine Comminations, Menaces, or Threats of
approaching Judgments? And has not England also slept securely under al Divine
premonitions of coming judgments? Had earthly-mindednesse a great place in
Jerusalems black Catalogue of Church-desolating sins? And have not English
Professors been dreadfully guilty of this sin also? Have not Back and Belly,
Trade, Pomp, and Pleasures, been the great Diana's, which have captivated the
hearts of too many Professors? Was Jerusalem infructuous and barren under al
gracious Appointments, Vouchsafements, and Influences? And has not this also
been Englands great sin? Did Jerusalem persecute Gods Prophets and Apostles?
And may we exemt England from the guilt of this sin? Was the want of
Reformation Jerusalems Churchdepopulating Sin? And is England free from this
Sin? Lastly, was Jerusalem guilty of Impenitence, want of Humiliation, and
open Apostasy? And let al judge, whether England has not been foully guilty of
the same sins. O that English Professors would spend some time, study, and
pains, in completing this parallel between Jerusalem and England, in point of
Church-wasting sins, thereby to break their hearts, and make them bleed forth
bitter Lamentations over Englands sins, and approaching miseries, if she repent
not.

Hence also we are furnished with matter of Use 2. Exhortation to mourn over
Englands sins, and feared miseries.
Exhortation to English Professors, That they would, by all means possible,
endeavor, both in themselves and others, an exact imitation of this our Lords
Lamentation over Jerusalem? Did our gracious Lord, who was himself void of the
least spot, weep so bitterly over Jerusalems sins? Oh then! how much should We,
poor sinful We, weep over Englands sin, whereunto we have contributed so great
a share? Does our blessed Lord, who was free from al sin, so much lament the
sins of others, wherein he had no share? O! What an high degree of impenitence
is it then for us, not to lament over our own sins, or National sins, wherein
we have had our share? If we mourn not over National, or Church-sins, do we not
hereby make our selves partakers in them; and so by consequence, in those
judgments that follow? Oh! What a sad contemplation is it, to think how many
great Professors make themselves guilty of National, or other-mens sins, by not
lamenting over them? How much Blasphemy, Atheism, Profanesse, Idolatry,
Sensuality, Security, Contemt of the Gospel, and other National sins, are by
the Righteous God, charged on the account of many great, yea some good
Professors, because they never mourned over these National sins? And may not
these Professors expect to be involved in National jugements, who thus, by
their defect of humiliation, involve themselves in National sins? Yea, may not
the great want of Mourning, and Humiliation for other men's sins, give too many
great Professors cause to suspect, that they never truly mourned, or were
humbled for their own sins? For he that mournes for his own sins as he ought,
mourns chiefly for the dishonor that comes to God thereby: Now if this be the
principal Motive of our mourning for sin, then we shall mourn for the dishonor
that comes to God by other men's sins, as well as by our own. But the
bottomereason why some Professors mourn for their own sins, and not for other
men's sins, is selflove: they think their own sins will draw jugements on
themselves, and therefore they mourn for them, thereby to avert Gods wrath
from themselves: Whereas true godly sorrow is chiefly afflicted for the offense
given to God: It is grieved, not so much because self, as because Christ is
grieved. Certainly a soul truly humbled for his own sins, will also be humbled
for, and mourn over National sins and jugements. How much then are we concerned
to imitate our great Lord in this his Lamentation? Do not his tears accuse, and
condemn our impenitent, secure, and hard hearts? He weeps for other men's sins;
but alas! how little do we weep for our own? May not Christ's tears fill us with
soul-confusion and shame, to consider, how much we are strangers to such
Christian Lamentations, over sinful and ruinous England? Has not this been the
practice of Saints in all ages, to lament over the Sins, and Ruins of their
Church or State? Was not this the temper of Lots spirit? Is it not said, He was
vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2. 7. 2 Pet. 2. 7.
(...), oppressed as with a burden, or dispirited and weakened, as with a
tedious sickness, as the word imports; so v. 8. Vexed his righteous soul, (...),
he cruciated, or tormented his soul as upon a rack: such was his grief and
anguish for their sins. And was not this likewise the gracious posture of
David's spirit, Psalm. 119. 53, 136, 158? Oh! what Lamentations did the good
Prophets of old make over Jerusalems first captivity, and her sin, which was
the cause thereof? Again, has not God made many gracious promises to such, as
mourn over the sins of the places they live in, as Ezech. 9. 4? Its true,
peradventure they may not be exemted from commun calamities; ay, but does not
God sanctify, and sweeten al unto them?

But to speak a little of the Qualification of our Lamentation: We are to
imitate, as much as may be, the Qualities, or manner of Christ's weeping. Were
Christ's tears Rational, Spiritual, and voluntary? Such should ours also be.
Was Christ's Lamentation generous and public? did he seem to forget his own
private sufferings, whiles he bewailed Jerusalem's? Oh! how ambitious should we
be of the like pure sorrow? Were his tears Pathetic, and Sympathetic? Did every
tear flow from a broken bleeding heart? How much then should we affect such
Tears? Again, were his tears so efficacious, so influential? What a shame is it
then for us, that our Lamentations are so barren and fruitless? Alas! how far
short do our Lamentations come of Christ's? Do not we grieve more for the evils
we our selves suffer, than for the sin, we or others commit? Sense of pain, or
loss afflicts us: but how little are we afflicted with the sense of guilt and
sin? We mourn over the Ruins of a burnt City, or impoverished Nation: but how
little do we mourn over our sin, and the wrath of a sin-revenging God, which
were the causes of those Ruins?

Lastly, Christ's Lamentation, does administer Use 3. Caution against
Church-sins.
to us a serious Caution against al those sins, which may draw down jugements
on a City, State, or Church. Is not this the great end and design of al
Divine Lamentations, to obviate and prevent the like Sins and Ruins? Was not
this one main end, why Christ here breaks forth into so sad a passion of
weeping over Jerusalem, thereby to lay in a Caveat for us, that we run not into
the like Sins and Ruins? O then let us keep our spirits, and lives, at the
greatest distance that may be, from these or suchlike Church-sins, which bring
with them such stupendous, inevitable Church-ruines. Reformation is the supreme
end of al sacred Lamentation: and albeit National jugements may surprise us, as
well as others, yet if we can keep our selves from National, and Church sins,
which are the causes of such jugements, they will in the issue prove no
jugements, but perfumed mercies to us. What ever burdens lie on our backs, if
sin lie not on our spirits, they will be very tolerable, easy burdens to us.

BOOK II. A General Consideration of the Text, Luke 19. 42. With a particular
Resolution of that first Question, What it is not to know the things that
belong unto our peace? Or, Wherein the Nature of Unbelief consists?
CHAP. I. The Explication of Luke 19. 42.
HAving given some general account of Christ's Lamentation, both as to its Matter
and Form, we now proceed to a more exact consideration of the chief
particulars thereof contained in v. 42. Saying, if thou had known, even thou,
at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they
are hid from thine eyes. These words carry in them an extreme Pathos, or
moving Affection: every word is Pathetic, and Emphatic: Christ's heart seems so
full of bleeding pity, as if he wanted words to give it vent: every expression
is so broken, as though his heart were quite broken to pieces: Yea, does he not
seem to drop a tear between every word? to speak, and weep; to drop a word, and
then a tear? So full of Affection and Commiseration is every expression, as it
will appear by each particular.

Saying,] Christ does not only weep, but Saying,
speaks, he mingles words very emphatic with tears; which adds much efficace,
and weight to his Lamentation. If,] (...): Illud (...) est (...) Ostendit enim
reddi a Christo causam fletus. Grotius.
Some understand the the first Particle, (...), as Aitiologic, or Causal; and
so they suppose it to discover to us the cause of Christ's weeping. Beza,
Gerhard.
But others, upon more grounded reasons, make the Particle (...) to be
redundant, and expletive; according to the Greek Idiome and Luke's wonted
Pleonasme, wherein it usually stands as a note of Asseveration, and so serves
for a Mimesis. For they are wont to premit it before a sentence, which being
spoken by some one, is recited; whence it is no more than an Enarrative, and
Expletive Particle. Neither does the Syriac version impede this construction:
for (...) there is not Causal, but a note of Exclamation.

As for that next Particle (...), rendered, If, it is variously explicated:
(...) hic est utinam. Grot.
Some conceive there is no defect in this discourse of Christ, and thence they
expound (...) in an Optative sense, by Vtinam, Would to God thou had known:
So they make it to be the same with (...).

Because (1.) This is not improper, or unusual in the Greek. (2.) The Syriac,
(...) Illu, is also Optative. (3.) In this sense (...) is also used by the Lxx.
for 17 Jos. 7. 7. (...), would to God we had remained.

But I rather incline to the jugemeut of Calvin, Beza, and others, who make
this Oration of Christ to be Elliptic, or defective; and so refer the Partible
(...), If, to the Subjunctive Mood. (1.) Because the Particle (...) is rarely,
if ever, found used in the New Testament, for Vtinam, would to God. (2.)
Because it is here premitted, as introductive to a pathetic exclamation, drawn
from most intimate Bowels, and such a torrent of melted Affections, as seem to
shut Christ's mouth, and interrupt his words. Si cognovisses tu. Pathetica
Oration, ideoque abrupta. Calv.
And indeed experience testifies, that such, in whose bowels are loged burning
vehement Affections, are not able to express their minds, but by abrupt and
broken words. And that which confirms this reason, is, that we find here, in
Christ's expressions, two mixed affections; 1. A great mesure of commiseration
and pity, as to Jerusalems approaching misery. And 2. a great degree of
Indignation, by reason of her prodigious Ingratitude, Contumacie, and Unbelief;
which were the cause of al her misery. Thus a learned Budaeus prioribus in
Pandectas Annotationibus.
Author observes, That this Oration of Christ is defective; as of one, who
partly commiserates Jerusalems approaching Destruction; and partly upbraids her
unheard of perfidie, and contumacie. Thus it seems evident, that the Particle
(...), If, here notes Christ's speech to be very defective, abrupt, and
pathetic. But yet there remains a difficulty, how this pathetic Interruption,
or defect in Christ's Oration, is to be filled up; concerning which we shall
speak in the Explication of that clause, even thou.

It follows, [Thou had known,] i. e. Believed, Thou had known.
embraced: For it is a general rule among the Hebrews, That words of sense
implie Affection. Faith is often in Scripture expressed under the notion of
knowledge; because Assent is the first essential Ingredient of faith; whence
follows Consent: and albeit the former may sometimes be found without the
later, as in historic faith; yet the later is never found without the former.
There can be no Consent, without Assent, although there may be sometimes Assent
without Consent, as in the Devils. Yea, may we not affirm (which we dout not
but to demonstrate in its place) that al true, Divine, Spiritual, deep,
prevalent, efficacious Assent, to the things that belong unto our peace, is
ever attended with a sincere Consent to the same? For, albeit Divine saving
Assent, and Consent, may differ as to their formal Acts, and Objects; yet are
they not the same, in regard of their effective principles, ends, and effects?
Is not the Will under the Tuition of the Understanding? Can it move regularly
toward any object, without the conduct of the mind? Yea, have not the Mind and
Will mutual, reciprocal Influences each on other? And lastly, What if we should
assert, that the Mind, which is the seat of Assent, and the Will, wherein the
consent of faith is seated, are not essentially different Faculties; but one
and the same soul, receiving different Denominations, according to its
different Acts, and Objects? This is no Novel opinion, neither do we want
reason, or sacred Authority to confirm the same, as we may prove hereafter.
This gives us the reason why our blessed Lord expresses Faith by Knowledge; and
Jerusalems unbelief, by not knowing the things that belong unto her peace. But
we are also to remember, that it is not simple Ignorance, that Jerusalem is
charged with; but a perverse, stupid, voluntary, affected Ignorance; which is
so far from excusing, as that it aggravates the sin of those who are guilty of
it.

Even thou,] (...). The Vulgar Latin and Erasmus render the Particle, (...),
Et, And; Even thou.
supposing it to be Copulative; as if our blessed Lord should deplore and
lament, that Jerusalem did not receive the Gospel, as other Cities had done.
Thus some will have the defect of this Elliptic discourse filled up by a tacit
indication of some other persons, or Cities, who knew the things that did
belong to their peace; whose exemple our blessed Lord would fain have Jerusalem
to follow, in knowing the things that did belong to her peace. These persons,
some will have to be the commun people, which immediately before make such
solemn Acclamations of joy, and sung Hosanna's to Christ, v. 38. Others
understand thereby other Cities of Judea, which had received the Gospel: Others
understand it indefinitely, of al such Cities as had at any time repented, and
turned to God. As if our Lord should have said, Other Cities, as Ninive, etc.
have acknowleged their sins, and understood the things that belonged to their
peace; Would to God thou also had known the things that belong to thy peace:
Thus some. But we are not necessitated to introduce any persons, for the
filling up this defective Oration: Particula (...) hoc loco non est Copulativa,
sed ponitur pro saltem, Gerhard.
For the Particle (...) in this place is not Copulative, but put for vel, even,
in this sense: If even thou, which art the Metropolis of Judea, the chief seat
of the divine Shekinah, or Habitation, and adorned with such singular
privileges, beyond al places in the world, If, I say, thou had known, etc.
Vel tu, Urbs illa supra omnes terrae urbes, Deo dilecta, Urbs Davidis, Deo
dicata. Grot.
Thus that which Christ here laments is not, that Jerusalem had not known the
things that did belong unto her peace, as other Cities had done, but this is
the great thing he bewails, that Jerusalem, which lay under such deep and
essential Obligations, to receive her Messiah, even she should so unworthily
reject him. So that the simple, and natural sense seems to be this: If even
thou, whom it so nearly concerns, had known, etc.

At least,] (...). The Repetition of the Conjunction (...) is not useless; but
carries with it a singular Elegance, and Emphase: (...) bis repetitum Emphatice
ponitur pro latino, vel, saltem Glass.
for the first (...), and, refers to the City; the^ last to her day, which
follows: as if he had said; If thou, Jerusalem, had known, even thou, whom it
so greatly concerns to know these things, at least in this thy day, in which
I, thy promissed Messiah, am come unto thee. Ergo hic quoque Particula (...)
accipienda est, ut paulo ante, quod etiam liquet ex Particula (...) adjuncta.
Bez
Thus the Particle (...) is to be understood, as before for vel, even, or,
saltem, at least; which is evident from the Particle (...) annexed thereto.
Whence it follows.

In this thy day] There is a great Pathos, In this thy day.
and Emphase in this notion, This thy day; whereby we must understand,
according to the Hebraic Idiome, that space of time, or the last period of that
time, which our Lord had so graciously vouchsafed to Jerusalem, for her
Repentance. Every word is very significant and weighty. (1.) The word Day, has
much in it: as if he had said; The day of Grace yet shines on thee: Thy Sun is
not as yet set: but the night will follow, Joh. 9. 4 This is termed, the Time of
thy Visitation, v. 44. (2.) The Epithet thy is also very emphatic. Thy Day,
i.e, That day, which thy Lord has, in much singular favor, vouchsafed to thee,
beyond all the world besides, which as yet lies in darkness. Thy day, wherein
thy Messiah has given thee such public and manifest Demonstrations of his
sacred Mission, and Commission from God: Thy day, wherein I have been wholly
taken up in preaching to thee, the great things of thy peace; wherein I have
given thee so many solemn Invitations, so many gracious Allurements, so many
bland and friendly Entreaties, to accept of me as thy Savior. And (3.) There
seems yet to lie a farther Emphase in that first Particle (...) This; which
seems to be both Restrictive and Emphatic: In This thy day, wherein I now make
my last Application and Address to thee. As if he had said: I sent my Prophets
to thee; but alas! how were they abused, and slain? I have in person made many
Addresses and Supplications to thee; but have I not received as many Repulses
from, as ever I made Applications to thee? Lo! now I make my Erat haec ultima
quasi occasio ad salutem Judaeis oblata, ut Mossi^^ sibi oblatam recip^^ent,
and ita salvar^ntur. Glass. Significat voce diei adesse, extremum tempus, etc.
Gerhard. Quamvis hactenus sceleste and impie contra Deum fueris contumax nunc
saltem resipiscendi est tempus. Calvin.
last Application to thee: every word is watered, and bedewed with Tears: O!
That thou would, in THIS thy day, thy last Day, receive the things that
belong unto thy peace. Albeit thou have hitherto rejected al my gracious
offers; yet even now, at least now in THIS thy day, be persuaded to listen to
me. Thus some understand by This thy day, the ultimate and extreme occasion,
and season, wherein Christ made offer of Salvation to Jerusalem. Yet we may not
exclude the former Seasons, and offers of Grace, which Christ gave to
Jerusalem: For this pathetic Oration includes in it, not only an Invitation for
the present, but also an Exprobation, and Indignation against Jerusalem, for
her former contemt, and rejection of the things that did belong unto her peace:
so that we may not exclude any part of that time, which was afforded to
Jerusalem, by her Messiah; although the last period of this time may, possibly,
be chiefly intended. Hence it is thought, that these words refer to that
Zechar. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion: shout O daughter of
Jerusalem; behold thy King comes to thee. But this coming of Christ, may not,
(...). Hactenus nunc saltem, cum illa dies illuxit Grot.
qua dictum est, Dicite filiae Sionis, Zachar. 9. 9. as I conceive, be confined
to this last coming of Christ to Jerusalem, but extends to the whole Oeconomie,
or Dispensation of his Grace, before his crucifixion. But it follows.

The things which belong unto thy peace] (...); The things which belong unto
thy peace.
This is evidently an Hebraisme: For the Hebrews under the notion of Peace
include al manner of Beatitude, and Prosperity. The things that belong unto
our peace, are either Complexe and Notional; or Simple and Real: The Complexe,
Notional matters of our peace, are the Evangel, or words of peace, promulgated
by Christ and his Apostles: The simple and real things of our peace, are (1.)
Christ himself, the great Mediator of our peace, with all his merits. (2.) The
Spirit of Christ, who makes Application of al our purchased peace. (3.) God the
Father, the original fountain. (4.) Heaven, etc.

But now] Here we have (1.) an Aposiopesis, But now.
or an abrupt breach in the course of the Oration; whereby a principal part
thereof seems to be left unmentioned. This argues the depth of Christ's grief,
and the vehemence of his Lamentation; which wanted words to give it vent. This
Aposiopesis, or breach in Christ's words, may be thus filled up: If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace, [Oh! how cheerfully, how greedily would thou have embraced them? or,
Oh! how happy would thou have been?] Beza, Gerard.
Others incline rather to refer the Aposiopesis to the last clause of the
following words, But now they are hid from thine eyes [to thine unspeakable
damage, and eternal ruin.] The difference is not material: we may take in both.

(2.) But now] As if had said: Time was, O Jerusalem, when thou had the
bright, warm beams of my Gospel Grace shining on thee: But now, thy day of
Grace is gone, thy Sun is set: thou have had many wooings, and importunate
offers of Grace from me: But now I am come to give thee my last Adieu: Adieu,
Jerusalem, Adieu. Thou have had many strivings of my Spirit vouchsafed to thee:
But now my Spirit bids thee farewell: farewell Jerusalem. Thence it follows,

They are hid from thine eyes,] Here is an They are hid from thine eyes.
Hebraic Ellipsis, wherein the Consequent is also expressed by the Antecedent:
for those things which are hid, are removed out of sight: whence the later is
also expressed by the former: Ellipsis est Hebraea, qua ex Antecedente
intelligitur simul Consequens. quae enim abscouduntur, ea a conspect^
removentur. Gerhard.
So that the meaning is, The Gospel is hid, and thenc removed from thee. Or
peradventure, it may allude to the Veil on Moses's face, whereby the Glory of
God was hid from the Jews; which was a Symbolic shadow of their blindness, as
it is explicated by Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14. For until this day remianeth the
same veil, etc. This continues in use among the Jews to this very day: For in
their Synagogues, whiles the Law is read, they have a Veil on their faces;
which is a black marque, though little considered by them, of the veil of
Ignorance, and Hardness on their hearts. Thus Christ threatens here, that, for
the future, The things of their peace, should be hid from their eyes. And it
deserves a particular remarque, that their jugement bears proportion to their
sin: They wilfully shut their eyes against the Gospel; and Christ judicially
shuts the Gospel, and hides it from their eyes: (...)] Ignorantia inexcusabili
quia lucemoblaram i mo ingestam fastidiose respuis. Grot.
They reject the things that belong to their peace; and the things that belong
to their peace reject them: Their hearts are sealed up by unbelief against the
Gospel; and the Gospel becomes as a sealed Book to them: They bid Adieu to
Christ; and he bids Adieu to them: They prefer Caesar before Christ; and Christ
deservedly leaves them, to be ruined by Cesars hands, whom they prefer before
himself.

CHAP. II. Eighteen general Observations drawn from the words of the Text, as
before explicated.
THe words being thus explicated, they offer to us variety of choice
Observations. As from that first notion, Saying, we may observe (1.) That
Christ's expressions of pity do Doct. 1.
spring from the deepest Affections. Every word is attended with a tear: every
saying is a lively image of a wounded heart.

(2.) That Christ's Sayings and doings are the Doct. 2.
same. Every word of Christ carries omnipotence in its womb: As his Promises,
so his Threats are omnipotent: and Jerusalem found, by dreadful experience,
this Threat fulfilled to a Tittle. Yea, to this very day she lies under the
dreadful arrest of this Threat. The Menaces, and Threats of men, even of the
greatest of men, are often but smoke and wind: they threaten and storm much;
speak big words; but alas! how little can they do? But oh! What energie and
efficace is there in every saying of Christ? Has not poor Jerusalem layen
1600. years under the prodigious curse of this one dismal saying? O! then dread
every saying of Christ.

It follows: [If] Hence observe (1.) That Doct. 3.
Christ is very real, serious, and pathetic in all his offers of Grace unto
sinners. Every word of the Gospel is but a chariot, that conveighs Christ's
heart to Sinners: If ever he be in good earnest, it is in his evangelic
Invitations. His Bowels are never more warm, and rolling; his affections never
more bleeding, than in inviting and drawing Sinners to himself. Oh! how low
does Christ stoop? unto what mean terms does he condescend, to win his enemies
to be reconciled to him? How studious and industrious is he, to remove al
Heart-cavils, against the offers of his Grace? Does he ever break with us
before we break with him?

(2.) This Particle [If] as explicated gives Doct. 4.
us yet this further Observation, That nothing does more deeply provoke Christ's
indignation against sinners, than the wilful rejection of his Gospel, Grace,
and Person. For this Particle, If, as was noted, implies not only
commiseration, but also Indignation and Exprobation: Christ by this abrupt
manner of speech does sorely upbraid Jerusalem, with her contumacious contemt
of himself, and his evangelic offers of Grace. Now to upbraid another, is to
lode him with reproaches, disgraceful and biting words; thereby to aggravate his
ingratitude, and the foulness of his fact; as also to manifest what a just
ressentiment, and sense we have of the injuries done to us, by the person
upbraided. So that Christ's upbraiding Jerusalem with her wilful impenitence and
unbelief, argues his deep ressentiment thereof, and just indignation against
her for it. Thus Christ upbraids his own Disciples with their unbelief, Mark
16. 14. which argues that the least degree of unbelief is greatly ressented by,
and sorely offensive to Christ. But of this hereafter, in the Aggravations of
unbelief.

Thou had known] Hence note (1.) That Doct. 5.
sanctified Notions are the root of saving Faith, and the divine life. To speak
a little what sanctified Notions import; and then what connection they have with
saving faith, and the divine life. These sanctified Notions, are a divine Light
of life, John 8. 12. an unction from the holy One, 1 John 2. 20. proceeding
originally from the Father of light and life, Joh. 6. 45. whereby Believers
know things as they ought, 1 Cor. 8. 2. For the Spirit of God impressing a
Divine Glory on Supernatural objects, it opens the same to the mind, and
also opens the mind to receive the same; and thence implanteth a supernatural
Instinct, a divine Sagacitie, and intuitive light; whereby the soul not only
sees spiritual objects, but also has a particular, experimental taste, and
feeling sense thereof; which kills beloved idols and lusts, turns the Bent of
the heart toward Christ, and proves the door to communion with God in Christ,
and the Divine life. And oh! how clear and distinct; how deep and solid; how
sweet and delicious; how efficacious and active, yea transformative are these
sanctified Notions, which lie wrapped up in the Light of Life? What a mighty
conformity has the renewed mind, clothed with these Divine notions, to al
Divine truths? How is all the glory of this lower world eclipsed, and al carnal
delights made to lose their relish hereby? What Satisfaction in God, what
fervent Affections toward Christ, what bigorous vigorous Exercices of Grace
does this Light of life work in believers? But it has a more peculiar
soverain influence on faith, and al its vitals. Inward, spiritual, deep,
feeling, affective and practic Notions, of God in Christ have an huge soverain
influence on faith: so the Psalmist assures us. Psalm. 9. 10. And they that know
thy Name will put their trust in thee. A clear, distinct, Psalm. 9. 10.
particular, steadfast, divine, operative knowledge of Christ breeds Confidence
in, Recumbence on, and Adherence to him. None are more tenacious, and resolute
in adhering unto Christ, than such as are baptized with his Spirit, and Light
of Life. Yea, according to the Quantity and Quality of our light, such will be
the Quantity, and Quality of our faith: If our light be Spiritual, Divine and
Saving, such will our faith be: Again, if our light be not only spiritual for
the kind; but also intense, prevalent and strong as to degree; then will our
faith be also mighty intense, prevalent and efficacious: such an individuous,
yea, essential connection is there betwixt saving knowledge and divine faith.
Hence,

(2.) Observe, That Ignorance is the original, Doct. 6.
and most pregnant parent of Unbelief. The Papists tell us, That Ignorance is
the mother of Devotion. And it holds true, as to their own Devotion, which is
but Superstition, and Will Worship: For Ignorance is both the Mother, and Nurse
of al Idolatry, and Superstition; and so by consequence also of Unbelief: and
therefore it is no wonder that the Papists require only an ignorant, credulous,
implicit faith of their Devoti: For such a blind faith suits best with their
blind Devotion, and Superstition. But surely such an Implicit blind faith will
not suffice a Christian: yea is it not the worst kind of Unbelief? To believe
only as the Church believes, without a right understanding of the objects we
believe, what is it but to believe nothing as we ought? He that pins his Faith
on the Churches sleeve, without ever considering what he believes, what does
he, but at once part with, and bid Adieu to his Faith, Religion, Reason, yea,
and his Humanity too, as we may show hereafter? Such are the malignant
Influences, and Qualities of a blind, ignorant Implicit Faith.

Even thou] Even thou.
i. e. Si vel tu, quae singulari privilegio in toto orb praecellis, si tu,
inquam, quae eoeleste es in rerris sacrarium, cognosceres. Calv.
Thou Jerusalem, who have been the Seat of the Divine presence, dignified with
such splendid marquis of Divine Favor, and adorned with such rich discoveries
of evangelic Grace, etc. Hence observe (1.) That, as to externe marquis of
Divine favor and benediction, the richest that a People, or Church can be made
partaker of, is to be made the seat of Gods gracious Presence, and Evangelic
Administrations. Out of Heaven there may not be expected a greater externe
privilege than this, for a people to be espoused by God, as his visible Church,
the place of his Gracious Residence, and Evangelic Administrations. Doct. 7:
This was Jerusalems privilege: she was Christ's first bride: the Covenant of
Grace was first loged in her bosom: Christ was her first crowned King, and
Lawgiver: The Oracles of God were first laid down in pawn with her: Her Land
and City was adopted by Christ, as Symbols of his Church: Her Temple was a
Type of Christ's Natural body; wherein he dwelt by visible tokens of Glory,
and Grace: Her Males bore somewhat of Christ in their flesh: Yea, Christ
himself was borne of Judaic flesh and blood: Jerusalem had the first tenders of
Gospel Grace: Christ long waited for, and as Minister of the Covenant,
endeavored after her conversion. Such were her privileges.

But in this pathetic Expression, even Thou, there lies couched not only an
intimation of Jerusalems Privileges; but also an Exprobation of her sin; and
that with vehement Indignation. As if he had said: What! Jerusalem serve me so!
Even thou, who have been so dignified by me! Oh! what an heinous odious sin is
this? who can bear it? Hence observe;

(2.) That by how much the more any People or Doct. 8.
Church is dignified with Divine privileges, or gracious vouchsafements; by so
much the more heinous is their sin, if they improve not those means and
privileges. The more excellent gifts we are invested with, the greater
punishment do we deserve, if we abuse the same: So Isai. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

At least in this thy day,] These words, as before explicated, afford to us
several practic Observations. (1.) That Evangelic sinners have a day of Grace
afforded to them. Wherever Doct. 9.
the Sun of Righteousness comes, he brings healing under his wings, (i. e.
beams) or a day of Grace. (2.) That it is the supreme wisdom and interest of
Professors, to fill up their day of Doct. 10.
Grace, with the Duties of their day. Oh! What deep engagements did Jerusalem
lie under, to improve her day of Grace? How happy might she have been, had she
but performed the same? (3.) Hence also observe, Doct. 11.
That the day of Grace will have its period. Though Christ wait long, yet he will
not wait always: the longest day of Grace has its night: and usually the
clearer, brighter, and warmer the day of Grace is, the shorter it is: where
Christ vouchsafes the greatest means of Grace, if they are not improved, but
contemned, there usually the day of Grace is shortest. Think of this. (4.)
Hence also Doct. 12.
observe, That the nearer Christ comes in the offers of his Grace; and the
longer he waits for our acceptance of those offers, the more inexcusable shall
we be, if we reject, or neglect the same. This observation lies wrapped up in
that first expression, at least. Our blessed Lord often came very near, and close
to Jerusalem, in the tenders of his Grace: Oh! how often did he knock at her
gates? how long did he wait for her Reception of him? What sacred, and sweet
Importunity did he use, to persuade, and prevail upon her, in that her day, to
accept of the things that did belong unto her peace? But alas! she would not;
she rejects al his gracious offers, 'til at last her day was expired. And oh!
how much does this aggravate her sin? Who is worse than he, who has a clear
day of Grace vouchsafed him, and yet electively embraces darkness before
light?

The things which belong unto thy peace] i. e. my self, who am thy Peacemaker,
the King and Mediator of thy peace; with whom is thy covenant of peace etc.
Hence note, (1.) That Doct. 13.
Christ alone is the great Mediator of our peace: Out of him there is no peace:
take away Christ, and you take away the chief cornerstone, the main foundation
of our peace. The Sin-revenging God is nothing but wrath, and everlasting
burnings out of Christ. But he that has Christ, has peace with God, and with all the creation besides. Nothing can hurt him, who is under the wing of Christ,
the Prince of peace. Al peace of conscience, which is collected either from
holy conversation, or from evangelic Promises, or from the sense of Gods love,
or any other way, is al resolved into Christ, as the proper source, and spring
thereof. Therefore he that knows not Christ, knows not the things that belong
unto his peace.

(2.) Hence also observe, That Unbelievers Doct. 14.
are the greatest enemies to their own peace, and welfare. All the enemies of
Jerusalem did not so much obstruct her peace, as her own Unbelief. Satan and al
his powers of darkness are not so prejudicial, and destructive to the peace of
souls, as their own unbelieving hearts. How feeble is Hell? How insignificant
and unable are its iron Gates, to prevail over the weakest believer, that
adheres to Christ? But as for sinners, that are under the Dominion of Unbelief,
oh! what a world of enemies are they exposed unto? How does every Tentation
prey upon them? What wars, what commotions, what confusions does every lust
raise in their hearts? Yea, how much are such obnoxious to the wrath, and rage
of the Righteous God?

(3.) Hence also we may observe; That it Doct. 15.
adds much weight to the Aggravation of Unbelief, that it is a rejection of
the things that belong unto our peace. The excellence of the objects, which are
offered to sinners in the Gospel of peace, greatly aggravates their sin, who
refuse them. Was it ever known that a conquered enemy refused terms of peace?
Is there any record to be found of a captive Rebel, that rejected a gracious
pardon from his Prince? And yet, Lo! this is the Unbelievers case: Christ comes
with gracious offers of peace and life; but alas! how are they rejected? Oh!
what an heinous sin is this? Yea, Unbelief is not a mere simple refusal of the
things which belong unto our peace; but it carries in its bowels, much Enmity,
Opposition, Antipathie, Blasphemy and Contumely against God, and Christ, and
all the great things of our peace, as hereafter.

But now they are hid from thine eyes] Hence Doct. 16.
observe, (1.) That when God puts a period to the day of Grace, al means of
Grace are insignificant, and ineffectual. Although God may sometimes continue
the means of Grace, yet does he not withdraw his Influences of Grace from those
means? And then how inefficacious are they? What is Christ but a veiled face?
What is the Gospel, but a sealed Book? What are Ordinances, but broken
Cisternes? What are Promises, but dead letters? What are duties, but barren
Wombs, when the day of Grace is gone? Yea, are not al these so far from
becoming means of Grace, as that they are indeed, by reason of man's wilful
impenitence, means of hardening? Yea, is not Christ himself a stone of offense,
and stumbling to such, as are deprived of the day of Grace? Thus are the things
of their peace hid from their eyes.

(2.) Hence also observe, That when God Doct. 17.
puts a period to the sinners day of Grace, then begins his day of jugement.
Jerusalem's day of jugement began from this very moment, that Christ pronounced
this dreadful sentence against her: For henceforward al Christ's Dispensations
toward her were in jugement. There was a curse upon her Blessings, wrath and
revenge mixed with her sweetest Privileges, and mercies. What Christ speaks in
general of Satan and his kingdom, Joh. 12. 31. Now is the jugement of this
world, etc. the same may be in particular applied to Jerusalem, and al other
impenitent sinners, who are passed their day of Grace. Thus when the day of
Grace ends, the day of Jugement begins: For when all the things that pertain to
thy peace are hid from thine eyes, what remains, but chains of darkness, and
beginings of Jugement?

(3.) Hence also we may observe, That Doct. 18.
there is an exact proportion between the unbelievers sin and jugement. The
wilful unbeliever shuts his eyes against all the things that belong unto his
peace; and then the righteous God comes and claps a seal of judicial
occecation, or spiritual blindness on his eyes, that so he never see them
more: Joh. 9. 39. For jugement am I come into this world, -- that they which
see might be made blind. There is often an exact conformity betwixt man's sin,
and Gods jugement: What a visible character, and stamp of Jerusalem's sin is
here impressed on her jugement? What is it that she suffers from the righteous
mouth and hand of Christ, but what she voluntarily inflicts on herself? She will
not see the things that belong unto her peace; and therefore says Christ, she
shall not see them, they shall be hid from her eyes. She will not open the Gates
of her Soul, that the King of Glory, her Messiah, may enter in; and therefore
says Christ, let her heart be shut under the curse of judicial obduration.
This was Gods usual method in punishing Israel, even from her Infant-state. And
oh! how much does this illustrate the justice of God, when visible Ideas and
stampes of men's sins, are to be seen in the face of their jugements? How must
this needs cut, and wound the heart of an awakened penitent sinner, to see his
guilt in the face of his punishment? This Analogy, and Affinity betwixt the
unbelievers sin, and jugement leaves him also without the least shadow of
excuse. Alas! who but the Unbeliever himself may be blamed, if the good things
of the Gospel be hid from his eyes, seeing he himself first shut his eyes
against the dazzling glory of those bright beams, which shone so long on his
eyes? What cause have Unbelievers to complain, that the Gospel is a veiled, or
sealed book unto them, seeing their hearts are veiled, and sealed with unbelief
against it? Oh! what a vindication will this be of the righteous jugement of
God, but confusion to wilful unbelievers, to consider the exact paritie, and
Analogy which there is between their sin, and their punishment? How will this
confound them to al eternity?

CHAP. III. The Notional Object of Unbelief: or, What are those Notional
things, that belong unto our peace, which unbelief assents not unto?
THe precedent Observations furnish us with singular matter of Discourse: each
Observation deserves a particular examen, and Remarque: But we shall cast al
into the mould, or form of this one general Proposition, or Doctrine: That
Unbelief, or the not knowing the Doct.
things that belong unto our peace, is a sin of the deepest tincture, or most
heinous Aggravations; and that which exposes the sinner to the most severe
wrath, and jugements of God. This Proposition contains the spirit and mind of
the Text; as also the sum and substance of all the former Observations; which,
in the explication hereof, will have their particular consideration. And, for
our more regular, and methodic procedure herein, we shall resolve the
Proposition into these four grand Questions. (1.) What it is not to know the
things that belong unto our peace? Or, Wherein the genuine Idea, or Nature of
Unbelief does consist? (2.) Whence this Unbelief springs? or, What are the
seminal Roots, the original Causes of this sin? (3.) What are the Aggravations
of this Unbelief? (4.) What severe wrath and jugements from God, attend this
sin of Unbelief? The Examen, and Resolution of these Questions will give us the
full Explication of our Proposition, as also of the Text.

Q. 1. What it is, Not to know the things The Nature of Unbelief.
that belong unto our peace? or, Wherein the Nature of Unbelief does consist?

For the more full Resolution of this Question, we shall consider Unbelief (1.)
with relation to its Object. (2.) In regard to its Act. 1. The Object of
Unbelief is here expressed, What the things that belong to our peace are.
under this comprehensive notion, The things that belong unto thy peace: These
are (as we before intimated) either (1.) Complexe and Notional: or (2.) Simple
and Real. The Complexe, or Notional Things that belong unto our peace, are al
those divine Axioms, Maxims, Canons, or Notions, loged in the sacred
Scriptures, which any way conduce to our peace. The simple, or real things that
belong unto our peace, are the good things themselves, which lie wrapped up in
those Divine Axioms, or Notions of sacred Scripture; namely, God in Christ,
Heaven, etc. The former are the Object of Faiths Assent; the later of its
Consent, Election, and Choice. Again, the Notional things that belong to our
peace, which are the complexe Object of Faiths Assent, may be considered by us;
(1.) Materially; (2.) Formally. The Material complexe objects of Faiths Assent
are the Scriptural Notions, which Faith assents unto: The Formal Object of
Faith's Assent is the Formal Reason, Proper Motives, or principal Grounds of
its Assent; that which induces, or draws our minds to assent unto sacred
Scriptural Notions; as also constitutes, specifies and distinguishes Divine
saving Assent. Lastly, The Notional, Material Object of our Assent is either
General, or Particular. The General Object is the whole Word of God: The
Particular is the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, which gives us a more
particular and express Idea of the things that belong to our peace. The things
that belong unto our peace being thus distributed, according to their several
Constitutions, and Regards to Faith, we may with more Facility, and
Perspicuitie determine and resolve our Question, What it is not to know the
things that belong unto our peace? But before we enter on the explication of
Unbelief, we must premise, that our Intendment is to treat of it in its
general, and abstract Nature, and not as it relates to this or that subject:
For albeit our Text speaks of the Unbelief of persons irregenerate; yet
inasmuch as the unbelief of persons regenerate differs not totally, from that
in persons irregenerate, we may very well and properly treat of both, under one
general Idea; though with different Reflections on, and Applications to this, or
that subject, Thus much being premised, we proceed to the explication of our
Question.

First, we shall begin with the Notional, Material, General things that belong
unto our peace, The first part of Unbelief in respect
of its object, is, Not to assent to the Word of God. which are the sacred
Scriptures, or Word of God in the General; which not to know, or, truly assent
unto, is the original, and no small part of Unbelief. Oh! here lay the the
bitter Root, and Spawn of al Jerusalems sin, and misery: she did not
understand, at least not practicly assent unto the sacred Scriptures, in which
all the things that belonged to her peace lay wrapped up. Moses, and the Prophets
were a sacred Map, wherein Jerusalem might have viewed the celestial Canaan,
her Messiah, his glorious Names and Titles of Honor, his Person, and Offices,
with all other things that did belong to her peace: But alas! Jerusalem wanted
spiritual eyes, to contemplate such glorious objects. This our blessed Lord
upbraids the carnal Jews with, Joh. 5. 39. Joh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me. (...), to search, signifies here, by a sacred
sagacitie, and unwearied study to hunt, or inquire into the Scriptures, as
dogs hunt after wild beasts: but oh! this the unbelieving Jews were strangers
to; and therefore no wonder, if they were strangers to all the things that did
belong to their peace. The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, the Glass
wherein his glorious perfections shine: neither can there the least ray of true
Religion shine on lapsed man, but what is reflected from this celestial Miroir
of the Divine will. The Splendour of Divine Majesty is but as an inexplicable
Labyrinth, unless we are conducted thereinto by this thread of sacred
Scriptures. God is nothing to us, but what he testifies of himself. God is
nothing, says Tyndal, but his Law and his promises, i. e, That which he
bids thee to do, and believe, and hope; and to imagine any other thing of
God, is gross, and damnable Idolatry. The Sacred Word is the Spirits Schole,
in which he teaches all the things that belong to our peace: so that we may be
contentedly ignorant of what is not here taught.

Hence it is apparent, that one main, and fundamental part of Unbelief consists
in not yielding a real, firm, distinct, certain, affectionate, deep, and
practic Assent to the sacred Scriptures. And oh! what an Epidemic, Universal
sin is this, even in the professing world? How many are there, among the crowd
of knowing Professors, who never gave an explicit, actual, cheerful,
spiritual, and steadfast Assent to the Word of God, and its sacred Authority?
Are not the most of Professors extreme partial in their credence, or belief, of
the divine Scriptures? Do not they pick and choose, what may correspend most
with their Lusts, or carnal Interests? This word that pleases them they can
believe, but that word which disgusts them they cannot assent unto: Do not
many, in their prosperity disbelieve the Threats, and in their Adversity the
Promises? And what is this, but not to know the things that belong to their
peace? For he that does disbelieve any one part of Scripture, may he not be
justly reputed to disbelieve the whole? Is not the Reason and Authority of a
part, the same with the Reason and Authority of the whole word? Wherefore, does
not he who rejects a part, also reject the Authority of the whole? Its true, al
Scriptures are not alike Fundamental, or equally necessary to salvation; yet
may we not justly conclude, that al are equally necessary to be believed, if we
consider their origin and Authority; as they are al inspired by the Spirit of
God, and clothed with Indelible Characters of Divine Majesty? O then! how many
knowing Professors are in this point guilty, of not knowing the things that
belong to their peace? How few are there that yield a rooted, welgrounded,
operative Assent to the whole Word of God; who have an ear to hear, wherever,
and whenever God has a mouth to speak? O that Professors would seriously
ruminate on this, That so far as they disbelieve the Truth, Certainty, and
Authority of any one word of God; so far they disbelieve, or know not the
things that belong to their peace. And whence is it, that many Professors are
so averse from assenting to the whole Word of God? Is it not from the
prevalence of some lust in their hearts, which turns them strongly another
way? They disbelieve some Scriptures; and why? Is it not because they lie not
level with their lusts? Oh! what a deep Mystery of Iniquity is this disbelief
of the Scriptures, as loged in some carnal hearts? What malignant, and venomous
effusions does it transmit into their lives? Is it not the great Stratageme,
and plot of Satan to dispirit, and weaken men's Assent to the sacred Scriptures?
And does he not hereby create, in many sincere Believers, much unbelief,
concerning the things that belong to their peace? May not the most of our
tentations be resolved into some disbeliefe of the Scriptures? And on the
contrary, has not a real, fixed, supernatural, and saving Assent to the Sacred
Scriptures, a mighty soverain, efficacious Influence on al our Graces, and
Duties? Does not the vigor, strength, beauty, and improvement of al Grace
depend on our belief of the Scriptures? O that men would then look well hereto!

2. We proceed now to the Particular notional Disbeliefe of the Gospel or
Covenant of Grace.
Matters, or Things belonging to our peace, which Unbelief rejects: and those
are the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, with all the branches thereof. The Gospel
is Grace's office; the shop where the sinner may find both food and physic. The
Covenant of Grace is faiths Magna Charta; the Epistle of Christ writ with his
own blood; the Cabinet, wherein al our Jewels of Grace, and Peace are laid up
by Christ; yea, the words of life; wherein Christ's heart lies wrapped up, and is
conveyed unto sinners. The Promises of the Gospel are the Element in which
Faith lives and moves: they are the Air, which Faith sucks in, and breaths
forth: they are the food, on which Faith seeds. There is no diet so natural, so
delicious, so restaurative, so corroborative, or strengthening, so nutritive,
so satisfying as the promises spirited by Free Grace: Faith relisheth no food
like this. Faith never reposeth herself so securely, never sleeps so sweetly,
as when she does lean her head on the bosom of some promise: If she has but
a promise to cast Anchor on, she can ride confidently in the greatest storms;
and laugh at all the proud waves, that beat against her. Now this being the
temper and spirit of Faith, hence it necessarily follows, That not to assent to
the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, and the Promises which lie wrapped up therein,
takes in much of the vital spirit of Unbelief. This will be more evident if we
consider, the chief material parts of the Covenant of Grace, and the evil
aspect which Unbelief casts thereon.

The Covenant of Grace contains in it; The Covenant of Grace contains.
(1.) Matters of Grace. (2.) Matters of Providence. (3.) Matters of coming Glory:
Now in all these regards Unbelief may be said, Not to know the things that
bolong to our peace.

1. The Covenant of Grace contains in it Matters 1. Matters of Grace.
of Grace. The Law tells us what we are by Nature; but the Gospel tells us what
we are, or may be by Grace: The Law discovers to us our sin and misery, but
the Gospel discovers our remedy; and so opens a door to Faith: Yea, the Gospel
does not only declare to us the Objects and Matters we are to believe, but also
furnishes us with many gracious encouragements, and incentives to believe: yea
further, the Gospel does not only afford us matters and motives of Faith; but
also it becomes a sanctified Instrument in the hand of the Spirit to conveigh
Faith, and al other Graces to us. For it is an infallible Maxim in Theology,
that Evangelic Promises of Grace, on such, or such conditions, without Grace
to perform those conditions, are as little available to beget faith, as the
law is. Thus we see how full of gracious Matters, Motives, and Offers the
Covenant of Grace is. But yet the more fully to anatomise the Bowels of
Unbelief, as to Matters of Grace offered in the Covenant, we shall a little,
though but cursorily, touch on those offers of Grace, which the Covenant makes,
with their Proprieties.

(1.) The offers of Grace made in the Gospel, Unbelief questions the Realitie
of the offers of Grace.
or Covenant of Grace, are very Real, and Cordial: There is never a line, no
nor a word of the Gospel, but it carries Christ's heart wrapped up in it: Every
promise is a love-letter sent by Christ, to assure the sinner, how
affectionate his heart is set toward him: There is not an expression that
drops from the mouth of Christ, but is full of bleeding Affection: Every
promise gives the sinner a good Law-right to Grace, provided that he accept of
it when offered: If Christ be real in any thing, he is so in the offers of
Grace to sinners. But now Unbelief looks on al these offers of Grace, as mere
Romances, Fables, or fine-spun stories. This was the case of the unbelieving
Jews, as Paul assures us, Romans 10. 15. How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of peace, and bring Romans 10. 10, 16.
glad tidings of good things! Oh! what good News is here? who would not
cheerfully assent to such glad tidings of peace? Is there any so sotish, as to
refuse such good things? Yes, adds Paul, v. 16. But they have not al obeyed
the Gospel: For Esaias says, Lord who has believed our report? As if he had
said: True, we preach the great truths of Gospel-peace unto sinners; but alas!
how few have obeyed, or assented to the truth of the Gospel? Do not the most of
men look on these things as too good news to be true? Where is the man, that
really assents to the Realitie of these Glad-tidings? May we not then justly
cry out with Esaias, Who has believed our Report? Thus Unbelief calls in
question the Realitie of Evangelic offers of Grace.

(2.) The offers of Grace in the Gospel are Unbelief questions the freedom of
the Covenant.
very Gratuitous and Free: and this draws on Faith freely to close therewith:
For faith being a federal Instrument influenced, and acted by the Covenant, the
more it apprehends the freedom of the Covenant, the more freely it will embrace
the same. Now the Covenant instructs Faith fully in this point: It teaches us,
that the Grace of the Covenant expects no foundation in us, no Condignitie, no
Congruitie, no moral Capacity, or Condition in us, but what itself intends to
confer. The Covenant informs us, that Free Grace is moved by nothing without
it self; that it gives, because it will give, or because it has given: That the
poorer we are, the more willing he is to enrich us; the nakeder we are, the
more ready Christ is to clothe us: Yea, the Covenant assures us, that Christ
intends much good for them, who intend no good to him, nor yet to themselves;
yea, to such as intend evil to him, and to their own souls, even for such
rebellious souls he intends gifts and Grace, as Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have
received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them. Now this freedom of the Covenant, and the Grace of God
offered therein, gives a mighty foundation, and encouragement to build upon:
For the great obstacle and bar to Faith is this, that we are not fit for
Christ: This is one of Unbeliefs greatest pleas, against closing with the good
things of the Covenant: What? may poor I presume to believe? I, who am so
unworthy? I, who have so long spurned at Christ, and all the things that belong
to my peace? I, who have so often broken with Christ, played fast and loose with
him? What? may I presume, that Christ will have any regard to me; poor, sinful,
backsliding, rebellious me? Oh! how can this be? What a presumtion would it be
in me, to cast an eye toward Christ, and the good things that belong unto my
peace? Thus Unbelief opposes, or at least demurs at the freedom of the
Covenant and its Grace.

(3.) Another propriety of the Covenant is Unbelief strikes at the
Universalitie of the Covenants offers.
the Universality of its gracious offers. Though the Covenant of Grace be, as
to its interne Spirit, Mind, and Dispensation particular, definite, and
absolute; yet as to its externe offers and Dispensation it runs in conditional,
indefinite, and universal terms; inviting all that will to come in. It sets no
bars or rails about the throne of Grace? but gives free Admission to al, that
will come for mercy, Rev. 22. 17. The Covenant excludes none, but such as
exclude themselves by Unbelief: and why should sinners exclude themselves,
before God excludes them? But alas! this is the il-humor of Unbelief, because
it cannot see the sinners Name in particular written on the Covenant, therefore
it questions all the grounds of Faith. Oh! says the unbelieving sinner, here
are rich offers indeed; but, alas! I, what am I the better for all this? May
such a wretch as I come to Christ, to be embraced in his sacred arms? What? I,
who am in such a nastie pickle; so polluted with sin? Oh! I may not, I cannot
believe that such an heinous sinner as I, shall find Christ's arms open to
receive me. Thus Unbelief questions the Universality of Christ's offer, and
puts a bar to its own mercies; whereas the Gospel puts none; but says, John 7.
37. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, and Rev. 22. 17. Whoever
will, etc. There lies no Restriction, or bar on the Covenants part: all the
Restriction and bar is in men's wills. Wilful Unbelief is the only bar.

(4.) Unbelief sets limits to the Plenitude Unbelief limits the Riches of Grace.
and Richesse of Grace, held forth in the Covenant. We find the Richesse of
Grace in the Covenant expressed under the Symbol of a sumtuous feast, Mat. 22.
4. Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my
fatlings are killed; and althings are ready: come unto the marriage. Here we see
what a bountiful Lord sinners have to deal with: how much his infinite Grace
excedes al our sins. Now what reception is given to such a magnificent rich
Treat? That follows v. 5. But they made light of it, and went their way, one to
his farm, and another to his merchandise, etc. Oh! what monstrous unbelief,
and ingratitude is here? O! what infinite Treasures of Grace are there wrapped up
in the Covenant? How much do those Treasures of mercy and goodness, loged in
the heart of Christ, excede all the treasures of sin, loged in the hearts of
poor sinful we? Is Christ such a liberal Savior for sinners? And shall they be
ashamed, or afraid to beg at the door of such a liberal Savior? Was not this
the very end why God gave the Law, That Sin might appear exceeding sinful; to
the intent that Grace might appear exceeding gracious, To. 7. 13? So To. 5. 20.
Moreover the Law entered, that the offense might Romans 5. 20
abound. As if he had said: This is the very reason, why God delivered the Law
on Mount Sinai, in such a terrible manner, that so thereby men might behold, as
by a magnifying Glass, the proper Dimensions, and Merits of their sins: Ay,
but what was Gods end in making Sin thus to abound? why, that follows, But when
sin abounded, Grace did much more abound: Here says Paul, lay Gods
bottome-designe, in permitting sin thus to abound, that thereby Grace might
superabound; yea, that at that very time, when sin so much abounded, Grace
might superabound; at that very time, when we appeared to be so great enemies
to Christ, he might appear to be so great a friend to us. Thus Mercy in God is
more merciful, than sin in us can be sinful. And oh! what a foundation and
encouragement for faith is here? But alas! how does Unbelief spurn at, and
despise, at least limit these Richesse of Grace?

(5.) Unbelief calls in question, the Immutabilitie, Unbelief questions the
certainty of the Covenant.
Certainty, and Fidelity of the Covenat. David gives us an excellent
character of the Covenant, and its Immutabilitie, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my
house be not so with God; yet he has made with me an everlasting 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Covenant, ordered in althings and sure: For this is al my salvation, and al my
desire; although he make it not to grow. Notwithstanding al David's care for the
settlement of his family on the Throne, yet he foresaw, by a spirit of
prophecy, how fragile, and instable his Throne was: only herein he solaceth
himself, that the Covenant, wherein his faith and main hopes were bottomed, was
most stable and sure: and oh! how does this, amidst al his prophetic fears,
touching the instable and tottering state of his family, revive and cheer up
his spirits? For this is al my salvation, and al my desire. Let althings else
sink or swim, it matters not, so long as the Covenant is sure and inviolable:
Hence Covenant-Grace is styled, the sure mercies of David. The blessed God has
obliged himself by Covenant, confirmed by Oath and Sacrifice, which are the
most essential ties, and therefore he cannot but be true and faithful to his
word: otherwise he were not true to himself. And yet, lo! how jelous, how
suspicious, how captious is Unbelief, touching the certainty of the Covenant.
Men are ready to confide in those who are sufficient and faithful; specially if
they have their Bond: But yet Unbelievers dare not trust the Faithful,
Alsufficient God, albeit they have his Bond, or Covenant, and that confirmed by
oath. So much for the Grace of the Covenant.

2. The Covenant of Grace is furnished Unbelief as to Providence.
with Promises, not only of Grace, but also of Providence, which Unbelief is
very apt to cavil at. The Covenant of Grace is the Believers Charter, not only
for Spirituals, but also for Temporals: it extends to the very hairs of their
heads, the most inconsiderable things. Surely they can want nothing, who have
Alsufficience engaged for their supply. Its true, Means sometimes fail? Ay:
but cannot, does not their wise Father feed them without means, when he sees it
necessary? And are not such supplies, by so much the more pure and sweet, by
how much the more immediate they are? The less there is of the creature, is
there not the more of God in all our provisions? Does not our omnipotent God often
bring the greatest Triumphs out of the greatest extremites? It Is true, He does
not always keep his people from the cross; ay, but does he not always keep
them under the cross? Have not the most black, and seemingly confused
Providence, an admirable beauty, and harmonious order in them? Did ever
Believer need any thing, but what he could better need than have? Are not those
Needs blessed that secure us from sin, and make way for greater mercies? Are
not al Gods Providence spirited by mysterious wisdom and paternal love? Is it
not then the Believers Wisdom, and Interest, to suffer his Father to be wise
for him? How comes it to pass then that Believers themselves, should be so
unbelieving as to Gods paternal providence toward them? Oh! what a mystery of
iniquity is there in Unbelief, as to this particular? This Christ much
cautions his Disciples against, and upbraids them with very often, and that with
sharp Rebukes. So Mat. 6. 30. Wherefore, if God so Mat. 6. 30, 31, 32.
clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into
the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, (...), Hebraeis etiam vocantur hi,
qui cum in praesens habeant satis futuri in^er ^itudinecruciantur. Grot.
O ye of little faith. As if he had said: Does God clothe the grass of the
field, which is so fading, with so much beauty and glory? And will he not much
more clothe you, O ye short-spirited ones? That which we render, O ye of little
faith, is expressed by the Hebrews in such terms, as import the anxious,
cruciating, vexatious cares of such, who, though they have enough for the
present, are still full of inquietude, and distrust about future supplies. Whence
he adds v. 31. Wherefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, etc. i. e,
be not anxiously solicitous, or incredulously thoughtful about these viatics,
or necessaries of life? And why? v. 32. For after al these things do the
Gentiles seek. As if he had said: Is it not a shame, that you, who are my
Disciples, should be as unbelieving, as anxiously inquisitive about these
things, as the poor Gentiles, who know nothing of my Covenant? Thence follows
another Argument, or branch of the former: For your heavenly Father knows
that you have need of al these things. i. e, Alas! Why do you concern your
selves so much about these poor things? Have you not a Father in Heaven, who is
mindful of, and provident for you? Does he not well understand al your needs?
And is he not engaged by Covenant to supply you with all necessaries? And has
he not promissed in this very case, Psalm. 111. 5. To give meat to them that
fear him, and to be ever mindful of his Covenant? Why then will you not believe?
We find the like character of Unbelief, as to the Providence of God, Luke 12.
22. Take no thought for your life: (...), Luke 12. 22-29.
give not way to anxious, distracting, distrustful thoughts, about the
necessaries of life. And then our blessed Lord gives the reason of this his
Admonition, v. 24. Consider the Ravens, etc. Luke makes a special mention of
the Ravens, because God has a particular providence, and care of the young
Ravens, as both Job, and the Psalmist observe. The Hebrews have many
observations about Gods care of the young Ravens: The Philosophers also note,
how the young Ravens are neglected by their parents. Aristotle, Pliny, Aelian.
Hence Christ argues (a minori) How much more are ye better than fouls? i. e,
surely if he be so much concerned for fouls, how much more will he concern
himself for you his Children. Then he adds another Argument against Unbelief,
v. 25, 26. And which of you, with taking thought, can add to his stature one
cubit? etc. Other Arguments are urged, v. 27, 28. Then he concludes v. 29. and
seek not what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; neither be ye of doutful
minds: (...), Let not your Minds hang, as Meteors in the Air, full of suspense
about future supplies; be not of an anxious, thoughtful Mind; Let not your
thoughts be distracted, and as it were racked with carking cares. The word
signifies, such an Anxietie, as fluctuates 'twixt hope and fear. Such is the
suspicious anxious temper of Unbelief, as to Providential matters of the
Covenant.

3. The last branch of the Covenant concerns Unbelief as to future Glory.
matters of coming Glory; wherein also Unbelief may be said, Not to know the
things that belong unto our peace. The chief concerns of our peace, are those
invisible Glories of the other world: Al our present spiritual Suavities, and
Delices are but dreams, in comparison of that formal Beatitude, in the Beatific
Vision of God face to face. Alas! how far short is our present vision of God in
Evangelic Shadows and Reports, of that immediate Intuition of God, as he is, 1 John 3. 2, 3? Whence the main work of a Believer here is to live by faith, in
the daily contemplation, and expectation of that approaching Glory. For the
more we eye our home, the more industrious, lively, and pressing will we be in
our journey thither: Faith makes things absent, present. So Heb. 11. 1. Faith
is the substance of things hoped Heb. 11. 1.
for: (...), that which gives a substantial Essence, an actual Existence, a
solid Basis or Foundation, the First Fruits; yea, a real presence, to those
Good things hoped for of the other world: So much is wrapped up in that Notion.
Then it follows, The Evidence of things not seen: (...), the Argument, the
Demonstration, the Meridian Light, the legal conviction, the spiritual eye,
whereby invisible Glories are made Visible. Such is the miraculous efficace of
faith, as to approaching Glory: such a clear, real, fixed fight of Heaven has
it here on earth. Ay, but now Unbelief draws a veil on al these invisible
Glories, and makes them to disappear: what fantastic dreams, what carnal and
gross Notions, what base and unworthy thoughts has it of future rest? How
studious is Unbelief to obliterate, and raze out the Idea of Eternity, fixed
in the heart? How apt is it, yea, industrious to remove far from conscience,
the second coming of Christ, and ensuing Jugement? How fain would it build
Mansions here, and take up with something short of God? Oh! how little does
Unbelief regard those Mansions of Glory, which Christ is preparing John 14. 1,
2? How seldom or never, does it take a view, with Moses, on mount Pisgah, of
the celestial Canaan, the new Jerusalem, where is the Lambs Throne? Yea, what
low, cheap, undervaluing thoughts has Unbelief of that promissed Land? Thus it
is said of the unbelieving Jews, Psalm. 106. 24. Yea, they despised the pleasant
Land, (or the Land of desire) and believed not his word. This pleasant land
Canaan was a type of Heaven; and in despising it they despised Heaven: and all this lay wrapped up in the bowels of their Unbelief. They did not yield a real,
supernatural, firm, certain, practic Assent to the word of promise touching
Canaan; and therefore they despised it, and not only that, but also the
celestial Canaan, which made God swear in his wrath against them, that they
should not enter in, Heb. 3. 11. So much for the Material Notions, both general
and particular, which Unbelief is ignorant of.

2. I shall treat a little of the formal Object The formal Object of Unbelief.
of Faith, and how far Unbelief is defective therein. The formal Object of
Faith, as it comes under the Notion of Assent, is the Divine Veracitie, or
Authority of God, appendent to his Word. For look as in the Works of God,
there are certain Divine Characters, Ideas, Impresses, or Notices of Gods
Wisdom, Power and Goodness; which a spiritual heart contemplates, and
admires; so likewise in the Words of God, there are certain Stampes and Ideas,
of the Veracitie and Authority of God; which the Believer contemplates and
assents unto, as the formal object of his faith. Thus 1 These. 2. 13. Because
when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received 1 Thessalonians.
it not as the word of men; but (as it is in 2. 13.
truth) the Word of God. [Not as the word of men.] As here notes a
Reduplication, i. e, the formal reason, proper motive, or principal ground of
their assent to Gods Word, was not any Human Authority; but the Divine
Authority, or Veracitie of God. And here lies the main specific, essential
Difference, betwixt divine, and human faith: Divine faith receives the Word of
God, as the Word of God; under that Reduplication, i. e, as it is clothed with
Divine Authority; but human faith receives the Word of God, as the word of men,
i, e, as clothed with some human Authority, Church-Tradition, or the like
commun Motives. Now this human faith, as to the Word of God, is no other than
real unbelief: For he that believes the Word of God, only as commended to him
by the Church, does really disbelieve the same. It is not the Objects believed,
but the formal Reason of our belief, that distinguishes a Divine from a human
faith: He that assents to divine Truths merely on human Grounds or Reasons, can
have but an human faith, which is real unbelief: as he that assents to natural
Truths, reveled in the Word of God, as reveled, and clothed with Divine
Authority, has a Divine faith. So that albeit the mind assentes to the whole
Word of God; yet if the principal ground, or formal reason of its assent be not
Divine Authority, its Faith is but real Unbelief. And here lies a main plague
of Unbelievers, its possible they do assent to the whole Word of God; ay, but
yet they see not those sacred Characters, those Divine stampes of Gods
Authority, and Truth, which are appendent to his Word; the chief ground of
their belief is only some human Tradition or Authority. Such was the Faith of
those Samaritans, John 4. 40. who believed merely for the saying of the woman,
etc. whereas afterward ver. 41. Many more believed, because of his own word.
This is a Divine faith, there was a sound of Heaven in Christ's own voice; a
little Image, or Stamp of Divine Majesty, which the believing Samaritans
could discern. O! Remember this, If the Authority of God be not the chief
bottom of your Assent, your faith is but Unbelief. So much for the Notional
object, both Material and Formal, of Unbelief.

CHAP. IV. An Explication of Unbelief, as it opposes, or is defective in the
first Act of faith, namely Assent to the good things that belong to our peace.
WE now proceed to the Act of Unbelief, comprised in that Notion, If thou had
known. This knowledge must be commensurate to, or as large as its Object; which
(as we have shown) is either Notional, or Real: The several gradations of
Dissent from the sacred Notions of our peace.
As it refers to its Notional object, so its termed Assent; as to its Real
object, so Consent. We shall begin with the first; namely, What it is not to
Assent to the Notional matters, or things, that belong to our peace? Now this
dissent from the things that belong unto our peace, implies sundry Gradations,
or Ascents; which tend much to the Explication of Unbelief.

1. Not to know, or assent to the sacred Notions 1. Rejection of Divine truths.
of our peace, is to reject them. This was the case of Jerusalem; she rejects
al Christ's gracious offers of peace: she will not so much as lend an ear to
them. Thus also it was with those obstinate Unbelievers, mentioned Prove. 1. 30.
They would none of my Counsel: they despised al my Reproof. To reject the
counsel of Christ, and to despise his Reproof, is the height of Dissent, and
Disbelief: So Jerem. 8. 9. Lo, they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and
what wisdom is in them? The Rejection of Gods Word is the highest degree of
Ignorance and Unbelief. The like Hos. 4. 6. Because thou have rejected
knowledge, I will also reject thee. This Rejection of the Word of God, is a kind
of total Infidelity; yea, such a Dissent, as implies an aversion in the mind
from the sacred Notions of its peace: Wherefore it denotes the dregs of
Unbelief; and a mind principled with enmity against divine Truths. For Truth
is the most beautiful thing that is: and of al Truths, Divine are the fairest.
Now then to reject such, argues a mind very much debauched and distempered by
sin.

2. Not to know the sacred Notions of our 2. Not to attend to sacred Notions.
peace, is not to give diligent Attention to them. Many Evangelic Unbelievers
dare not openly reject the things that belong to their peace; but yet they do
not attend with diligence unto them. The first step of saving Faith is
diligently to attend to the Reports of the Gospel; to bow the ear to divine
Truths, as Pro. 5. 1. My Son attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my
understanding. This Attention, and bowing the ear to Divine Truths, is the
first step to the obedience of Faith. Whence, by Consequence, not to attend, or
listen with diligence to the Reports of the Gospel, takes in much of Unbelief.
This also was the case of many unbelieving Jews, they did not attend to Christ's
Evangelic offers of peace. Thus Psalm. 81. 13. O that my people had hearkened
unto me, etc. i. e, given diligent Attention to my Word. Attention is the
Contention of the soul to understand: and that which draws it forth, is the
admirable Greatness, Sweetness, and Suitablenes of Reports: Unbelievers want an
inward sense of the wonderful greatness, suavitie, and fitness of Evangelic
gladtidings, and therefore no wonder that they attend not to them.

3. Men know not the things that belong to 3. Not to yield an explicit assent
to Divine Truths.
their peace, when they yield not a discrete, explicit Assent thereto. True
saving Faith implies an express, judicious Assent: it carries with it the
highest, and purest Reason; yea, the flour, and Elixir of Reason. What more
rational, than to assent to the First, supreme Truth, Truth it self? Surely,
Believers are no fools: they know who it is they believe, and for what: So Paul
2. Tim. 1. 12. I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him. Paul
was not ashamed of his sufferings, because he knew whom he had believed: he did
not content himself with a Popish implicit faith; but understood well the
object, and reasons of his Faith. Alas! what is implicit Faith, but implicit
Unbelief? Can he that understands not the Propositions he assents to,
rationally believe the same? Is this to believe, to understand nothing of what
we believe? Does not this implicit faith destroy the very formal Nature of
true faith? What! may we suppose, that Divine faith consists in ignorance? If
we pin our Faith only on the Churches sleeve, without ever understanding what
we believe, is not our faith worse than that of Devils, who know what they
believe, and therefore tremble? Yea, does not this Implicit faith strip us,
not only of our Christianity, but also of our Humanity? For, is not every
rational Being so far a Debtor to truth, as to examine well the reasons and
grounds of his Assent? Yea, does not this implicit Popish faith carry in it
much of Atheism, and Blasphemy? For, to believe only as the Church believes,
without examining the Articles, or Motives of our faith, what is it but to make
the Church our infallible God, and our selves but mere Brutes, divested of
reason? So that can there be any thing more destructive to the Notion, and
Nature of true faith, than such an Implicit faith? And yet, alas! how commun
is it among a great number of Christians? How many are there who pretend to be
Believers, and yet understand little, or nothing of the main Articles, or
grounds of their faith? It stands on sacred Record, as a noble character of the
Bereans, Act. 17. 11. That they searched the Scriptures daily, whether these
things were so. Hence surely we may conclude, that an implicit faith is no
better than virtual Unbelief.

4. Not to know the things that belong unto 4. Not to give a supernatural
Assent,
our peace, is, not to give a supernatural, Divine Assent to them. The things
that belong unto our peace, are supernatural and divine; and therefore they
cannot be truly apprehended by a Natural, Human Assent. To yield a natural,
human Assent to things Supernatural and Divine, is no better than real Dissent.
Now men yield not a supernatural Divine Assent to the things that belong to
their peace. (1.) When the Principal Grounds, Formal Reasons, and proper
Motives of their Assent are only natural and human, i, e, when men's assent is
grounded only on some human Authority, or Argument. Al faith is by so much the
more firm, by how much the more firm and infallible the Authority of him that
reports the matter is: If the Authority be only human, the Assent can be but
human, and so fallible; the Assent to the Conclusion being founded on the
strength of the Premises, as the edifice is on the foundation: Now the
strength of a Testimony consists in the Authority of him that testifies: For
such as the principal ground and Foundation of the Assent is, such will the
Assent be: and if there be any defect, or imperfection in the Foundation of our
Assent, the same will diffuse it self throughout the whole: If Church-tradition,
or human Argument be the only, or main ground of our Assent, it can never be
supernatural and divine, as before. (2.) Men yield not a supernatural Divine
Assent to the Gospel, when the productive Principle, or Efficient of their
Assent is not Supernatural and Divine, i.e, when their Assent is not infused by
the Spirit of God. A natural Faculty can never, of itself, produce a
supernatural Assent. And the reason is most evident, even from the commun
nature of al Assent; which requires some A'dequation or Agreament betwixt the
Object, and the Faculty: Now what proportion is there betwixt a natural mind,
and supernatural Truths.? Are not Divine Mysteries above the reach of a human
Understanding, unless the Spirit of God come and clothe it with a divine
Light? Is not the natural mind shut against supernatural objects, until Christ,
by his Spirit open the same? Thence it is said, Luke 24. 45. Then opened he
their Understanding, that they might Luke 24. 45
understannd the Scriptures. They had some habitual Light before; but Christ
now extendes and stretches their minds to a more full comprehension of the
promises: To every degree of saving light, there is required a fresh
Influence, and Assistance of the Spirit. Its said, He opened their
Understandings: Men may open supernatural Truths, and Promises to our minds;
but none can open our minds to take in supernatural Truths, save the Spirit of
Christ: such therefore as are not illuminated by the Spirit cannot know the
things that belong to their peace. The Believer has a Divine light, a
supernatural instinct, whereby he understands, and assents to the voice of
Christ in the Gospel; John 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice: just as the simple
Lamb, by a natural instinct, discerns the voice of her Dam from the rest in
the flock.

5. Men know not the things that belong 5. Not to give a deep Assent.
to their Peace, when the Truths and Promises of the Gospel take not deep root
in their hearts. Our Assent ought to be commensurate, or proportionable to its
Object: great and weighty Truths, must have a rooted and deep Assent: A
superficial, indeliberate Assent to the great things of the Gospel, is but
interpretative Dissent. This was the great defect of the Highway, and stony
ground, Mat. 13. 19, 20, 21. The seed sown by the way-side, was lost as soon as
received: But the word sown in stony hearts, was received with some joy, i.e,
the Novitie, and greatness of the things offered, made some superficial
Impression on their hearts; but yet there wanting a depth of earth, an hot day
of persecution, soon blasted al. There is no Assent stable and firm, but what
is deep and rooted. Thus much our blessed Lord assures us, in his Parable of
the sandy foundation, Mat. 7. 26. whereas the sound Believer, who digs deep
into the heart, and builds his assent on rooted, welgrounded Principles, though
windy, stormy tentations beat against it; yea, albeit he has a thousand
objections against what he believes, yet his assent is firm and steadfast;
because the bottome-Principles on which it is grounded remain firm. A
superficial, precipitated, and rash assent is very staggering and mutable: when
men judge according to the apparences of things, without solid deliberation,
and deep inquisition into the grounds and reasons, they never arrive to a fixed
Assent. Thence says Christ, Joh. 7. 24. Judge not according to the appearance,
but judge righteous jugement. A superficial assent is soon turned into dissent.

6. Such as yield not a Real, but only Notional Assent to evangelic Truths and
Promises, 6. Not to yield a real Assent.
know not the things that belong to their peace. For things may then only be
said to be truly known, when they are received as offered: Now the things
offered in the Gospel are practic, or things referring to practice: Thence to
yield only a notional assent to them, is really to dissent. Many of these
unbelieving Jews, whom Christ condemns in our text, had a very great Form of
knowledge, or Notional assent to the things that belonged to their peace, as
it is evident from Romans 2. 17, 18, Romans 2. 17, 18, 19, 20.
19, 20. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and make thy
boast of God, and know his will, and approvest the things that are more
excellent, being instructed out of the law, etc. i, e, Thou art an accurate
Critic in the law, thou can exactly distinguish between things clean and
unclean: and then he sums up al in one expression, ver. 20. Which have the
form of knowledge, and of the truth in the law. (...) here signifies (...).
Oecum.
an Artificial Image, Scheme, Figure, or Picture of knowledge; and its opposed
to a substantial, solid, real knowledge; which is styled, Prove. 2. 7. Sound
wisdom, or Essential knowledge. These unbelieving Jews had a notional Idea, an
artificial Scheme, a curious picture of knowledge; but they wanted the real,
substantial, essential contemplation of those things, that belonged to their
peace. Now as there is a vast difference between the contemplation of things in
pictures, or shadows; and the contemplation of them in their own proper
substances: So here, the Unbeliever that views the things of his peace only in
Pictures, Systemes, or Notions, comes far short of the Believer, who views the
same Intuitively, as they lie wrapped up in Evangelic promises. Faith is
described Hebr. 11. 1. The substance of things hoped for, i. e, it has a real,
substantial contemplation of things hoped for, as if they were actually
present, before the eyes: and then it follows, The evidence of things not seen;
The invisible things of celestial Canaan become visible to an eye of faith:
whence it is apparent that he who has only a notional knowledge of the things
that belong to his peace, is really ignorant of them. Mere Speculative Assent
to things practic, is no better than real dissent: For our Assent is then only
true, when it is agreeable to its object, formally considered. The things of our
peace are most substantial and real; but the Unbeliever assents not to them as
such: he sees them only in Words, Notions, and Imaginations; and therefore
counts them but mere conceits, fine-spun Notions, and curious Pictures: His
form of knowledge is but real Ignorance.

7. Men know not the things that belong to 7. Not to give a spiritual Assent.
their peace, when their Assent to them is Carnal, not Spiritual. The things
that belong to our peace are most spiritual; they admit not the least
commixture of what is carnal; and therefore a carnal mind never truly assents
to them. Things Spiritual cannot be apprehended by any but a spiritual
faculty: Carnal assent to things spiritual, is real dissent. How can he assent
truly to any sacred Truth, who understands nothing truly of that he assents
unto? Thus the Apostle argues strongly, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are 1 Cor. 2. 14.
foolishnes to him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. (1.) By this Natural, or Animal man, we must understand every
irregenerate man, who has not his mind imbued with saving Faith. (2.) Of this
man its said, he receives not; (...): its a Metaphor assumed from
narrowmouth'd vessels, which cannot take in things too big for them: The things
of the Spirit of God (which are the same with the things of our peace) are too
big for Animal, Natural Minds. Yea, (3.) He adds, Neither can be know them:
there is a moral Impossibility that he should know them: and why? that
follows (4.) because they are spiritually discerned: As if he had said; Alas!
how is it possible that he should know them? What proportion is there betwixt
spiritual Objects, and a carnal Subject? Must not every visive faculty have
some agreament with the object visible? And is there any agreament betwixt a
carnal mind, and things spiritual? Is not every thing that is received,
received according to the nature of the Recipient? Does not then the carnal
heart receive things spiritual carnally; as on the contrary, the spiritual
heart things carnal spiritually? Thence says Christ to the unbelieving Jews,
Joh. 8. 15. Ye judge after the flesh, i.e, ye judge of me, and of my Gospel,
only in a carnal manner, by carnal Reason, and therefore no wonder ye believe
not in me.

8. Such as content themselves with a general 8. A general confused Assent.
confused Assent to evangelic Truths and Promises, know not the things that
belong to their peace. The more particular, and distinct our knowledge is, the
more certain it is: General Notions are more confused and fallacious: a
particular Dissent may well stand with general Assent. Therefore he that has
some general confused Notions of the things that belong to his peace, lies
under a particular ignorance of the same. This was the case of these
unbelieving Jews; they had some general notices of the Messiah; some rude
confused Ideas of Heaven and God; but alas! How imperfect, how gross, how
insignificant were their Notions? Hence our blessed Lord exhorts them, that
they would, in order to the procurement of a true saving Joh. 5. 39. Metaphor.
A canum sagacitate sumta, etc. Strigel.
faith, Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. (...). Its a Metaphor drawn from the
sagacitie of Dogs; which with their noses closely follow, and search into the
sent of their prey. These unbelieving Jews had much general confused knowledge
of the Scriptures: ay, but they wanted this Divine sagacitie, to inquire and
search into them, as Dogs do into the sent of their prey: they could not sent
the things that belonged to their peace, because they made not a narrow
scrutinie, a particular, distinct, exact inquisition into evangelic Truths, and
Mysteries. As if Christ had said: Ah friends! You pretend to believe Moses and
the Prophets: You conceit your life lies wrapped up in them: But how comes it to
pass then, that you believe not in me? Do not all the Scriptures testify of
me? Oh! here lies your sin, you will not search into the Scriptures: you content
your selves with some general confused Notions; without any particular,
distinct Inquisition into the things that belong to your peace.

9. Men know not the things that belong to 9. To suspend our Assent.
their peace, when they suspend their Assent, or yield to any prevalent dout,
touching the truth of them. I shall not dispute, what mesure or degree of
certainty is essential to true saving Faith; but that it cannot consist in a
mere opinion, or probable conjecture, without some degree of certitude, I
think, is most certain from the current of Scripture. This is evident by the
character Paul gives of Abraham's faith, Romans 4. 19. Being not weak in-faith, i.
e, his Romans 4. 19.
mind did not hang in suspense, or under some prevalent dout, touching the
truth of the promise. This is illustrated by another notion, ver. 20. He
staggered not at the promise through ver. 20.
unbelief. (...) here signifies to hesitate, or remain under variety of
anxious douts and opinions: his mind was fully persuaded of the truth of the
promise, as it is expressed v. 21. being fully persuaded, (...): ver. 21.
its a Metaphor borrowed from Navigation: as sails are filled with a good wind;
so his mind was filled with a fullness of assent, to the truth of the promise:
there was no room for any suspense, or prevalent dout. And this indeed seems
essential to al true saving Faith, that there be a prevalent certitude, or
certain persuasion touching the truth of the object; albeit many sincere
Believers may be altogether uncertain touching their Title to, or Interest in
the Object. My meaning is this: There ought to be a plenitude, or fullness of
Assent to the Truth of the Promise; albeit there may be wanting, in many
Believers, an assurance of their interest in the things promissed. Now this
certainty of Divine assent arises partly from the certitude of the object,
but more immediately from the Demonstration of the Spirit, elevating, or
raising the mind unto this certain persuasion, touching the truth of the
promise. And herein true saving Faith is differenced from that which is commun
and human: The Unbeliever may yield some feeble, staggering, instable Assent,
to the good things that belong unto his peace; but still he hangs in suspense;
his douts are greater than his faith. Its true, the true Believer has often
great douts touching the Promises; but yet his douts are not so much of the
truth of the Promises, as of his interest in them; or, whether his
apprehensions of them be true: whereas Unbelievers dout of the truth of the
Promises, albeit they may be presumtuously confident of their Interest in
them. Thus it was with the unbelieving Jews, Joh. 10. 24. How long do thou
make us to Joh. 10. 24
dout? or, (...) hic est quod (...), Luc. 12. 29 Suspensum tenere. Grot.
how long do thou keep our souls in suspense? They hung, as it were, 'twixt
Heaven and Hell; under much suspense, whether those things Christ preached were
true or false: They did not totally dissent, and yet they could not fully
assent to Christ. Thus they hung in suspense: for suspense is a middle, twixt
Assent and Dissent: Though as to Divine Assent, every such prevalent suspense,
or dout touching the truth of the promise is real unbelief: he that assents
not fully, does really dissent. Therefore Christ adds, v. 25. I told you, and
you believed not: they seem to lay the blame on Christ, the darkness of his
Revelation; but he resolves al into their unbelieving hearts. The like
character of unbelief we find, Luke 12. 29.. Neither be ye of doutful Luke 12.
29
minds. (...), Graecis non eum modo declarat qui positus est in sublimi, sed
eriam eum cujus animus velut
(...), in its primary Notation signifies to be carried up aloft in the Air, as
Meteors, Clouds, or Birds; which wanting a firm foundation, are tossed to and
fro with every blast. So it signifies the same with (...), to wander; or with
(...) in a^re suspensus, modo huc modo illuc inclinat. Beza. (...), John 10.
24. to lift up the mind, or keep it in suspense. Hence also it is used to
signify an anxious suspense, hesitation or dout, touching the truth of things.
This is the condition of many awakened sinners, they arrive at some anxious
suspense or doutfulnes of mind, and that is al: They hang in the air of commun
conviction, between Heaven and Hell; for a little while til the prevalence of
lust make them fall down again on the earth; where they lie buried in the ashes
of their own convictions and profession: They dare not, they cannot yield a
full, and prevalent assent to the Gospel of Christ: all that they attain unto, is
a mere opinion, a suspensive faint Assent. Thus every unbeliever hangs, as a
Meteor in the Air, under prevalent suspense, and hesitation, touching the truth
of the promises. Thence Mark 11. 23. We find douting in heart, and believing
opposed. They that yield only an opinionative, doutful Assent to the things of
their peace, do really dissent: a suspensive faith is no faith in Gods estime.

10. To yield only a cloudy, inevident, obscure 10. An inevident obscure Assent.
Assent to the things that belong unto our peace, is not to know them. Divine
Faith carries with it not only Certainty, but also Evidence: Thus Hebr. 11. 1.
Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Evidence implies a full, clear,
manifest apprehension of things present: among which such are most evident, as
are most visible: Thence the Sun is most evident, because most visible. Its
true, the objects of Faith are altogether absent, inevident, and invisible, as
to Sense or Reason; whence they are styled, Things not seen: ay, but yet they
are present, evident, and visible to an eye of faith. So the Schools determine,
Veritates fidei sunt evidenter credib^les. Aquin
That the truths of Faith are evidently credible. On! what a manifest, clear,
intuitive vision does Faith afford? But the Unbeliever sees nothing evidently
and clearly: he has only obscure, misty, dark notions of the things that belong
unto his peace: So 2 Pet. 1. 9. And cannot see far off: Like one 2 Pet 1 9.
that is purblind, or in a mist. The Unbeliever has no evident conviction, or
discovery of the great things of the other world: he sees only things next to
him, Objects of sense or reason; and therefore he knows not the things that
belong to his peace. Some think the Original (...) is used to represent the
image of a false faith, under the Similitude of a blind man, who moving his
eyelids, may take in some confused obscure shadow of light; which yet is
altogether unuseful, and insructuous.

11. Such as receive the things that belong to 11. A legal Assent.
their peace with a legal Assent only, may be justly said not to know the same.
The main things that belong to our peace are evangelic; and therefore such must
our Assent be, if right. To receive evangelic Truths only, with a legal faith,
is really to disbelieve the same. Many convinced sinners, yield a very strong
assent to all the terrors of the law: This, and that, and the other threat,
belongs to me, says the poor Sinner: I am he, to whom this sentence of the
Law, and that curse does appertain, etc. Its strange to consider, how far
awakened sinners may proceed, in such a legal assent to Lawthreats, and yet
never attain to an Evangelic faith. This seems to be the case of those
unbelieving Jews, mentioned Hebr. 4. 2. But the Heb. 4. 2.
Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it. (...), not being incorporated: it seems to be a term borrowed from
meats; which being received into the stomach, and mingling with that acid
ferment, or juice, which is loged there, are by the assistance thereof
digested, and so turned into good nutriment, blood, and spirits: just so the
Word of God, being received into an honest heart, and incorporated with an
evangelic faith, does nourish and strengthen the Believer. Ay, but now these
unbelieving Jews wanting this acid juice of evangelic faith, the word received
profited them not. They yielded a legal assent to the threats of the Law; but
yet, being void of an evangelic assent to the promises of the Gospel, they
received no profit from the Word preached. Legal assent to the threats of the
Law, if it proceed no further, usually ends in greater unbelief, and security.

12. Such also may be said not to know the 12. Forced Assent.
things that belong to their peace, who yield only an involuntarie, forced
Assent thereto. This follows on the former; For a legal Assent is only forced,
and strained; whereas an evangelic Assent is affectionate and free: whence it
is made a character of those primitive Believers, Act. 2. 41. Then they that
gladly received Act. 2. 41.
his Word. What word does he here mean? The word of promise, v. 39. For the
promise is to you, and your children, etc. Its said v. 37. They were pricked
in their heart, etc. i, e, They were wounded with the sense of their sin, in
crucifying the Lord of Glory: and having now the promise of life and pardon
preached to them; O! how gladly do they receive this word? What welcome News is
this? How are they overjoyed at such glad tidings of Salvation? What content,
what satisfaction, what pleasure do they take in this Evangelic word of life?
How greedily do they receive, or assent to it, even as a voluptuous man
receives his food, or a condemned malefactor his pardon? So much the word
(...), gladly, does import. Again, As many as gladly received the word: Here is
a restrictive and distinctive note: For gladly here does confine and restrain
the sincere reception of the word, to these here specified, in distinction from
the rest of the Auditors; of whom also many received the word, but not gladly:
So that this note seems to be characteristic, and descriptive of true saving
Assent, which has joy and gladness mixed with it: They receive the word, and
they receive it gladly: they assent to it, and they assent cheerfully; they
would not for a world but assent to it. As the eye sees the Sun, and sees it
gladly; the ear hears Music, and gladly hears it: So faith assenteth to the
Word of God, and assents with gladness: Though there be much obscurity, and
seeming contrariety to carnal reason, in some parts of Gods word; yet, so far
as it appears to be the word of God, faith willingly assens to it: the mind is
captivated to divine Testimony. Though perhaps the poor Believer cannot
rationally discourse, or reason touching the truths he assents to; yet he has
a divine Instinct, a spiritual Sagacitie, an interne Sense, whereby he tastes
Divine words; and so can distinguish them from al human words, though sugared
over with never so much spiritual Rhetoric. Thus he receives the word gladly.
So also (...), signifies such a reception as an Host gives his Guest, or a man
his intimate friend. Al which fully demonstrates, with what an affectionate
Assent they received the Word of life. The like is mentioned of the Bereans,
Act. 17. 11. These were more noble Act. 17. 11
than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness
of mind, (...), i. e, with an affectionate cheerful Assent. Indeed al true
saving faith connotes a pious inclination in the soul: For the things that
belong unto our peace being purely dependent on the Testimony of God; if there
be not a pious affection in the heart toward God, the sinner will never assent
to, and close with the promises, and offers of life made to it. Affection to
any person, makes us very credulous, or apt to receive his report: Love makes
our Assent quick and cheerful: it puts the best interpretation upon whatever is
spoken: and if there be but an half-promisse, or a word hinted, that may be for
encouragement, the lover is apt to apply it to himself, and improve it. Thus
every word of God is an infallible oracle, to such as have a pious affection
for him. Thus David describes his faith, by his delight in the statutes of God,
Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight my self in thy statutes. The original imports,
Psalm. 119. 16.
to behold with delight, or to contemplate with pleasure. Oh! What satisfaction
did David's faith find in the Statutes of God? But oh! how melodious and sweet
was the joyful sound of the Gospel to David's faith? If the Law be so delightful
to a Believer, because he sees therein, as in a Glass, all the spots of his
soul; Oh! how delightsome then is the Gospel to him, which discovers the face
of God, and Christ to him; yea, and transformes his heart into the same
glorious Image? Hence it appears, that if our Assent to the Reports of the
Gospel be not affectionate and cheerful, it is not saving. The Devils believe
and tremble; but because they do not gladly assent, therefore their faith is
not saving. So essential is an affectionate inclination to divine Assent.
Whence it naturally follows, that such as afford only a forced assent to
evangelic Truths, do really dissent from them: such an intimate connection is
there between Divine Assent, and pious Affection.

13. Not to know the things that belong unto our peace, is not to retain the
same, when once 13. Not to retain the things of our peace.
received. This also is a consequent of the former: For things forced are not
durable: when our Assent is only compelled by legal convictions, it lasts no
longer than that compulsion, which gave foundation to it: whereas an
affectionate Assent is very adhesive: it sticks fast unto its object: every
thing delights to adhere to what it likes: If the heart be cheerfully inclined
toward God, it will delight in its assent unto his word. But when our Assent is
grounded only on legal Threats, and forced convictions; how soon does it wear
off, and die away? This was the case of many unbelieving Jews: they had now and
then some stounding convictions, such as produced in them a great Assent to the
words of Christ: Oh! What Attention, what Reverence, and Respect do they give
to Christ's word? But alas! how soon is their Assent turned into Dissent? Thus
John 5. 38. And ye have not his word abiding in you. (...), Jo. 5. 38. (...),
Johanni est insigi Grot.
to abide signifies with John, to dwell, or take up its fixed habitation: The
Word of God now and then found some place in their minds, as v. 35. ay, but it
did not inhabit there: it loged there, but as a Traveller in an Inn, for a
night only. There are many Professors, who entertain the glad tidings of the
Gospel for a season, but they retain them not: Whereas David says, Psalm. 119.
11. Thy word have I hid Psalm. 119. 11.
in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. There seems to be an elegant
Metaphor in the word hid, drawn from those, who having found a choice
Treasure, they hide it, thereby to secure it. Thus David hid Gods word in his
heart. Whence Christ pronounces a blessing on those that hear his word and
keep it, Luke 11. 28. Luke 11. 28
Hence that exhortation, Hebr. 2. 1. Therefore we ought to give the more
earnest heed to the things that we have heard, lest at any time we should let
them slip. (...), i. e, let them slide away as water through a Mil, which never
returns more. He that lets evangelic Truths slide away, out of his heart,
cannot be said to know the things that belong unto his peace: Al true Divine
Assent is permanent and lasting: he that ever dissents from, never yet truly
assented to Evangelic Notions of peace. We find this Divine Retention of Gods
word well expressed by Moses, in his exposition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9.

14. Such as have not a transcendent estime, 14. Low estime.
or great and sublime thoughts of the things that belong to their peace, may
also be said not to know them. For an object or thing is then only known
truly, when its worth and value is in some mesure known: He that has only
poor, unworthy, base thoughts of great things, may be said not to know them.
The efficace, vigor, and strength of every Assent, arises from the right
valuation of the object: For the minds adherence unto truth is more or less
prevalent, according to the apprehension it has of their value: unto several
truths equally apprehended, the minds assent, or adherence is not equal; but
greater or less, according to the estime it has of their worth. Thus the
prevalence, vigor, and efficace of our assent, and adherence to supernatural
Truths, does naturally arise from the apprehension we have of their value: and
thence a true assent to divine Notions, and Promises always carries
admiration in its bowels: he that does entertain the great Mysteries of the
Gospel with a cheap, mean estime only, does really disestime the same: An
undervaluing low assent to divine Truths, is real dissent: Certainly such know
not Christ, who estime him not as the Worlds wonder. This Christ Ironicly
upbraids the unbelieving Jews with, John 7. 28. Ye both know me, and know
whence I am, etc. He speaks Ironicly in reply to the Joh. 7. 28.
Jews reprocheful speech, v. 27. Howbeit we know this man whence he is, etc. As
if he had said: You neither know me, nor yet the Messiah, as you pretend: for
if you knew me and whence I am, you would highly estime me as your Messiah,
sent by God, etc.

Lastly, They know not the things that belong 15. A barren Assent.
to their peace, who give only a sterile, dead, unactive assent to them. True
Divine Assent is full of Life, Virtue, and Activitie: A barren dead faith is
real Unbelief: the end of saving knowledge is Practice: Unprofitable knowledge is
one of the worst kinds of Ignorance. Al sacred Sciences are Affective and
Effective: That Assent which does not kill sin, will never give life to the
sinner: Divine Assent leaves suitable Impresses, and sacred Stampes on the
Heart. Does thine Assent to the things that belong to thy peace fill thy soul
with Admiration of, and Love unto them? Is there an agreament twixt thine
heart, and the things thou believe? Thou say, thou assentest to the Truths
of the Gospel; ay, but does not thine heart dissent from the Duties of the
Gospel? and is not this a strong argument that thy faith is but a dead Assent?
So Jam. 2. 26. For Jam. 2. 26.
as the body without the spirit is dead; so faith without works, is dead also.
Though works are not the cause, which gives life to faith; yet they are
necessary products, which argue life in faith. A living faith is full of vital
spirits and operations: he that wants these, has only a dead corpse of faith, or
the name of a Believer. David gives us a better account of his faith, Psalm.
119. 11. Thy word have I hid Psalm. 119. 11.
in mine heart: and why so? that I might not sin against thee? He gave a deep,
firm, practic Assent to Divine truths, such as kept him from sin. So much for
the first part of Unbelief, as opposite to the assent of faith.

CHAP. V. The Explication of Unbelief in reference to its Real Objects; and its
first main Act, consisting in the Wills rejection of Christ.
HAving finished the Notional Objects, and Acts of Unbelief, it remains that we
proceed to the Explcation of its simple, real Objects, and the Acts which
answer thereto. (1.) As for the simple, real Objects of Unbelief, 1. The simple
Objects of Unbelief.
they will, as before, be best explicated by considering, what are the simple,
and real Objects of Faith: For Unbelief being but a privation of faith, it has
one and the same object therewith. Now the simple, real Objects of Faith regard
either our Present, or Future state: As to our present state, the object of
Faith is either Remote and Vltimate; or Next and Immediate: The Remote and
Vltimate object of Faith is the Deity, or Divine Essence: The Next and
Immediate object of Faith is Christ, God-man, and Mediator, betwixt God and
Men. The object of Faith, as to our future state, is approaching Glory, Heaven;
or, al those good things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1. According to this distribution
of the real Objects of Faith, we may, with facility, determine, what are the
objects of Unbelief? or, what are those Simple, Real things, that belong to our
peace, which Unbelief refuses? Of these we shall treat but very concisely;
because they will again fall under consideration, when we come to the
Aggravations of Unbelief.

1. Unbelief is a Rejection of God, his Divine Unbelief refuses. 1. God. 1.
His Being.
Essence, Attributes, Providence, Works, Ordinances, and Glory: which are al
great Ingredients of our Peace. Unbelief strikes at the Deity, or Divine
Being, which is the alone ultimate foundation of al saving Faith, Heb. 11. 6.
Oh! what a world of practic, if not speculative Atheism, lies wrapped up in the
womb of Unbelief? Again, how are all the divine Attributes struck at by
Unbelief? Does 2. His Attributes, Wisdom.
not Unbelief reject the Wisdom of God, by preferring carnal wisdom before
it, Luke 7. 30? Faithfulness.
Is not the Fidelity and Veracitie of God oppugned by Unbelief, in that it
receives not his Testimony, and so makes him a Liar, 1 John 5. 10, 11? How
much is the Soveraintie of Soveraintie.
God opposed by Unbelief; in that it cannot, because it will not, submit, either
to his secret, or reveled will? How does Unbelief quarrel at, and murmur against
the soverain pleasure of God, both Preceptive and Providential? It can neither
yield Active obedience to the former, nor Passive to the later: It can do but
little, and suffer less for God. Again, Does not Unbelief offer much violence
to the Love, Mercy, and Compassions of God? Is not Mercy Mercy.
clothed with the rough garment of Severitie? Is not the ugly vizard of Hatred,
and Revenge, put on the beautiful face of Divine Love? Does not Divine
Benignity, or Bounty, fall under censure of illiberalitie, when Unbelief sets
in the chair? Further, Is not Divine Justice impleaded, or masqued with the
Justice.
face of Injustice by Unbelief? Does it not put light for darkness, and darkness
for light; good for evil, and evil for good? Is not the Righteous God accused,
as one that justifies the wicked, and condemns the Innocent? Moreover how does
Unbelief narrow Divine Omnipotence; yea, look upon it as mere Impotence,
Omnipotence.
and weakness? Does not Infidelity also prescribe bounds to Gods Omnipresence,
Exodus 17. 2-7? Is not Gods Omniscience also blinded by it, Isai. 40. 25? So
also, for all 3. Providence.
Gods works of Providence, how does Unbelief draw a Veil on the most glorious
of them? Ordinances.
Lastly, as for all Divine Ordinances and Institutions, are they not dispirited,
and made ineffectual by Unbelief? Is not prayer no prayer, Hearing the Word no
hearing; are not Sacraments no Sacraments to the Unbeliever?

2. Unbelief refuses Christ, the next immediate 2. Unbelief rejects Christ.
object of faith, and the great Mediator of our peace. Oh! what a large heart
has Christ to give, but how narrow-hearted is the Unbeliever in receiving the
things that belong to his peace? Is not Christ the great Ordinance of God,
constituted, designed, and adapted to be the Mediator between God and man? And
yet, Lo! how does Unbelief slight him, yea slander him, reproach him, plunder
him, grieve him, provoke him, and crucify him day by day? Is not Christ
extreme liberal toward Sinners? Does he not meet them half way; yea, prevent
them in the offers of Grace? And yet, oh! how backward is Unbelief; how
unwilling to come to him for life? What Distances, Shinesses, and estrangements
from Christ, does it continually delight in? Does not Infidelity attemt to
turn the whole of Christ's Mediatorie office, into a mere shadow, or Romance?
What rare experiments has Christ given of the efficace of his blood, the
energie and power of his grace to redeem sinners? and yet how does unbelief
question, and cavil at al? What wonders are there in Christ's love to sinners?
how omnipotent, and invincible is it? What sweet charms to conquer hearts has
it? and yet how does Unbelief cover al, with the masque of hatred and cruelty?
Oh! what incomparable beauties are there in Christ's person? how amiable and
lovely was he, even in his lowest condition; in the Womb, Manger, and on the
Cross? Do not all the lines of Gods grace, and our duty meet in Christ as
Mediator? how inglorious are the most excellent things in the world, if
compared with Christ's glorious perfections? and yet lo! how does Infidelity
disgrace, and reproach Christ? What low, mean, scandalous, yea cruel thoughts
has it of him?

3. Unbelief rejects not only God and Christ, 3. Unbelief refuses Heaven.
and the Holy Spirit, but also approaching Glory, and al those good things
hoped for of the other world. Oh! what gross, and carnal conceptions has
Unbelief of al those invisible, and coming Glories? How does it turn all the
great and glorious enjoyments of Heaven into mere insignificant Fancies,
Notions, Fables, and Sick-dreams? Yea, does not Unbelief despise and contemn
those rich delices of future Glory? Are not the sensual enjoyments of the
flesh, the pleasures of Egypt, preferred before the ravishing delights of the
celestial Canaan? Do not sensible goods weigh down the invisible weight of
Glory in the Unbelievers heart? But thus much for the real objects of
Unbelief, of which more largely hereafter.

Sect. 2. We now proceed to the several Acts The Acts of Unbelief.
of Unbelief, in relation to these real Objects; which may be also
distinguished according to the several acts of Faith, whereof they are
Privatives. The first and general act of Faith, in relation to Christ, its next
and most immediate object, is Consent, Election, or Reception of him as tendered
in the Gospel: And opposite hereto, the first and great act of Unbelief is
Reprobation, or Rejection of Christ: and this indeed is the most fundamental,
and vital Act 1. Rejection of Christ.
of Unbelief; that which our Lord does most directly strike at, in this his
doleful Lamentation, over Jerusalem: If thou had known the things that belong
to thy peace, i. e, If thou had embraced, and received me thy King, and
Mediator of peace, oh then! how happy had thou been? But alas! alas! thou
have rejected me thine alone Messiah; and therefore, Lo! all the the things of
thy peace are hid from thine eyes. And that this not knowing the things that
belonged to her peace, connotes Jerusalems Rejection of Christ, is further
evident, if we consider the Hebraic Idiome, that lies wrapped up in this notion:
For its a commun rule among the Hebrews, That words of sense, or knowledge
implie Affection: so that not to know, is not to elect, or embrace the things
belonging to our peace. Whence its very manifest, that the Rejection of Christ,
is the main thing which our blessed Lord intends, in this his black character
of Jerusalems Unbelief. But seeing this Rejection of Christ is a This Rejection
of Christ Implies,
comprehensive large notion, which admits a great latitude of degrees; we shall,
as the Lord inables us, distinctly explicate its particulars.

(1.) The beart rejects Christ, when it openly 1. Open opposition.
opposes him, and all the wooings of his grace. This was the case of the
unbelieving Jews for the most part: Our blessed Lord comes with offers of Grace
and Peace: But oh! how is he fleighted? how much is he contemned? what
opposition is made against him, by the most and chiefest of them? Thus much our
Lord himself complains of, under the Parable of an Householder, who planted a
vineyard, etc. Mat. 21. 33, etc. whence he concludes, v. 42. The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: This is the
Lords doing, and it is marveilous in our eyes. Oh! what a Marvel is this, that
the very Builders, the Elders and Rulers of the people, should reject their
Messiah, the chief cornerstone of their Salvation? The like Mark 8. 31. And he
began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected of the Elders, and of the chief Priests and Scribes. What? the Elders
reject him? the chief Priests and Scribes oppose him? Oh! what a prodigious
piece of Unbelief is this? And is this the sin of unbelieving Jews only? Are
there not multitudes, who would fain be estimed good Christians, and yet thus
oppose, and resist Christ to his very face? What shall we think of the sensual
Professor, who rolleth himself in the delices of Egypt, and cannot part with a
lust for Christ? Where may we place the sleepy Christian, who logeth his head
in the bosom of the Times, and sleeps sweetly on the bed of carnal
security, without the least attention, to the loud and repeted knocks, and
cries of Christ? And may not also many terrified awakened sinners be reckoned
among the opposers of Christ; even such, who though they see their sin and
misery, yet fly from Christ, as from an enemy; and choose rather to take
refuge in their own carnal confidences, than accept of Christ as their
Mediator? May not al these, and many more seeming Christians, be justly reputed
Opposers, and Rejectors of Christ?

(2.) Such may be said to reject Christ, who, Dislikes of Christ.
albeit they do not openly oppose him, yet maintain secret soul-disgusts, and
heart-dislikes of Christ. Faith lies much in a wel-inclined Affection, or
affectionate Inclination toward Christ: it supposes a good liking, or pious
propension toward Christ. For, while the sinner looks upon Christ as an
enemy, or as a severe, austere Lord, he minds not going to him. Unbelief is
very apt to take offense at Christ: it is il-minded toward him, and therefore
on every trifling occasion offended at him. This was likewise the temper of the
Unbelieving Jews, whence says Christ, Mat. 11. 6. And Mat. 11. 6.
blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. The word (...) signifies
to set a gin, trap, or snare; to put an obstacle or impediment in men's way,
that so they may not proceed on. Some derive the word from (...), to halt, and
so a scandal signifies originally a sharp stake, or stone, that makes men to
halt: others derive it from (...), a crooked piece of wood, whereof they made
gins, or snares to catch wild beasts: (...) significat proprie tigillum in
instrumentis quibus capiuntur Lupi, aut Vulpes, aut Mures: Hesychius express
inquit, (...) and Commentarius Aristophanis inquit, (...), sunt curva ligna in
decipulis- Strigel. in Romans 11. 9.
whence a scandal naturally signifies a gin or snare. The word scandal
sometimes also signifies a stone, or block in the way, at which men are apt to
stumble, and fall: and thence in the old Testament it is taken for a Fall, and so
sometimes for Sin, as Judge. 8. 27. where it is rendered a Snare. The meaning
seems this: Blessed is he, whose conscience shall not be scandalized at me;
whose mind shall not be possessed with black scandalous thoughts of me; by which
the heart stumbles, and falls into many snares and gins. Oh! what lies, and
scandals does the unbeliving heart raise of Christ? Thus Unbelief fills the
heart with disgusts, and offenses against Christ, which are as so many gins, or
snares; as so many sharp stones, or bars to keep the heart from Christ. Faith
breeds a good liking to Christ, and therefore it puts a good sense, a candid
interpretation on all that is spoken by Christ: But oh! what a world of offenses
and scandals against Christ are there in this unbelieving heart? how proneisit
to quarrel with Christ? What is this but to reject Christ?

(3.) Such as do allow themselves in secret, Heart cavils against offers of
Grace.
Heart-cavils, and Disputes against the offers of Grace, made by Christ, do
interpretatively reject him. Some poor awakened sinners there are, who,
peradventure have not any deep disgusts, and dislikes against Christ; yet they
study what they can to raise objections against the tenders of life made by
Christ. Its strange to consider, how the hearts of some lie at catch, and
study how they may evade the offers of Grace. Thus it was with the unbelieving
Jews; whose cavils for the most part arose, not so much from any desire of
satisfaction, as from the bitter root of inveterate prejudices against Christ.
So Luke 20. 5. Luke 20. 5.
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say from heaven, he will
say, Why then believe ye him not? The chief Priests and Scribes are here
brought to a great Dilemma: They must either disown John to be a true Prophet;
or they must own Christ for their Messiah: Now they reason with themselves, how
they may evade this forcible Argument. And is it not thus with a great number
of awakened sinners? When Christ comes with a close conviction, and makes them
see their necessity of believing on him; Oh! what secret Cavils and Disputes
are there against Christ? How artificial, and witty is Unbelief, to shift off
Christ, and al his tenders of life? What stout Logic has every unbelieving
heart against believing in Christ? What is this but to reject Christ?

(4.) The will may be said, at least virtually, 4. Not approving the reports of
Christ.
to reject Christ, when it does not justify, or approve those Reports that are
made of Christ, by the ministry of the word, or in conscience. This is a more
refined degree of rejecting Christ, very commun among many great Professors.
Some convinced Sinners are not so disingenuous as to be always cavilling at
Christ, yet they do not approve the Reports made of Christ as they ought. They
have no considerable objections against evangelic offers; and yet the heart is
unwilling to entertain them. They are unwilling to grant what they can hardly
deny. This Christ calls being slow of heart to believe, Luke 24. 25. O fools
and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. This is the
first part of faith in the will, to justify, recognize, or approve that Assent
which is wrought in the jugement touching Christ: And when Christ has obtained
the Wills approbation and consent, he soon gains its affiance, or confidence. As
a carnal heart, that approves of the offers of sin, is soon overcome by it: So
an awakened heart, when once it comes to approve the offers of Christ, and the
Assent made thereto by the mind, how soon is it induced to yield its consent to
Christ? But oh! here lies the root of Unbelief, the will does not fully approve
and allow, of what the mind is often forced to assent unto. This was also the
condition of many unbelieving Jews: So Luke 7. 29. And all the people that heard
him, Luke 7. 29.
and the publicans justified God, being baptized with the Baptism of John. The
commun people and publicans are said to justify God, i. e, they approved of
what reports were made touching Christ: though its likely many of them, did it
but with a temporary faith. But then it follows ver. 30. But the Pharisees,
and Lawyers (...), recte vertitur rejicere: id enim optime opponitur
rejected the counsel of God v. 30.
against themselves, being not baptized of him. How did the Pharisees, and
Lawyers reject the counsel of God? Why it was by not justifying or approving,
what God reported touch -verbo (...), quod est approbare and laudare. Groting
Christ: So that when the will does not justify, approve, or commend, what God
in his word, or by the dictates of conscience does report touching Christ, it
may be said to reject the counsels of God, and Christ. As the will by approving
the Assent of the jugement turns it into Consent; so by disapproving the same
it declares its rejection thereof. This holds true both in matters of Sin, and
Grace.

(5.) The Heart may be justly said to reject 5. Delays as to a through closure
with Christ.
Christ, when it admits of demurs, and delays, as to a complete closure with
him. This is a more subtle, and refined degree of Unbelief. Some there are,
who seem to justify, and approve the Reports made of Christ, and their own
Assent thereto: they have nothing to object against Christ: they seem
wel-satisfied in the offers he makes: But yet all this while there is a secret
dilatorie, procrastinating, delaying spirit in them: they would fain close with
Christ, but not as yet: they have a will for hereafter, but not for a present
choice of Christ: they cannot as yet bid Adieu to their beloved lusts: a little
slumber, a little sleep more they must have, in the lap of their Delilahs. This
was the case of some tardy Disciples of Christ, among the Jews, as Luke 9. 59.
And he said unto another, follow Luke 9. 59.
me: but he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. He has
nothing to object against Christ; but seems abundantly satisfied in Christ's
offers; only he desires to be excused for a while, til he had buried his
Father. Again ver. 61. And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee: but let
me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. Thus awakened
sinners put off Christ, as Felix did Paul, with delays: If Christ will but wait
a while their leisure, well and good; they are then content to espouse him for
their Lord: but at present, they have no leisure, because they have no heart,
to close with Christ. Yea, is there not much of this dilatorie humor in many
wounded souls, who conceit they are not yet humbled enough, and therefore not
meet to go to Christ? Whereas indeed there is no such way to get an humble
spirit, as to come to Christ for it. Certainly, al such delays argue much
unwillingnes to believe: A Will for hereafter only, is a present Nil: An
election for the future, is no better than a present Reprobation: If you
consent only for hereafter, you at present reject Christ. So long as you defer
to do, what you know you ought to do, so long you will not do it. Yea, what are
these delays to embrace Christ, but a more sly rejection of him? May not
Christ justly estime your delay to embrace him, a refusal of him? Are not such
put offs a kind of denial? When Christ wooes thee long, by many sweet
Inspirations, both of Word and Spirit; for thee to stifle al these good
motions, by continued delays, does not this argue a mighty unwilling heart to
believe? Have thou the least shadow of Reason for thy delays to believe? Thou
say thou want Grace: ay, but may thou not, by believing, receive Grace
for Grace? Is not Grace both in being, and degrees the effect of Faith in
Christ? Do not thy sins greaten much by delays to believe? Are not thy debts to
Justice multiplied by not believing? The longer thou forbearest to believe, will
not thy heart be the more averse, and backward to believe? Peradventure thou
conceitest Christ will not receive thee, if thou come to him: ay, but whence
springs this prejudicate conceit, but from the unwillingnes of thine own heart
to receive Christ? Has not Christ declared himself to be more willing to
receive thee, than thou can be to come unto him; as it is evident from the
Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 16. 22-28? Are not al thine objections against
believing presently, but the forgeries, and figments of thine unwilling heart?
Remember, there is as great hazard in thy loitering delays, as in downright
rejection of Christ: For, albeit thy delays may be painted over with some
apparent colors of humility, and fears lest thy faith would be presumtion,
yet Christ is as effectually opposed, and excluded thereby, as by manifest
opposition. Thou had as good say it in down right terms, thou will have none
of Christ; as thus put him off, time after time, with dilatorie answers: Though
the Acts differ in degrees; yet the Principle and root is the same in one and
the other; namely an unwilling heart: and this Christ sees full well; and therefore
thy demurs, suspense, and seeming caution, or delay to believe, greatly
provokes Christ; and is by him interpreted no better than a flat refusal of
him. All the relief thou have is this, thou hopest to embrace Christ hereafter,
when thou art more humble, and fit for him: But oh! what a poor shift is this?
Tell me, may thou not be in Hell, before this hereafter come? or, Will not
thine unwilling heart be more fortified against Christ by delays? can thou
ever hope to be better, or more humble but by believing? Oh! consider what a
world of Unbelief lies at the bottom of such an unwilling heart; and how much
Christ is rejected by such delays? So much for Unbeliefs rejection of Christ.

CHAP. VI. The Explication of Unbelief, as to the Wills defective Reception of
Christ. wherein is considered its essential defects, both as to the Object, and
Subject.
HAving fininisht the first great Act of The Wills defective Reeption of Christ.
Unbelief, which consists in the Wills Rejection of Christ; we now proceed to a
second, namely the Wills defective reception of Christ. Though indeed this
second Act of Unbelief, differs from the former, not so much in Essence, and
Degree; (for every defective Reception of Christ, is a kind of Rejection of
him) yet we may thus distinguish them: The former Rejection of Christ we may
look on as a more express and manifest piece of Unbelief; but this defective
Reception of Christ is more subtle, and refined Unbelief: The former is more
commun, and belongs, for the most part, only to carnal, secure sinners: But
this later is more proper, and confined to close Evangelic Hypocrites: The
former is more Total and Universal; this later more partial Unbelief. How many
awakened sinners are there, who dare not openly oppose Christ; yea, that would
not seem to have any Dislikes against his person; or cavils against his offers;
yea, that seem ready to justify and approve the reports, and convictions they
have of Christ; and not only so, but also to close with him presently, without
any demurs, and delays; I say how many such are there, who are thus far free
from the Rejection of Christ, and yet guilty of some essential Defect, or flaw
in their Reception of him? Wherefore for the more full explication of the nature
of Unbelief, it is apparently necessary, that we inquire into the several
essential defects, which Unbelievers are guilty of, in their pretended,
partial reception of Christ; for which they may be justly said, not to know the
things that belong to their peace. The Defects of Unbelief as to its object in
receiving.


Now these essential Defects, which many evangelic, refined Hypocrites are
guilty of, in their seeming reception of Christ, may be considered, either in
regard of the Object, or of the Subject of this Reception: As for the Object of
this defective Reception, men's seeming Faith is no better than real Unbelief;
(1.) When they receive only a false Christ instead of the true: or, (2.) When
they receive the true Christ under false respects, and considerations.

1. We shall begin with the defects of Unbelief 1. A false Christ.
as to its object, in receiving only a false Christ. Oh! what a world of
splendid, glittering Professors are there, who, notwithstanding their pretended
faith in Christ, receive only a false Christ, a formed Picture, or Idol of
their own sick fantasies, in the room of the true Christ? Unbelievers may be
said to receive a false Christ, (1.) When they compound, or add any thing to
Christ: and (2.) When they divide, or take any thing from Christ.

(1.) Such as compound Christ, or add any 1. A compound Christ.
thing to him, do thereby make him, as to themselves, a false Christ. And are
there not a vast number of refined Hypocrites, who are guilty of this
defective Reception of Christ? Do not some compound their carnal Interest with
Christ? They would forsooth, receive Christ; ay, that they would, as they
conceit, Christ compounded wirh the world.
with all their hearts; but they must have the world too. They need Christ to
relieve their burdened consciences; and they need the world to relieve their
sensual hearts. Was not this the very case of the young man, who came so
confidently to Christ, with what lack I yet, Mat. 19. 20? What lack I yet? poor
man! thou lackest the main, says Christ, Mat. 19. 20, 21, 22.
ver. 21. If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the
poor, etc. Christ saw his pretended reception of him was very defective; he
knew what his beloved Idol was, and therefore pincheth him in that: and what
follow,? v. 22. He went away sorrowful, Supra modum tristis Est enim composita
dictio, ex Adverbio intendendi (...), quod semper per Paroxytonum est; Et
significat admodum, excellenter, valde nimis, Schmidius in Mat. 26. 38.
[(...), befieged with sorrows, or rather, beyond mesure sorrowful: for (...)
here is not a Preposition, but an Adverb, and signifies excedingly, eminently;
as our Latin per, (which is supposed to be derived hence) in perquam, etc. Oh!
what a deluge of sorrows pressed in on him? and why?] for he had great
possessions. He had a months mind to be one of Christ's Disciples: he seems
very forward to give him a cheerful reception; provided, that Christ would be
content to loge with his swinish Idol, the world: But if this may not be; if
Christ will not be content to have the world for his corrival, then with a
pensive sorrowful heart, he bids farewell to Christ. And is not this the very
case of a world of rotten-hearted Christians; who could be content to give
Christ good reception, would he be but content to admit of the world for his
corrival? But if Christ will not admit of a partner, then farwell to him; he is
not for their turn. Yea, how many are there, who compound Christ with some
prevalent beloved lust? Christ they must have to Christ compounded with lust.
satisfy conscience, and lust they must have to satisfy their heart: hence
they mediate a league between Christ, and their darling lust; which seems to be
the case of those forward Professors, Luke 13. 26, 27. who pretended to much
acquaintance with Christ, but all the while were but workers of iniquity; such
as joined some bosome-lust with Christ. What is this but to make Christ a
Servant, yea, a Pander and Caterer to lust?

Lastly, Do not the best of refined Hypocrites Christ compounded with spiritual
Idols.
join a world of Spiritual Idols with Christ? What shall we think of the politic
Hypocrite, who joins his own carnal prudence with Christ's wisdom? Where may we
place the gifted Hypocrite; who places his Evangelic gifts in the room of
Christ? May we not rank the whining, affectionate hypocrite among Unbelievers;
since that he makes his Tears, and melting affections, in part, if not wholly,
his Christ? What shall we conclude of the devote, legal Hypocrite, who makes his
Duties and self-righteousnes a part, if not the whole of his Christ? Where may
we rank the self-dependent, self-confident Hypocrite; who takes the commun
Assistances and Influences of the Spirit, vouchsafed to him, and places them
in the room of, or equal with Christ? Are not al these so many false Christ's,
or imaginary Idols, joined with Christ; which render the reception of him
defective?

(2.) Such as divide Christ, make him a false 2. A divided Christ.
Christ, and so their reception of him defective. As they who add to Christ,
so also they that take any thing from Christ, transform him into an Idol of
their own sick brains. And oh! what a multitude of close Hypocrites are
defective in their reception of Christ, as to this particular? How many are
there, who seem content to receive our blessed Lord, under the notion of Jesus,
a Savior; but dare not receive him as Christ, an anointed King, and Lord, to
rule over their Persons and Lusts? This seems to be the case of the unbelieving
Jews, John 1. 11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. What?
(...), i, e. ut Dominum, Grot.
Not Joh. 1. 11.
receive their Messiah? Do they not often flock after him, and sing Hosanna's to
him, as a little before our Text, Luke 19. 37? Yes, they were content to
receive him as a Savior, (so Hosanna imports, Save us now) ay, but they would
not receive him as King and Lord: So long as he preaches glad tidings of
Salvation, oh! how welcome is he? what cheerful treatment do they give him? who
but Christ? ay, but when he comes to king and lord it over their lusts; to rip
open their hypocritic, rotten hearts; to pinch and wring their lusts; oh then!
how do they kick, and throw at him? Again, how do others divide between Christ
and his yoke? The wages of Christ is sweet, and pleasing: but, oh! how
cumbersome and irksome is his work? This was Isreal's, temper, Hos. 4. 16. But
Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer, i. e, L^r^ impatiens*
in heifer impatient of the Yoke. Israel loved to tread out the corn, Hos. 10.
11. because that was pleasing work, there was wages in the work: but O! how
averse is Israel from plowing work? What a burden is the yoke to her
effeminate, tender neck? Further do not many seeming Christians divide betwixt
the Crown and Cross of Christ? The Crown is very beautiful in their eye; but,
oh! what a black ugly thing is the Cross of Christ? How pleasing is it to
reign with Christ? but how displeasing is it to suffer with him?

Lastly, do not the most of Professors divide betwixt those good things that
are in Christ, and those good things that flow from him? Al would gladly share
in the Benefits of Christ; but how few desire to have share in his Person? How
forward are awakened sinners, to catch at the Righteousness, and Merits of
Christ, thereby to screen off the scorching heat of Divine wrath? But how
backward are they to close with the Person of Christ, as the object of their
fruition? Thus Unbelievers pick and choose; take so much of Christ as as will
serve their turn, and no more: There is some one thing in Christ they like
well; but some other thing they as much dislike: They like the Blood that came
forth of his heart, to wash their guilty Consciences; but oh! how do they
dislike the Water that came forth also, to wash their filthy hearts? His
smiling countenance, and gracious Pardons are very grateful to them; but oh!
how ungrateful is his royal Scepter of Righteousness; his Soverain Authority,
and Laws? Thus Unbelievers diminish and take from Christ, in their seeming
reception of him: which indeed is but to turn Christ into an Idol: For a
divided Christ, as well as a compound Christ, is but a false Christ; no true
Christ.

2. Another branch of Unbelief, as to its defective The De^ects of
reception of Christ, is, when men receive Unbelief as to the respects under
which Christ is received.
the true Christ, in a false manner, or under false Considerations and
Respects. There are many who seem willing to take Christ only, and completely,
without Composition, or Division; but yet there remains still some essential
defect, or flaw in the manner of their receiving, or in the formal Reasons,
proper grounds; and fundamental considerations, on which they receive Christ.
Though this may, in something, agree with the former, yet we may conceive this
difference: in what precedes Christ is considered Materially; but now we are to
consider him, as the Formal Object of Faith, and Unbelief: and so the first
thing we are to consider herein, is the Motives and Grounds on which Christ is
received.

(1.) Unbelievers are defective in their manner 1. As to Motives;
of receiving Christ, when the principal Grounds and Motives of their receiving
him, are only false, or at best but commun. To receive Christ only on false, or
commun Motives, is in truth, not to receive, but refuse him. And, O! what a
world of Professors are greatly defective herein? Are there not a vast number
of seeming Christians, who receive Christ only on carnal Motives, and Grounds?
How many are there, who receive Christ, as the way to a terrestial, or earthly,
not to a celestial, or heavenly life? Do not some receive him, as the most
compendious way to Riches? Others, as the way to Honors? etc. Was not this the
case of many carnal Jews, who followed Christ only for the Loaves, and
Miracles, he wrought for them? Thus Joh. 6. 15. They were al in have to make
him King: and why? The reason you have, ver. 26. Because ye did eat of the
loaves, and were filled. O! how sweet was it, to be fed by Miracles? Again how
many are there, who receive Christ merely out of Noveltie, to please their
Fantasies, and satisfy their Curiosity? And do not such soon grow weary of
Christ? Thus it was with Herod, Luke 23. 8. he longs to see Christ; and why? to
gratify his curious eye, with the sight of some Miracle: and therefore when
Christ would not humor his curiosity; how does Herod deride, and set him at
naught, v. 11? Yea further, do not many receive Christ on Hellish grounds,
merely to concele a rotten heart, or some base practices? Lastly, are there not
amany convinced, terrified sinners, who seem to receive Christ in good earnest,
but it is only to quiet conscience; to allay the scorching heats of Divine wrath,
which torment conscience? Surely this, albeit it be good in its kind, yet it is
but a commun Motive, and therefore no firm Foundation for the reception of
Christ. He that will receive Christ as he ought, must take him, not only to ease
conscience of the burden of guilt, but also to ease his heart of the Burden of
lust. So much for the false, or commun Motives, which render some men's
reception of Christ, no better than real Unbelief.

(2.) Unbelievers are defective in their manner 2. As to the Grandeur of Christ.
of receiving Christ, when they receive him not in his Grandeur; or, in that
State, and Greatness, which is due unto him. A Prince is then received aright,
when he is received according to his Dignity. Should a subject receive his
Prince, and entertain him no better than he would entertain a Peasant, or
Countrey-neighbor; would not this be interpreted a contemt, rather than a kind
Reception of his Prince? So Christ, if he be not received in some degree
according to his Grandeur, Dignity, and State, he counts it a contemt, rather
than a good Reception of him. Christ must be received as Christ, i.e, as
Supreme Lord, and alone Mediator, or he is not truly received at al: He will be
a King, or nothing. This was the great sin of the Jews, they could be content
to receive Christ as a great Prophet, (as the Mahumedans do) but they did not
receive him according to his Grandeur, or that Greatness and Glory which he was
invested with; and therefore they are said not to receive him, John 1. 11.
whereas John says of the believing Jews, those who received him indeed, ver.
14. That they beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the
Father, full of Grace and Truth: i. e, They received him in all his Grandeur,
Splendour, Majesty, and Glory. The unbelieving Jews stumbled at the meanness
of his Person, Kingdom, and Glory. Christ will be received as King, or not at
al.

(3.) Christ is received in a false manner, 3. When Christ is not received as
offered.
when he is not received as offered in the Gospel. Christ is never received as
he ought, unless he be received as he is offered, i. e, on his own Terms and
Conditions, without any Limitations, Restrictions, Impositions, or Laws, from
such as receive him. If men come to indent with Christ, or impose terms on
him, beyond what the Gospel allows, Christ thinks it dishonorable for him, to
enter into such a soul. So much for the defects Unbelievers are guilty of, as
to the object of their Reception.

Sect. 2. The Nature of Unbelief may be The Defects of Unbelief as to the
subject of its Reception.
further explicated, from the many essential Defects that attend the Subject of
this Reception? Refined Hypocrites may be guilty of notorious Unbelief, not
only in receiving a false Christ, or the true Christ in a false manner; but
also in receiving the true Christ, with a false, or defective Heart: If the will
be naught or defective, the Reception can never be good, or perfect. For every
thing is received according to the Quality or condition of the Recipient. Now
Christ may be received with a naughty, or defective Will several ways.

1. A rotten, hollow, deceitful Will, is a base, 1. A rotten deceitful Heart.
naughty Will. He that truly receives Christ, receives him with a sound
sincere heart: If there be any prevalent degree of guile and hypocrisy loged
in the Bent of the Will, that renders it a rotten, hollow, hypocritic heart,
such an one as Christ will never delight to dwell in. A believing heart is a
single heart: it has single Aims, single Ends, single Regards to Christ:
Wherefore a double heart is a false, treacherous, lying heart: What ever its
pretensions to Christ are; yet still it has some oblique Regard, some squint eye
on some beloved Idol: Such have, as Psalm. 12. 2. An heart and an heart; one
heart for Christ, and another for some darling lust. Oh! What adulterous hearts
have many glittering Professors? notwithstanding their pretenses of Virgin-love
to Christ, yet what secret Hants have they for some other lovers? What private
Dalliances with inferior goods, are they guilty of? How are their hearts
distracted, and torn, as it were to pieces, between Convictions of sin, and
yet Affections to sin; between Assent to Christ, and yet Consent to lust? What
adulterous hearts are these! Such we find well characterised, James 4. 4. Ye
adulterers, etc. A true Believer receives Christ with an upright, strait heart:
he has a strait end, and a strait rule: But oh? what perversitie, what
crookednes is there in many men's hearts, who pretend to a reception of Christ?
What secret turnings and windings are there? Surely such divided hearts are
very faulty, as the Scripture tells us, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is divided, now
shall they be found faulty. A divided heart, or Will, is a naughty, adulterous,
rotten, lying, perverse heart, and therefore can never make a good subject for
the reception of Christ. The faith of such is but rank Unbelief.

2. The Will is defective in the reception of 2. A languid, faint Will.
Christ, when it is only incomplete, languid, and faint. Saving Faith is the
act of a Will strongly bent, and determined for Christ. If the heart be not
firmly resolved and fixed for Christ, al our faith is but mere fancy. So many
degrees as we have of a bended will toward Christ; so many degrees we have of
saving Faith. Remissness argues division of heart, and this argues hypocrisy:
Christ counts not himself duly received, unless he possess the sanctified
Bent of the Will. And herein therefore lies the Soveraintie of efficacious
Grace, in bending the Will, to a correspondence with Christ: Til the bent of the
Will be purged from Idols, and opened to Christ, he never enters into, or
inhabits any soul. Christ is too pure a Spirit, to loge with Swinish lusts, in
one and the same Bent of Will: he will be al in all there, or none at al. So that
they who give not Christ the entire Bent of their Will, give him not that place
which is due unto him; and therefore such may not expect his company. May it
be imagined that the Lord of Glory will take up his logement in that soul,
where base nasty lusts have the same, or better room than he? Is this, even
among men, counted good Reception, to entertain a person of honorable
condition, in some out-loge, or in the same place with the Swine? And do not a
world of great Professors thus receive Christ? How many are there, who loge
Christ only in some out-Affections; in some faint, imperfect Desires? or, if
some others are more civil to him, and afford him some room in their more
inward Affections; yet is he not still loged with the swine? have not some base
lusts as good, if not a better room in the heart than Christ? Surely this is
not to receive Christ: He that has not a stronger will for Christ than for sin,
is really unwilling for Christ, but willing for sin. If the heart be bent for
lust, it is unbent for Christ: He that is only in a faint mesure willing to
receive Christ, is habitually unwilling: such as are not prevalently resolved
for Christ, are prevalently resolved for sin; and so consequently, and
virtually unresolved for Christ. Yea, a faint and languid willing of Christ, is
a virtual and implicit, though not formal nilling of him: Imperfect, weak
volition, or willingness to receive Christ, is implicit, and real nolition, or
unwillingnes to have him. Hence that sad complaint of God against Judah, Jer.
3. 10. And yet for all this, her treacherous Jer. 3. 10.
sister Judah has not turned to me with her whole heart, but feignedly, says
the Lord. Judah gave God some imperfect Reception; but it was not with her
whole heart: the Bent of her will was not turned toward him, and therefore she
is said to embrace him but feignedly, or in falsehood; as it may be rendered. A
languid, partial will is but a feigned false will, in point of faith: He that
gives not Christ the whole heart, or the prevalent bent of his will, (which in
moral estimation passes for the whole will) gives him nothing but a civil
refusal, or denial. Such as the Bent of the will is, such is the man, as to Sin,
or Grace.

3. The Will is defective in the Reception of A terrified forced Will.
Christ, when it is only terrified, and forced; not free, and cheerful in
closing with him. Many awakened sinners, while under dreadful Terrors, and
Horrors of conscience, seem strongly inclined to receive Christ: who but
Christ? Ay, but how little have they of a cheerful ready will? Are not al their
closures with Christ wrung, and forced from them, merely by the violence of a
tormented terrified conscience? Do they not come to Christ only as a wounded
person to his Surgeon, for a Plaster to heal conscience? They receive
Christ, but is it not only, as a Bankrupt entertains a rich Surety, to pay
their debts to the Law? Surely, such involuntary, constrained Receptions of
Christ, if they do not end in a more cheerful Election, are but more modest
Refusals of him: Involuntarie election is a degree of real Reprobation. Albeit
every Election has something of the will in it; yet that may be termed an
involuntary forced election, when the Will, might it with security use its own
freedom, would not elect, what it now closes with. And oh! how many terrified
souls do, with such an involuntarie, forced Will, receive Christ? They see no
beauty, or worth in Christ; only they make use of him to serve a turn, to
quench the flames of Divine wrath in conscience; and when that is done they lay
him aside again, as an useless servant: What is such an unwilling choice of
Christ, but a more courtly rejection of him? Do not such forced consents pass
for real dissents, among more civil persons? Such as entertain Christ in the^
extremities, and perplexities of conscience, with such an involuntary Will, how
soon do they lay him aside, when the storm is over? Was not this the very case
of the unbelieving Jews, even from their infant-state in the Wilderness? So
Psalm. 78. 34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, Psa.
68. 34.
and inquired early after God. When God awakened their consciences, by terrible
jugements; Oh! how early do they inquire after their Messiah? what cheerful
Reception do they seem to give unto him? Ay, but this was but a terrified,
affrightned will; they did but flatter him with good words: their heart was not
right, as it follows, ver. 36, 37. A forced will, is but a false lying will; it
is no real Will, but Nil. When there is nothing on the Will but mere compulsive
terrors, it never gives a fiducial reception to Christ: Til the will be in
faith, it is never saving. Convictions of sin, seconded by legal Terrors, may
compel some to believe; but if there follow not a Spirit of Adoption and
liberty, that faith proves only legal, and temporary. We find a good character
of evangelic faith in Zacheus's reception of Christ, Luke 19. 6. Luke 19. 6.
And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully: His will was in
his faith: he received Christ, and would not for a world, but receive him: He
believed, and would not but believe: His heart was in the work: it was his joy
and delight to entertain Christ, not only in his house, but in his heart also.
But is it thus with all that pretend to receive Christ? Are there not many who
receive Christ, under dolors and rackings of conscience, who yet have no liking
to him; yea, who would gladly shift themselves of him, were their troubles of
conscience once well over? Do not the hearts of such secretly draw back from
Christ; yea entertain an inveterate, old grudge against him, while they seem
willing to draw near to him, and make use of him in their extremity? Have not
such soon enough of Christ? are they not soon weary of him, and therefore turn
him off again, as soon as he has served their turn? Do they not secretly wish
that they might be saved by their own doings, rather than by believing in
Christ? Its true, they, in a sort, receive Christ; but how is it? Is it not as
a wounded captive receives his enemy with fair words, to save his life; whiles
yet he hates him in his heart, and is grieved, that he should need his enemies
favor? Surely this is not to receive Christ gladly: For to such it is a burden
to be beholding to Christ for Salvation: They had rather be saved any other way
than by Christ: Oh how glad would they be, if God would but accept of their own
goods works, instead of Christ's merits: whereas a true Believer would to
choose, be saved by Christ's merits, rather than by his own: he is abundantly
satisfied in Christ, and the way of Salvation by him: his will does electively
hug and embrace Christ, as his best friend. Thus Zacheus received Christ
joyfully. Its true, many sincere Believers, at first, whiles under a Spirit of
Bondage, have only a terrified, affrightned will: yea, after they have received
a Spirit of Adoption, and Christ, by saving Faith, how much of an unwilling
heart do they find mixed with their faith? What legal, selfish regards have
they often toward Christ? Ay, but this is the distemper, and therefore the
burden of their souls: They are never better pleased, than when their wills are
most cheerful, spiritual, and forward in closing with Christ: How greatly do
they approve of, and delight in the way of salvation by Christ? What
contentement, and pleasure do they take in believing? How much rather had they
have their Grace, peace, and comfort in Christ's keeping, than in their own? But
is it thus with Unbelievers, such as receive Christ only with a terrified,
legal Will? Is it not a burden to them, that they should be driven to such
streights, as that none but Christ can relieve them? Is there not a secret
displeasure, and dislike against Christ, even while they are forced, by reason
of their extremities, to make use of him? Would they not be glad to be eased of
Christ, were their consciences eased of their trouble? Such is the temper of a
terrified will. And so much for the Unbelievers defective Reception of Christ.

CHAP. VII. Unbelief explicated as to its Defects, in Adherence to, Recumbence
on, Satisfaction in, Obedience to, Application of, and Waiting for Christ.
3. HAving explicated the Nature of Unbelief, from its defective Reception of
Christ, we now proceed to those defects 3. The Wills Defects as to adherence
unto Christ.
which attend the Consequents of such a Reception. And we shall begin with the
Wills Adherence to Christ; which seems to be an immediate consequent of the
foregoing Reception of Christ. Adherence is an essential branch of Faith; and
that which naturally follows upon al reception of Christ: So that he, who does
not firmly, yea, inviolably adhere to Christ, may be justly said, never to
have received him aright. (...).
Faith is defined a firm and rooted Disposition, or Habit: Moses, in his
Exhortation to the unbelieving Israelites, advises them to cleave unto God,
Deuteronomy. 10. 20. The Original, in its primarie notion, signifies a conjugal
adherence, such as is between Man and Wife, as Genesis Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
2. 24. and so it denotes here that conjugal adherence which the soul ought to
maintain toward Christ, as its husband; which Paul also expresses by the
similitude of Marriage, Ephesians. 5. 25 -- 32. and 1 Cor. 6. 17. by cleaving to the
Lord. This conjugal adherence of the Believer to Christ, is well illustrated by
Ruths cleaving to her Mother, Ruth 1. 14, 16. The like Job 41. 17. They are
joined one to another, (...)
they stick together, that they cannot be sundred. Such ought to be the
inviolable adherence of the soul to Christ. So Act. 11. 23. Barnabas exhorts
them, with full purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord. Faith is a mighty
adhesive and tenacious Grace: it adheres to Christ as the Needle to the
Loadstone: yea, it follows hard after Christ, though he may seem to run from
the soul; yea, to turn against it as an enemy. Thus Psalm. 63. 8. My soul
follows hard after thee. Christ had deserted him, but Psalm 63. 8.
he could not desert, or leave Christ: his soul cleaves fast to Christ, albeit
Christ seems to shake off his soul: for so (...) signifies; and so it is
rendered by some, My soul adheres to thee. Such is the temper of Faith. But now
Unbelief is always drawing back from Christ: Though it may, under a storm,
shelter it self under Christ's wing, and give him some forced reception; yet it
soon has enough of Christ; and therefore cares not how soon it be rid of him,
when its turn is served. This backsliding temper of Unbelief is well expressed,
Hebr. 3. 12. Take heed, Heb, 3. 12.
brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. An unbelieving heart is a backsliding heart: Unbelief is
one of the greatest cowards in the world: every shadow of danger makes it draw
back from Christ. Whereas true faith is full of Masculine, undaunted courage: it
can follow Christ through a sea of blood: yea, it dares not let go its
confidence in Christ, though he seem to shake the soul over the flames of Hell,
or drag it through the lake of fire. The weakest believer, at his greatest
straits, keeps his Reversion of Christ: Though Christ's Divine Suavities, and
spiritual consolations forsake him, yet he does not totally forsake Christ, nor
yet his duty: He may fall into sin, and fall backward unto backsliding, yet he
dares not lie in his false: His soul is rooted in Christ, and the Covenant; and
therefore never dies: The spirit of Christ abides in him, and that causes him
to abide in Christ, radically, and habitually, even under the most severe
Winter of Tentation. So it Heb. 3. 14.
follows ver. 14. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the
beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. The word (...), rendered here
Confidence, signifies, in its primary notion, a firm basis, or foundation; a
subsistence, and substance. Faith gives a firm foundation, subsistence, and
stabilitie to the soul; so that it keeps steadfast in adhering unto Christ, even
in the most unstedfast times. But now Unbelief has no foundation, and therefore
no subsistence: It is stable in nothing but Instabilitie. Oh! how fluctuating,
staggering, unstedfast is the unbelieving heart, even in the most steadfast
times? How apt is it to draw back from Christ, on the least appearance of
difficulty? Unbelievers do, as the Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. 21. forsake their
God, when their God forsakes them. And this drawing back is so essential, and
natural to Unbelief, as that they are reciprocally used one for the other. So
Heb. 10. 38. Now the Heb. 10. 38, 39.
just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, i. e, believes not in, or
adheres not to me. Thus again ver. 39. But we are not of them that draw back
unto perdition; but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul. Where
drawing back is opposed to believing, and so expressive of Unbelief, its most
natural genius and disposition; which is to draw back from Christ. Now this
drawing back of Unbelief has a double Object; (1.) God in Christ, the supreme
end, and object of faith: and (2.) Divine Institutions, and Appointments, which
are the Means, in and by which Faith adheres to God in Christ. This later,
seems chiefly (though not exclusively) intended in this place; as it appears by
the whole scope of the precedent discourse; wherein the Author gives the
Hebrews a strict Admonition, To beware how they did forsake the assembling of
themselves together, as the manner of some was, to avoid persecution, v. 25,
etc. So that to draw back from the Institutions, and Ordinances of Christ, is
here, as it may justly be interpreted, a drawing back from Christ. And this is
grounded on a great Maxim in Nature, which teaches us, That he who forsakes
the means, forsakes the end. For he that firmly wills, and adheres to an end,
does also firmly will, and adhere to the means, which have an intimate, and
essential connection therewith. Yea, the more difficult the means we undertake
for Christ are, the firmer is our adherence to him, as our End. Whence it is
evident, that so far as any soul forsakes the Institutions, and Ordinances of
Christ, so far he forsakes Christ: Withdrawment from the means of Grace,
appointed by Christ, is a withdrawment from himself: and herein much of the
spirit of Unbelief discovers itself and its malign influences. This was the
great iniquity of the unbelieving Israelites, as we find them characterised,
Hos. 11. 7. And my people are bent to backsliding from me. Their backsliding
Hos. 7. 11.
lay, chiefly, in forsaking the Institutions and Appointments of God, and
giving up themselves to Idolatry, and superstitious Worship. This also was
their sin, in the Wilderness, as it appears, Psalm. 78. 37. For their heart was
not right with me, neither were they steadfast in his Psalm. 78. 37
Covenant. Albeit they had engaged themselves to Christ, by a solemn League
and Covenant; yet what a crooked, perverse, lying heart was there in them? How
unstedfast were they in his Covenant? how did they play off and on, fast and
loose, to and fro, up and down with Christ? Such is the nature of Unbelief:
whereas our blessed Lord instructs us Luke 9. 62. That no man having put his
hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God, i. e, He
that does not persevere in adhering to Christ, never truly believed on him: A
temporary faith is no better than real Unbelief: That faith was never real,
which is not lasting. 4 Diffidence and Distrust.


4. Another branch of Unbelief consists in Diffidence and Distrust, as it is
opposed to the Recumbence of faith. Faith is the most passive Grace: it can do
or suffer nothing without Christ: and therefore its force, and strength
consists in Recumbence on Christ. Faith never knows better days, than when it
goes most out of it self, and rests on Christ. Hence we find the Nature of
Faith often described, by its Recumbence: So Psalm. 37. 5. Commit thy way Psalm.
37. 5.
unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Commit, (...)
i. e, Devolve, or Roll thy way, i. e, thine Affairs, thy cares, from thy self,
or thine own heart, upon thy Lord. So Psalm. 22. 8. He trusted on the Lord: or
according to the Hebr. He rolled (himself, or his burdens) on the Lord. It
seems to be a Metaphor, borrowed from Porters, who exonerate, or unlode their
Burden on some place fit to receive it. Faith rols off all the sinners burdens,
whether of Guilt, or Filth, or Tentations, or Duties, or Civil concerns on
Christ. Thus the Spouse is described Cantic. 8. 5. Who is this that comes up
from the Cant. 8. 5.
Wilderness, leaning on her Beloved? Faith is a Recumbent Grace: when it
cannot honor Christ, as it would, by Obedience, yet then it honors him by
Dependence: it fetches al from Christ, and so gives al glory to him: Yea, the
more Grace it receives from Christ, the more sense it has of its need of
Christ: The more it acts for Christ, the more it conceives itself obliged to
Christ. Though it does never so much for Christ, yet it dares not trust in any
thing it does or has; but wholly in Christ. Such a mere passive, dependent,
Recumbent thing is faith; as we find it described, Isai. 10. 20. Let him trust
in the Lord, and stay upon his God. Though the Believer may, by Storms of
Tentation, be now and then beaten off from Christ his Rock and Center; yet he
comes on again, and casts Anchor afresh on Christ: He counts not himself safe,
til his heart fix here: al his Interruptions and Assaults do but bring him to
a more absolute, and complete Recumbence on Christ: His faith finds no sure
bottom but here: It counts itself secure no where, but on Omnipotence. Yea,
the stronger Faith is, the stronger usually is its recumbence on, and
confidence in Christ. And this, in all desertions, keeps the Believer from
sinking, in that he swims by faith on the Covenant, and in recumbence on Christ.

But now it is quite contrary with Unbelief: How natural is it to corrupt
Nature to trust in, and depend upon its own forces? Yea, are not Divine
Assistances, and Influences abused by unbelief, unto carnal confidence? Oh!
What an absolute Independence, and Self-sufficience does Unbelief affect? How
fain would every Unbeliever Deifie himself, by making himself the first
principle of his Dependence, and Trust? Was not this the sin of our first
Parents, to affect a self-sufficience; that so they might derive from
themselves, what they ought, by a natural Dependence, to derive from God? And
do not al their lapsed seed naturally follow their steps herein? As fallen man
affects to seek himself, as his last end; so does he not strongly desire to
depend on himself, as his first cause, and supreme efficient? And if the
Unbeliever cannot find a sufficience in himself to depend on; then how does he
hunt, and seek out among the creatures, for some bottom to recumbe, and fix
upon? So Hos. 5. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound,
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to king Jareb. Israel had rather go
any where, for relief, than unto God. How natural is it to Unbelievers, to
trust in any sorry Idol-God, of their own making, rather than in the God, that
made Heaven and Earth? How unable are Unbelievers to trust God, in the want of
althings? But how much less are they able to trust him, in the fullness of
althings? Does not men's depending so much on themselves, or the creature, argue
their little, if any dependence on Christ? Its true, some refined, evangelic
Hypocrites may now and then seem to depend on God; ay, but do not they, all the
while, secretly depend on themselves? Is not their Recumbence on God, as
hypocritic, as their false hearts? Do they not seem to depend on God, but mean
while shift for themselves? Is their confidence in God universal? Can they
trust God in all conditions, difficulties, emergences, seasons, and things? True
confidence, as well as obedience, must be universal: But alas! how unable are
unbelievers to confide in God, in a stormy day? What a poor Affiance in Christ
have they under the abundance of althings? How little do they regard, and
depend on Christ in small concerns? This self-dependence was the great sin --
of the unbelieving Jews, which Christ every where upbraids them with: So Luke
11. 41. But rather give Alms of such things as you have: and behold althings
are Luk 11. 41.
clean unto you. Our blessed Lord here seems Ironicly to upbraid the Pharisees,
with their self-confidences: They conceited, that their Alms and other externe
good works, would expiate for all their sins; albeit their hearts were full of al
manner of wickedness: Christ sharply taxes, and rebukes their folly, with this
smart Ironie: And behold althings are clean unto you. As if he had said: You
presume, by your Alms, to purchase Heaven; but, alas! how are you deceived?
what small support will this yield you at the last day? Thus Augustine: Christ
seems smartly to tax the vain persuasion of the Pharisees, who albeit they had
spirits obnoxious to the vilest lusts, yet by giving Alms, they trusted they
were half-Gods.

5. Another branch of Unbelief consists in 5. Dissatisfaction.
a certain Dissatisfaction of heart: opposite to that Acquiescence and Rest,
which the Believer finds in Christ. Faith brings with it a Divine contentement
and satisfaction: the more experience it has of Christ, the better pleased it
is in adhering to him: if it were to choose again, it would make no other
choice than Christ. There is no Doctrine, no Discourse so pleasing to Faith, as
that which exalts Christ: It loves to hear Christ's excellences displayed. Oh!
how sweet is it to Faith, to see Christ's face, to hear his voice, to smell his
sweet Savors, to taste his Delices in the Gospel? How glad is it to be stripped
of al fond presumtions, carnal confidences, and false bottomes, that so Christ
alone may give rest to the soul? So Paul, Phil. 3. 3. And rejoice Phil. 3 3.
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. How does he insult over
al his former vain confidences? what satisfaction does he take in Christ, and
in him alone? How glad is he that Christ takes any course to break his carnal
confidences, that so nothing but Christ himself may support his heart? Such
Acquiescence, Satisfaction and Rest does Faith find in Christ.

But now Unbelief is of a quite contrary humor: Though it may, being forced by
the importunity of a clamorous conscience, give Christ some reception for a
while; yet how il satisfied is it with Christ: what a burdensome guest is he?
How soon does the unbelieving soul hanker again after its beloved Idols? Oh!
what reachings forth of heart after this, or that, or the other secret Idol? what
Disquietments, and repining Discontents are there, at the deprivement of such,
or such an inferior good? What secret desires and inclinations are there
toward the Law, that old husband? At least how fain would the heart admit the
Law, as a Covenant of works, to share in that Conjugal Faith and Affection,
which is due only to Christ? Thus it was with many unbelieving Galatians; Gal.
4. 9. But now after that ye have known Gal. 4. 9.
God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly
elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage. [How turn ye again?]
What does he mean by this? Were the Galatians ever under the legal ceremonies,
here styled beggarly elements, as ver. 10? No, The Galatians were never before
under those Judaic ceremonies: only they are said to turn again unto them,
because they affected a Vocula (...) non rem eandem, sed similem respicit. Idem
(...) Glass. Gram. Sacr.
similitude, or ressemblance to the Jews herein. Oh! how fain would they
Symbolise or agree with the Jews, and so mingle something of the Law with
Christ? So it follows: [whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage,] (...), ye
desire, or, (...), i. e, qui ultro and perinde appetitis, velle aliquando pro
cupide optare. Glass. Gram. Sacr.
ye greedily covet, ye greatly wish and long to be under the Law: oh! how much
do you desire, what strong wishes have you to join the Law with Christ? the
like ver. 21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the the law, (...), i. e, ye
who are so hungry, and greedy after the law. This was the temper of many
Judaising Galatians; they would fain compound the Law with Christ: they could
not rest satisfied in Christ alone, as the matter of their justification, but
must needs join the law with him; which Paul tells them, Gal. 5. 2, 3. Was to
make Christ of none effect. For he that rests not in Christ alone, as the matter
of his justification, trusts not at al in him.

So also in point of happiness, he that does not acquiesce in Christ alone; as
the object of his rest and satisfaction, does not really believe in him: whence
says Christ, Luke 14. 26. If any come to me, and hate not his Luke 14. 26, 33.
father, etc. i. e, if he be not satisfied in me as the fountain of his life,
he has no share in me: (...), est minus amare, Grot.
For to hate here, is to love less. Christ does not injoin his Disciples
simply, and absolutely to hate Parents, etc. No, that were sin: But he means
comparitively, i. e, whoever does not love Parents, Wife, etc. less than me,
cannot be my Disciple. So ver. 33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. What does Christ mean by this? Does he
expect that, when we turn Christians, we bid Adieu to al outward comforts? No
surely: This command of Christ does not so much respect the Act, as the
Affection: we are not commanded to cast away al, but to love Christ above al.

6. Again, Unbelief is full of murmurs, Disobedience, 6. The Disobedience of
Unbelief.
and Reluctance against the soverain Will of God. Faith is the most obsequious,
obedient, and dutiful Grace: Oh! how full of Resignation, and Submission is the
believing Will, so far as it is believing? When Christ enters into any soul, he
expects, that every proud imagination, every high thought stoop unto him: That
the whole soul bow before him, and adore his soverain will and pleasure. Thus
Job 1. 20. Then Job arose,] This notes Job. 1. 20.
his speed, courage, and resolution in complying with the divine Will. [And rent
his mantle and shaved his head,] these were Symbols, or tokens of great sorrow,
and humiliation under the hand of God. Faith does not destroy natural
affections; but it regulates and spiritualiseth them. When the hand of God is
on us, our hand should be on our hearts, in order to a deep sense, and
humiliation under Gods visitation. Then it follows: [and fell down upon the
ground, and worshipped] The Hebrew words do both signify a bowing to the
ground. Because in their worship, they usually fell to the ground, or bowed
their head, knee, or whole body; therefore the same word, among the Hebrews,
signifies both to bow, and to worship: What then does Jobs falling to the
ground, and worshipping import? (1.) A sense of Gods hand in this visitation.
(2.) An Adoration of, or bowing before the Divine will as most righteous. (3.) A
satisfaction in the present issues of the divine Will. In short, it implies a
melting or dissolving of his Will into the Divine will, as most holy and best.
Hence v. 21. its said, That in all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
follishly. i. e, Jobs faith brought his will to correspond with the Divine will.
O! What a sweet harmony was here? But this unbelief cannot endure: Oh! what
risings of heart are there against the Truths, Grace, Will, Ways, and Cross of
Christ? How does unbelief strugle, and fret against the supreme pleasure of
Christ? Hence the same word in the Greek signifies both Unbelief Joh. 3. 36.
and Disobedience; as John 3. 36. He that believes not the Son. (...), which
signifies also, Qui inabsequiens est filio. Grot.
He that is not obedient to the Son: Al faith carries something of obedience in
it, or a subjection of the mind, and will to the Word, and Grace of Christ:
whence Unbelievers are styled, Ephesians. 2. 2. (...), Children of disobedience, or
unpersuasible, untractable children; such as cannot bring their hearts to bow
and stoop to divine Truths, Grace, and Commands. And indeed much of the nature
of Infidelity is lively expressed by this notion of Disobedience: Thus the
Israelites unbelief is set forth to us, Act. 7. 39. To whom our fathers would
not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again to
Egypt. How did they disobey Christ, and thrust him from them? Was it not
chiefly by their murmurs and Unbelief? So in like manner we find unbelief set
forth by fretting against God, (which is an high degree of Disobedience) Psalm.
37. 1. Fret not thy self because of evil doers. [Fret not thy Psalm. 37. 1.
self,] or, be not angry, chide not. Unbelief is very prone to be angry; yea,
to chide God; because of the prosperity of wicked men: whereto is opposed
verse. 3. Trust in the Lord, etc. This trusting in God is opposite ver. 7.
to that fretful spirit, v. 1. The like Antithesis, or opposition we find ver.
7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently; fret not thy self, because of him that
prospers in his way. Rest in the Lord: Hebr. (...) be silent unto the Lord:
Don't let one murmur, or impatient word drop out of thy mouth, but wait
patiently, or expect, with much silence and patience, relief from the Lord:
beware, how thou do fret, and repine against his Soverain pleasure. So that
a fretful, murmuring spirit is quite opposite to that silence and obedience,
which faith implies: What is faith, but a free and cheerful resignation of al
concerns to God; with a complete subjection to his Soverain Will, Grace, and
Spirit for the accomplishment of al? Faith subjugates, and captivates our
wisdom, to divine Wisdom; our consciences to the divine Law; our whole heart
and life, to the divine Will, either preceptive, or providential. A Believer, as
such, lives no longer, than he lives in the divine Will and Grace: and no thing
is so fit a subject for such a Divine life, as a broken heart: and what so
effectually breaks the heart as faith in Christ? Oh! what meekness is there in
faith? How silent is it? How flexible to the Divine Will? Certainly the lower
the will lies in subjection, and submission to God, the higher faith rises: The
highest faith is that which lies lowest in subjection to the foot of God. Such
was Abraham's faith, Isai. 41. 2. Called him to his foot. Faith yields up it
self to Christ, to be acted as he pleases; to do or suffer as he thinks fit:
it leaves the soul with Christ, to be wrought upon as he seems good. So Paul
Act. 9. 6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? Paul makes Christ master of his
will, and al: he is content to be wholly influenced by Christ's Soverain will and
Spirit. Whence faith is compared to a Mariage-covenant; whereby the wife gives
over, and resignes al right to her husband: So the Believer gives up himself to
Christ, that he may be his. Hence the more resistance there is against the Will
and Grace of Christ, the more Unbelief: An unbelieving will is an inflexible
will: its mighty stiff and hard. Unbelievers are extreme covetuous and greedy
of their own wills: to part with their wills is death to them.

7. Infidelity, or Unbelief, implies also an 7. Nonapplication of the Grace of
Christ.
unwillingnes to appropriate, or apply the Promises, and Grace of Christ, for
the sinners benefit. Faith is a mighty appropriating, applicative Grace:
although it be very silent, patient, and submissive, as to mesures, degrees,
seasons, and the manner of receiving Grace; yet it is very ready to apply al
Promises, or intimations of Grace given it: Yea, if it has but a general
promise, yet it can make particular application of it to the soul: yea,
sometimes, though it has but an Item, an halfpromisse, or nod from Christ, yet
it can apply and improve it for the sinners encouragement. As by the acts of
Adherence and Recumbence the soul goes forth to Christ; so by this
appropriating applicative act of faith, it sucks in, and applies to itself the
Grace of Christ, according to its several needs, and indigences. Is the poor
sinner laden, and pinched with the guilt of sin? O then! how does faith apply
thereto a Plaster of Christ's blood? Does some powerful lust, or tentation
assault the soul? then faith goes to Christ for fortifying, corroborating
Grace? Is the Believer called to any difficult piece of service, either active
or passive, for Christ? then Faith applies to itself the Divine assistance and
direction of Christ's Spirit. Thus it receives out of Christ's fullness, Grace
for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. But now unbelief is altogether unacquainted with this
Divine Art, of appropriating, and applying the Grace of Christ: It does want,
not only legs, or an active power to go to Christ; but also hands, or a passive
power to receive from Christ. Oh! what a prodigiously proud beggar is Unbelief,
in that it scorns to receive an Alms from Christ? What! not receive Grace
when offered? Does Christ offer an Act of Indemnitie unto sinners; and will not
they receive it at his hands? Oh! what a proud, bloody sin is Unbelief? Alas!
many convinced sinners think it too much Presumtion and Arrogance for them to
appropriate, and apply the Grace of Christ to themselves: They think it better
becomes them to apply nothing but wrath and condemnation to themselves: So
modest and humble do they seem to be: But, oh! what a world of pride does there
lie at the bottom of this seeming Modesty and Humility? Is it not rank pride
for sinners to refuse that Grace, which is freely offered? When Christ comes to
pour in Grace freely into the soul, then to refuse that Grace, because we have
no money to purchase it, what egregious pride is this?

8. The last act of Infidelity, or Unbelief, 8. Putting far off Christ's second
coming.
is, A diffident removing, or putting far from the soul, the second coming of
Christ, and all the great things of Eternity, which ensue thereon. Faith has
such a miraculous efficace, as that it can make things absent, present; things
invisible, visible, Heb. 11. 1. It gives a prelibation, and foretast of
approaching Glories, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Here Paul tells them, That after they
believed, they were sealed, (...): Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
It is a Translation borrowed from Seals, by the impression or stamp whereof
we distinguish things true from false, things authentic from uncertain. The
stamp of a Seal impressed on an Instrument, renders it indubitable and
unquestionable. The Jews had the externe seal of Circumcision; and the Grecians
were sealed with the marque of their Idols; ay, but says Paul, Ye were sealed
with that Holy Spirit of promise; (...): The Article here is treble; which
carries in it a great Emphase; and demonstrates some extraordinary work of the
holy Spirit: It seems to refer to the great Promise of the Spirit, Luke 24.
49. as elsewhere. But what is meant by this seal of the Spirit? I know some
understand it of the Seal of Assurance; whereby they were assured of their
eternal possession: and we need not altogether exclude this sense: yet I humbly
conceive, that this Seal is primarily to be understood of the Stamp, or
Impresse of Grace at first Regeneration, which is communicated to al Believers:
whence it is said, they were sealed with that Holy Spirit, i. e, the Spirit of
Sanctification. Now this Impresse, or stamp of the Spirit of Sanctification
after their first believing is said to be, ver. 14. the earnest of our
inheritance, etc. (...), comes from the Hebrew (...), which in the general
signifies all that which is given for the confirmation of a promise; and
particularly among the Phenicians, (whence the Grecians seem to have derived
the word,) it notes earnest-money. So that the sense is this: Ye, who have
believed, have received the earnest of the Spirit of Grace, whereby you have
hopes and expectation of glory; Hence Faith has the Bridegrooms coming fixed on
its eye; the sound of the last Trumpe ever ringing in its ear. Ay, but Unbelief
removes al these far from the soul: it says, in the language of those secure
sinners, 2 Pet. 3. 4. Where is the promise of his coming? do not althings
continue as they were? Unbelief is possessed with a kind of sleeping Devil: it
dreams of nothing but building Tabernacles here: What a stranger is it to
eternity, and the concerns thereof? If the secure sinner be now and then a
little awakened, and startled at the apprehensions of future jugement; how
restless is Unbelief, til it has got the soul asleep again? How are the eyes
shut, and the will bolted against al foresight, and expectations of Christ's
second coming? Oh! what a torment is it to the Unbeliever, to lie under
awakened apprehensions, expectations of, and approches toward future jugement?
What would he give, if eternity were buried in oblivion? There is nothing in
the world that the Unbelievers heart is more alienated from, and averse to,
than the second coming of Christ. Faith breeds a great expectation of longing
for, and has leaning unto that great day: But oh! how does Unbelief endeavor to
choke and stifle al awakened apprehensions thereof? And if the spirit of
Bondage work any lively sense and convictions of that terrible day, what
dreadful storms and tempests of legal fear does unbelief raise in the soul,
whereby it is indisposed, and hindered from any effectual endeavors, and
preparations for that day?

And oh! how commun is this piece of Infidelity? Did not our great Lord
foretell, that it should be the main sin of these last days, Luke 18. 8. Yea, is
it not foretold, Mat. 25. 4. That the wise Virgins, as well as the foolish,
should, in these last days, be overtaken with spiritual slumber, and removing
far from them the coming of their Lord? But oh! what a dead sleep are the
foolish Virgins under, who mind not at all the coming of Christ? And whence
comes the Sensuality and Luxury of secure sinners, but from this great piece
of Infidelity, in not waiting for Christ's coming, as Mat. 24. 36-39? What
makes many knowing Professors so formal, dead-hearted, loitering, and lazy in all the great duties, and services of Christianity, but their not expecting
this great day? Fiducial expectation of Christ's coming makes Christians active
and vigorous in all gracious exercices, as we find it exemplified in Paul, 2
Cor. 5. 9. Phil. 3. 12, 13. Again, whence springs the excess of unlawful
passions, and the prevalence of domineering lusts, but from unbelief as to
Christ's second coming? Lively apprehensions and expectations of this glorious
day, are most efficacious to kill lusts, and remove tentations, as 2 Pet. 3. 10,
11. How comes it to pass that men are so careless and regardlesse of a good
conscience, but from want of such lively expectations of Christ's coming? What
made Paul so exact in keeping a good conscience, but his faith in eying this
great day, as Act. 24. 15, 16? How little do men mind, affect, or do any thing
as they ought, so long as they put far from them the coming of their Lord? Does
not the peace, comfort, grace, strength, beauty, and flourishing of a
Christian depend on this piece of faith? Does it not argue a desperate, hard,
unbelieving heart, not to regard this day? Do not such Professors, as neglect
this piece of Faith, live below their principles and profession? So much for
the nature of Infidelity.

CHAP. VIII. Doctrinal Corollaries deduced from the precedent Idea's, and
Notions of Infidelity.
HAving dispatched the formal Idea, or Nature of Unbelief, before we pass on to
the remaining Questions, it will be not a little Useful, that we make some
Improvements of what has been laid down, both by Corollaries, and more practic
Uses. As for Corollaries, Corollaries.
various great truths may be deduced from the precedent Explication of
Infidelity. As, 1. That awakened Sinners may proceed Corol. 1.
Almost-believers may proceed far and yet continue Infidels.
very far in Assent, and Consent to the things that belong unto their peace,
and yet remain Infidels, or Unbelievers. This Corollarie does naturally flow
from the former description of Unbelief; and we need go no further for the
exemplification hereof, than those unbelieving Jews, over whom our Lord here
weeps, and laments. Alas! how far did many of these awakened Jews proceed in
their Assent, and Consent to Christ, as their long-waited-for Messiah? Do they
not immediately before v. 37, 38. solemnly recognize him as their crowned
King? Oh! what joyous Hosanna's, and Psalms of Praise do they sing unto him,
as John 12. 13, 14, 15. which refers hereto? And does not this argue a great
conviction in their consciences; as also some faint, and languid inclination in
their wills toward him? And yet, Lo! our blessed Lord weeps over them as those,
who knew not the things that did belong unto their peace. Oh! What a
soul-astonishing consideration is this, to consider how far many poor, awakend
sinners have gone in owning Christ, and yet at last have been disowned by him?
How many selfdeluding souls assent to Christ in their jugements, and yet
consent to lust in their hearts? If we make some brief reflection on the
forementioned particulars of faith, what a strange concurrence shall we find to
make good this Corollarie?

(1.) Did not the unbelieving Jews of old, 1 As to Assent,
(as a world of false Professors now) assent unto the Scriptures, as the
Oracles of God, wherein all the good things of their peace were loged; and yet
never arrived unto a real, particular, fixed, evangelic, prevalent, and
vigorous credence thereof? How many assent to the things which belong to their
peace in notion, but yet dissent in heart and practice? Do not too many assent
to the pleasing, and sweet offers of the Gospel, but yet dissent from the
displeasing, and self-crucifying duties thereof? Oh! how far have many
convinced Sinners gone in Attention to, and Reception of the things of their
peace? What great and amazing Conceptions have they had thereof? Yea, how much
have they approved of things most excellent? Yea, what strong legal assent have
they yielded unto the terrors of the Law? Yea, have not some been as it were
ravished with joy in their contemplations of approaching glories? Yea and have
not these convictions wrought their hearts to a great mesure of alienation, and
aversion from sensible goods; as also closing with the good things that belong
to their peace? And yet all this while, what strangers have they been to a
saving assent to the things that belong to their peace? Have they not given a
mere natural, human Assent to supernatural Divine truths? Its true, they have
received the Word of God, but was it not as the word of men, as clothed with
some human Authority, or excellence? Oh! how many have their consciences
awakened by the Word, who yet never subject their Consciences to it? How many
receive the word of Faith, and yet mix not faith with the word they receive?
Alas! what a dismal contemplation is it to consider, how far many awakened
Professors have gone, in a professed, and partial assent to the things that
belong to their peace, and yet all the while really dissented from them?

(2.) May not also convinced sinners proceed 2. As to Consent.
very far in their Consent, to the good things that belong unto their peace,
and yet remain Infidels? Did not many of these unbelieving Jews, whom our Lord
here weeps over, approve of, and consent to him, as their crowned King and
Messiah? and yet how soon do they spit in his face, and bid defiance to him? Is
it not said, John 2. 23, 24. that many believed in the name of Jesus, whom yet
he did not believe, or confide in? They commit themselves to him, but he dares
not commit himself to them; knowing them to be rottenhearted. Alas! how many
seem willing to take Christ hereafter, provided they may for the present solace
themselves some while in their lusts? And do not al such demurs, delays, and
Wills for hereafter, argue a present Nil, or unwillingnesse to embrace Christ,
as Luke 9. 59, 61? Yea, are not many terrified Wills, under the stings and gals
of conscience, often inclined to a present, and speedy closing with Christ, who
yet never arrive to a saving election of him? Oh! how many are there, who elect
a compound Christ, or a single Christ with a compound heart? Do not too many
awakened sinners choose a divided Christ, or a whole Christ with a divided
heart? Oh! what a world of legal consciences bottom their faith on some false
Christ, of their own framing; or on the true Christ with a false rotten heart?
How few, yea very few embrace Christ, and the other good things of their peace,
in the greatness of their glory? Do not many seem willing to adhere to Christ
in a storm of legal terrors, who yet, when the storm is over, return again
to their lusts, and adhere to them, as their best friends? How many also elect
the good things that belong to their peace, but yet reject the means, without
which these good things can never be obtained, as Luke 14. 15, 18? And is not
such a languid, incomplete, feeble Will, and Consent, a real Nil, and dissent?
Farther, have not many almost-Believers been brought to some mesure of
Recumbence, and Dependence on Christ, who yet have still secretly and insensibly
depended, and leaned on something in themselves, as Isai. 48. 1, 2? How many
also have seemed very forward to resign up al concerns, both of soul and body
to Christ, who yet have still retained secret Reserves, and Hants for some
beloved Lust, or Idol, as Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5. 1, 2, 3? Yea, have
there not been some, who have not only applied themselves to Christ, but also
applied, and appropriated Christ to themselves, in some mesure; and yet never
had a real union with him? Does not this seem to be the case of those carnal
Professors, Luke 13. 26, 27? How forward are they to appropriate and own
Christ, and yet he will not own, but reject them, as workers of iniquity? Yea,
have not many been content to give some kind of feigned subjection unto Christ,
and yet all the while continued voluntary Slaves and Vassals of their lusts, as
Psalm. 72. 9? Here Christ's enemies bow before him, and lick the dust, which in
those oriental parts were Symbols, or Signs of great homage and subjection.
Again, have not some illuminated Professors seemed to acquiesce, and take up
their rest in Christ, and the other good things of their peace, and yet
secretly rested in something below Christ, or at least not alone in Christ?
Lastly, is it not said of the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 1. That they expected
the Bridegrooms coming, yea went forth to meet him; who yet never had interest
in him, or the good things of his Kingdom? Oh! What a dreadful consideration
is this, to think, how far many awakened sinners have proceeded in the main
acts of Faith, and yet after al determined in final Unbelief?

2. Albeit Unbelievers may proceed very far Corol. 2. The difference betwixt
saving faith and commun.
in some Acts of Faith, yet there is a boundless difference between saving
faith, and commun; as also between Believers, and Believers. I cannot persuade
myself, as some, that saving faith and commun differ only in degrees: I
conceive the difference to be specific, or in kind; though I affect not
contention, and therefore will wave Controversies: Only that there is a vast
difference between the saving faith of true Believers, and the commun faith of
Unbelievers, will be evident from the following Propositions.

(1.) The commun faith of Unbelievers arises 1. As to knowledge.
only from some traditional Notions of the Gospel, or commun Illuminations; but
the saving faith of Believers arises from the Light of life, Joh. 8. 12. And
is not the difference between saving light and commun, as great, as that
between the light of the Sun and of a candle? Is there not a vast difference
between the unction of the Holy one, 1 John 2. 20. which Believers have, and
the commun notions of Unbelievers? Oh! what mistie and confused notions of the
good things that belong to their peace have Unbelievers, 2 Pet. 1. 9? But how
bright and distinct are the Believers notions, proceeding from the Light of
life, Jo. 8. 12? Is not the Unbelievers candel-light mere darkness, if
compared with that intuitive real sight of things invisible, which the Believer
enjoys, Heb. 11. 1? Oh! how superficial, and fleeting are all the Unbelievers
Notions? But how solid and deep are the Believers conceptions of spiritual
Mysteries? The Believer has a divine Instinct, and spiritual sagacitie, as to
the good things of his peace: but alas! what is all the unbelievers knowledge
thereof, but a mere natural Notion, or commun hearsay, or forced conviction?
How does the Believers light of life, kill his Lusts, darken the Worlds glory,
melt his Affections, turn the Bent of his will toward all the good things of
his peace; yea, transform his soul thereinto, by stamping an Image of God
thereon, as Col. 3. 10? But oh! how dull and lazy; how dead and lifelesse, is
the Unbelievers faith and knowledge, Jam. 2. 19-26?

(2.) The commun faith of Unbelievers arises from self-love, self-flatterie,
and carnal presumtion; 2. As to selfdenial.
but the saving faith of believers arises from self-jelousie, and self-denial.
How apt is self-love to frame a faith of its own, such a faith as will easily
correspond with its lusts? Is it not the grand design of Self-love, wherever
it is predominant, to come to Christ on its own feet of carnal confidence? But
how much does the self-denying Believer abjure himself, and al his own
self-sufficiences to win Christ, Phil. 3. 7, 8? Spiritual poverty is the next
capacity to saving Faith: the more sensible the humbled soul is of his own
needs, the more ready is he to go to Christ. But is it thus with Unbelievers?
Do they not seek in themselves what they should seek in Christ? And when they
have found any imperfect good in themselves, how much do they recumb and rest
on it, as the main bottom of their confidence? Oh! what a pregnant cause is
self-fulnesse of commun faith; as self-emtinesse of saving faith, Luke 18. 12,
13, 14? So also for carnal presumtion, and self-flatterie, what a seminal root
is it of false, or commun faith? What a world of faith consists in mere fancy?
How many Professors have no other bottom for their faith, than a fond
presumtion that they have faith? Thus men baptize their carnal presumtions into
the name of faith. Oh! how prone are presumtuous Unbelievers to plung their
nasty defiled hearts in the precious Blood, and Promises of Christ, and then
fondly conclude Christ is theirs; albeit they never were deeply sensible of
their sin, and need of Christ? And are not such presumtuous conceits, or rather
deceits, the main spring of most men's commun faith? But is it not quite
otherwise with the true believer? Does not his faith spring mainly from
self-jelousie? Its true, he can justify God and Christ, though it be in his
own ruin; But oh! how much does he condemn himself day by day? He can be
indulgent to others; but is he not very severe against himself? Is not every
one nearer to Christ than he in his own apprehensions? Oh! what
self-accusations, and self-condemnations does he, or ought he to pass on
himself every day? And are not these his self-jelousies, and self-jugements a
great spring of his faith in Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 31?

(3.) The commun faith of Unbelievers arises 3. As to a legal and evangelic
spirit.
from a legal Spirit of Bondage; but the saving faith of Believers from an
evangelic Spirit of Adoption. And oh! what a vast difference is there between
commun faith, and saving, in this regard? A legal faith, arising from a spirit
of Bondage, may work dreadful terrors, but never solid peace of conscience: It
brings men under a legal Covenant, but cannot keep men steadfast therein, Psalm.
78. 8, 10, 37, 57. It works in men legal preparations for Christ, but it
cannot work a through conversion to him: It divorceth the heart in part from
sin; but marries it to the Law, not to Christ: It plows up the fallow ground,
but cannot sow the seed of Grace. It makes a deep wound in Conscience, but
cannot heal it: It may drive men into despair, but it cannot, of itself, drive
to Christ: It may restrain from sin, and constrain to duty, but it gives no
strength for, or love to duty: It may kill, but it cannot make alive: It may
rend, but it cannot melt the heart: It may make sin bitter, but it cannot make
Christ sweet: It may be an Advocate for the Law, but not for Christ. Such is
the commun faith of Unbelievers. But now the evangelic faith of Believers,
arising from a Spirit of Adoption, does not only kill, but also make alive in
the blood of Christ: It does not only divorce the heart from sin, self, and the
Law; but also espouseth it to Christ: It improves al legal preparations in
order to an evangelic closure with Christ: It works godly sorrow for sin, not
only that it may be pardoned, but because it is pardoned: It is not only
compelled to duty by legal motives; but also allured thereto by evangelic
persuasives: It does much for Christ, and yet rests on nothing but Christ: It
works not only evangelic Actions, but also evangelic Principles and
Dispositions: It urges the Law much, but on Evangelic grounds, and designs:
It destroies not Morality, but perfects it: It frees men not from duty, but
in and for duty. Such are the different postures of a legal, and evangelic
Faith.

(4.) Saving faith turns the main Bent of 4. As to turning the Bent of the Will
to Christ.
the Will toward Christ, and al other good things that belong unto its peace;
but commun faith affords Christ, and al those good things only some imperfect
desires. The true Believer makes a free, and complete Acceptance of Christ,
and Resignation of al unto him: He takes the whole of Christ, and gives Christ
the whole of his heart: He goes to Christ with a plenitude or fullness of will,
and receives from Christ a plenitude of Grace, John 1. 16. He is so amorous of
the good things that belong unto his peace, that he can part with althings for
them; yea his will is carried with a violent propension toward them, as the
Iron to the Lodestone. But is it thus with the Unbeliever? Does he not ever
add something to Christ, or take something from Christ? Alas! what is his
commun faith, but a mere faint velleitie, a languid imperfect desire after the
good things that belong unto his peace? How unable is he to go to Christ, with
a plenitude of will? How little is he allured, or ravished with the incomparable
Beauties of Christ? perhaps he has some good liking to the good things of his
peace; but oh! what a violent lust has he after other things? He may have some
evanid or dying wishes after the divine life; but oh! what a peremtorie
obstinate will has he toward present goods? Every small tentation makes him let
go Christ; but oh! how tenacious, how strong is his holdfast of the creature?
An Unbeliever is the greatest Monstre in the world; he has two hearts, an
heart for God, and an heart for the world, Psalm. 12. 2. and yet when any
difficulty approaches, he has no heart at al: Such a coward is he, and so far
from true faith. A true believer, the more difficult his work and tentations
are, the stronger is his Adherence to Christ, and all the good things of his
peace: yea, though Christ may seem willing to part with all Interest in him;
yea, to turn against him as an enemy; yet oh! how unwilling is he to part
with his interest in Christ; or to do any thing unworthy of that friendship he
professes to Christ? But is it thus with the commun faith of the Unbeliever?
Alas! on what easy terms can he part with all claim to Christ? How unsteadfast
is he in all his covenants with Christ? How little can he resign up himself
wholly to Christ, or receive whole Christ, as offered in the Gospel? In times
of soul-troubles he seems willing to elect Christ, but in times of competition
between Christ and lust, how soon does he prefer lust before Christ? What are
al his good wishes toward the things of his peace, but broken half-desires?
Does he not at the same time, when he lays hold on Christ, secretly also catch
at the world, or some beloved lust? How unable is he to will and nil the same
things, to be constant to his own election of Christ, and reprobation of sin?
Though he sometimes looked toward Christ, yet how little does he follow that
look? What a latitude, and liberty does he leave for idols in his heart; and
thence how little room for Christ? So little is his will fortified, and armed
with Resolution in adherence unto Christ.

(5.) The true Believers saving faith is a purifier 5. As to purifying from sin.
from sin, Act. 15. 9. But the Unbelievers commun faith is a Protector, and
Promotor of Sin. And oh! what a vast distance is here betwixt saving and commun
faith? How impossible is it that the unbelievers heart, which is the spouse of
sin, should be married to Christ? Will Christ's jelousie, which is so severe,
admit any Corrival, or equal lover into his conjugal bed, the heart? Must not
his royal love have a throne al alone in the heart? Is it not then impossible,
that sin, in its dominion, should dwell in the same heart with Christ? Yet, lo!
is not this the grand design of the unbelievers commun faith, to reconcile
Christ and sin, two opposite Lords? How often does commun faith go to Christ for
life, that so the sinner may live more securely in sin? The Believers very falls
into sin, are, as managed by faith, a sanctified means to purge out sin: But,
oh! the Unbelievers partial departure from sin, and closure with Christ, is, as
improved by his commun faith and lust, made a blind and engine for the
protection, concelement, and improvement of sin. Saving Faith makes the
Believers very defects, and neglects serve for the promoting of some spiritual
good: how is he humbled for, and by his very sins and negligences? But the
commun faith of an Unbeliever makes his best duties, and performances serve to
promote spiritual sins: How do al his Covenants and Resolutions against some
grosser, visible sins, serve only to hide, strengthen, and foment secret,
invisible lusts; as spiritual pride, carnal confidence, Hos. 7. 16? Or at best,
does he not make use of al his covenants against sin, only as a balsame to heal
the wounds of his conscience, not as poison to kill the lusts of his heart. Such
is the curse, and plague of commun faith.

(6.) Saving faith transformes the heart into 6. As to transformation into the
image of Christ, and conformation to his life and Laws.
the Image of Christ, and thence makes the Believer conform to his Life, and
Laws; but commun faith works neither. Saving Faith brings the heart near to
Christ, and so stampes the Image of Christ upon the heart: It cannot make men
Christ, but yet it makes them like unto him, and that not only in one
particular excellence, but in all: It changes the last end, and disposition of
the will, and thence the whole soul and life: It infuseth a divine plenitude, or
fullness of Grace into the soul, answerable to that fullness of sin, that was
there before. And as Christ is one with his Father, by personal union; so
Believers are one with Christ, by faith: Hence much of the life of Christ
appears in their lives: The love and spirit of Christ prevails with them, to
live the life of Christ, and conform to his Laws: And oh! what a sweet
harmony and conformity, so far as Faith and Grace prevails, is there between
the Spirit and Life of Christ, and their spirits and life? How much do their
hearts, and lives answer to the primitive Pattern of purity, in the heart and
life of Christ? But can the Unbelievers commun faith work such rare effects?
Its true, sometimes his Actions are changed; but are not his vital Principles,
and Dispositions unchanged? He may sometimes conform to the Laws of Christ in
appearance; but does he not still hate them at heart? Whereas the Believer,
whiles he breaks the law of Christ in Action, he conformes to it in Affection
and desire, as Roman. 7. 22. The Unbelievers commun faith may lead him to
please Christ in show, but is it not al to please himself in truth? Does he not
wholly live on self as his spring, and to self as his last end? Oh! how
impossible is it for him to live by faith on Christ, and to Christ, which is
the Believers life?

(7.) Saving faith makes Believers diligent 7. As to the use of means.
in the use of means, and yet keeps them from trusting in them: commun faith
makes Unbelievers negligent in the use of means, and yet to trust in them. Oh!
how industrious is Faith in the use of means, as if there were no Christ to
trust unto? And yet does not faith trust wholly in Christ, as if there were no
means to be used? Yea, does it not trust Christ as much in the fullness of
means, as in the want of them? But oh! how much does unbelief trust in means,
though it be very negligent in the use of them?

(8.) Saving Faith is always bottomed on a 8. As to the foundation.
Promise, and by it works up the heart to God: But commun faith is always
bottomed either on false persuasions, or self-sufficiences, and by them turns
the heart from God.

(9.) Saving Faith walks in Gods ways, by 9. As to end and rule.
a strait rule, to a strait end. But commun faith is always stepping out of
Gods way: its rule and end both are crooked. True Faith looks both to its end,
and rule; it will not do good that evil, or evil that good may follow: But
commun faith will do both.

(10.) Lastly, Saving Faith values an halfpromisse, 10. As to Gods faithfulness.
yea a mere peradventure from God, more than the best promise the creature can
make: but commun faith depends more on the rotten, and false promises of its
own heart, or of the creature, than on all the promises of God.

3. Hence we may further infer, That there Corol. 3. No middle twixt faith and
unbelief.
is no medium, or middle, between true Faith and Infidelity. Commun faith is
but real Unbelief: He that is not a sound Believer, is a real Infidel: He that
receives not Christ on his own terms, rejects him: Not to trust in Christ with all the heart, is not to trust him at al in truth: A forced election of Christ,
is a real reprobation of him: A mere human, or notional, or general, or
confused, or instable, or inefficacious Assent to Christ, is real Dissent. Not
to rest in Christ alone as our Mediator, is not at al to confide in him: He
that cannot part with all for Christ, will soon part with Christ for any thing:
If faith purifies not the heart from sin, and fortifies it against tentation,
it deserves not the name of faith, Acts 15. 9. If Faith gives not a substantial
being to things not in being, it does nothing; Heb. 11. 1. If you can believe
nothing but what you have reason, and evidence for from the things themselves,
you believe nothing as you ought: for though reason may assist faith as an
instrument, yet it destroys faith as a principal ground or argument; because
faith is of things inevident, Heb. 11. 1. Faith takes nothing for its formal
reason, or principal ground, but increated Authority: and therefore it is not
the mere evidence of reason, but the testimony of God, that makes men
believers. And if so, then, oh! what a world of that, which passes for faith
among men, will one day appear to be real Unbelief? What may we judge of those
who hang up Christ in their fantasies, as pictures in an house, but yet never
really adhere to, or recumb on him? Is not this mere fancy rather than faith?
What shall we conclude of the presumtuous believer, who presumes God will shape
his mercy according to his humor? Is not his faith mere Unbelief? Yea, can
there be a more cursed piece of Unbelief, than a fond groundless presumtion
that we do believe? Again, what shall we say of the deadborne sleepy faith of
secure Sinners, who lay their head in Satan's bosom, and sleep securely on the
pillow of his rotten peace? Is not this a piece of Unbelief, which Devils and
damned Spirits are not guilty of? For they believe and tremble at the
apprehensions of their approaching jugement. And oh! how soon will these their
sweet sleeps end in dreadful hellish awakenings? Again, may we not judge the
same of legal faith; which sets up the Law in the room of Christ; or at least
yokes the Law and Christ together? Do not such, by joining the Law with Christ,
disjoin their hearts from Christ, Romans 7. 1-4? Is it not as bad a piece of
Unbelief, to set up the Law instead of Christ, as to set up lust instead of the
law? Yea, is there not much of Idolatry in such a legal faith? for do not such
as depend on their own legal performances for life, make themselves their God
and Christ? Oh! how often does such a legal faith, or carnal confidence end in
black despair? Were it not easy to show, if opportunity served, how all the
false, or commun faiths in the world are indeed but real Infidelity, colored
over with a tincture of faith? O then! what a world of Infidels and Unbelievers
are there, who walk up and down under the masque and vizard of Believers?
Surely if al these pretended fancied faiths are real unbelief there can be no
middle betwixt Faith, and Unbelief; and then, how many great Professors will fall
under the black character of Unbelievers, albeit they may now pass for good
Believers?

4. Hence also we learn, That solid saving Corol. 4.
Faith is most rare and difficult; but commun 4. Saving faith rare, but commun
faith cheap.
faith most cheap and easy. Its no difficult matter, in these knowing times, to
gain the Notion of Faith: but oh! how difficult is it to attain unto the thing
faith? A general, implicit Assent to the things that belong unto our peace is
very commun; but oh! how rare is it to meet with a particular, explicit, real
Assent to the things of our peace, formally considered? Do not the most of
Professors yield only a human, natural, or traditional Assent to Divine,
supernatural Truths and Mysteries? Multitudes now adays receive the Word of
God; but how? is it not as the word of men, i. e, as clothed with human
Authority, or the evidence of reason; not as the Word of God, 1 These. 2. 13? A
confused, suspense, reeling assent to evangelic Doctrines is very commun; but
is not a distinct, fixed, deep, welgrounded assent as rare? Oh! how
superficial, and feeble is most men's assent to the good things of their peace?
Or if some awakened consciences arise higher, to a more complete and deep
assent; yet, alas! how legal is their assent, even to evangelic Truths? How
hard is it even for true Believers, much more for those who have only commun
faith, to see sin as sin, and not to fall under a legal spirit of Bondage? To
assent to the truths of the Gospel, when Conscience is fired with the terrors
of the Law, is no great pain: but oh! how painful a thing is it, to assent to
Gospel truths, from an inward feeling apprehension of their own worth and
excellence? To assent to the Doctrines of the Gospel is commun: but is it not
as commun to dissent from the duties of the Gospel, which in divine estimation
is but a dead faith? How few have impressions suitable to their faith? How few
are there among the crowd of Believers, who have an admiring assent, an high
estime, and right valuation of the good things that belong unto their peace? It
is indeed very facile to yield a barren, lazy, dead assent to Evangelic
Notions; but oh! how difficult is it to arrive unto a fruitful, vigorous,
lively, efficacious, practic assent, such as may form, and transform the
heart into the very image of those good things we assent unto?

So also for Consent, it is very commun and easy for convinced sinners to be
induced to make some indeliberate, involuntary, partial, imperfect election of
Christ, and other good things that belong to their peace; but oh! how rare and
difficult is it to attain unto a cheerful, speedy, complete and fixed closure
with Christ, on his own terms, as offered in the Gospel? Is it not commun with
many to adhere to Christ in Profession, but to lust in Affection? How many
commun Believers give Christ good words; but give their hearts to some
Idol-lover? Do not too many also pretend subjection to Christ, and his soverain
pleasure; but really intend subjection to no other Lord than their own Lusts?
How many seem to depend wholly on Christ for Grace, who yet secretly lean on
their own understandings, and good wills? O that men would believe, what a
difficult thing it is to believe aright? Alas! how violent is the motion of
Faith? How much against corrupt nature are the supernatural acts of Faith? Was
there ever a greater miracle under Heaven, excepting the Incarnation of the Son
of God, than the working of faith in an unbelieving heart? Is not every saving
faith a standing Miracle? Oh! what a contradiction is it to carnal wisdom, and
corrupt Nature, to assent and consent to the imputed righteousness of Christ?
What a painful thing is it to carnal hearts, to part with right eyes, and right
hands, every beloved lust for Christ? How many thousand ways are there to
Unbelief or commun faith, but oh! how narrow, yea indivisible is the way to
saving faith? Commun faith grows among roses, but Saving faith among thorns.
What a grand deceit therefore is it, to conceit Saving faith easy and commun?
Certainly he never yet believed aright, that has not in some mesure had
experience, What a difficult thing it is to believe aright.

5. Hence likewise we may conclude, That Corol. 5. Believers have much of
Unbelief in them.
Believers themselves, have many Relics and Remains of Unbelief in them,
Alas! how much darkness is there mixed with their Notions, of the good things
that belong to their peace? How much dissent is there in their assent to
Evangelic truths? Its true, they dare not, when they are themselves, reject the
good things of their peace; ay, but do they not too often neglect, and undervalue
the same? Are their Apprehensions, and Impressions suitable to the worth of
those objects they believe? How then comes it to pass, that on the interposure
of some tentation, they turn aside to lying Vanities? Are not Believers
themselves often very confused, and instable in their assent to evangelic
Mysteries? Yea, have they not sometimes many prevalent suspensions,
hesitations, and douts touching the sacred Scriptures, and their Divine
Authority? How often have many sincere Believers been violently assaulted with
Atheistic thoughts, that there is no God? What a sealed Book, and dark saying
is the whole Gospel, to many afflicted Consciences, in times of Desertion? In
times of distress, how often does their Faith question the realitie of the
Promises? What Is the reason why many true Believers are so much shaken, in some
difficult cases, but because they do not bottom their Souls on the immutable
faithfulness of God in his Promises? Are not the gracious offers of the
Covenant most rich, abundant, and free? How then comes it to pass, that
Believers are so poor and low in Grace? Is it not from their want of Faith, to
draw out that fullness that is contained in, and offered by the Covenant? Have
not Believers Gods immutable Word, Oath, and Fidelity to confirm his
Covenant? And yet, lo! How backward are they to trust him in any straits? How
frequently do Believers stagger in their adherence unto Christ? How much are
they off and on, up and down, fast and loose with Christ? How little are they
acquainted with the applicatorie, appropriating Acts of Faith? What great
things might Believers receive from Christ, had they but a great faith to
expect and receive them? How seldom are the most of Believers in realising
believing views of approaching Glories? What obscure, and strained notions have
they of Eternity? Had we eternity in our eye and heart, how would the view
thereof darken the glory of this lower world? Did Believers eye much their
home, how vigilant, active, and vigorous would they be in their way thither?
Life and death are the same thing to one that daily expects the coming of his
Lord: But oh! How apt are Believers themselves to put far from them that great
day? Were not the the wise Virgins overtaken with fits of slumber as well as the
foolish? Again how little can the most of Believers acquiesce and rest
satisfied in Christ, as the alone spring, and matter of their life? Do they not
sometimes conceit, that there is some grace, or other good, to be found out of
Christ? And are they not hereby often inveigled to wander from Christ? Ought not
the heart to be where the treasure is? And is not the Believers treasure in
Christ? How then comes it to pass, that he is so little satisfied in Christ,
but for want of faith in him? Moreover, how short-spirited and impatient are
many Believers? What confined and narrow hearts have they under the cross? Do
not the length, and weight of their burdens often make them extreme
shortspirited, as Exodus 6. 9. for shortness of Spirit? So Number. 21. 4. its
said, They were short-spirited, because of the way, i. e, the length of their
sufferings shortened their spirits; they could not in patience possess their
souls: and many of them were true Believers for the main. Oh! how soon do such
short-spirited Believers despond, and sink under their burdens? What faintings
under duties are they obnoxious unto? How straightened are their spirits as to
present, or expected mercies? What murmurs and discontents have they against
the Yoke, and Cross of Christ? Yea, how dissolute, soft, and feeble are they
in resistance of Tentations? How timorous and faint-hearted at the approach of
difficulties? Whence proceed Believers black and dismal Imaginations under
Desertions, but from their Unbelief? Is is not hence also that they are so
humorous, and il-minded toward Christ; so apt to raise black lies and slanders
of him? Do not their unbelieving hearts change Christ into another Christ, by
covering his face with a masque of hatred and displeasure? Oh! How much are the
sinews of many poor believing souls shrunk; how much are their spirits cramped
and dispirited by Unbelief, specially in cases of soul-trouble or tentation? So
great is the prevalence of Unbelief in many sound Believers.

6. Hence we may further collect, That Corol. 6. Infidelity the greatest sin.
Unbelief is a sin of the first Magnitude, a great mystery of Iniquity; the
greatest Monster that ever was. This naturally flows from the former Idea and
explication of Unbelief: For if the character and nature of Unbelief be so
comprehensive; if it seize so much on the vitals of the soul, then certainly it
must needs have a very malign and venomous influence on al sin; yea, it must
contain in it the malignitie, and poison of al sin. Oh! What a prodigious Sin
is Unbelief? What Abysses and depths of iniquity are there in the bowels of
it? We have seen how it infuseth itself into the whole soul, and dispirits all the faculties thereof; Oh! what darknesses and mists does it infuse into the
mind? How foolish and sottish does it make sinners? What grand mistakes and
prejudices does it breed, touching all the good things of our peace? How stupid
and senseless does it make conscience? What a world of security, and false
peace does it produce? What made the old world so secure before the Deluge
came, and swept them al away, but their Unbelief? How comes it to pass that
both wise and foolish Virgins slumber, before the coming of the Bridegroom, but
from their Unbelief? What makes sinners so stout-hearted and opposite to the
righteousness of Christ, but their Infidelity, Isai. 46. 12? How comes it to
pass that Sinners are so inflexible as to al Chrsts gracious offers, but
flexible toward sin, and its allurements? What is it that fortifies the heart
so much in its adherence to Idols, and false objects of trust? What makes men's
wills so rebellions against Christ, yea destroys obedience in the principal
root thereof? Are not al these the fruits of Unbelief? Oh! What a lazy,
slothful, remiss, and softnatured thing is Unbelief, as to all that is good?
And yet how vigorous and active is it in, and for the production of al sin?
Yea, is not Unbelief virtually al sin? Does it not breed, preserve, foment,
encourage, actuate, and spirit al sin? Whence proceed the great errors of men's
minds, hearts, and lives but from Infidelity? How comes it to pass that
sinners are so hasty in snatching at present goods, but so slow-hearted and
backward in closing with the good things of their peace? Surely it is from
Unbelief. Whence spring men's confusions, and distractions of heart in times of
trouble, but from their Unbelief? Whence also springs all that formalitie, and
deadness in duties, but from Unbelief? Is not this also the cause of men's
hypocrisy both in heart and life? Oh! what a world of irregular and exorbitant
passions does Unbelief work in men's hearts? What makes the sensual world so
tenacious in adhering to sensible good, but their Unbelief, as to good things
hoped for? May not then every sin deservedly call Unbelief, father? Is not this
sin of Infidelity to be found at the end of every sin? Whence spring the main
exorbitances, and distempers of men's hearts and lives, but from Infidelity?
Men discourse variously what was the first sin by which Adam fell; but have we
not much reason to believe, that Unbelief was Adams first sin, which opened the
door to al sin and misery? For had not Adam disbelieved the Word of God, which
threatened him in the day that he did eat of the forbidden fruit he should die,
he had not believed Satan. And as Unbelief at first opened the door to al sin,
so does it not still hearten, and improve al sin? Yea, is it not the prodigious
womb of al sin? Yea, has it not more of sin than any, or al other sins? Its
true, scandalous sins have more of Infamy; but has not Infidelity more of
obliquitie, and guilt in it? Is not that the greatest sin, which is against the
greatest Laws, and Obligations? And is not Infidelity against the greatest
Obligations that ever were, even a Covenant of Grace; which makes such free,
such full, such rich, such suitable, such general, such importunate, such
heart-satisfying offers of Grace? And can there be a greater law, than the
Mediators evangelic law; which is composed of such sweet alluring precepts, and
promises? and yet lo! how does Unbelief oppose the royal Law of Christ? Oh!
what a world of rebellion lies wrapped up in the bowels of Infidelity? How does
it scorn, reject, yea spurn at bowels of evangelic Love, and Grace? Yea, is
it not extremely opposite to all the principles of obedience? Is there not also
abundance of Idolatry in Infidelity? Can there be a worse Idol than self
idolized? And does not every Unbeliever idolize his own carnal wisdom, his
proud will, his commun gifts, his selfsufficience, his legal Righteousnesses,
and seeming good duties? Is not the Unbelievers self-dependence the worst piece
of Idolatry? Does not every Unbeliever by depending on himself, as his first
principle, and last end, make himself his God? Again is there not an Hell of
Blasphemy in Infidelity? Does not every Unbeliever, by his secret, or open
murmurs against God raise many black lies, and scandals on God? Yea, what are
the Unbelievers discontents against God, but, in the Scriptures account, a
cursing of God, as Job 1. 11, 22? Lastly is there not a world of Atheism in all
Infidelity? Does not Unbelief, at one stroke, take away the Scriptures, God,
and Christ, and all the good things of our peace? As the Unbeliever does by his
self-dependence deifie himself, so does he not also by the same undeifie the
true God? Thus we see what a prodigious monstrous sin Unbelief is.

7. This Notion of Infidelity, as before explicated, Corol. 7. God justified
in his severe procedure against Unbelievers.
Justifies God, in his most severe procedures against al Unbelievers. Alas!
what blame may be laid upon the holy God, for hiding the things of his peace
from the Unbelievers eyes, when as he wilfully shuts his eyes against them? Has
the Unbeliever any thing to object against Christ, for not healing his wounded
soul, seeing he wilfully rejects the Medicinal Grace, and Blood of Christ, which
are the only remedies for his healing? If sinners will justify their unbelief,
which is so much condemned by God, is it not just with God to condemn them for
it? So long as Unbelievers despise Gospel-love, and Mercy, is it not just that
Gospel-vengeance take hold of them? What more equitable than that such perish
in their sins, who resist all the sweet attractives and allurements of Grace, by
which Christ endeavors to draw them out of sin and misery? Does not
Infidelity dispirit and make void al Ordinances, and means of Salvation? Who
then can be blamed, but the Unbeliever, for his own damnation? Is not
Infidelity the highest Treason against Heaven? Can then any punishment be too
severe for it? Does not Unbelief, as has been intimated, darken all the glorious
Attributes of God? Is not the wisdom of God estimed mere folly by it? Does it
not rebel against the Soveraintie of God, by placing the sinners will above it?
Does it not make the Faithfulness of God unfaithful; Yea, give the lie to it,
by questioning the truth of his Promises, 1 John 5. 10? Oh! how warm, how
large, how tender, how rolling are the Bowels of Free Grace toward sinners?
But does not Unbelief spurn at those bowels, by shutting the heart against
them? Is not the Omnipotence of God limited, yea counted mere Impotence by
Infidelity, Isai. 40. 27, 28, 29? How does it likewise trample on the
patience, and forbearance of God? Is it not then most righteous, that the great
God, who is thus injured, and abused by Infidelity, should revenge his own
quarrel thereon? Again, how does Infidelity slander, reproach, and undermine
Christ, the great Mediator of Life and Salvation? Is not Christ the greatest
Institute and Ordinance of God? Is he not appointed by God as the alone Savior
of Mankind? And yet, lo! how do Unbelievers reproach and oppose him? Is not
Christ greatly undervalued, when his gracious offers are rejected? Can we abuse
Christ more, than by opposing the good things offered by him? Is it not a
bloody crime to meet Christ's Grace with resistance? Oh! what an Hell of
Iniquity lies in this sin of Unbelief, in that it is a despising of Christ's
bleeding, drawing Love? Is any sin a greater burden, and pain to Christ than
Infidelity? Is he not hereby wearied, Esa. 7. 13? Yea, is not Christ greatly
mocqued, and slandered by Unbelief? Yea, does not Infidelity rob Christ of al
his Mediatorie Offices, and Perfections? Yea, is it not the sorest Crucifixion
of Christ? Did not Judas, the Jews, and Pilate pierce Christ more sorely by
their Unbelief, than by their acts of betraying, and condemning him? Now if
Infidelity be so injurious to Christ, is it not just with him to vindicate
such injuries? Yea, indeed, What are all the Unbelievers jugements and torments,
but such as he electively, and voluntarily draws upon himself? Are any
Evangelic Unbelievers damned, but such as wilfully elect Death before Life? Do
not al they that reject Christ, electively embrace Death, Prove. 8. 36? And has
the Unbeliever any reason to complain against God for condemning of him, seeing
he is unwilling to be saved? Is not this the main that Christ expects from
evangelic Unbelievers, that they willingly accept Grace offered to them? And if
they will not, who is to be blamed, but their own perverse stubborn wills? Do
not they deservedly perish, who wilfully perish? If sinners will be so cruel, so
bloudy-minded, as to murder their own souls by unbelief, they must blame none
but themselves for their ruin: the righteous God is sufficiently vindicated
from any imputation against him. Oh! how will this silence, and seal up the lips
of Unbelievers unto al eternity, that Grace and Life was offered to them, but
they voluntarily chose death before life? What pleas can such have, why they
should not be damned, seeing they wilfully rush into ways that lead to damnation?

CHAP. IX. Practic Uses. 1. Study the Mystery and Causes of Infidelity. 2.
Lament over the prevalence of it. 3. Examine how far it prevails. 4. Abjure it
as the worst Hell. 5. Pursue Faith as the highest Interest, and Spring of the
Divine Life.
WE now proceed to a more close, and practic Application of these general Use
1. Of Advice to study the Nature and Influence of Infidelity.
Notions of Infidelity. And the first Use we shall make of this Doctrine, is,
by way of general Advice unto al, both Believers and Unbelievers, to study
much the black nature, and venomous Influences of Infidelity. Certainly, if
Sinners were but well acquainted with that Mystery of Iniquity, that is wrapped
up in the bowels of Infidelity; and how pernicious this sin is to their souls,
were it possible that they could please themselves in it as they do? Alas! Can
we imagine, that Unbelievers would sit down so quietly under the chains and
fetters of their unbelief, were they but in a serious manner apprehensive of
it? But ah! here lies the great damning sin, and misery of the Unbelieving
World, men are not deeply and feelingly sensible of the burden, and stings of
an unbelieving heart. How few are there, who observe and mourn under the secret
veins of Infidelity, that loge in their hearts? Where is that soul that
lamentes, day by day, his want of a particular, supernatural, spiritual,
distinct, certain, firm, evangelic, full, prevalent, affective, effective, and
transformative Assent to the good things that belong to his peace? Do not many
great Professors seem to assent to the Mysteries of the Gospel, but yet really
dissent from, or, at least not live up to them? Have not many the name of
Believers, who yet never felt the virtue, and efficace of faith? Do not many
pretend to a kindness for Christ, who yet secretly hate him in their hearts?
How few, yea very few, among the crowd of professed Believers, live under the
vital power of Faith? May we not, without breach of Charity, judge those to be
under the power of Unbelief, who were never truly sensible of the power of it?
Is not Infidelity, as it has been shown, the greatest sin, and therefore ought
to have the greatest sense? What is the main and first work of the Spirit of
Bondage but to convince the unbelieving world of their unbelief, as John 16. 9?
And can men be convinced of it, unless they study, and observe the nature and
workings of it? Why is it that the most of men do account Infidelity so small a
sin, but because they never inquired into its black ugly Nature and
Aggravations? How comes it to pass, that many take part with their Unbelief,
but because they are not sensible, what a mischievous pernicious thing it is?
Alas! Did men study, and believe what an heinous sin Infidelity is, how would
they abominate and loath it? What speed would they make to be rid of it? Yea,
why is it that Believers themselves are so much under the prevalence of
Unbelief, but because they have not that sense of its indwelling, and
prevalence, which they ought to have? Did Believers meditate much of, and
mourn under the evils of an unbelieving heart, surely they would not be so
much troubled with it as they are. Oh! What a rare thing is it for Believers to
have a quick sense of Unbelief? What better argument and marque can we have of
a sound Believer, than a daily sense of, and humiliation for Unbelief? Yea, is
it not a good sign of much growth in Faith and other Graces, to be inwardly
acquainted with, and troubled for the remains of Infidelity dwelling in us? Do
not the best and most improved Christians usually complain most of this sin?
Oh! What an invisible, sly, and subtle sin is Infidelity? How long does it
lie lurking in the soul, before it be observed? Does it not, like some cunning
Politicians, animate and encourage every sin, yet concele itself in all its
actings? Does it not then greatly concern al, both Believers and Unbelievers,
to study well the Nature, Causes, and malign Influences of Unbelief? Oh! how
much of Infidelity might we find in every sin, were we but wel-skilled in the
nature, and workings of it? But, alas! what Mysteries and Riddles are
Unbelievers to themselves? How unacquainted are they with the spiritual,
cunning, and subtle turnings and windings of their unbelieving hearts? Is it
not then the great concern of al, to be greatly intent on the study of, and
inquisition into the Nature, Operations, and Effects of Unbelief?

But above althings we should much contemplate, Study the Causes of
Infidelity.
and inquire into the Causes of Infidelity. Is not he the wisest Philosopher,
who contemplates, and understands best the causes of things? And do not men
account him the most able Physician, who gives the best conjecture at the
Causes of a Disease? So in like manner may we not repute him among the most
understanding Believers, who is best skilled in discerning the Causes of
Unbelief? Surely althings are best known in and by their Causes: O then! if
thou will understand the black nature of Infidelity, study and inquire
narrowly into its Causes: Inquire into that Soverain, venomous, black
darkness, which 1 Spiritual darkness.
dwells in Conscience, and makes all the good things of thy peace to disappear.
Oh! What a Veil does this thick spiritual darkness draw on all the excellences
of Christ? How does it stain all the Beauty, and Glory of Evangelic offers,
made to the unbelieving Soul? Oh! what an efficacious influence has the
darkness of Conscience, on the darkness of Infidelity? Study also how much
carnal reason does promote Infidelity. What more contrary 2. Carnal Reason.
to Faith than carnal reason? When men endeavor to mesure the Promises, or
Providence; the Words, or Works of God by carnal wisdom; what black
jealousies, and suspicions of Gods love, care, and faithfulness proceed
thence? How is the Unbelievers heart filled with black ugly prejudices against
Christ, and all the offers of his Grace? The less of carnal reason, there is
mixed with Faith, the more pure it is. Again observe how much carnal Security
does foment, 3. Carnal Security.
and promote thine unbelief. Is not a secure Conscience ever an unbelieving
Conscience? When men consider not the things that belong to their peace, how
can they understand, or believe them? What made the old World so much
disbelieve the approaching Deluge of Gods wrath, but their wretched security?
Its true, Unbelief is often the cause of carnal security, but is it not also as
often the effect of it? Is not the Security of the wise and foolish Virgms, made
a cause of their Infidelity, Matthew 25. 5? Is not faith maintained by an
inward, tender, feeling sense; and Unbelief by the want of such a sense?
Further, take 4. Selflove.
notice how much self-love does feed, and nourish thine Unbelief? What
self-dependence and self-seeking it works in thee? How softnatured, and
faint-hearted as to Duty, but stout-hearted and resolute against Christ, and
al his gracious invitations, it makes thee? Oh! Study how much self-love
fortifies thy heart against all the good things of thy peace; but exposes and
lays it open to all the tentations of Sin and Satan. Consider also how much
Spiritual Pride contributes to thine Infidelity: 5. Spiritual Pride.
Oh! how crafty and cunning is the pride of Infidelity? and how much are the
Unbelievers bands strengthened hereby? Meditate also on thy
short-spiritednesse, and its 6. Shortspiritednes.
venomous influence on thine unbelief: How contracted and narrow is the
Unbelievers heart? And how much is his unbelief promoted hereby? A confined,
short, straightened spirit is always pusillanimous, feeble, and unbelieving, as
Exodus 6. 9. Lastly, Examine Lastly, Beloved lusts.
if there be not some base, darling lust lurking at the bottom of thy will,
which secretly feeds, and fortifies thine unbelief. Oh! what large provision
does any beloved lust make for Infidelity? How much is its Throne maintained
by it? What stout arguments do darling lusts urge against Christ, and al his
gracious offers? These with some other are the principal causes, and most
bitter roots of Infidelity, the observation and discovery of which, will be of
great use for the subduing of this sin. But the more full Inquisition into the
Causes of Infidelity will be the entire Subject of the second part of our
Discourse touching Unbelief.

2. Another practic Improvement we may make Use 2.
of this Doctrine, is by way of sad Lamentation, and Humiliation for the
prevalence of Infidelity in the world, even among Professors. Of lamentation
and humiliation for the prevalence of Infidelity.
Is the Idea, or visage of Unbelief so black and ugly? Are its Influences so
venomous, and contagious? How then comes it to pass, that this knowing world
is enamored, and fallen in love with it? Could any sober mind imagine, that a
thing so deformed, and pernicious, should seem so amiable and desirable in the
eyes of men? Was it ever known, that the Leper was amorous of his Scabs; or the
Beggar in love with his Rags; or the Prisoner with his Fetters; or the wounded
Person with his bleeding Wounds? How then comes it to pass, that the Christian
world is so much amorous of, and delighted in Infidelity; which is the worst
leprosy, poverty, deformity, and misery, that the Soul partakes of? Yea,
how comes it to pass, that Believers themselves have such relics and remains
of Unbelief in them; and that in such days as these are, wherein Evangelic
Light, Love, and Grace so much abound? Has not our blessed Lord taken all the
courses and means that may be, to cure men of their Infidelity? As to the
encouragements and motives to believe, does he not show himself as kind as kind
may be? Has he not given al manner of warrants, yea commands for men to
believe? Does not the Covenant of Grace give as good law-right, as may be, for all that will to come and embrace the good things that belong to their peace? Are
not the offers of the Covenant general, free, abundant, and most affectionate?
Is not Christ more willing to save, than sinners are to be saved? As to means,
what can God do more, than he has, in saying, Here is my Son, my Spirit, my
Gospel, and all the good things of My peace; take al, and welcome? And are not
the terms on which al these good things are offered, most easy to any that is
but really willing to be happy? Yea, are not the means vouchsafed by God, to
cure our Infidelity in these lightsome days, much greater, than in former
days? whence then is it, that men continue in their Infidelity, and that with
so much delight? Has Christ condescended so low in the offers of his Grace, and
do sinners still persist in their rejecting, or not improving such rich and
gracious offers? Oh! What matter of sad contemplation, and Lamentation is here?
How ought every eye to weep apart, and every heart to bleed apart, for
personal, domestic, Ecclesiastic, and National Infidelity? Alas! how true, too
true, is that prediction of our Omniscient Lord, touching these last days, Luke
18. 8. Nevertheless when the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the
earth? Who knows how near this coming of the Son of Man may be? May we not
conjecture, that some great coming of the Son of Man cannot be far off, because
faith is so much departed from the earth? Was there ever, since the coming of
our Lord in the flesh, more light, and yet more Atheism in the world? Is not
the disbelief of the main Articles of our faith, the only faith and belief that
is to be found among some? Are not all the great fundamentals and vitals of
faith struck at by some, who would count it an high affront to be judged
Unbelievers? Yea, to come nearer home, have we not cause to fear, that many,
who pass for shining Believers, will one day appear to be rotten-hearted
Unbelievers? Yea, to leave others to their supreme Judge, have we not al cause
to lay our hands on our hearts, and condemn our selves of much Infidelity? If
thou art not sensible of much Unbelief indwelling in thee, is it not a sad
Symtome, that thou have nothing, or at best, but very little of true Faith in
thy heart? May we not safely say, That he never truly mourned for any sin, who
never mourned for Infidelity, which is at the end of every Sin? Oh! what
lamentable ruins has Unbelief brought on many flourishing Churches? And may we
expect to be exemted from the like strokes of Divine justice, unless we
lament, and mourn over our Unbelief, which deserves the same? Take these
Motives to provoke thine heart to a deep Lamentation and Humiliation for thine
own, and other men's unbelief. (1) Unbelief is, as has been said, the greatest
Sin, and therefore ought to work in us the greatest sense and humiliation. (2)
If thine heart be not deeply humbled for thine Unbelief, thou will soon be
overcome by it. (3) The more thy soul is melted under the sense of Unbelief,
the more evangelic and spiritual it is. What better marque is there of a
spiritual, yea of a believing heart, than a deep sense of, and humiliation for
Unbelief? It is a great proof of our Faith, yea, of an eminence in Faith, to
mourn greatly under Unbelief. (4) A little unbelief in Believers is much worse
than much unbelief in others; because Believers have greater Obligations,
Encouragements, Assistances, and Means to believe. (5) Not to be humbled for
the Unbelief of others, whether Churches, or State, is to partake with them in
their sin; and so to expose our selves to their approaching jugements, at least
temporal.

3. This lays a deep and essential obligation on Use. 3. Of examination,
whether thy faith be saving, or only commun.
al, to examine accurately, how far they fall under the Guilt and Power of
Infidelity. If the Nature of Unbelief be such, as has been described, then
surely it concerns al to examine how far it prevails in them. Does not the
great Ressemblance that there is between saving Faith and commun, oblige al to
try of what stamp, and make their faith is? Alas! how much commun Assent is
there, which passes for saving? What a great verisimilitude, or likeness is
there between the notional Assent of Unbelievers, and real Assent of true
Believers? Do not many knowing Professors seem to receive the Word of God, as
the Word of God, who yet indeed receive it only as the word of men? Have not
many contemplative Professors sublime, and raised Apprehensions of spiritual
Mysteries, and yet all the while their assent to them is but carnal and natural?
Do not some seem deeply convinced of, and confirmed in evangelic reports, who
yet yield but a legal, staggering assent thereto? Does not the vigor and
strength of many men's assent arise from some transient work of the Spirit of
Bondage, rather than from a deep apprehension, and valuation of Evangelic
objects, which they assent unto? Again, how easy is it for men to be mistasten
in their Consent to the good things of their peace? Do not many seem very
forward in electing of Christ, who yet retain secret reserves for some beloved
Idol? Are not too many, from the force of legal convictions, compelled to close
with Christ, who yet secretly hate him at heart? How many adhere to Christ in
Profession, and yet adhere to the world, or lust in Affection? Are there not
many, who seem to recumb and lean on Christ for life, but yet really recumb,
and lean upon self? Oh! what a world of convinced sinners take up with a
spurious or commun faith instead of saving? How dreadfully do millions of
Unbelievers delude themselves with a sick dream, and shadow of commun faith?
Alas! what an easy matter is it for Professors, in these knowing times, to
mistake commun faith for saving? to deceive themselves and and others with a
form or picture of faith, and yet to remain under the real power of Unbelief?
It is indeed very difficult to gain a true solid divine Faith: but oh! how
easy is it to take up with a seeming faith; which yet shall look as much like
saving faith as may be? Oh! how securely does Infidelity lurk in many poor
souls, under the vizard of Faith? Does not commun faith often look so demurely,
as that you can very hardly discern its difference from saving? Are not the
most of Professors too soon satisfied in their own faith? Do not multitudes of
awakened sinners lay their consciences asleep, or amuse themselves with the
apparences of faith? Is not every Unbeliever, yea Believer also, a mystery to
himself? How much then are we al concerned to make a narrow scrutinie into our
hearts, and to examine whether our Faith be of the right kind? Oh! What a
foolish and dangerous thing is it, for any to deceive themselves with false
Images and Apparences of Faith? Is not the least error here fundamental? Alas!
What a poor felicity is it, to steal silently to hell, in a fond persuasion of
being Believers, when as our faith has no foundation, but in our own sick
dreaming Fantasies? Of what use will a Form of Faith, without the Power of it
be, unless to sink us deeper into Hell? To have a Notion of Faith, and yet to
live under the practice of Unbelief, what will this serve for, but to concele,
and fortify hypocrisy, and al manner of spiritual lusts in the heart? Does
not this then further oblige us, to examine strictly what we are as to Faith
and Infidelity? Again, if after all this men will not examine and use the means
to discover their state, are not such willingly deceived? And if men are
willingly deceived in this particular, do not they willingly perish? And oh!
What a sting will this be to torment wilful Unbelievers in Hell, that they were
so willing, and took so much pains to deceive themselves with a mere semblance,
and shadow of faith; but were no way willing, and took no pains to examine
their hearts, thereby to undeceive themselves, and lay a foundation for saving
Faith? Will not this make the Evangelic Unbelievers Hell seven times hotter than
al other Hels, that he took so much pains to deceive and ruin his soul; but
was not willing to take a little pains to undeceive, and save his soul? Oh!
What cruel self-murder is this? Does it not then nearly, and greatly concern
us al to make a very curious examen, and strict research into our hearts,
touching our faith, whether it be saving, or only commun? O that Professors
would put such Questions as these, unto their Consciences, and never desist,
til they have brought the whole to some good issue.

Its true, I have a Notion and Form of faith; Heart examens by way of
Soliloquie.
but have I indeed the real Power and Virtue of Faith? Am I not rather under
the Dominion and Prevalence of Infidelity? I assent to some words of God that
are agreeable; but do I not dissent from some other which disagree with, and
cross my lusts? I do receive the word of faith; but have I Faith mixed with
the word I receive? Mine awakened Conscience attendes to the joyful sound of
the Gospel; but does not my lustful heart attend as much to allurements of
lust? The Peace of the Gospel is pleasing to my wounded Conscience; but are not
the duties of the Gospel displeasing to my rebellious heart? My mind has some
estime for the good things of my peace; but has it not as great estime for the
good things of this world? Have I a right valuation of those things I hope for?
Mine assent to Evangelic truths, and Mysteries seems firm and strong; ay, but
does it leave suitable impressions on mine heart? Is it vigorous, affective,
and active? Does it kill my lust, and give life unto my soul? Moreover, O my
soul, thou seem to have a good liking to Jesus, the Savior; ay, but have
thou as good a mind to Christ, i. e, as anointed by the Father to be King over
thy lusts, person, and goods? Art thou brought over to a voluntary, free,
cordial, complete, and fixed closure with him, as offered in the Gospel? Can
thou take a whole Christ, with thy whole heart, and that for ever? Do thou
give Christ that place in the Intention and Bent of thy Will, which belongs to
him? Has his Lave and Grace the Soverain dominion over thy Will? And is thy will
bended to a correspondence with his Divine Will? Can thou be content to be
nothing, that Christ may be althings to thee? Is his Glory thy last and utmost
end? And is it thy joy to see althings to suit with his end, though they may
cross thine own private ends? Will nothing but Christ content thee? Art thou
restless 'til thou attainest to the enjoyment of him? Is this the grand motive
of thy seeking after Christ, that thy good is laid up in Him, and not in thy
self? And art thou wholly for Christ, as he is wholly for thee? Do thou
adhere to Him with a plenitude of Will, as the Iron to the Loadstone? Can thou
do much for, and yet trust in nothing but Christ? Art thou obsequious and
obedient to the Spirits dictates, as to thy supreme Conductor and Director? And
when thou come short of honoring Christ by Obedience, do thou honor Him by
humble acknowlegement, and Dependence? Can thou wait on, and adhere to Christ
in his Ordinances, albeit thou feel no sensible impartments of comfort,
peace, and quickening? These, or such like questions, which take in the spirit
and life of Faith, thou should frequently put to thy soul, and never desist
from urging of them, 'til thou have brought the question to this Conclusion,
Whether thou art a true Believer or not? If thou desire more express rules
to examine thy state by, then take those mentioned in the foregoing Chapter,
Corollarie 2. touching the Differences between saving Faith and commun: Whereby
thou may, with the concurrence of Divine illumination, arrive to a
welgrounded persuasion, Whether thy faith be only commun, or saving.

(4.) This also affordes matter of exhortation Use 4. Of Exhortation to deal
with Infidelity as our worst enemy.
unto al, to abjure and abandon Infidelity, as the worst enemy in the world;
yea, worse than Satan, or Hell itself. Can there be a worse enemy, than that
which deprives us of our chiefest good? And is not this the grand design of
Infidelity? Yea, does it not put a bar to al Mercy, but open the door to al
Sin and Misery? How sottish, and foolish does it make Sinners? What a dull,
lazy, remiss, loitering spirit does it breed in Men? Yea, how negligent,
slow-hearted, and backward to whatever is good, are Believers themselves, so
far as Unbelief prevails on them, Luke 24. 23? O! how does it slug men's spirits
in whatever good they are about? What a clog is it to the soul in all its
spiritual Exercices? How does it crampe, and dispirit the Affections, those
feet of the Soul? What stubbornness, rebellion, and obstinace does it infuse
into the Will? How much does it distract, deaden, and harden the heart in all
duties? How lean, poor, and barren in Grace, and gracious fruits are many
Believers, by reason of their prevalent Unbelief? Does it not also take off the
Beauty, Luster, and Sweetness of Mercies received, or expected? Oh! how
bitter are many sweet Mercies when mixed with Infidelity? Yea, does it not
turn al Mercies into Curses, to those who are under the complete dominion of
it, as Romans 11. 9? And how many choice Mercies are Believers deprived of by
reason of their Unbelief? Whence spring their groundless troubles of
Consciences; their misjugements, and mistakes about their state; their
heart-faintings, sinking discouragements, and despondences under Desertion;
their hard and scandalous thoughts of Christ, his Heart, and Dispensations
toward them, but from their Infidelity? Oh! What a sting does it put into al
afflictions? How burdensome, and irksome is the Cross of Christ to the
unbelieving heart? How sweet and easy is the bitter, heavy Cross so far as
Faith prevails? But, oh! What a troublesome, vexatious neighbor is Infidelity?
How does it torment the heart, and cause it to pine away, and consume to
nothing, even under groundless expectations, and needless fears of trouble?
May it not become a true Proverb, Much Infidelity, and much Sorrow? How do
afflictions pinch, and gal unbelieving spirits? How unable are such to see any
good in afflictions? What need have afflicted persons of Faith? Again, how soon
does Infidelity betray us into the hands of every Tentation? Faith has
Omnipotence engaged for its assistance: but oh! what a poor, impotent thing is
Unbelief? How unable is it to to conflict with small Tentations? Satan is often
the father, but is not Unbelief the mother of al Tentations? What made Adam and
Eve yield to Satan's tentation, but their Infidelity? Was not this also that
which made Judas betray, Peter deny, and the Jews crucify the Lord of Glory?
Its true, when the Tentation is asleep, the unrighteous man is righteous; the
unclean person is chaste; the passionate man is meek; the invidious man is
kind; the avaricious man is liberal; the unfaithful man is faithful: but oh!
when the tentation is awakened, how soon does Unbelief betray the heart into
the hands of these, or the like corruptions? Think not thy self secure from
the prevalence of any Tentation, so long as thou art under the prevalence of
Infidelity. Alas! how soon is Tentation fired by Unbelief? but oh! How is the
believing soul, that by faith adheres to Christ, strongly fortified, and armed
against the most violent Tentations? Moreover, how are the main breaches of our
lives maintained, and improved by Infidelity? What departures from God, what
turnings aside from, or remisnesses in Duties are Unbelievers exposed unto?
Does not Unbelief cut the Sinews, and Nerves of al evangelic Obedience? Does it
not let out the vital spirits, and heart-bloud of al good Inclination and
affections? Is not the very root, and seminal virtue of good Intentions
withered and blasted hereby? How much beneath the least evangelic duty is the
unbelieving soul? How does Unbelief poison many good Inclinations? Oh! what a
venomous malign thing is Unbelief? How does it infuse a malignitie, and poison
into all the parts of the Soul? Is not the spirit of the mind, the most noble
part of the soul, envelopped, or wrapped up in contagious black darkness by it?
Are not all the faculties of the soul spoiled of their vigor, beauty, harmony,
order, and exercices by Unbelief? Oh! What a bloody, hard-hearted,
soul-murdering sin is it? How does it compel the Sinner to embrew his hands in
his own blood; to sheath a sword in his own bowels, by a wilful rejection of
Evangelic offers? How welcontented is it to see the Unbelievers sentence of
condemnation subscribed, and sealed with the Mediators dreadful curse, John 3.
18? What flames of vengeance; what treasures of wrath does Infidelity treasure
up against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9? How patient is it,
whiles Satan claps on the chains, and fetters of spiritual slumber, and
hardness of heart on the Sinners legs? How willing is it to see the poor
Unbeliever famished and starved, amidst the rich and sumtuous feasts of
evangelic Grace, and Mercy? Has not Christ made a plentiful, and costly feast
for Sinners? And is he not extreme free, and cordial in his Invitations? How
then comes it to pass that Sinners come not to it when invited? Why, is it not
Unbelief, that keeps them back, and that as it were by hairs, namely some poor
and foolish excuses, Mat. 22. 1-6? Oh! how studious, and ready is Infidelity
to shift it self of Christ, and all the good things of its peace, offered to it?
What silly excuses, and pretenses does it make, to put off Christ, and his
evangelic offers? What little reason, or cause have Unbelievers to object
against Christ's gracious offers? Are not Christ's arms open to receive them,
when they come? Yea, Does he not, day by day, call upon, and importune them to
come unto him, Prove. 1. 20-25? Did he ever refuse, or look strangely on any
that came unto him? Yea, is he not more willing to receive Sinners, than they
are to come unto him? or, are the flames of Hell more elegible, than the joys of
Heaven? Is the Vassalage of Satan more desirable, than the Liberty of the Sons
of God? Is there so much Beauty in Sin, as to make men desire it before the
Beauties of Holiness? Are the Remorses, and Stings of the worm of Conscience
more agreeable, and pleasing, than peace of Conscience, and the smiles of Divine
Love? If not, how comes it to pass, that Sinners choose the evil, and refuse
the good offered to them? Oh! is not Infidelity the cause of all this misery?
Is not Christ's hand, and heart open toward Sinners; but are not their hearts
shut against him by Unbelief? Is there any thing in Christ, or his evangelic
offers that keeps men from believing? O then! What an irrational, sottish,
perverse, cruel sin is Unbelief? What a world of misery does it bring on
Sinners? How justly does Christ pronounce a sentence of death against them, who
wilfully reject his offers, and means of life? Alas! how is it possible that
Salvation itself should save such, so long as they wilfully spurn at the
offers of Salvation? Is there any sin that does more directly oppose Salvation
by Christ, than Unbelief? Christ comes, by his Evangelic offers of Grace, to
draw the Unbelievers heart unto him; but oh! how does he draw back? Yea, how
does his unbelief oppose Christ, as He comes clothed with Grace, Love, and
Pity? And can Unbelievers expect, that Christ should pass by such affronts,
and indignities, without severe punishments? Does any thing more provoke
Christ, than to have his bowels, and compassions toward Sinners spurned at?
Cannot he put up any injuries better than this? Is not Unbelief the most cruel,
and bloody enemy in the world, in that it takes away not only the active
power of doing good, but also the passive power of receiving good, when
offered? Is not this the language of Infidelity, Lord, I need not, I desire
not thy Grace; keep it to thy self: I have wherewith of mine own, to supply my
needs; I can make a shift with mine own righteousness, to clothe my
nakedness; with the balsame of mine own good works to heal my wounds, etc.
And as Infidelity thus puts a bar to al Grace and Mercy; So also does it not
open the door to all the jugements of God? Are not the most severe Plagues of
God entailed on Infidelity? Does not this sin provoke God to curse men's
blessings? Does it not also cut us off from many promissed Mercies? Yea, how
severely has God punished this sin in his own people? Was not Moses an holy
man, deprived of entering into Canaan for one act of unbelief? Oh! how deep does
Gods wrath sink into the unbelievers soul? How many flourishing Churches have
been deprived of the Gospel, and means of Grace for their Infidelity? Or
suppose, that God continues some means of Grace, yet does not Unbelief turn
them into means of hardening? When men will not believe the Gospel, how often does
Christ leave such to a spirit of error, to believe lies? Yea, does not
Infidelity continued in, often cause Christ to give up such to their own lusts;
which break forth sometimes into scandalous sins? Yea, how often does Christ
deliver up impenitent, obstinate Unbelievers, to a spirit of slumber, judicial
hardness, and al manner of Divine vengeance? Are these the effects of
Infidelity? Is there so much sin, and self-murder, wrapped up in its bowels? and
are there so many Curses and Plagues, both temporal, spiritual, and eternal,
entailed on it? May we not then, without any injustice, conclude, that Unbelief
is the worst enemy we have in the world? Does not our Infidelity give us more
pain and trouble than al other enemies? Oh! then how should we, with fire and
sword, persecute Unbelief, as our most mortal enemy? Can we be too severe
against such a deadly enemy? Is not al pity and compassion that we show
toward Unbelief, the greatest cruelty that may be to our own souls? Why
should we then cease our Indignation and Revenge against Unbelief, 'til we have
let out its heart-bloud? Remember, the more you pity, and spare it, the more
cruel you are to your selves.

5. This also lays an essential and strong obligation Use 5. To pursue after
Faith as the most excellent and powerful Grace.
on al, both Believers and Unbelievers, to put an high value on Faith; and to
pursue after it, as their supreme Interest, and Concern. Surely, if
Infidelity be so prodigious, and pernicious a Sin; then, by a paritie of
reason, Faith most be the most useful, and excellent Grace. Contraries much
illustrate, and set off each other: And oh! how does the black deformed nature,
and venomous qualities of Infidelity set off the Beauties, and excellent
qualities of Faith? What a strange, and miraculous Faiths efficace.
power, and efficace has Faith? How does it make things absent, present; the
invisible glories of the coming world visible; as the visible glories of this
world invisible and disapparent? Yea, does not faith appropriate to itself the
whole of Gods Alsufficience and Omnipotence; and so may, in a sober humble
sense, be said to be in some sort alsufficient, and omnipotent? For all that is
in God, Faith, by a strange magnetic virtue, can apply to it self; and thence
it can do althings, so far as it has a Promise to bottom on. Does not the
great God make himself a debtor to such as trust in Him? How does Faith The
effects of Faith. 1. Selfdenial.
rend a man from himself, without violence, or pain? What more effectual to
break al our Idols, and Images of jelousie, than saving Faith? How does it make
all the beauty of the Creature to fade away, as a Sun-burned Flower? Does it
not also dismount the Believer, and make him walk on foot, in all manner of
self-abasement? How soon does the bottom of al sensible good fall out, when
Faith comes into the Soul, and takes the Chair? What does more elevate and
refine reason, than saving Faith? Have not those 2. The elevation of reason.
that believe most, the deepest, and soundest reasons? Who is the wiser man,
The Believer that adheres to the First truth and chiefest good; or the
Unbeliever, who rejects the same, and adheres to Idols of time? How does Faith
corroborate, and fortify the Will in what is 3. The fortifying of the Will and
Affections.
good, by uniting of it to Christ, and the Divine will? What a sweet harmony,
and order does it inspire into the Affections? How does it make the Believer to
fear God under smiles, love him under frowns, hope in him under difficulties,
wait for his return under desertions? Yea, when our affections are under the
greatest disorder and confusion, does not Faith often draw peace and order out of
it? Is not Faith both food and physic? Does it not as well feed Grace, as purge
out sin? Whence springs the Christians union with 4. Union with Christ.
Christ, but from Faith? Could Christ and Sinners ever come together, unless
Faith did unite them? Can things contrary be united, but by some efficacious
bond of Union? Was it ever known that there was a marriage between the living
and the dead? How then comes it to pass that the dead Sinner is espoused to a
living Christ? Is not this happy match, the alone miraculous effect of Faith,
wrought by the Spirit of God? And hence does not Faith make God thine, as
surely as 5. Sanctification.
thou art thine own? And Faith having united the person to Christ, does it not
thence, by Grace derived from him, purify the nature also, Acts 15. 9? And
does not Faith hence work a miraculous change in the whole disposition of the
soul, and conversation? And as the member is naturally subject to the head, so
does not Faith subject the whole soul to Christ? Whence also does not the
Believer entirely give up himself to Christ, as Christ gives up himself to the
Believer? Oh! how 6. Adherence to Christ.
does the believing Soul follow after, and adhere to Christ, by ineffable
groans, and acts of Faith, though Christ may sometimes seem to depart from him?
How inquisitive is Faith to understand all the virtues of Christ, and to receive
from him Grace for Grace? What a violence is it to Faith to live, act, breath,
speak and walk out of Christ? What is it that keeps the heart, as a chaste
Virgin for Christ, but Faith? Hence also Faith gives the soul solid peace in
and with God: and oh! 7. Peace and Communion with God in Christ.
How satisfying is this peace, which Faith gives? What child-like confidence,
and boldness ensues hereon? And thence, how much is the soul satiated in
communion with Christ, so far as Faith prevails? What solaces, and delicious
suavities does the believing Soul, at times, receive from Christ? What an
active application is there on Christ's part toward the Believer; and passive
application on the Believers part toward Christ? How much is Faith delighted
in trading with Heaven and Christ? Is not this the main business of Faith to
enjoy Christ, to live and die in him? What is it that gives the soul an abode
in Christ, and Christ in the soul, but Faith, as John 15. 5? Oh! What strong
desires, and thirsts after Christ does Faith work in the soul? Does it not
make the absence and presence of Christ, the mesure of bitter and sweet, of
good and evil? What more efficacious to draw forth every Grace in 8. The
exercise of Grace.
its exercice than Faith? Unbelief is the spring of spiritual sloth and
laziness; but oh! how vigorous, and active is Faith? There is no Grace, or
Duty but it is made easy by Faith: How easy is the work of Humiliation made
by Faith: What makes divine Love more spriteful, and vigorous than Faith? Yea,
is not the whole of Christianity contained in the bowels of Faith? Is there
any Grace required to the Divine life, which Faith cannot supply us with? Yea,
Faith is so good a Chemist, as that it can extract riches out of 8. Al
Spiritual goods.
poverty, strength out of weakness, glory out of shame, peace out of
trouble, Grace out of sin, life out of death, something out of nothing. Oh! how
miraculous are the virtues of Faith? It makes a man able to do althings, an yet
it makes him see he is nothing, and can do nothing: It makes a man content with
any thing that God gives, and yet unsatisfied 'til he can enjoy althings in
their fountain.

Again, If we consider Faith in its parallel Antithesis, or opposition to
Infidelity, we The opposition betwixt faith and Unbelief.
shall then see more fully the excellent qualities of it, as also the
mischievous Influences of Infidelity. (1.) Faith breeds jealousy of our
selves, but confidence in God; it reckons it cannot believe God too much, nor
self too little. But oh! What self-confidence, and jelousie of God does
Infidelity produce? How much does it trust self; and thence how little can it
trust in God? What mutual Influences, and Reciprocations are there between
self-confidences and jelousies of God? (2) Faith keeps the heart close to
God, his Word, and Ordinances; and so keeps God close to the heart: It
follows Christ in ways of Dependence, Adherence, Subjection, Submission, and
Conformity; and so Christ follows it in ways of gracious Communications,
Consolations, Manifestations, and Communion. But is it thus with Unbelief? Does
it not depart from God, his Word, and Ways? And thence does not God depart from
the Unbeliever? (3.) Faith prepares for, quickens in, and sweetens every Duty:
It sets Prayer on foot, Meditation on the wing, and draws forth the Attention,
and Intention of the Soul in hearing and reading of the Word. But oh! How does
Infidelity hinder, deaden, and embitter the Soul in all gracious exercices? How
does it clip the wings of Meditation, stifle and choke the breathings of
Prayer, and c? (4.) Faith fixes and establishes the heart, by knitting of it
to Christ, who is an immutable Rock. But oh! What a mutable, variable,
inconstant thing is Infidelity? How does it make the heart to stagger, and
reel, by dividing and taking it off from God, Isai. 7. 9? (5.) Faith makes a
livelihood out of Divine Promises, Engagements, Relations, and Influences: It
sucks sweetness out of Promises, and so is nourished by them: It feeds on
Divine Relations, and Influences, and so finds a livelihood in the greatest
famine of spiritual enjoyments: It is long-handed, and reaches to Heaven for
supplies, when al means below fail. But oh! how short-handed is Infidelity?
It Is true, it has a long hand to reach forth to the Creature; yea, sometimes to
Hell; but it has no hand to reach after Christ, or his Promise: how does it
suffer the poor hungry soul to starve amidst al evangelic Promises and
Dainties? Whereas Faith takes the Soul by the hand, and leads it from one
Promise to another, from one Attribute to another, and so suckes gracious
Influences from al, as it need requires. (6.) Faith conquers the whole Soul to
God; and thence althings else are conquered to the Soul: It subjects the heart
to Christ, and so makes althings subject to it. But Infidelity captivates the
heart to lust, and thence it becomes captivated to every thing else. Oh! What a
vassal is the unbeliever to every base lust, Yea to himself? (7.) Faith
fortifies the Soul against all the Blandissements, Allurements, and eye-pleasing
Delights of this lower world: It blasteth all the fair promises of created
good, by outbidding of them. But alas! how soon is Unbelief entangled, and
overcome by every inveiglement, and snare of sinful pleasures? It can fortify
the heart against nothing, but the convictions, and good motions of the Spirit.
Faith is the shield of the new creature, to repel all the poisoned darts of the
World and Satan; but Infidelity is the shield of the old man, to repel all the
Convictions of the Spirit, darted into the Sinners Conscience. (8.) Faith
prepares the heart for, and preserves it under every difficulty, frown, and
afflictive cross: It prepares for the worst times, yet hopes for, and expects
the best: It takes out the sting and poison of every cross; and infuseth into
it a medicinal, healing virtue. But can Infidelity do such marvels? does it
not unfit us for every difficulty, and then betray us into the hands of it?
Faith never leaves us at a loss; it clotheth the mind with a divine light,
whereby it is enabled to see, and pass thorough al dangers. But oh! How does
Unbelief darken the eye of the Soul; and so create black visions of carnal
fear, and heart-rending troubles? Difficulties and distresses are the element
of Faith; but how unable is Infidelity to live, or breath in such a sharp
Air? (9.) Faith opens the door to promissed Mercies and Deliverances: It keeps
the condition of the Promise, and so keeps the soul under the blessing of the
Promise. But is this in the power of Infidelity? Does it not rather put a bar
to promissed Mercies; as Number. 20. 12. Heb. 3. 19? Yea, does it not open a door
to all the threats and curses of the Law? Yea, does it not bind the Unbeliever
fast under a sentence of condemnation, as John 3.36? Whereas Faith on the
contrary stops the mouth of al legal Threats and Curses, and locks the soul
fast under a state of Salvation, John 6. 47. (10.) Faith improves Mercies
received, and so makes way for more: It gives God the honor of his Mercies,
and man a sanctified and comfortable use of them. But can Infidelity thus
improve Mercies? Does it not rather, by its murmurs, and misimprovments,
destroy former Mercies, and so hinder future? Was not this the temper of the
unbelieving Jews in the Wilderness, as we find it described, Psalm. 78. 11 --
40? Oh! how does Unbelief rob God of all the Glory, and so man of all the
comfort, and right use of Mercies received? How unthankeful, how discontented
is the Unbeliever under Mercies received; and thence unfit to receive more?
Whereas the Believer is content under the want of Mercies, and thence fit to
receive them: He can trust God with his soul, and al other Mercies; and thence
God trusts him with Mercies needful. But the Unbeliever, notwithstanding the
receipt of former Mercies, cannot trust God for the future; and therefore God
will not trust him with any special marque of Love and Mercy.

These and suchlike being the admirable Qualities of Saving Faith, how much
does it concern al to labor, with all possible vigor and activitie, after this
so noble and useful a Grace? Art thou an Unbeliever? Oh! how much then does it
concern thee to labor after Faith, that so thou may partake of these
admirable Privileges and Advantages, which hereby thou will be invested with?
Art thou a new Convert, and Beginner in Christianity? Oh then! how much does
it concern thee, to get much Faith, that so thou may be strong? Art thou
strong, and well grown in Grace? and art thou not then engaged to act Faith
much, that so thou may continue strong, and grow more strong in Grace? Alas!
What can thou do or suffer without Faith? How much art thou beneath the least
duty or suffering farther than thou art acted by Faith? And oh! be sure thy
faith be of the right make and stamp: Dread being deluded with a false, or
commun faith, more than Hell. Make a curious inquisition into the Nature,
Causes, and Workings of thy faith: see that it be wel-grounded, and duly
qualified. This advice does more nearly concern young Converts, whose eternal
welbeing depends chiefly on the right constitution of their Faith at first
Conversion. For if thy Faith in its first framing be naught, thine heart and
life will never be good: Thou may build a beautiful and goodly structure of
Profession on a common faith; but let me tell thee, a storm of Tentation will
come, and wash al away: If thy Profession be bottomed only on a Commun faith,
it is begun in Hypocrisy, and will end in Apostasy. O that men would be wise
before it be too late, and endeavor To know the things that belong to their
peace, before they be hid from their eyes.

FINIS.

