DE Succo Pancreatico: Or, A Physical and Anatomical TREATISE Of the NATURE and
OFFICE of the Pancreatick Juice; Showing its generation in the Body, what
Diseases arise by its Vitiation; from whence in particular, by plain and
familiar examples, is accurately demonstrated, the Causes and Cures of Agues,
or Intermitting Fevers, hitherto so Difficult and Uncertain: with sundry other
things worthy of Note.

Written by D. Reg. de Graaf, Physician of Delph, And Translated by Christopher
Pack, Med. Land.



London, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange,
1676.

Licensced,

February 2d. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

To the most ILLUSTRIOUS D. JOHN CAPELLANUS, Counselor to the most Christian
KING.
Sir,
THis Treatise, which five Years since, I willingly Dedicated to You in the
French Idiome, is now again presented to Your self, replenished with many
Observations in the Latin Tongue: seeing that by the great esteem of Your
Name, our French Edition was not only Heartily accepted in France; but also in
other Foreign Nations among Learned Men: The exceeding happy success of which,
had wrought in me an Admiration, had not the fame of Your Transcendant Learning
made it Immortal, by your most Learned Writings, known, and thoroughly
considered by me. You being so well versed in all kind of Studies, that the
most Illustrious Ludovicus XIV, King of France and Navarre, made You the
Mecaenas, or Cherisher of most Learned men. Since it is so, I may remember the
former Edition, and so much the rather, seeing that the Here Duyst van
Voorhout, a Man of an excellent Genious, made me as certain of Your Peculiar
Favors toward me, as Your own frequent Honoring me with your Epistles:
Wherefore with all Humility I crave, that even as You protected the former
Edition, under the Shield of Your Authority, so You would vouchsafe also to
protect This. Sir, The doing of which, will oblige him in the highest Nature,
who is, and will be, during his Life, the Adorer of Your Resplendent Name.

Reg. de Graaf.

THE PREFACE.
IN the Year 1663. in the University of Leyden, I hearing the most Famous, and
Indefatigable Man in Studies, Francis de le Boe-Sylvius, daily teaching
concerning the Pancreatick Juice, to be one of the chiefest Foundations of
Physic, I endeavored to find out that, hitherto undiscovered Juice; the which
when I had done, and indeed after that manner which he had first described to
us; he having understanding thereof, with all Diligence did incite me to Print
those things, which I had observed worthy of Notice, concerning this Subject,
through diverse Dissections of various Animals: And I, willing to gratify his
Request, published a little Treatise, concerning the Nature, and Office of the
Pancreatick Juice; which, although in an unpolished manner, nevertheless, it so
took with the Curious Indagators of Nature, that in a short time, sufficient
Examples of that Nature, were desired of me: For which cause, in the Year 1666,
I published, at paris, this little Treatise, in the French Tongue; which, three
or four Months together, I presented to the Famous Dr. Bourdelot, to be
publicly examined; to whose House the most Curious Wits of the University do
frequently resort. And I, seeing that this second Edition wonderfully took with
the most Learned Physicians of all France, who have their College at Paris,
and returning to my own Country, I found that there were remaining no Coppies
of my First Edition, being instigated by the Printer, and my Friends, for their
sakes who understood not the French Tongue, have again turned the same little
Treatise into Latin, and that not barely, but in several places have inserted
new Observations, and resolves to several Objections, put to me against this
Treatise, both in France, and other Countries, that my Opinion might not seem,
in any Respect, to be faulty; So that, the Treatise, which I now publish, may
bear the name of a new one; which I hope, will not be unacceptable to the
Reader. But seeing no writing (as Plato says) can be so exact, that it may
avoid the Censures of Critics, without doubt, there will be Carpers, who are
better affected with Brawlings, and Drinkings, than the Dissections of Bodies,
which will laugh at me, for the spending so much time in the discovery of this
Juice: But Hippocrates, in an Epistle to Damagetus, has taught me in an
History of Democritus, that those Gibeings ought not to be regarded, etc. So
much of which History, as most nearly appertains to us, I will briefly relate:
Democritus, inferior to none of the Abderitans, when, to find out the nature
of the Bile, had betaken himself, apart from the City, and there alone had
dissected many Animals; he was generally reputed to be mad; wherefore the
Senate, and People of the Abderitans being sad, and troubled, did very much
importune the Prince of Physicians, that he would vouchsafe to come, and cure
the madness of Democritus: Hippocrates, by the Merits of Democritus, and the
Entreaties of the Abderitans, taking Ship went to Abderis, where he found all
the Citizens, and Inhabitants gathered together, waiting for him without the
Gates; part of whom running before, and part following, led Hippocrates to a
high Hill without the City, (crying out save, help, heal,) that he might see
the Madness of Democritus: From whence they saw Democritus sometimes dissecting
Animals, sometimes museing, and sometimes writing. Hippocrates, going all alone
to Democritus, and making an exact trial of him, although then he understood he
was not mad, asked him what he wrote there? Democritus answered concerning
Madness; And being further asked, What he wrote of Madness? said, What else,
than what it is, and how generated, and how allayed in the Bodies of Men? For,
these Animals, which you see here, that I open for this purpose, is not because
I hate the Works of God, but search out the Nature and Seat of the Bile: For,
you know, this is the cause of Men's Madness, etc. Which being understood, says
Hippocrates, Democritus in truth, I call God to witness, you speak truly, and
wisely: And he, returning to the Abderitans, who waited for him at some
distance, commended Democritus, and accused themselves of Madness. I wish
Hippocrates, the great Prince of Physicians, might rise from the Dead, he would
not blame those less, which deride me for my more diligent search of the
Pancreatick Juice, than them which judged Democritus to be mad, for his
exquisite enquiry into the Bile: Seeing that he thought them to be taught of
God, which did not only study about Heat, Cold, Dryness, and Moisture, but
about their Causes: For, it is not Heat (says he) Lib. De Vet. Med. Text XXVI.
XII. which has great force, but Sharpness, and Fluidity, and other things by
me related. And he says before Text XXIV. XX. Because there is in Man both
bitter, salt, sweet, acid, sharp, and fluid, and infinite others, having all
manner of Faculties, both of Plenty, and Strength. From whence he commonly
calls those Faculties, and Powers he affirms Salt, Bitterness, and Acidity,
with other things of the like Acrimony, to be commonly the causes of all
Distempers, as appears Lib. cap. Text XXV. From which it is as evident, as the
Sun at Noonday, that Hippocrates, if he were alive, would judge our
Dissections, and Searchings, about Salts, Acids, and other Faculties, sometimes
abounding in the Pancreatick Juice, to be highly necessary. In regard
Hippocrates, and other of the Ancients, who were famous in their time, were
altogether ignorant of the Pancreatick Juice; neither did they understand the
whole depth of Nature; It is not to be imputed to them as a Fault: But on the
contrary, those famous, and chiefest Guides of Wisdom, and Inciters of Wits,
are to be commended; because they broke the Ice for us; and (as it is said)
those things which we read, were rightly invented, and observed by them, are to
be heartily embraced; and those things, which we really know to be false, and
erroneous, I judge they ought to be corrected with such Modesty, as we desire
those things, which we now write, should be corrected with. If we consider a
Thousand Years yet to come, something may be found out, which will correct, and
amend our Writings, by the unwearyed Searchers of Nature; for Arts admit of a
daily Improvement, especially in this age of ours, in which the Yoke of
Authority being shook off, we may bring to the Test those things which our
Reason and Sense does afford us; for, the Enquirers into things Natural ought
not to distrust themselves, or so doubtfully to follow the steps of their
Ancestors, as at any time, when they shall discover Novelties, be afraid to
publish them.

-- Non omnia grandior aetas
Nos aeque Scimus habet, seris Venit
Usus ab annis.
Ancient times not all things knew:
For, Practiss sprang from Years more new.
And as much as pertains to this Treatise, of ours, which has been so
illustrated with daily Experience, new Observations, and Reasons, that they who
first made a Question of the Truth of our Hypothesis, would be on our side; or
at least confess, till now, never any Systeme was found out, in which fewer, or
lesser difficulties are, than this of ours, if they will but examine our
Dictates without Prejudice, and Envy. First of all, Let the Reader be persuaded
in himself, that our Pancreatick Juice is no Fictions, but a real Humor of our
Bodies; and such a one indeed as after its own separation from the Blood, and
Propulsion, to the Intestines, is in a short time after, again permixed with
the Blood, seeing that all Liquid things, being carried by the passage of the
Guts, do easily ascend (by the Venae Lacteae) the first The Origin. is Thalamus.
Treasury of the Living, and the last of the Dead.

Which being granted, he may further consider it was not (by the Almighty God)
ordained in vain, but for a common use to the Body; and so all men will be
easily persuaded, that as often as the Pancreatick Juice is rightly
constituted, its use does naturally happen: And likewise when it happens
preternaturally, then it is vicious, and preternatural: Seeing it is so, and my
whole Treatise consists in the preserving a good Order of the Pancreatick
Juice, and amending it when vitiated, and helping Distempers from thence
arising, we hope it will be very acceptable, and profitable to Practitioners:
For, let this be its whole design, to give a helping hand to all who profess
Physic, that they may sooner, safer, and more delightfully help the
Calamities, and miseries of the Sick: And if I unhappily miss my aim, you may
commend my Design, and modestly correct those things in which the weakness of
my Genious does mistake: And if any one please to inform me better, I will
allow him to convince me of my Error, and not to accuse me of Obstinacy,
seeing that I am not moved by Ambition, but only desirous of finding out Truth,
offer up these my Studies unto you.

To the Right WORSHIPFUL Sr. CHRISTOPHER PACK, Knight. The Translator Dedicates
these His ENDEAVORS.
Honored Sir,
CVjusque ingenium non statim emerget, Plin:
nisi Materiae, Fautor, occasio commendatorque contingat, Epist. 2 lib. 6.
(says the Learned Pliny) the Work and Ingenuity of every Person does not
constantly prosper well, unless the matter or occasion be remarkable, or some
worthy Patron happen to favor it.

As for the Matter, it has already commended it self to the World, and crowned
the Learned Author thereof (throughout the European Division) with an
honorable Acceptance, and Estimation, both in respect of the Invention, and
Doctrinal Performances.

But in regard that I have assayed to make it more Universally Intelligible,
and Beneficial to English men, by putting it into our own Native Idiome, I
conceive I ought to present my Undertaking to the Patronage of some worthy
Person; under the Protection of whose Name, it may have the freer passage
through the World. To which end I have thought no Person fitter than your
worthy self, both in respect of Your profound Judgment, and Favor to all
things that may advance a Public Good. Neither could I do less, if the Bonds
of Gratitude be any Obligations to the minds of men, seeing (that next to my
Parents) I stand more highly engaged to Your Worship, than to any other Person
living; which has been a great Motive and Inducement to this Presumption,
which I hope Your Candor will pass by, and Heartily accept this mite from him
who at the present, is not capable of a better Retaliation of Your many
Favors, than the humble offer of this Translation: The which, having been
brought forth in Your Name, I knew not how it might better live than in Your
Family; the kind aspect of which, will not be only Amicable to it, but also
Honorable to him that is,

SIR, An Honourer of Your Self, and Progeny. Christopher Pack.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
Candid Reader.
I Having often viewed this Treatise of the most ingenious D. Regnerus de
Graaf, and many times also heard it wished for in English, at length Resolved
to Translate it for their Sakes to whom the Original was not Communicable, in
Regard of their Nescience of the Language, though otherwise competently
ingenious and intelligent. The which I am well satisfied will prove servicable
(and I hope also acceptable to them) in three Respects.

First, that it will be of great Vtillity, for the more complete understanding
the Works of the Learned Franciscus Sylvius de le Boe that late Renowned
Professor of Physic in the University of Leyden, the first part of whose
Praxis is already in English; for in regard that he urges the Pancreatick
Juice to be an Agent of Fermentation and Concoction of the Chyle, and so
consequently a constitutive part of the Blood, and Author of many grievous
Diseases, and Enormities of the Body. It necessarily follows 1. That the
certainty of this Juice ought to be known; that is, that it be a real Juice, or
Humor in all Men's Bodies, and not a thing only immaginary or uncertain, which
this Author has evidently demonstrated. 2. The way and manner of collecting
it, by sensible Experiment (the surest of Guides) to convince those who
oppugn, and resolve the Doubting, which he has largely shown. 3. Because the
Anatomical Disquisition of the Pancreas, and its Juice, is omitted by Sylvius,
in the first part of his Praxis, as not pertinent to his present Scope, which
omission this Book supplies, and to which the said Sylvius, in a manner, refers
his Readers: So that he which deliberately reads this Book, will be thereby
highly inducted to the Understanding of the Doctrines and Notions of the most
Learned Sylvius, concerning the Pancreatick Juice, throughout his whole
Writings, as they relate to diverse Diseases, and Affections of the Body of Man.

The second Commodity I shall propound is, That this Book does most Indubitably
contain the certain Causes of all Agues, or Intermitting Fevers, with their
true and effectual Rules of Curation. It is a wonder to see the many Books
which have been written concerning Agues, and Fevers, (perhaps as many as
there are Old Women's Medicines for the cure thereof) and the great Diversity of
Opinions concerning their Causes and differences; so that, for a man exercised
with a tedious Ague, to call a Council of Physicians to his Assistance, usually
received no more Relief, than a Criminal Person does by the Verdict of a Jury,
which delivers him from Prison, either to Death, or Banishment. Which has
formerly enrolled this Disease in the Catalogue of those which were wont to be
termed Opprobrium Medicorum, the Reproach of Physicians.

Neither, in my Judgment, is it greatly to be wondered at, that Physicians were
wont to have no better success in the Cure of this Disease, seeing they were
involved in so many Uncertainties about the Seat, and Cause thereof; some
assigning the Seat to be in the Blood in general, others in some particular
Parts of the Vessels, where the Blood happened to be stagnant; others in the
Meseraick Veins; others in the Guts, and perticularly in the Colon, and
several other Conceits, as if they went about to gain the Knowledge of the true
Seat, Arithmetically, by the rule of false Position. Then again, as to the
Causes, and Reasons of Differences, whilst they ascribed them to the Four
Humors, viz. Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and their different
Degrees of Mistion, and Putre-Faction, they ran upon such Rocks as constantly
ship-wracked the Barks of their Opinions: For, still, as they endeavored to
solve one difficulty that would arise, they caused the Rise of another. But
this Author's Hypothesis, being so free from all Intricacies, and Difficulties,
renders it agreeable to Truth.

I have yet further to say in the behalf of its Certainty, that is the
Consequence of Curation; which, although every single Cure of a Disease does
not indeed declare the Administrator of the Medicine, to have a certain
Intelligence of the Cause of the Disease; yet, when a Distemper shall be
certainly cured, at diverse times, in different Persons, and with different
Medicaments; always from the Notions, Doctrines, and Considerations of the
same Cause, that surely is a certain Argument that the Cause is known. And this
I my self have oft-times done even to Admiration, by removing Ague-Fits in a
few days space, and never yet failing of the Cure of any kind of Ague, whether
Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan, with their Compounds; and am yet (by God's
blessing) ready, at any time, to undertake the cure of the worst Ague-Fits that
are; which Aquisition, I acknowledge, I owe to this Author: I am able also, to
perform the same in those deplorable Fits, commonly called, The Fits of the
Mother.

I have instanced this not out of boasting, but to show the certainty, and
excellency of the Doctrine of the Pancreatick Juice, and to excite the Reader
to a serious Contemplation, and Observation thereof.

There is yet a Third Vtillity of this Book, which is, That it refutes several
Errors in Physic, and Anatomy; many of which, in times past, have been
received for certain Truths, and some of them perhaps yet remaining; the
Principle whereof relate to the Pancreas, or Sweetbread, and to the Nervous
Juice; concerning which, I shall say no more, but commit you to the things
themselves, as they shall occur by reading.

I have nothing more to say, but to beg the Readers kind Acceptance; and
withal to mind him of the Difficulty of things of this Nature, (especially
when an Author writes in such a style as de Graaf has done) that if he meet
with any Errors committed by me, I hope he will the more easily pass them by,
as not being Intentional, and I presume not Essential.

If I find this be kindly accepted, it will encourage me to serve my Country
with somewhat of my own, more at large.

I do expect to be censured, and snarled at by some (for as Erasmus says,
Nihil morosius Hominum Judiciis) there is nothing more peevish than Men's
Judgments, I shall easily dispense with it, being of a peacable Spirit: And as
I have professed to do this for a Public Good, so I also declare, that I have
been void of Prejudice therein, to all Men's Persons, and Interests; being only
desirous of the Propogagation of all Laudable Science, whilst I am

Christ. Pack.
From my House, at the Sign of the Globe, and Chymical-Furnaces, in the
Postern, near Moor-Gate, Feb. 2d. 1675/6.
AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHap. I. An exact Description of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread; before which,
some things are put concerning the necessity of Anatomy, and its Increase.
Chap. II. The Opinions of diverse Authors concerning the Use of the Pancreas,
Examined. Chap. III. How, or in what manner the Pancreatick Juice is found.
Chap. IV. The Qualities of the Pancreatick Juice are described, in a plain
division of the Glandules of the whole Body, is showed, that the Pancreatick
Juice is not Excrementious; in like manner, how it is generated. Chap. V. The
Liquor of the Glandules is Demonstrated to be necessary, and that the
Pancreatick Juice does ferment with the Bile. Chap. VI. What that Fermentation
is in the Sound, and in the Sick, and what benefit accrews to the Body thereby.
Chap. VII. The Diseases by which the Substance of the Pancreas, and its Juice
may be molested. Chap. VIII. The Functions which are vitiated by the Pancreas,
or its ill disposed Juice. Chap. IX. The Diseases arising from the Vitiation of
the Pancreatick Juice. Chap. X. How the vitiated Pancreatick Juice may be
corrected. Chap. XI. A Discourse of Intermitting Fevers.
ERRATA Sic Corrigenda.
PAge 20 line 1 read Months. p. 23 l. 9 r Pancreas. l. ultim r. Aliment. p. 32
l. 2 r. into the Ductus. p. 35 l. 4 r. but not except the Spirits were
dissipated. p. 42 l. 32 r. Faculties. p. 43 l. 1 r. imbibe. p. 56 l. 11 r.
strictly. l. 31 r. Preternatural. p. 63 l. 1 r. in the Temples. p. 91 l. 7 r.
Plethora. p. 92. l. 18 r. Intermitions. p. 97 l. 15 r Ventricle. p 98 l 21 r
abounds p. 124 l 12 for thirty r thirteen p 131 l 9 r Phlegm. p 132 l 12 r
though p 133 l 2 r attent p 148 l 24 r Acrimony.

A Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the Nature and Office of the Pancreatick
Juice.
Regnerus de Graaf, concerning the Pancreatick Juice.
CHAP. I. A Description of the Pancreas, before which some things are put
concerning the necessity of Anatomy, and its Increase.
IT was never made a Question, (unless perhaps by such through whose ignorance
True Physic is disgraced; or that cannot distinguish the true Science of
Physic from the Emperical curing of Diseases (that Anatomy is very useful and
necessary, as well for all Physicians as Chyrurgians; and that real Physic
without it is Knowledge cannot stand, or be in force; which is wont to be called
Dogmatical and Rational.

Seeing it is so, their Ingenuity and Study deserves Praise, who endeavor to
arrive to a greater degree of Perfection in the Knowledge of Anatomy, by making
a narrow search into the Secrets of Nature, and communicating those things
which they have found out to others.

And amongst those who have given themselves up to this Work; neither frighted
with it is difficulties, have had laudible success therein: Gaspar Ase^ius the
Anatomist, comes not far behind, who, when he had met with the Venae Lacteae,
in the Year 1622. in a Dog which he undertook to open alive, he wholly gave
himself to the further Discovery thereof; so that no Week passed without one or
other Dissection; not only of Dogs, but other living Creatures also, as Cats,
Lambs, Hogs, Cows, and also Horses, as you may see in that Book of his
published after his Death. But dying young, he could not make a further
progress in many other things, tending to this business exactly to explain
them, and communicate them to the Learned World: Concerning their site and
office, many Controversies, and Disputes have arisen amongst Anatomists; for
they who immagined that all the Chyle ascended by the Meseraick Veins (in order
to it is Sanguification by the Liver) did stiffly affirm, that these Milky
Vessels went to the Liver; but others described their course another way.

And this matter remained in Doubt until the Year 1651. that the Ductus
Thoracicus was found out by that most ingenious Anatomist, John Pequet, a
Frenchman, to which it is evident to all men, the Vessels discovered by
Asellius do tend, and there lay down the humor, or matter by them contained.

And that we may not only speak of trifles, we cannot pass by with silence the
famous Invention of the Bloods circulation by the incomparable William Harvey,
chief Physician to the King of England, discovered in the Year 1628. which
although at the first found many Opposers, (to whom it seemed strange, that
they being old, should lay aside their old Doctrines, and be taught anew what
younger men did most certainly affirm) nevertheless, this Pillar of Truth
remained unshaken against the most furious Assaults, and that so steadfastly,
that not long after many Learned men were found, who considering the solid
sayings of the Ancients, after this new Invention was found out, that it might
be explained after a far better, and easier manner; plainly made it appear by
the wrightings of Hyppocrates, that he understood this circular Motion of the
Blood, to whom they judge there were nothing in the Art of Physic lay hid.

Yea, the matter is come so far, that you shall scarcely find any Physician of
note, who doubts of the Bloods Circulation. So it requires some time to
disperse the mists of men's contradicting any good, and new Inventions.

Many famous men both in Judgment and Practice, were stired up by the Examples
of worthy and excellent Anatomists, by whose Diligence about the same time,
viz. 1650. and 51. in diverse Countries it was discovered by Olaus Rudbechius, a
Swede, and Thomas Bartholinus, a Dane, both famous in Anatomy; that the
Lymphatick Vessels were distributed through the whole Body.

Also the Ductus's were observed in, or about the Year 1656. (by Thomas Wharton
an English man) tending from the lower Maxillary Glandule by a straight passage
to the Nipples; which are found also at the fleshly Ligature of the Tongue,
near the Teeth: Through which seeing the Salival Humidity continually flows
to the Mouth for the moistning thereof, they are called Salivales, and also
Inferiores: To distinguish them from the superior Salival Ducts, which running
from the upper Maxillary Glandules, by a direct passage about the Cheek-Muscle
to the former part of the Mouth by the region of the upper Eye-teeth, lay down
their Spittle.

Which Invention we owe to Nicholas Stenonis a Dane, who discovered them in the
Year 1661. in his little Book for public good. Also by his Industry were found
out many other Vessels passing into the Nostrils and Mouth. We following his
Example, some years since have observed, that the Glaudulous part of the Jaw
being pressed, a thick and viscous Humor came forth by the general opening of
the Pores; from which time we thought that that viscous Matter which appears by
Spitting, or other compression of the Jaws, did in an especial manner proceed
from those Duct:

Jo. George Wirsungus of Bavaria, is not silently to be passed by (who can all
to mind all Inventions) who was very excellent in the Study of Anatomy; in the
Year 1642. at Padua, first found out the Ductus Pancreaticus, which for the
general good of Physicians, he caused to be Engraven in Copper, from whom we
might have expected more, had he not been wickedly Pistol'd by envious persons
in his own House. Seeing therefore this famous man could not so successively
find out the Use of this Duct by his own Study, others, that they might be
serviceable to the Physical Republic, persisted in the fame Labor, and with
so much the more Earnestness, in regard daily, there were more sharp Disputes
concerning it is true Office, and that especially in the University of Leyden in
Holland; the most famous and indesatigable Franciscus de le Boe Sylvius leading
the way; who when he had understood the various Experiments which we had
successfully made, by the dissecting of diverse Kinds of Animals, very often, as
well in private as in public, advised us, that we would commit to Writing
these things which we had observed worthy of Note concerning this matter.

We distrusting our own Industry, (and considering that there are found some
(gluttons of Books, as they may be termed) who being stimulated with the desire
of Vain Glory, spare not to assault all with their scribbling Pen, and
scurrilous Language;) were almost afraid to enter upon this work.

Yet consisidering that for the public good, any thing was to be born with a
Courageous mind; we at last put a helping hand to this Labor, and withal, have
polisht our Endeavors, which so took with this worthy man, that he more urged
their publication than before; as certain that we should have the favor of all
Learned Men, for doing a thing of so great moment to the Public Good: and
often said, That we should not fear to publish these things which are clearly
demonstrated to our Eyes.

We being persuaded by the Council of him, and other learned men, thought it
worthy our Labor, the description of the Part being prefixed; afterward the
Judgments, and Opinions of others being explained, concerning this Juice, as we
find it in every respect, to make it plain to all, and after to find out its
true Use.

The lower part of the Belly being opened, and the Intestines, with the
Venticle removed, the Pancreas or Sweetbread presently appears; concerning
which, as we shall find occasion to speak more, in the following pages, we will
spend a little time in the exact Delineation thereof

The Word Pancreas is Compounded of (...) and (...), as if they would say that
this viscous Part were all Flesh, which Apellation, notwithstanding is no way
fit; but may be used as Money to pass from one to another Asellius and some
others of his Followers, particularly noting the middle-most glandule of the
Mesentery, gave the first Occasion of understanding all its Parts, by one and
the same name.

The Substanee of the Pancreas (or Sweetbread, if you except its Membranes and
vessels), is wholly Glandulous; made up of many small Glandules; all which have
so great a hardness, and Strength, that being separated from each other do
still retain their proper form; and being put together, by reason of their
loose joining, make a soft Body: so that, not without Reason, they have called
the Pancreas a loose and soft Glandule. Moreover, each Glandules, constituting
the Pancreas, have their propper Membranes; and all being joined together, are
encompassed about with a Coat of sufficient Strength arising from the
Peritonaeum; by the benefit of which, they are strongly kept, with their little
Vessels, in their own place.

Its Situation, in a man, is under the hindmost part, of the Ventricle, about
the uppermost Vertebra of the Loins, where it is firmly connected to the
Peritonaeum. And it is extended from the Cavity of the Liver, viz. from the
Entrance of the Venaporta, to the Region of the Spleen; by which means it is
Transversly Situated, and not exactly in the middle of the Body; seeing that
the greatest part thereof, is placed in the left Hypocondrium.

If you consider its Color, it is pale, being altogether Glandulous; for the
Blood gives little or no Color to the Pancreas.

Its Figure is oblong, and broader, and thicker, toward the Intestinum
Duodenum, and toward the Spleen narrower and thinner; nevertheless it is
differently constituted in diverse Animals; for in Dogs; Cats, Apes, Ottars,
and others of the like Nature, it is Bipartite: So that one part ascends
toward the Stomach, and the other descends by the Membrane of the
Mesenterium, (according to the passage of the Intestine) to the which, it is on
every side firmly knit.

In Fishes and Fowls, for the most part it is long and single.

The Magnitude of the Pancreas in Healthful bodies is small, and compared with
the other Bowels, comes short of most, yet in men of full growth, considered
with the other Glandules it exceeds them all.

It Is Longitude is usually eight or ten Fingers breadth, which it seldom
exceeds in men of perfect health. It Is Latitude is ordinarily two Fingers
broad, or two and a half. It Is Thickness, for as much as we could observe in
dead Bodies by us Dissected, is a Fingers breadth. Finally, the weight is
various, according to the diverse Magnitude of the Animal in which it exists:
We have with the most curious Wharton, often observed it in Men to be four or
five Ounces, and in Horses about eleven. The Vessels of the Pancreas, by the
most accurate Searchers of Nature, are referred only to four Kinds, viz.
Arteries, Veins, Nerves, and it is own proper Ductus. The Arteries borrow their
Original from the Caeliaca, the Veins from the Ramus Splenicus; the Nerves from
the sixth pair of Nerves, and the Ductus Pancreaticus seems to be derived from
the Parenchyma of the Pancreas. For as much as each Glandules constituting the
Pancreas, send forth small Vessels, which meeting in the middle thereof, make
up this large Ductus.

This Vessel which has been before exposed to curious Eyes, in all appearance
is Membranous; and although it be small, nevertheless it is sufficiently
strong. It Is bigness near the Intestinum Duodenum, is about the quantity of a
small sized Quill, called a Pinion; but in it is progress toward the greater
Lateral branches, and also to the lesser, running to all the Glandules of the
Pancreas, it is divided, and gradually lessened; wherefore by how much the more
it approaches the Spleen, by so much it is the less, and sends forth smaller
branches

This Ductus, or passage for the most part, is wont in men to show it is
greatest branch in the lower part thereof, next to the Intestinum Duodenum,
which has more little branches than any other proceeding from the great
Ductus, as appears by the following Table.

The Explication of the first Table.
AAA. The Ductus, or Trunck, of the new Vessel stretched forth according to the
Longitude of the Pancreas. BBB. The lateral Ducts, or small branches, arising
on each side from the great Trunk, and dispersed into the substance of the
Pancreas. C. The Conjunction of the new Vessel with the Ductus Biliarius, or
Choler-passage. DD. The Cholar-passage freed from the Pancreas, by which it is
hid. E. The Common Ductus of the Pancreas and Cholar-passage, ending in the
Intestinum Duodenum, about four Fingers breadth under the Pylorus. FFF. The
inner part of the Pancreas, admitting the Lateral branches. G. Part of the
Pancreas separated from the Ductus Biliarius, which it did cover. HH. The
inferior part of the Ventricle drawn upwards. I. The Pylorus. K. The first of
the small Gutts, which is called the Duodenum. L. Part of the Duodenum lying
under the Mesenterium. MM. Part of the same Duodenum rising again in the left
Hypocondrium. NN. The Mesenterium freed from the Gutts. Tab. I.

O. The Meseraick Vein. P. The meseraick Artery. Q. The Ductus Cysticus. R.
The Ductus Hepaticus. S. The Intestinum Duodenum opened.
We think it to be worth our while to examine that in many and different
Animals, which belongs to the Insertion of the Ductus Pancreaticus; seeing that
Nature oftentimes in one is more depressed and obscure, in another, more
clearly manifested; so that none can truly determine concerning the Use, and
Office of any part, which has not diligently examined the Fabric, and
Situation, the Vessels annexed, and other accidents in diverse Animals.

For which Cause, we will briefly insert below the Differences, which we have
observed in several kinds of living Creatures; as well that which belongs to
the Ductus, as that which pertains to it is Insertion, that all may be able the
better to judge of it is use. There are some Animals which have only one single
Pancreatick Duct. Others there are which have it double, and lastly, some have
three, when the Ductus is single; sometimes it enters with the Ductus Biliarius
into the Intestinum Duodenum, and sometimes a part. When the Ductus is
duplicate, sometimes one, sometimes both meet together with the Ductus
Biliarius in the Intestine. But when the Ductus is threefold, sometimes one
only, sometimes two, and sometimes all three enter into the Intestine by the
same passage, and also therein lay down a contained Humor. And if you consider
the place of Insertion, it very much differs in diverse living Creatures; for
some are found in which the Ducts do disburden themselves into the Intestines,
and also others in which they are discharged into the Ventricle.

The single Ductus for the most part is found in Man, Calves, Hogs, Hares,
Conies, Cats, Dogs, Pikes, Carps, Eells, Barbils, etc. as we have formerly
asserted; for in Men and Dogs we find it sometimes double, yet so as the second
is less than the former, viz. then that which passes into the Duodenum with
the Ductus Biliarius.

As often as these two Ducts happen in the Animals but now cited, for the most
part they are conjoined in the Pancreas; so that the one being blown up, the
other will swell; yet we find them so constituted in Man, that they are not
joined together, although both be extended to the extremity of the Pancreas
almost in the same Longitude and Magnitude. A twofold Ductus is commonly found
in Pheasants, Peacocks, Geese, Ducks, and other Animals, especially of the
number of Fowls.

The threefold Ductus, for the most part is in Cocks, Hens, Pigeons and
Magpyes, etc. When the Ductus Pancreaticus is single, it is commonly joined
with the Ductus Biliarius about it is Insertion into the Intestinum, Duodenum,
in Men and Fishes, as we have above declared; as also in Cats, in which once we
found by the side of the Gallbladder, another little whitish Vessel toward
which the Pancreas in an extraordinary manner extending it self, which being
lightly compressed, there flowed a certain Matter into the Ductus Pancreaticus,
like to the Juice thereof, both in color and substance: But the Bile in the
same Cat retained both it is natural substance and color, so that nothing
seemed to be changed which related to it is natural Constitution.

The Ductus Pancreaticus, and the Ductus Biliarius are not joined together, but
enter the Intestine in diverse places in Hogs, Calves, Conies, and Hares, etc.

When the Ductus Pancreaticus is twofold, or threefold, sometimes only one of
them is joined with the Ductus Biliarius, as is evident in Pyes, and some other
Birds, Sometimes two, as appears in Peacocks, Geese, Ducks, Pheasants; and
Pigeons, in which now and then only one is joined to the Ductus Biliarius:
Sometimes all three being joined therewith do pass into the Intestine, as we
have sometimes observed in Hens*

Seeing we have already sufficiently spoken of it is Insertion into the
Intestine, it also remains for us to speak something concerning the place of
Insertion, as more nearly appertaining to our business. The Pancreatick Juice
does immediately discharge it self into the Stomach in Barbils and Carps; but
in other Creatures (for as much as we have observed) it discharges it self
into the Intestines, and that in diverse places; for in Men it is performed
about four Fingers breadth, under the Pylorus, and in Birds about eight Fingers
breadth, but in Hares and Conies, the breadth of fifteen or sixteen Fingers
below the Pylorus.

Here we would diligently note, that as often as we name the Ductus Biliarius,
we always thereby understand the Cysticus and Hepaticus; because these two are
always joined together about the end, only in Pigeons excepted, which want the
Gallbladder, and furthermore, are said to have no Gall; nevertheless, they
have usually a threefold Ductus Biliarius, one of which enters immediately
under the Pylorus, the other two make their entrance into the Intestine at a
lower distance. Where those Ducts enter the Intestines or the Ventricle, the
inner Tunicle of that part buncheth out, being wrinckled like a Navel; for
which cause it more difficultly admits the Style then the Ductus Biliarius,
which is broader and not so lax.

There is no value found throughout the Ductus Pancreaticus, nor in it is
Insertion to the Ductus Biliarius, as is rashly and falsely affirmed by some.
And these few Observations may be sufficient as concerning the Systeme of the
Pancreas; and no man ought to think, who has observed so great a variety in
it, and so many notable sports of Nature about it, that the Pancreas is
slightly made; for the Liver, the Spleen, and several other Entrails of
Animals, also highly necessary, being different in themselves are found out by
such, who diligently apply themselves to the Dissecting of sundry living
Creatures; neither will they easily say it is unprofitable, who have observed
it to be found in all kinds of Animals.

CHAP. II. The Opinions of sundry Authors concerning the Office and Use of the
Pancreas examined.
AS concerning the use of the Pancreas, it was not so much accounted of in
former days as now it is; for Hyppocrates, the reverend light and deity of
some Physicians gave the Pancreas no Name, concerning which now a days, so
many Opinions are seen in Authors: For some think it only to serve as a Pillow
placed underneath the Ventricle, or Stomach, and for the distribution of the
Vessels. Others that it received the Chyle from the Intestines: Others imagined
that it purged the Excrement of the Chyle: Others that it were as the
Bilarvesicle of the Spleen: Others, that the thicker and more unapt purgations
of the Blood, were purged into it by the ordinary course of Nature: Others,
that this part was made for the Reception of the Excrement of the Nerves.
Finally, others have publicly taught, that the Humor in the Pancreas was not
only useful, but highly necessary to be understood.

The first Opinion may be ascribed to the Ancients, that this part is as a
pillow under the Stomach, and serves to distribute the Veins and Arteries; as
Vesalius, the most ingenious Anatomist of his time sufficiently affirms, who
broke forth into these words about the Fabric of Man's body, Lib. 5. cap. 4. De
omento. This body in Man (speaking of the Pancreas) is more white than red,
every where attended by the branches of the Vena porta, Arteries and Nerves,
that their Complications may be the more firm, being only supported by the
lower Membrane of the Omentum; that it may be placed under the Stomach like a
prop, or pillow.

But this Opinion is no way probable; seeing then the Pancreas in Birds,
Fishes, and many other living Creatures, in which it is otherwise situate then
in Men would be useless; because in those it is in no wise found to be so
placed under the Ventricle, neither does it admit a passage to the Vessels,
unless in a very few. But because the Ancients never had a true knowledge of
the Glandules, we must not blame them for not delivering to us the true Use of
the Pancreas.

The second Opinion is attributed to Baccius and Folius, both which sharply
maintained, that the Chylus passes from the Intestines to the Liver and
Spleen, through the Ductus Pancreaticus: The contrary of which is as clear as
the Meridian Sun: Seeing that nothing is received from the Gutts into this
Ductus, but only the Juice sent forth by it self to the Intestines.

The third Opinion is ascribed to Johan. Veslingius; because in his Systeme of
Anatomy, chap. 4. he thus speaks of the Pancreas: The use of this Ductus is
not obscure, for seeing it has acertain Juice not much unlike to the Bile, it
is manifest that such an Excrement is separated from the Chylus by a further
Concoction, and being conveyed into this Vessel, is thence emitted into the
Duodenum. Asellius, Riolanus and others favor this Opinion; but Experience
contradicts it, and manifestly shows, that the Humor contained in the
Pancreas is never really in it self bitter, and therefore in no wise to be
compared with the Bile.

If at any time it happens that the Probe being put into this Ductus be yellow,
every one will easily believe, that this is not occasioned by the Humor
contained in the Pancreas, but from the Bile, as well flowing from the Ductus
Cysticus, as the Hepaticus immediately into the Intestine; especially if he
consider that the Stylus is spotted by the Bile, before it passes from the
Intestine to the Ductus Pancreaticus; and again, that it passes through the
Bile whilst it is drawn out: For the Ductus Pancreaticus, and the Ductus
Biliarius in Men perforate the Intestine in the same place.

And although the most famous D. Van. Horn, in a Bilious Diarhaea saw that
Vessel full of Choler, we say it was Preternatural, in as much as the Bile,
which Copiously adhered to the end of the Ductus (as is wont to happen in a
Diarhaea) was thrown into the Cavity thereof, by the Agitation of that dead
Body: Also that the excrement of the further Elaboration or Concoction of the
Chylus, is not sent into this passage, is manifest, in regard the same is
witnessed by Occular Inspection. In some Animals, that Glandulous Body does not
at all touch the Milky Vessels; and in others it only passes over, and in no
wise enters their Substance; as also because they are easily separated from the
Pancreas, without the Effusion of any Chyle, as we have formerly demonstrated
in Dogs, Cats, and other Animals.

Therefore we do not see upon what ground they might maintain the further
Concoction of the Chylus to be celebrated in it, unless they following the
Opinion of Asellius, would take this Glandulous body for the Middle Glandule of
the Mefentery, into which the Venae Lacteae are altogether immersed. The fourth
Opinion is of Bartholinus, as is manifestly apparent from his Anatomy Chap. 13.
De Pancreate; where he thinks the Bile to be purged Naturally by its Ductus,
and will have it to be the Bilar-Vesicle or Gallbladder of the Spleen; so that
the same use which the other affords to the Liver, he believes that this
affords to the Spleen: Which Opinion (by the leave of so great a man) Anatomy
in our Judgment seems to confute: Seeing the Ductus Pancreaticus passes not to
the Spleen; neither are there any other Vessels, which do convey any thing from
the Spleen to it: For, there are found only two kinds of Vessels, which carry
any thing back from the Spleen, viz. The Veins and Lymphatick Vessels: But the
Veins carry back the Blood to the Liver, and the Complication of the
Lymphaticks carrying from the Spleen, do not in like manner go to the Pancreas,
but to the great Receptacle of the Chyle; so that nothing can be discharged out
of the Spleen to the Pancreas, as our trial in France has sufficiently
manifested, for their sakes, who judging this to be the best Opinion of most
Authors, rejected ours. We tied a Dog upon a Table, as is Demonstrated by the
first Figure of the third Table; and when we had made a little Hole in the left
Hypocondrium, with our two fore-Fingers we pulled out the Spleen, whose Bloody
Vessels we tied with two or three several Ligatures, and afterward we cut the
same in sunder between the Spleen and the Bonds; and when we had quite taken
away the Spleen, we drew together the Lips of the Wound with small threads in
three or four several places, whereby this Dog, in ashort time, being well
cured, was returned to us, (at which we did not at all wonder, because we once
had a Bitch, which brought forth three or four Puppies after the Extirpation of
her Spleen); and two Mouths after the loss of the Spleen in the same Dog, we
collected a notable quantity of the Pancreatick Juice, which the Professors of
Andegave, the Doctors of Vtrecht, D. Haverloo, and D. de Maets, judged to be
acidly Salt: which being true, none as we think free from Prejudice, will
maintain that the Succus Pancreaticus proceeds from the Spleen.

Also, it is worthy to be noted, That those Dogs did no less greedily desire,
or better digest, their Food after the Extirpation of the Spleen, than before;
from whence we, receding from the Common Opinion, judge that no Fermentitious
Matter or Humor is sent from the Spleen to the Stomach.

The Fifth Opinion is attributed to the most Famous Lindanus, seeing that in
his Medic-Physiol. c. 5. Art. 5. page 114. he says, When I consider what
appertains to the Use, besides the structure of the Pancreas; how many Diseases
Practice takes notiee of in it, I cannot doubt but that the thicker, and more
useless Purgations of the Blood, are thrown out into it, by the Ordinary Law of
Nature; so as they may be corrected by the Spleen: and also by an
Extraordinary: all the Melancholy which either an Intemperate Diet, or Disease
has bred. The Ductus it self gives us cause to believe, That they are both
carried to the Intestines; and Curation teaches the same by the Medicines
often required. And this Opinion seems also to us to be contrary to the Truth,
seeing that the Pancreatick Juice, as often as it has been truly collected by
us, always appeared Limpid like Wine.

But what we shall say concerning the Excrementitious Humor, will sufficiently
appear by the following Article, and also by those things which shall be spoken
of presently after. The Sixth Opinion is manifest enough from Wharton's
Treatise of the Glandules, Chap. XIII. whilst he writes. Therefore I think that
this Glandule (as likewise all others) do minister to the Nerves, and that it
receives some of the Superfluities of the Nerves, of the Sixth Pair, with the
little Branches of the Spinal Marrow, in the greater folding of the Vnitings;
and by its own Proper Vessel carries it to the Intestines.

But seeing that the Nerves are designed to carry Animal Spirits, we do not
understand upon what ground the industrious Anatomist will hold, that the
Excrementitious humor is carried through them, and wherefore he will affirm
that it is rather carried into the Pancreas than into the Spleen, or other
parts of the Body, to which Nerves of the same Original do belong.

Truly the Pancreas is too far from the Brain to receive its Excrement;
moreover, the Nerves abhor all acrimony, so as to receive any sharper Juice:
For which cause, we judge this Opinion to stand upon too slight a Foundation to
be admitted for Truth; and so much the less, seeing we could never perceive any
Cavity or Liquour in the Nerves, notwithstanding all the diligence we could use
to this purpose, the most accurate Microscopes have been of no use to us, for
the discovery of the least pores in them: We do not here speak of the distances
which are like Pores, seen between the small Conveyances of the Nerves; but of
the Cavity it self, of the little Pipes, by which these Excrements ought to
pass. Furthermore, it is proved by Ligatures that no remarkable quantity of
Humor is carried by the Nerves, in which there is not the least Swelling, of
either side the Ligature which we have obserserved, nor yet by any other that
we read of.

That which Chyrurgions cry out of the dropping of the Nerves, we rather
ascribe to the hurt of the Lymphatick Vessels, being nigh to the Nerves, than
the hurt of the Nerves themselves; for which reason, that we might have a more
certain information, we have sometimes in Dogs, laid bare that notable Nerve in
the hinder-most part of the Legs, and cut it cross through the middle, and have
put it into a Vial, being freed from the Lymphatick Vessels (as we use to do in
collecting of the Pancreatick Juice), the neck of which was so straightned for
this purpose, as that the Nerves being cut asunder, the Orifice might be well
closed by its thickness, that Spirits, or whatsoever subtle Matter passes
through the Nerves, might not vanish into the Air. We fixed this Vial to the
skin with the Nerve hanging down into its Hollowness, hoping that if any Liquor
did pass through the Nerves, we should by that means attain it, but in vain:
For, in the space of four or five hours, we got not the least drop; nor did we
observe that the Animal Spirits did adhere by Condensation to the sides of the
Glass.

Such Birds are to be caught with more subtle nets; which after they are
taken, we will prepare to breakfast withal. Seeing therefore little or no
visible matter is carried through the Nerves, we pray the Propugners of this
Opinion to tell us, Why Nature in the Pancreas (as they will have it) has only
formed a Ductus to receive the Excrements of the Nerves, which sometimes exceed
in Magnitude the Recurrent Nerves themselves, whose small Branches often touch
the Pancreas. What appertains to the word Excrement, whereby they point out our
Juice, we think it not convenient for it, if they understand whatsoever is
separated from the Blood, whether good or evil; but it is in no respect
agreeable to the Pancreatick Juice, if by the word Excrement they understand
whatsoever is carried from the Blood to be unprofitable, for Reasons hereafter
to be declared.

The Seventh Opinion is assigned to the most Famous Franciscus de la
Boe-sylvius; who thinks nothing is carried from the Intestines to the Pancreas,
by this Ductus; nor any secret unprofitable Excrement by the same to the
Intestines; but a commendable Humor prepared therein of Blood, and Animal
Spirits; and so conveyed to the Intestine, and permixed with the Alement.

And in regard he knew that nothing was carried to the Intestines, but what was
first swallowed into the Stomach, and by that driven out again through the
Pilorus, or is sent through the Bilar, or Pancreatick Ductus; and he moreover
considering, not only in intermitting Feavours, that the sick were always
troubled with various pains in their Loins, by Cold, Heat, Yawnings,
Reachings, and Vomitings, as well of insipid Phlegm, and sometimes acid, as of
Choler; sometimes bitter, sometimes acid and bitter, etc. but also in other
diseases proceeding from hence to the Hypocondriack Affection. As for example,
in the Scurvey, the Disease called the Suffocation of the Womb, the Chollerico
Passio, pains of the Belly, and consequently from hence in the Ulcerated
Mouths, or Thrushes of Children, etc. Belchings, and Acid Humors do arise, he
concluded (although he never saw the Pancreatick Juice, as he ingenuously
confesses, These. 37. of the use of the Spleen and Glandules) that the
Pancreatick Juice, in its own Nature was Subacid, in an especial manner
tempered by the animal Spirits.

For, he judged that the Bile which is bitter and contrary to Acidity, could
not be the cause of an acid Humor; and therefore he determines that Spittle,
always insipid in sound men; and oftentimes so acid, and remarkably sharp in
the sick, came not from the Pancreatick Juice.

And because we heard that most Learned man often teaching these and the like
things, and did see the same confirmed by a happy practice in the Hospital; his
opinion so pleased us, that we never frequented his Meetings, whether public
or private, without great satisfaction of mind; in which, being excited to find
out the further truth of the matter, by the same worthy person and his
Disciples, we have undertook the work; and although we could not once despair
of a happy success; in process of time, God favoring our Enterprise and
Desires, in the Year 1662. found out the way of Collecting the Pancreatick
Juice; which, by way of History, as it shall conveniently occur in the Work, we
will set down: In which our Thoughts shipwrackt themselves from those scruples,
by which they may be precautioned, who will follow our footsteps to examine it.

CHAP. III. In what manner the Pancreatick Juice was found out.
THE First Experiment by which we undertook to collect the Pancreatick Juice in
a living Dog, was a Ligature with which we tied the upper part of the Pancreas,
together with the thin Gut; for, by that means, we hoped that after some Hours
we should have found the Pancreatick Duct swelled with Juice, but in vain:
which seemed to our Judgment to happen by reason that the Motion of the Blood
being hindered to the Pancreas, the separation of the Juice from it was
prevented also.

The Second Experiment was also by a Ligature made about the Insertion of the
Ductus into the Intestinum Duodenum, but also in vain. The Reason perhaps was
the Glandules of the Pancreas being hurt, by whose Ductus all the Pancreatick
Juice might the more easilier have flown out, by reason that neither in the
great Ductus nor in the lateral branches is there any values found.

The Third Experiment was by two boards or planks, higher in the middle, than
at the ends, applied and straightly bound to the Duodenum, at the ingress of
the Pancreatick Ductus; from whence, after some hours, the Abdomen being opened
again, which before had been lightly stitched up, we found the Pancreatick
Ductus swelled with a clear and limpid Juice; nevertheless, we could not
conveniently either take it out, or taste it. By which success we being animated
the more, resolved a fourth Trial, by opening the Intestinum Duodenum,
according to the Longitude thereof; and presently applying a little vessel to
the Orifice of the Ductus Pancreaticus, as the first Figure of the following
Table A. demonstrates; afterward by straightly tying the said Intestine about
the neck of the vessel: so that its Orifice was diametrically opposite to the
end of the Ductus Pancreaticus, not doubting but by this means we should gather
a rare quantity of the Pancreatick Juice; but this also in vain: without doubt,
because the air included within the vessel, denied entrance to the Pancreatick
Juice, lightly touching it. Therefore we resolved to try a Fifth Experiment,
with a little vessel smally perforated, as the first Figure of the Second Table
shows under the letter B. By which advantage, in the space of five hours, we
collected so great a quantity of Liquor, that the vessel was almost half full;
whose contained Liquor was of a bitter relish, and of a yellowish color; which
we judged to happen, because the bile, (by reason the Intestine was not first
cleansed) was intermixed with the Succus Pancreaticus. Wherefore, after many
and tiresome vexations of mind, we came to a Sixth Experiment; which seeing it
in all respects sufficiently answered our Expectations; here we will add its
exact description for the sake of the Curious, that they may give credit to
their proper senses, which in others words most easily lessen the Credit.

A little Vessel, with a longer neck, was taken, as the II. Table under the
letter A. represents; in the upper part of whose Belly a little hole was
pierced B.; by which the air included in it, gave way to the Pancreatick Juice.

Let the neck of the Vessel be encompassed with a little cord C.; and several
Rings of Iron, thereunto affixed, or any other convenient thing; by the
advantage of which, the Intestine may the more easily be stretched up.

Furthermore, you must take a wild Ducks quill D. because that kind of bird
has longer and thinner than all others, which must be so obvolved about the
larger part thereof with Paper, a little besmeared with boiled Starch, that the
Orifice of the vessel H. whilst it is included in it, may be most exactly
closed: lest either the Bile or Blood, penetrating by the sides of the quill,
defile the Juice collected, or to be collected in the Vessel.

This quill is affixed to the Vessel, by reason of the straightness of the
Pancreatick Duct, which will not admit the neck of the Vessel. Presently you
must take a little tap or stopple made of soft Wood, and of such thickness that
it may fill up the narrower Orifice G. which with the Alligated thread K. by the
help of the Style may be so far protruded through the larger part of the quill
F. that a little thereof may remain in the larger part of the quill G. and
there may stick so fast, that it may not return of its own accord into the
Ductus Pancreaticus: because then the Pituitous or Vermiculous crusted matter,
of the Intestines, continually adhering about the end of the Ductus being
moved, would easily cause it to be obstructed; which need not be feared, if the
stopple remain in the quill.

But the Tap is not so strongly to be forced into the Quill, but that by the
help of the thread it may easily be retracted. You have all these things set
forth in the Second Figure of the Second Table.

The Explication of the Second Table.
Fig. I. Shows all things necessary for the preparing of the Vessel. A. The
Glass Vessel. B. A small hole in the upper part of the Vessel. C. A little
String adorned with Iron Rings. D. A long and slender Quill of a Wild Duck. E.
The Paper with which the Quill is enenwrapped. F. The larger part of the Quill.
G. the more slender part of the Quill. H. The Mouth of the Glass Vessel. I. The
wooden Tap or Stopple. K. The thread annexed to the Tap.
Fig. II. Does exhibit the Vessel as it ought to be furnished with all its
Requisites. Fig. III. Denotes the parts of the Instrument, by which the lower
end of the Ductus Pancreaticus may be closed. AA. Two Tables made of Ivory.
BBBB. Four little Holes made in the ends of the Tables. CC. Two Cylinders. DD.
Two Scrues turned about the Cylinders.

All the Instruments aforesaid being prepared and fitted, a Dog to is be taken;
to whom, for the space of some hours, no food has been given: But, a young
Mastive is to be preferred; because he, of all other Dogs, of the same
Magnitude, has larger Bowels, and by reason of the Humidity predominating in
him, yeildeth more Pancreatick Juice, and also longer Life, and moreover less
trouble in diffecting. We say that a fasting Dog is to be taken, lest that the
Intestines, with the Ventricle waxing bigger by aliment, the Closure of the
Abdomen, after the Application of the Glass, be impedited; or also, the mouth
of the Quill, by the two much Compression of the Bowels, be shut up.

Tab. II



Having got such a Dog, after his Mouth in strictly bound that he may not bite;
and having tied his extended Legs, upon a Table, let the Style be thrust under
the Larynx, the long Muscles being first removed, bending his neck; which done,
let there be made a little hole in that part thereof, which is most prominent,
by cutting the Particles of the two Cartilages; that by the same Hole, his
troublesome cry, to the standers by, being removed, a Respiration be procured.
In such sort as is showed, Tab. III. Fig. I. These things premized, you must
open the Abdomen with one incission, according to the White line from the
sword-like Cartilage, unto the Region of the Pubes; then presently draw the Gut
through the Wound, and make a Ligature about it three or four fingers breadth
below the Pylorus, as also under the end of the Ductus Pancreaticus, lest the
Aliments sliding from the Ventricle, or those things contained in the Guts, by
their Peristaltick Motion, against things thrust forward, should disturb or
hinder this our Work.

Then between both Ligatures, let the Intestine be cut open in its Anteriour
Part, being first freed from the Mesentery; by and by the Bile, with the
Phleme, and other matter found therein, being cleansed away by a Sponge, the
Ductus Pancreaticus may be observed; the which, with almost two Fingers breadth
beneath the end of the Ductus Biliarius, and well nigh the same space above the
Connection of the Intestine, with the descending part of the Pancreas, into
Ductus of the narrower Orifice is gently to be immitted, the end of the Quill
shut up with its Spout or stopper, with the Glass vessel on the other part
fastened to it; which, by the mediation of the little Cord, containing the Rings
C. it is sewed to the Intestine with a double thread; so that, the extremity of
the quill G. may remain in the Ductus Pancreaticus; nor the Vessel recede from
the Intestine. Which things rightly performed, the Abdomen is to be sewed
together with a thick thread, that the Vessel may hang forth without the Cavity
thereof, as is to be seen Fig. II. Tab. III. To which, now part of an
Exsiccated Bladder N. is to be so bound with a string about the neck of the
Vessel, that it may on every side cover the Vessel; lest the blood or bile
flowing by the hole of the Vessel B. might enter into it. These things so done,
the Tap or Stopple I. by the help of the thread K. is to be drawn through the
hole B. This Instrument will always be sufficient where the Ductus
Pancreaticus has only one passage into the Intestine; but if besides this
ordinary Ductus, there be yet another passage, as in like manner we have
sometimes found; there is another Instrument required, by which that also may
be closed. The which Instrument in the end we thought upon, as being more
agreeable to this matter, then that of which we have already discoursed in the
third Experiment, and it is noted, Tab. II. Fig. III.

It has two Tables made of Ivory AA In the extremity of which are four holes
BBBB. These Tables may be so applied between the Ventricle and the Vessel,
affixed to both sides of the Intestine; and the intermediate Intestine may be
somewhat compressed with the hand, till the acute Style, and the Clynders CC.
be transmitted through the holes, and through the Scrues DD.

The intermediate Intestine may be so straightned, that nothing from these
Secondary Ducts (which we have always found to be present in the Superior
place) may flow out; by which means all the Juice flowing through that Ductus,
in which the Quill is immitted may be received by the affixed Vessel.

The Explication of the Third Table.
Fig. I. Exhibiteth a Dog, in which is showed the manner how, and place where,
the Instruments noted Tab. II. are to be affixed. A. The Glass Vial. B. The
Needle. M. The Pylorus. N. The Intestinum Duodenum. O. the Pancreas. P. The
Press. Q. The little Hole cut in the Larynx.
Fig. II. Represents a Dog, whose Abdomen, after the Application of the
instruments is sewed together. AA. Two Glass Vials to collect the Succus
Pancreaticus, and the Spittle. N. A part of the Bladder, wherewith the Glass
is covered, lest the Blood entering through the hole thereof should defile the
Pancreatick Juice.

CHAP. IV. In which the Qualities of the Pancreatick Juice are described: By a
plain Division of the Glandules of the whole Body, is shown that the Succus
Pancreaticus is not Excrementitious: Also, How it is Generated.
HAving related the Instruments with their manner of applying, there is none
but may see that we may easily come to a more intimate knowledge of the
Pancreatick Juice, by observing not only the qualities thereof, but also the
Quantity which at all hours do flow to the Intestinum Duodenum.

The Qualities of the Pancreatick Juice so collected, both Visible and
Tactable, such as we have frequently observed them, we shall here set down for
the sake of those who desire to be informed.

As often as we have rightly collected the Pancreatick Juice, we have found it
like clear Fountain Water, with something of Viscidity, but not without the
associating of Dissipated Spirits. The Qualities thereof are perceptible to the
taste; not always in the same manner in themselves, which denote those
Functions depending upon it, not seldom to be vitiated, and the same is
evinced by our Experience; For, we sometimes have found it most gratefully
acid, sometimes almost insipid, sometimes austere, often times salt, but most
often acidly salt.

Of this our Experience, we cite an approved Witness, the most excellent D.
Vander Sprongh, with the most famous Professor Sylvius, as also many others who
have sometimes been Fellows of our practical College, who in their presence
judged with us, that in such a Collection it were both of an austere, and
acidly Salt Sapor.

The notable Effect of the Austerity thereof, then also observed, we will
hereafter declare. Now having found out the Pancreatick Juice, that we may
clearly and distinctly subject the Generation thereof to your Eyes, we will
propose a description of all the Glandules, by distinguishing them with the
Famous D. Sylvius into Conglobated and Conglomerated. We call them conglobated,
which are Constituted, as it were, from one continued Substance, having an
equal Superifices; such as in the Mesentery, Neck, Shares, and other parts of
the Body, many are found.

But we call those Conglomerated, which rise from many lesser Glandules joined
together; such are the Pancreas, Salival Ducts, and many others in the Fauces,
Nostrils; yea they constitute the Thyme it self, or Glandule, under the Channel
bone, concerning which we are willing here to say somewhat of what we have some
years since observed, whilst we were Conversant about the dissecting of Calves
(in which this Glandule was found very great, and that which is most worthy of
note, no less in Calves, than in other Animals, That it is sensibly diminished
after the Birth) that this notable Ductus was found repleat with a Limpid
humor, which we sometime prosecuted; but because, upon the laying open thereof,
the Liquor did continually Flow out, the entire Ductus vanished away before we
could enter its end: For which reason, we were constrained to defer its further
Enquiry till another occasion.

That this Distinction of the Glandules is not Fained but Real, the following
Experiment does prove. As well the Conglomerated as the Conglobated are
clothed with a Coat or Membrane; which being taken away, and a certain Liquor
immitted, as well through the Ductus Pancreaticus, as through the Salivales;
also by the Arteries of all the Glandules, by the help of a Syringe with diverse
little pipes fastened to the same, contrived by us, and proposed in our Treatise
concerning the Organs of men; as subservient to many things in Generation; and
there will be observed by a most Elegant Spectacle Conglomerated Glandules,
receding or parting by course from themselves; especially if from hence the
little Membranes, whereby they are connexed, be cut with a Knife: Which, in no
wise, is to be expected from the Conglobated Glandules, notwithstanding the
greatest diligence.

Besides the Glandules differ among themselves, in relation to their Substance:
Because in the ordinary course of Nature, we have found a Cavity in the middle
of the Conglobated Glandules; but not in the Conglomerated; which, by that
great Expounder of Nature, and by an indissoluble bond of Friendship endeared
to us, Nicholas Stenon, we have seen noted; and observed; who in his Anatomical
Observations concerning the Conglobated Glandules, says:

For, outwardly the Conglobated Glandules are hollow not inwardly like a Basin,
yet if you rightly enter the Separation between the protuberating Lips on every
side, you shall find as it were a Cleft or Chap, by which go forth certain
Lymphatick Roots returning with the Membrane. Their Substances differ not only
among themselves by way of Connection, as they are Conglobated and
Conglomerated, but also in the peculiar Vessels; for, the Conglobated are given
to the Lymphatick Vessels, which toward, and at the Common Ductus Thoracicus,
or the Superior Folding thereof, especially Conspicuous in Dogs, drive out a
Liquor prepared in themselves, or received from another. But the Conglomerated
dispose their Liquour into peculiar Cavities, as the Salivales into the Mouth,
the Pancreas into the Duodenum, and so of others.

That the Motion of the Lympha is such, as we have even now asserted, and not
from the Center to the Circumference, is proved by the Values in the Lymphatick
Vessels, everywhere existing, as may be seen in a little Treatise, concerning
the Values of the Lymphatick Vessels, by the most Famous, and our entire
Friend, Dr. Raysch, Anatomyst of Amsterdam, Printed Anno 1665. by whose
Indefatigable Diligence, at the same time, was discovered that Vessel which he
calls the Bronchial Artery, by reason that it accompanyeth the Widenings of
the Branches of the sharp Artery through the whole Substance of the Lungs; as
may be seen by the Figure thereof, inserted into his little Book,
aforementioned, and worthily Communicated to us.

Seeing that the Duct's, and also the Substances of the Glandules are diverse,
it is worthy our enquiry, Whether the Humor, observed in all the Glandules, be
of the same, or a different Quality? But we shall answer, That the same, or
like Humor is separated in all the Glandules, of a diverse Species; for one
Liquor is deposed in the Conglobated, and another in the Conglomerated: For,
that which is separated in the Conglobated is all of the same Nature: which is
proved, not only by the Substance of the same Glandules, every where
Consimilar, but also by the ways by which they are all distburdened; for as
much, as further appears to us, ending in the Ductus Thoracicus. Moreover, it
is further Demonstrable, by the Liquor of the Conglobated Glandules, ordinarily
found more Saltish, and less Acid in them, than in the Conglomerated Glandules
of the Pancreas; nevertheless more of Acidity, and Salsitude, than that of the
Conglomerated Salivales. From whence it is manifest, that a Liquor is separated
from the Conglomerated Glandules of the Salivales, and Pancreas not alike in
all its Qualities, as we have asserted even now to be done in the Conglobated;
in which matter, that we might be more certain, at the same time, and to the
same Animal, we applied the Instrument depicted Tab. II. Fig. II. both to the
Ductus Pancreaticus, and to the upper Salivary Duct, as is exhibited Tab. III.
Fig. II. But we found a notable diversity of the aforesaid Liquors; For, the
Salival is either Temperate or Insipid; but the Succus Pancreaticus is acidly
Salt, or such like, for the most part, as we have described it in the former
Chapter.

Seeing there is a diverse Juice of diverse Glandules, it deserves our enquiry,
What use every one may have, and whether it be prositable or unnecessary? That
is, Whether it brings any Commodity to the Body? Or, Whether it be such as is
in no wise Subservient to the Economy of the Humane Fabric? It will not be
hard to satisfy this difficulty, especially if we make a more exact Scrutiny
into the Motion of those Liquors; for seeing that all the Liquor of the
Conglobated Glandules, is inserted into the Ductus Thoracicus, and there
permixed with the Chyle, the chief part of Aliments, and with the same may
proceed, and be purged into the Jugular Vein, or left Subclavian Vessel; from
whence, being confused with the descending Blood, necessarily passes through
the right Ear of the Heart, into its right Ventricle. We do not see by what
name it may be called Excrementitious and unprofitable; because the
Excrementitious Humors are separated from the Blood: so that, according to the
Order of Nature, they may not any more be commixed therewith; but are wholly
separated from the Body; which is clearly seen in the Urine; the which, being
separated from the mass of Blood in the Reins, and thence deduced through the
Ureters into the Bladder: from whence, after some stay, according to the
Dictate of the Will, by the Urinary passage it is excluded from the Body; so
that it can never again return.

So, the Juice of the Conglomerated Glandules, is effused through particular
Ducts, into diverse Cavities of the Body, where it may be mingled with other
Humors necessary for Nourishment, and is least of all to be esteemed for
Excrementitious, or Unprofitable. Which that it may likewise, be made known, in
like manner, as we have prosecuted the Liquor of the Conglobated Glandules; so
also, we shall follow that of the Conglomerated flowing from the Salivales, and
the Pancreas.

The Spittle is separated from the Blood, in the Maxillary Glandules, as well
the Superior as the Inferior, and is carried by the said Salival Ducts, into
the Cavity of the Mouth; where it may be mixed with the assumed Aliment, or out
of the time of the Aliments Assumption, is continually swallowed; the which we
never better consider, than whilst we hold something in our Mouth; the which,
because of the cleanness of the place, in which we are, we will not spit out,
neither dare we swallow it down; for the Mouth is very quickly filled with
Spittle.

Therefore the Spittle, although without our knowledge, is continually
swallowed, and mingled, and confused in the stomach with the Aliment, which
truly would be very indecent, if the same were unprofitable and excrementitious.

The Pancreatick Juice is e^^used in the glandules of the pancreas, after the
same manner as the Spittle in the salivales, being continually separated in a
Man about the breadth of four fingers under the Pylorus into the intestinum
duodenum, and there is mixed with the Aliments already passed the fermentation
of the stomach, and with the same is driven downwards by the peristaltick
motion of the Gutts; in which propulsion the greatest part thereof, together
with the more pure and liquid part of the Aliment is carried to the venae
Lacteae, and thence to the Cistern; from thence it penetrates through the
Ductus Thoracicus to the subclavian Vein, and so forward to the right Ventricle
of the Heart; which indeed would happen against reason, if the said humors
were Excrementitious, and unprofitable to the economy of the body of Man.

To this Opinion, besides Sylvius, agrees Godofridus Moebius, who in his
Physiological foundations of Medicine, c. 12. concerning the use of the
Intestines, thus speaks: But this Juice (namely the Pancreatick) seeing that
it may be admixed with the Chyle, together with the Bile in the Duodenum,
without all doubt it further helps and promotes its Fermentation: For, if the
pure purged Excrement should be of no use, Nature would have derived that
Channel to the lower Intestines, wherein hard and unprofitable Excrements are
lodged, not to the Superior, where the Chyle begun in the Stomach, ought to be
perfected.

Seeing than that by Reasons and Experiments, already sufficiently inferd, it
is manifest, That the Humors, as well of the Conglobated, as the Conglomerated
Glandules, are not Excrementitious. We think fit, before we proceed any
further, to propose their Way or Mode of Generation.

It has been, in times past, believed by the Ancients, (to say nothing
concerning Faulties, and other their Figments) that the Glandules did imbile
Superfluous Humidities, like unto Sponges. But to the Neotericks, it seemed
after a more attentive Examination of their Structure, that this Simillitude
was greatly wide of the Truth; by reason the Glandules are not every where open
to the Pores, but are sufficiently clothed on all sides with a strong
Membrane; and therefore they think that nothing enters into the Glandules,
unless it be thither propelled by the Arteries and Nerves.

But the Arteries carry the Humors of every kind to the Glandules, under the
Color of Blood; every of which, by reason of a certain Disposition of the
Pores, even as Seives do admit such Particles of the Humors, which in respect
of their Magnitude, and Figure, have the greatest Analogy, with the little
Pores; in the mean while excluding others, which have with them a lesser
Simillitude; which therefore by the name of Blood, are constrained to return to
the Heart; from whence, being more exalted in their passage, they are presently
driven indiscriminately, by the Pulsifick force thereof, to the Glandules, and
other parts of the Body; but, notwithstanding the Particles fitted to the
Generation of the Pancreatick Juice, are no where more easily separated than in
the Pancreas, no where more serous than in the Reins, no where more
commodiously Bilious than in the Liver; and so of the rest: Because there are
some parts of the Body which do more commodiously receive this or that Humor
into the Pores than others.

Nature has therefore invented a singular Artifice, whereby it does so happily
absolve so diverse a work, in diverse parts of Animals; which they do less
admire, who diligently consider with themselves, that the like thing does
necessarily happen in Plants: For, we see various Plants, posited in the same
Sand, each to admit a peculiar Juice; which, nevertheless, is so Homo-geneous,
that it may contain in it self diverse Particles, as we see in Trees, whereon,
by the Industry of Gardeners, diverse Fruits do grow; whereas also diverse
Branches or Twigs are grafted into the same Stock; which by reason of the
different Constitution of their Pores, they admit this, and not that part of
the Liquor or Sap, others being excluded, which have a lesser Affinity with
their Pores.

The which things being equally granted, we may infer, that the matter fitted
to the generation of the Pancreatick Juice, is separated from the Blood by a
certain disposition of the Pancreas; yet not so exactly, but that it may bring
diverse other Particles with it; as occular Inspection does ascertain us to
happen in the Reins; in which indeed primarily the more Serous Particles of the
blood, after the manner of Transcolation, are separated from its entire Mass;
yet, nevertheless, we note those many Saline, Bilious, and other Humors; which
are, as it were, snatched away therewith, by reason of them or those Particles
largely abounding in the Body; in like manner as Chemistry does Demonstrate all
these things to our Eyes, as clear as the Meridian Light.

The Animal Spirits join themselves to the Succus Pancreaticus by a continual
Circulation, continually separated from the Blood, with which, being joined
together by an Amicable Connection, they run into the Intestinum Duodenum. From
whence it is Conspicuous, that our Pancreatick Juice is not simple, but
compounded of diverse; this especially, Acid, Aqueous, Saline, and other
Particles therein found, adjoined to the Animal Spirits; by whose Volatile
Sweetness the force of Acids is restrained; whence it happens, that the
Pancreatick Juice is Naturally Acidly-Temperate.

Some may say, after what manner may the Pancreatick Juice be Acidly Temperate,
seeing that in the Precedent Chapter we have said, that it is very often
Acidly-salt, and naturally may be said to be such as always, or for the most
part, it happens to be? But, we shall Answer, That perhaps it so happens in
Dogs only; because they ought to digest Bones, and other things of a harder
Concoction, but in Men we judge there is no such Salsitude existant or
required; Because, in Men, that which is Vomited, is either Insipid, or Bitter,
or Acid, very rarely, and perhaps never Acidly Salt; the which undoubtedly
would happen if their Pancreatick Juice were Naturally such.

But being granted, that in men, likewise as in Dogs, it may naturally be
Acidly Salt, Whether then will our Hypothesis run? Nowhither: Because a
Salsitude joined to it, as hereafter shall be declared, does no way impede its
primary Operation.

CHAP. V. The Liquor of the Glandules in the Body, it demonstrated to be
necessary, and that the Pancreatick Juice does effervesse with the Bile.
ALL these things premised, deservedly, who can ask what the Juice of the
Glandules may perform in the bodies of Animals? To whom we shall answer, that
the juice of all the Conglobated is subservient to Sanguification, but the
liquor of the Conglomerated is ordained to other uses: For that which is
generated in the Maxillary Glandules, and other of the Conglomerated, placed
about the cavity of the mouth, for the most part absolveth the Fermentation of
Aliments in the Stomach: And that liquor which is generated or separated in the
Conglomerated Glandules of the Pancreas, seems to us to perform far more:
Seeing that Nature for the most part so wisely disposes matters, that one and
the same thing may be accommodated to many.

But seeing the use thereof is not yet sufficiently known, we shall examine
what is first effused from it into the thin Intertine, and also happens in
the same.

There is a sufficiently large quantity of this Pancreatick juice continually
brought to the thin Gut (we remember there has been collected from one Dog, in
the space of seven or eight hours, two Drachms, half an Ounce, and from a
Mastive an entire Ounce) that it may be continually lifted up, and fermented
with the Bile flowing from the ducts of the Liver, to a double or tripple
quantity (for as much as we could observe by the benefit of an instrument
applied to their passage into the intestine in Dogs) being therein carried
with a certain struggling motion.

That this Effervescency is excited from the acidity of the Pancreatick Juice,
and the concourse of the Bile abounding with a fixed and volatile salt, we dare
the more freely assert; because hitherto we have seen no example of an acid
spirit concurring with a lixiviate salt to happen without an effeverscency
sufficiently manifest, so that all impediments were taken away. That both salts
are found in the Bile, Chemistry that most excellent and famous Medical
instrument of truth does prove; by the benefit of which we can separate a
volatile salt effervescing with an acid spirit, and lixivious salt more
manifestly absolving the same work. But that the Pancreatick Juice contains
in it self an acidity is manifest by an experiment above-recited; the which,
for their sakes who are lovers of truth, and whose belief derogates not from
their proper Senses, as in the Academies of diverse Regions, we have performed
both publicly and privately, we have declared, not again to be repeated: and
it is notably confirmed by an experiment which the most accurate searcher of
nature, Floventius Schuyl, in his written Tractate for ancient Medicine page
94. described in these Words:

Moreover, I have opened the Abdomen of another Living Dog in the same Method,
and in the Intestinal Bilar Ductus, which is common to the Cystic and Hepatic,
by a Compressed Instrument in such manner as the Figure represents; that the
Pancreatick Juice alone might issue forth, we collected in the space of nigh
three Hours the Quantity of two Ounces of Acidly Sour Juice; whose manifest
Sourness was not only proved by the Taste, but also by the permixing it with
warm Milk; which was so Coagulated, that thereby was formed as it were a
Cheese, being a manifest Experiment, that Acidity was altogether prevalent in
the same. Also, page 157. Writing concerning the Pellicle or Bilar Pore of
Horses; I, ( says he) by a double Experience, have found that Pellicle, first
of all to be Replenished with a Humor Subacid, then with a Bilious Humor,
with a Temperate Acidity; into which, in like manner, a Humor, a little
Sourish, did flow from the Pancreas, and from thence into the Intestinum
Duodenum.

It is likewise concluded, That the Pancreatick Juice, in Men, has an Acidity
in it, not only from the like nature of all the Bowels and Contents in Brutes
and Men, but deduced also from other Experiments: To wit, by sour Belchings,
without the Assumption of sour and acid things into the Stomach; and in the
Hypoconders forthwith stretched out, or after Rumbling and Noise, first
observed in the Belly, presently again breaking out through the Mouth.

Hither also belong those wonderful, and almost inexplicable Motions, and
Agitations perceived by the Sick; first of all about the Region of the Loins,
especially after any heavy Affliction of the mind, as anger, terror, Fears,
occasioned by the acidity of the Pancreatick Juice, flowing into the thin Gut.

If any one object in the Cases now mentioed, that the Pancreatick Juice is
evilly disposed, but that naturally in it self it contains no Acidity, let
him declare: Dr. Paisenius, a man joined to us in peculiar Friendship, says,
in his Disputation concerning the Vices of Humors, How may that Juice
Preternaturally wax four, if in the same, the Seeds of Acidity, as we may so
call them, were not Prae-existent. If we stand by Authorities, no doubt but the
Cause will fall: For, Hippocrates de Veteri Med.. XXIV. against those, openly
teaches, That there is not only in man an Acidity, and that mixed with other
things, and therewith so attempered, that it is neither Conspicuous nor Hurtful
to a man; but also subjoyneth. XXV. But where the Acidity shall be divided,
then it is Conspicuous and Hurtful to man. Hippocrates does not say, That it is
arisen, but separated: Therefore it is present in the Natural State, although
Inconspicuous.

Besides Galen teaches that Melancholy is so made of the Blood, as Must is
made of Wine.

But now with what Probabillity may we say, That in Wine, Ale, Milk, and the
like Liquors, which left to themselves, without the Addition of any other
matter, do grow sour; that the acid parts were not before Existent? What
hinders, but that the same thing may also happen in men?

Besides the Reasons and Authorities already brought, we will add the following
Experiment, which after a wonderful manner does confirm the natural acidity of
the Pancreatick Juice in Men. In the Year 1666. whilst we were resident in the
Academy of Andegave, a Shipman, about thirty years of Age; a man of a good
Habit of Body, and for as much as we could understand by the Standers by, very
Healthful; in his little Vessel, endeavoring to pass under an old Bridge,
standing upon the River Moene, with his Mast erected, was by the Bridge,
unhappily thrown down, which, falling upon the man, killed him; whose dead Body
was immediately brought to the Hospital, where the same being as yet warm, was
opened by Dr. Crosnier, the Chyrurgion of the same Hospital, and our self; in
which we collected the Succus Pancreaticus, which we exhibited to diverse
curious Tastes, who judged it to be acid; and for our own part we freely profess
never to have found it more gratefully acid in Dogs.

Who is he, these things being rightly considered, that doubts of the
Effervescency happening between the Pancreatick Juice, and the Bile rightly
Constituted? Yet, lest it should in any part seem deficient, we will set down,
in few words, those Primary Objections and Difficulties, both here and in other
Countries proposed to us against this Effervescency; the which being cast off,
doubts of lesser moment will be ready to fall of their own accord.

The first Difficulty is, That the Pancreatick Juice, as often as it has been
found by us Insipid, has not in the least been able to raise an Effervescency
with the Bile in the thin Gut. To this Objection we answer, That it does not
follow, that the Pancreatick Juice, sometimes found by us Insipid, should, at
that time, have in it no Acidity. Concerning which matter, let them consult
Galen De Simp. Med. Fac. Lib. 3. Cap. 13, 14, 15. as also Hippocrates, in that
place before alleged, saying, That in many mixed things, there are Substances
of various Qualities by Act, in which, nevertheless, those Substances are not
sound. The same is confirmed by daily Experience, whereby it is evident that
diverse Liquors are rendered insipid, whose Effects we allow to consist, partly
in acid, partly in Lixivious parts; for example, the Spirit of Salt, which is
most sharp, may be so dulcified with Spirit of Wine, that no acidity may be
perceived in it; yet notwithstanding it fails not to Effervesce, if it be
permixed with a Lixivious Salt; so also, in infinite other things, which appear
not acid, by reason of the Acid Particles which are in them, do excite
Perceptible Effervescencies both to the Sight and Touch. But we do not
absolutely deny, but that the Pancreatick Juice may be sometimes generated so
Sluggish, as that it may scarcely, indeed not at all ferment with the Bile; but
we then judge it to be distempered or Sick. Yea, that those Animals in whom it
so happens, do sometimes dye by reason of the Non-contingent Effervescency: But
this does not destroy the Natural Effervescency.

The Second Difficulty which has been proposed to me, is, that seeing our Bile
and Pancreatick Juice is diluted with the Chyle, they cannot Effervesce: But to
this Objection we shall answer; That Oil of Vitriol, being mingled with Pure
water, does stir up a greater Effervescency with the fileings of Steel, than
if it were mingled therewith alone without Water; and which is yet more, if
after the said Effervescency has ceased, if fresh Water be added to it, the
Oil of Vitriol, with the Steel Dust, will ferment again afresh. But that we
might have an Experiment which might come nearer to our business, we have taken
Cows Milk, as having a very great Affinity with the Chyle, and have poured to
it Spirit of Vitriol, mingled with the Lixivious Salt of Tartar, and the
Effervescency was presently excited, which continued a great deal longer, than
if the Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, had been mingled
without the Milk.

We judge that the long continuance of the Effervescency, ought to be ascribed
to the Viscidity of the Milk, seeing that daily Experience teaches us, that
Milk, Honey, and other things, may be more, and longer rarefied, whilst
boiling, than Distilled Waters, Spirits, and other the like things, not having
a Viscidity.

According to which, in the said Experiment, it is worthy of note, That the
Effervescency (perhaps by reason of the Coagulation of the Milk) does not so
well happen, if the Spirit of Vitriol be put to the Milk, before the Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium: Hence (with the safe Opinion of the more Learned) a
Reason seems to us to be sought into; why commonly, in all Animals, the Ductus
Biliarius, either first, or with the Ductus Pancreaticus, do enter into the
Intestine.

From hence may be answered their Difficulty, who say, That in some Animals the
Distance between the Ductus Pancreaticus, and the Ductus Biliatius is too
great: It is not necessary, that this Effervescency should always happen
immediately under the Pylorus; but the Matter may be carried some fingers
breadths further, where at length it may ferment; namely, when the Pancreatick
Juice, with the Diluted Bile, is mixed with the Chyle: because those Animals,
in whom so notable a Distance is found, have always (for as much as we have
happened to see) very long Intestines; as may be seen in Coins, Hares, and
very many other Animals. Moreover, neither need it be feared, that our
determined Effervescency, by which the profitable parts of the Aliment, are
separated from the unprofitable, should happen too slowly; seeing that in those
Animals some one Passage or Channel of the Intestines, may be over and above,
sufficient to receive the profitable Particles of the Chyle.

The third Thing which we have observed is, That the natural heat of our Hand
would more increase that Effervescency, than the artificial Heat of Fire. After
the same manner we read in Chemical Books, That the Heat of Horse dung performs
many things, which could not be expected from our Artificial Fires, but with
the greatest Difficulty.

Which seeing it is so, no man ought to admire, that we are not able to
Demonstrate the Effervescency, between the Bile and the Pancreatick Juice,
without our Body, whilst they remain in their Temperate and Natural Estate;
because neither artificial Fire, nor the natural heat of our Hand, can stir up
such a heat as we know to be excited in the Small Gut, by reason of the
Circumjacent Bowels, which are most hot.

But some perhaps, being little content with these Reasons, will say, That to
see that naturally Effervescency, it behooves to open a living Dog, seeing that
as yet in him the natural Heat is in its Vigor: the which seems to carry
something of force with it, with those who consider not that in a Preternatural
Disposition of the Body, we cannot know its natural Operation; as also with
those who have never moved their Hand to the Work; because those things which
happen in the Intestines, cannot be seen, unless they be opened, and many
Vessels must necessarily be dissected when they are opened, out of which flow
such an abundance of Blood, that it is impossible (as we have often
experienced) to see the desired Effervescency.

Add, that the Succus Pancreaticus cannot after the manner of a rushing Torrent
hasten it self into the thin Intestine, because this River flowing as it were
from so many Springs and Rivolets, as the Pancreas is environed with Glandules
and little branches, does by a pleasing course continually slide into its own
Channel: So that the cleansed juice being now effused with the blood, you
cannot without a very tedious delay collect a sufficient quantity of the
Pancreatick Juice to be fermented, and which in the mean time will be so
altered by the cold Air, that it will be in vain to expect an Effervescency
perceptible to the sight.

For it very much agrees with Vulgar Observation (says the most learned
Willis, Exercitat. Medico-Physic. de sanguinis incalescentia, Fol. 85.) That
fermentible Liquors when closed more strickly in the vessel, do most ferment,
and presently cease from their Fermentation, if the Air be admitted through an
opened Hole: More-over, Boyles Experiments, Experiment. Physico-Mechanicor. 41.
42. 43. do most clearly show Effervescencies to be excited from the Ebullition
of dissimilar particles, or by Corrosion; also the Ebullition of Hot water in a
glass Sphere to be wonderfully augmented after the Air is sucked out, and that
there are some things which in a space of time, are intended in the Air to a
great Vacuity, whose action after the air is drawn out, is presently
extinguished: So that without reason they desire that the Effervescency between
the Bile, and the Pancreatick Juice should be manifested to the Eye without the
Body: For it is plainly ridiculous to be willing to see the Effervescency of
those Humors, and to impede the Humors by which they are performed; or not to
admit of the preturnal constitution of the Animal, and willing to see those
things which are performed in the Bowels of Animals.

If their Pancreatick Juice who desire this thing, were endued with such an
Acrimony as nevertheless being destitute of Natural helps, might ferment with
the Bile to the Eye without the Body; with how great pains would not their
bowels be tormented, if being helped by those aids in the body, the
Effervescency should be performed; doubtless they would not desire such an
aciditie, before they would subscribe to our so often commemorated
Fermentation, but in short, would wish for themselves such a Pancreatick Juice,
as we have above deemed to raise up therein a Natural Effervescency.

Lastly, The third difficulty which has been proposed to us against the
Effervescency between the Bile and the Pancreatick Juice, is, that the
Pancreatick Juice being acidly salt (as it is ordinarily found in Dogs) ought
not to ferment with the Bile: Seeing that the acidite thereof, by reason of the
Salt therein contained, helping the innervated Liquor will be subdued.

But we may easily answer this Objection also, by distinguishing Sea-Salts,
Fossile-Salts, and others compounded of a Lixiviate-Salt, and Acid-Spirit, from
the pure Lixiviate Salts. No man will ever deny, but that the last of Acids
does lose its Force and Energy, and consequently hinders its Effervescency. But
that which appertains to the first, of whose Nature we esteem that to be
which is in the Succus Pancreaticus; (forasmuch as we can perceive by the
Taste:) All men will easily grant that that in no wise hinders the
Effervescency, of those things, especially, which have an acid Spirit; as for
example, that of Vitriol, in which was dissolved Sea Salt, mixed with the
Lixivious Salt of Tartar, or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium.

Yea it is so far from diminishing the Effervescency, that it exciteth a
greater than otherwise would happen; as Sal Armoniack dissolved in Oil of
Vitriol, so highly accuates it, that it dissolveth Gold, the which without it
could not be done. Hence perhaps it comes to pass, that Dogs, which devour
Bones, and other Aliments, of difficult Concoction; which cannot be dissolved
by an acid Spirit alone; for, the most part have their Pancreatick Juice
acidly-Salt.

Among those things which we have asserted, concerning the Pancreatick Juice
insipid, acid, salt, etc. it is sufficiently manifest, that the diversity
observed therein, excludes not the Acidity thereof; neither destroys its
Effervescency, which we have taught to be made in the Thin Gut, without any
Interruption.

But we have sometimes observed a pleasant Effervescency of the Bile, with an
acid, in the Bile of a Dog, closed up in a Glass Vial, after having poured on
about a third part of Spirit of Niter, and keeping it a while in the warm
Rays of the Sun.

But that we may come nearer to the matter, we will declare the Experiments
brought by Dr. Schuylius, to demonstrate the Effervescency between the Bile, and
the Pancreatick Juice, in the presence of many Students; in his Treatise Pro
Veteri Med. page 88.

Therefore ( says he) the Abdomen of a Living Dog being opened, I have bound
the Duodenum, not far from the Pylorus with a Ligament; and also with another a
little below the Insertion of the Ductus Pancreaticus: then left the Dog to
himself, his Abdomen being sowed up. Three Hours being clapsed, the Dog, as it
seemed, yet living; for he had only lost some few drops of Blood: The Abdomen
being opened, we found the Space intercepted between the Ligatures, vehemently
distended; so that, it would altogether resist the Compression of the Fingers,
and threatened a Rupture. Neither did we find the Gall Bladder less distended:
Also that that Intercepted Space of the Duodenum was possessed, with an
Intense, and burning heat; in which making a little Wound with the Lancet, the
contained Wind, with the Humor, broke forth with a bouncing Noise, also
Vapors and Exhalations; from whence a certain sharp stink did strike all our
Nostrils, the which was greater by the opening of the Intestine; so that, none
of the Students standing by were able to bear it; which was a manifest Argument
not only of the large quantity of the Bile, and Pancreatick Juice, which had
flown thither: But also of the Effervescency, which had been in them Excited;
not only to a Mediocrity or Gentleness, such as happens in Health, but
Vehement: For, that part of the Intestine was not only full, but also by a
certain Force and Fermentation much distended.

Neither could that part of the Duodenum distended, have dissipated the Wind,
Humors, and Exhalations, with so great a Force, unless by the Effervescency or
Agitation of the Particles of those contrary Humors. Qui cupit, Capiet. A few
days being past, I repeated the same Experiment in the Presence of many
Students: And after the space of two Hours, that Portion of the Intestine, did
swell in like manner as before, but less hot: But that swelling Portion of the
Intestine, which before I had bound, being opened, frothing Bubbles broke forth
with a noise; the which had so distended that part of the Intestine, that no
man may further doubt of the Certainty of this Effervescency.

CHAP. VI. What this Effervescency is both in the Sick, and in the Sound; and
what Benefit Accrews to the Body thereby.
SEeing then that it is more than sufficiently evinced, and granted by Reasons
and Experiments, that there is an Effervescency between the Bile and the
Pancreatick Juice, in the Thin Gutt, and that continually, we will further
enquire, what it is in the Sick, what in the Sound, and what Utility it
brings to Humane Bodies.

In the Sick, we often observe, That this Effervescency, either by its
Fretting, and Tormenting Pains, or else by Heat or Cold, is very troublesome,
as some Years since, we knew in our dear Kinsman; who sometimes, for a whole
week together, came himself to us, to perceive a cold Ebullition in his Right
side, and that in the place where the Intestinum Duodenum is seated; and the
Bile runs together with the Pancreatick Juice; and that afterward, by the
means of Medicaments, meanly hot, to be changed into most hot, continuing a
Fortnight, and longer.

That both these Effervescencies, viz. Cold and Hot, may be excited, is proved
by the Thermometry, most ingenuously contrived by the Learned Swammerdammius,
and depicted in his Treatise of Respiration, Page 108. In the depressed part of
which Supreme Sphere A. if you mingle together Salt of Tartar, and Spirit of
Vitriol, an Effervescency will presently be excited; and such indeed as will so
condense, or thicken the Air contained in that Sphere, that the Water,
contained in the lower part of this Instrument B, may ascend upward: being a
manifest Experiment of Cold, produced by that Effervescency. But, on the
contrary, if you mingle Spirit of Tartar with the Spirit of Vitriol, you shall
observe, by the Effervescency excited between them, that the Water is
depressed; and the more if with those Spirits, you conjyne the Oil of
Turpentine; from whence no man, who is endowed with the lightest Tincture of
Philosophy, but will judge, that to proceed from the hot Effervescency,
rarifying the Air contained in that Sphere.

Therefore we judge, that in the Sound, that Effervescency happens after a
gentle manner, because then there is no Sense thereof: The same thing is to be
said concerning the Motion of the Heart, and beating of the Arteries; the
which, although they are Continual, are not perceived by those in Health; but
when we are evilly disposed, they sometimes manifest themselves in diverse
parts of the Body, especially in Temples, the Pulsation of the Arteries is so
manifestly molested, as if they were contused by some hard body. By the same
Reason the Motion of the Heart, is sometime so vehement, that as it has been
observed by Practitioners, it might in a manner be heard to their Neighbor
Houses; Surely this is an Hyperbole.
yea it has sometimes broke the Ribs; as in like manner, we have seen at
Leyden, in a Baker's Son, dwelling in the Fish-Market; whose Ribs, by the
Vehement Palpitation of the Heart, or rather the Convulsive Motion thereof,
were Conspicuously driven outward; from which Vehement Palpipation, it was
freed in a short time with Medicaments, prescribed by Dr. Sylvius; yet not so,
but that the Ribs still remained driven outward.

But now if any ask unto what end and use this Effervescency between the Bile
and the Pancreatick Juice, being naturally excited, does happen? We answer
first of all, that it serves to cut, and attenuate the over viscous pituity
adhering to the sides of the Gutts, left they being stufft up, the pores of the
Venae Lactea should be obstructed, or a passage be denied to the Pancreatick
Juice, and the Bile continually sliding into the Intestinum Duodenum, or also,
lest by the too great abundance of Phlegm, the sense of the Intestines might
be obtunded, and their peristaltick Motion either be diminished, or abolisht,
by help whereof, not only the passages of the parts necessary for the
nourishing of the body may be facillitated, but also the more grosser Foecies
and unprofitable Excrements may the more commodiously be separated; which use
Gallen has ascribed to the Bile alone, as not knowing the Pancreatick Juice,
first by us discovered, nor the Effervescency excited between it and the Bile:
Therefore he says in Lib. 5. De usu partium, cap. 4.

A necessary Excrement (to wit Phlegm) of this sort, is to be found both in
the Stomach and in the Intestines, as we have elsewhere demonstrated: but that
it may be generated, both Anatomy, and those Diseases to which men are daily
subject from the abundance of the superfluities hereof do declare: The Cure
whereof is simple, to wit, by the Exhibition of those things which have power
to divide, to cut and cleanse viscous matters.

For that cause therefore Nature has from the beginning provided a Defense for
them, that this Juice being sharp, might be cleansed, and as it ought be
altogether separated from the body, not into any Intestine near the Anus; but
into the first Intestine taking its beginning from the Pylorus, neither
sometimes may it want the external Help of some of the inferior Intestines.
Moreover, as long as the body is rightly governed, the pituitous Excrement is
daily cleansed. But when it is more copiously collected by some evil affection
of the body, the most famous Physicians doubt nothing, but that those most
grievous Diseases which happen to the belly, as the Ileum, Lienteria, and
Tenesmus, may be occasioned by it. Neither therefore is that Translation to be
contemned which Nature has provided for Health, by the opportune immission of
the Bilious passage in Animals.

The same Office is no less to be ascribed to the Pancreatick Juice, then to
the Bile hereafter to be made conspicuous by the Description of its acid
Qualities. Before we go any further in declaring the Effects arising from this
Effervescency, we will premise some Fermentations, that these things being with
all possibility inspected, it may become the more obvious, what benefit the
Intestinal Effervescency brings to the Aliments after their propulsion to the
Gutts.

As many as have mingled filings of Steel with Oil of Sulpher, prepared Per
Campanum, or Spirit of Vitriol, having added a sufficient quantity of water,
they might observe an Effervescency to be excited after a certain manner by the
concourse of those contraries; by help whereof, the laudable parts of the Steel
are joined to the acid Spirits, whilst the rest counted as refuse, do partly go
to the bottom, and partly like Froth swim or flote upon the Liquor.

But I think that the more purer parts of the Steel, and those most exactly
mixed, are therefore joined to the acid Liquor, because they have therewith a
more greater affinity, because of which they suffer themselves to be dissolved;
but not the other more Impure and less mixed among them, whether they be more
Terrene, and therefore seek the bottom, or whether they they be more Oleus,
and therefore Supernatant.

The same, greater or lesser, Affinity of Acids, with the dissolved Matter,
does further appear, if in the same Liquor more Metals be successively
immitted; First, those which have a less; afterward, those which have a
greater Affinity with it: So, when Silver is put into Aquafortis, and so long
detained therein, till it be all dissolved; which Effervescency, is absolved
with its Coagent: hence let Copper be put to the aforesaid Solution, the
Aquafortis will leave the Silver, and begin a new Effervescency with the
Copper, whilst that the Silver, being gradually neglected by the Aquafortis,
gets to the bottom; which Mutation, by the Chemists, is called by the name of
Precipitation.

But if afterward, you cast Iron to this Solution of Copper, the same thing
will again come to pass, and by degrees the Copper will be precipitated to the
bottom. Which if again, to the Solution of the Iron, you affuse some Lixivium
of Calcind Tartar, Vine Ashes, or the like, the Acid Spirit will join it self
more strictly to the Solution of that, than of the other Mettalick bodies, and
will scarcely suffer it self to be separated from the same.

The Reason of this more straight Union is to be required from the more pure
Acid Spirit, that is less mixed, and therefore more narrowly joins it self
with the said Lixiviate fixed Salt, hitherto also more pure and less mixed,
than with the same Salt; but less pure, that is more mixed: So that, here the
purity of the contrary Parts ought to be understood by their Affinity.

By reason of this greater Affinity, the Oil of Tartar prepared per Deliquium,
(which is nothing else but the Salt of Tartar, dissolved by the Humidity of
Air) when it is in like manner poured with the Vitriol into Water, it joyneth
it self to the acid Spirit, existing in the Vitriol, whilst its Sulphurous
part, as having a lesser Affinity with Acidity, by little and little departs,
and gets to the bottom.

Which being permised we will consider, what things may happen in the Aliments
in the Stomach by its Fermentation, and what also befalls the same; (after
the aforementioned Fermentation) in the thin Gut especially, that we may
conclude something more certain, and more probable than usual. First, The
Stomach, being opened, together with the Guts, seeing that the Aliments, by an
absolute Fermentation, are wont to be driven from the Stomach to the
Intestines, we have observed a notable Change between that which is contained
in the Stomach, and that in the Guts: For, that in the Stomach has had a more
grosser, and Viscid Consistence, and by the Diversity of the Aliments, and
other things assumed, a diverse Color, and oftentimes less White.

Certainly, this Mutation cannot be derived from any other thing than from the
Bile, and Pancreatick Juice: Because those Humors only flow in a large
Quantity to the Superior part of the small Gut, and are admixed with the
Aliments.

The Examen of both the aforesaid Liquors, does confirm this our Opinion: For,
the Bile, abounding with a Volatile Salt and Oil, has a force of Inciding,
Attenuating, and making Fluid most things wherewith it is permixed, especially
such as are pituitous; as Galen also teaches, Lib. V. De usu Part. Cap. IV. as
by the place above quoted may be seen, to which Platerus subscribes, Cap. VIII.
concerning the Defect of Hearing by the Repletion of the Ears, whilst he
breakth out into these Words:

First, he declares that Aqua Mulsa, or Hydromel, or if to cleanse more
powerfully, with the Decoction, or bitter Juice beforementioned, of Wormwood,
Centaury, or Lupines, that may be effected, adding Honey or Gall, which, above
all other things, as has been often said does make those things, which are
Viscous, Fluid, etc.

But the Succus Pancreaticus, being pregnant with a Subacid Spirit, as
appears by the Precedent Reasons, and Experiments, does in like manner
augment the Viscidity of the Aliments by the Solution of their Fluidity; the
which being so as it is more than sufficiently known, we will not delay time,
by further proofs concerning the Manner, whereby Acids in the thin Gut, do
return to a Liquid, and Fluxile Motion, or other-wise to an Ine^t and Pituitous
Viscidity; we shall only say that in our Judgment it so happens; for as
much, as by the Tenuity, and Sharpness of the Parts, stirred up by the
Effervescency, the Phlegm is thereby as with Swords, incided, and attenuated
into very Minute Parts. That which attaineth a Whitish Color, then observable
in the more Fluid part of the Aliments, we think it deducible from the Acidity
of the Pancreatick Juice; because we may note, that many other things,
abounding with a Lixivious Salt and Oil, do wax White upon the affusion of
Acids: So, that Vinegar or Sharp Wine, being poured upon common Sulpher,
dissolved with any Lixivium, and grown Red, that Reddish Color is so changed,
that it is made almost like to Milk: Wherefore also it is called by the
Chemists Lac Sulphuris. The same is apparent in the Resinious Extracts of
Vegitables, as also in Spirit of Hart's Horn or Soot, being Replete with much
Volatile Salt; with which an Acid Spirit being mixed, acquires a Milky Color.
All those things being rightly considered, we judge, Secondly, That the
Effervescency, in the thin Gut is exceeding necessary for the right Separation
of the profitable Parts from the unprofitable. But perhaps some, who are
altogether wedded to Antiquity, admitting nothing which to them is Novel,
because they have read or understood nothing, in the Ancients, concerning this
our expected Secretion, by Fermentation, will not think that such a preparation
is required to separate the profitable parts of the Aliment from the
unprofitable; but that the alteration which is performed in the Stomach, is
sufficient to this purpose; in which, if any thing be wanting, it may be
Consummated by the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts; by the help whereof its
more Fluid parts are thrust forward into the Milky Veins, the Foeces, with the
remaining thicker and lesser profitable parts, passing away by the Channel of
the Intestines.

To the which we deny not, but that something is contributed to this matter
both by the said Fermentation and the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts;
nevertheless we do not think that any Physician, unless a Slave to the
Ancients, amongst all those things which are daily observed in the dissecting
of Brute Animals, and Medical Practiss; or at leastwise may be observed, will
reject this cause proposed by us; If, first of all, he diligently consider,
that in the Coeliack Flux the Aliments, sometimes viscid like a Pultiss, and
every where alike, and sometimes mixed with a whitish Liquor are purged out.

But this Diversity of Color happens, by a Contingent, or Non-contingent,
Secretion of profitable parts from the unprofitable, by the said Effervescency;
which, who can but in vain, Attribute to expression alone.

Yet we deny not, that by the Fermentation of Aliments alone, rightly performed
in the Ventricle, something Fluid may, Spontaneously, pass away from the rest
of the Aliments more Pultatious; nevertheless that is but little, if it be
compared with the large quantity of noble Chyle, which is continually strained
through the Venae-lacteae, or also from thence swimming up in the Caeliack
Flux; so that, then the more watery part of the Chyle, freely going forth by
the Compression of the Bowels alone, is more without Effervescency, than the
other which is more white, or, as we may say, more Milky.

In that Spontaneous Separation of the parts wont to happen through
Fermentation, the Spirituous indeed first go forth with the Watery, necessary
for the Reparation of the Animal spirits: We have an example in the
Fermentation of Plants, and other things, abounding with a Volatile Spirit, in
which the Spirituous Particles, always expanded, and endeavoring to flee
through the Pores of the Stomach and Guts, being loosed from their Fetters,
rush through the Pores: From whence we are fully persuaded, that after the
Assumption of the most Spirituous Aliments, a sudden strength is found in men;
and although it be Inconspicuous to our Bodily Eyes, that the Spirits, by the
same reason, are diffused through the Pores of the Body; nevertheless, after a
manner, we understand it with the Eyes of our Mind, whilst we see a Stupendous
Virtue in some Medicaments externally applied: The same thing is often observed
by Anatomists, when after the Incision of the Peritonaeum, they receive the
Foetid Flatulencies passing through the Tunicles of the Guts to the Nostrils.

But because the Spirituous and Volatile parts are not sufficient to sustain
Life; but, Moreover, Acid, Oleous, and Salt parts, are also required; therefore
there is need of a new Alteration of things assumed, that those parts, by a
decent Copiousness, might be separated from the Superfluous and Unprofitable:
Which alteration we call Effervescency, and by help of which, we judge (with
our sometimes Famous Professor Francis. de le Boe-Sylvius, from whose Lectures,
as well public as private, we do not deny to have drawn many Fundamentals of
this Doctrine) that Secretion to be accomplished.

We do not only judge by that Effervescency* mediateing the more Subtle and
Fluid parts of Aliments, but also the Pituity by the help thereof dissolved in
the thin Gut, part of which is carried together, with the better Portion of the
Bile, and Succus Pancreaticus, through the Vermiculous crust of the Intestines
into the Milky Veins; from hence to the Cisterne or Common Receptacle of the
Chyle, and Lympha, placed in the Region of the Loins under the Appendices of
the Diaphragma; and from thence ascends through the Chyliferus, or more rightly
the Lymphatick Ductus, Thoracicus, (because it continually carries the Lympha,
and the Chyle, only by Intervals) to the Subclavian, or left Jugular Vein,
that from thence it may descend, with the Blood, through the Superior Trunck
of the Vena Cava, descending into the right Ear of the Heart, and the right
Ventricle thereof. And in the right Ear, and right Ventricle of the Heart, it
is confused both with the ascending and descending Blood, and also impregnated
with the Pancreatick Juice, the Bile, Phlegm, and Lympha; from whence it
acquires a requisite Consistency of Blood.

This confirms what we have said; That any thing acid Coagulates all Fatness
and Oil.

But because, on the other side, the aforesaid humors have in themselves a
force of attempering, we need not fear too great a Consistency of the Blood; so
long, as at least they remain in a Laudable and Natural Estate.

But seeing that the more fluid and more profitable parts, as well of the
Aliments assumed, as of the three nominated Humors, do go to the Heart; the
rest more gross, and less profitable, by the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts,
gradually without Sense, are driven forwards to the thick Guts, where they are
distinguished by the name of Alvinary Foeces. Whether also the Exhalations,
excited by this Effervescency, or even the Juice it self may not afford a
natural Fermentation in the Stomach, we dare not as yet assert; although some
Animals seem to persuade it to us, of both whose Ducts, to wit, the Pancreatick
and Bilar, Nature has determined a passage into the Stomach. We judge this
Pancreatick Juice is not only Subservient to the Functions, already declared,
but also by the Sub-acid Spirit with which it is impregnated by the most wise
God, we think it to be ordained after a certain manner, to Incrassate, and
Inspifate the more fluid Bile, and also to temper its too much Acrimony; This
thing is manifest in the Bile by affusing any acid Spirits thereto, which
presently, either more or less, will be thickened, and its more gross part
precipitated to the bottom, whilst its Thinner part floats on the top like
Phlegm. Hence peradventure Hippocrates, Lib. De Victu Accutorum, Text 29. 8.
9. teaches that bitter things are dissolved, and pass into Phlegm, that is,
They become sluggish whiles they are spread or mixed with an acid, which is not
only confirmed by the Authority of the Divine old Gentleman, but also by a
daily Effervescency; whereby it is evident that Acids, and Salts, being put
into a Conflict amongst themselves, do so infringe their sharp Particles, that
they become almost temperate: Wherefore not without Reason Hipp. Aph. I. Sect.
VI. has taught us in the daily Levities of the Intestines, That if an Acid
belching should supervene, which had not been before, we ought to hope well:
For it is a sign that the Pancreatick Juice, by its acidy, will, in a short
time, attemper the Acrimony of the Bile.

We have said that the Pancreatick Juice is ordained by Nature, after a sort to
incrassate the more Fluid Bile; but it may also so happen that the Bile, by its
Acidity, may be rendered more Fluid, viz. when the Viscidity of the Bile
depends upon the Viscidity of Phlegm; therefore in one respect Acids may
render the bile more gross, but in another more Fluid; for Acids do incrassate
Fats, and Lixivious Salts.

Among those things which we have now recited, it is sufficiently evident, in
the Humors naturally constituted in the small Gut, and the Friendly
Effervescency of Nature from thence occurring, that many Functions in the Body
are rightly performed; which by the said Effervescency evilly happening, are
wasted, and become Vicious. The verity of which thing, that we may make it more
clearly appear, we shall, first of all, declare some Vices which happen in the
Substance of the Pancreas. Secondly, We shall adjoyne those things which may
befall the Juice thereof.

CHAP. VII. With what Diseases the Substance of the Pancreas, and its Juice may
be Molested.
CErtainly not a few, to whom the Pancreatick Juice has been unknown, have
nevertheless believed that the Causes of many grievous Diseases lay hid. For,
Schenkius in his Exer^itatione, Anat VI. Lib. I. Sect. II. Cap. XXI. says, And
there are the Seats (meaning the Pancreas, and the Mesentery) of innumerable
and wonderful Diseases; for the searching of which, the age of one man is not
sufficient. Which thing, being the Scorn of Physicians, also casts those
which are most exercised into a Blushing hue.

Fernelius also Lib. VI. Pathol. Cap. VII. speaking concerning the Diseases of
the Pancreas and Mesentery, does affirm and profess, That he has thought for
the most part, these to be the Seats of Choler, Melancholy, Diarhaea,
Disenteria, Cachexia, Atrophia, of Languishing, of Light, and Erratick Fevers:
Lastly, the Causes of hidden Diseases; by the driving away of which, Health
might be restored to the Afflicted.

And Riolanus, that Egregious Ornament of the University of Lovaine. V. F.
Plempius, with other Famous men, also Conversant in Practice, do also think
that the cause of intermitting Fevers, of Hypocondriack Melancholy, and other
Chronick Diseases, do lurk, or lie hid in the Pancreas. But this business,
without all doubt, had been more successfully treated of both by these, and
other men of no small Merit in Medicine, had the Pancreatick Juice, with its
Generation and Nature, been known to them: Wherefore we shall endeavor, being
excited by their Commendable Examples, to produce something to the Learned
World for the Common good, by considering first, By what Diseases the Substance
of the Pancreas may be infested. Secondly, By declaring the Primary Vices,
which may happen to its Juice. Thirdly, By searching into the Functions, which
are hurt by its evil Disposition. Fourthly, By investigating the Diseases which
follow those Functions hurt. Fifthly, and lastly, By delivering the Remedies
wherewith all of them may be amended. The Diseases wherewith the Substance of
the Pancreas is wont to be molested, are Obstructions, and those which follow
them, Tumors, Schirous's, Abscess's, Stones, etc. Obstructions may happen to
the Pancreas two ways: First, In the Ductus, when the Pancreatick Juice cannot
freely pass through it, into the Intestines, even as we shall more clearly
Demonstrate to happen when we shall discourse of Intermitting Fevers.
Secondly, In the Substance of the Pancreas it self, when by any cause, either
Internal or External, the Circulation of the Blood through it, is hindered;
from whence the Parenchyma, by the continual appulse of blood, is puffed up,
and swells, unless it be indurated, or by a previous Inflammation goes into an
Abseessus.

Which, that it may be made known to all, we will bring upon the Stage the
Observations of several Physicians, and Anatomists. Riolanus, Anthropog. Lib.
2. Cap. 10. writes, that he had observed in many people, who were of a
Melancholy Nature, and Habit of Body, that the Pancreas equalled the weight of
the Liver; and also confirms the same, by the Example of the most Illustrious
Augustinus Thuanus; Who, by the Melancholy Habit of Body, did complain for four
Years together of a Colic Pain, about the Region of the Colon, with a Sense
of a Burden, or Weight, at his Stomach, while he stood upright, or walked: But
his Hypoconders did not swell: At length being taken with an unlookt-for
Gangreen, from his right Foot suddenly to the Superior parts with Horrible
and Direful Pains, in the space of Six Hours expired. His Body being opened,
and the Liver taken out, was round like to a Sphare, stuff with Fat, and
trans-fixed with a certain pituitous hardened Matter like to Mortar: But the
Pancreas, by its Amplitude and Weight, did equalize the Liver, wholly Schirhous
with many little Knobs, which were filled with the Species of a Pigeons Egg;
the Spleen was so wasted that it scarce weighed an Ounce.

For which reason, some have called the Pancreas, the Vicar or Supply of the
Spleen; not considering that this Diversity might happen to other parts also;
and likewise in Dogs, after the Extirpation of the Spleen, the Substance of
the Pancreas did in no wise grow into a greater weight; which, according to
them, ought to happen, if the Pancreas supplied the Office of the Spleen.

Aubertus relates a story of an Abscessus Progym. ad lib. abdit. Fernelij
Exercit. 44. of a certain Merchant of Lions, which could never sleep, and when
he endeavored to sleep, he fell into a Lipothymie, and cold sweat of the whole
Body, till at length he dyed. His Body being opened there was only found a
putrid Abscessus in the Pancreas; the Stomach and other principal parts being
safe. Guilh. Fabric. Hildanus. Cent. 1. Observe. 71. also relates, that he, in a
certain Carpenter, who for the space of two years, by Intervals, was grieved
with diverse Diseases, labored under Obstructions, and Cachexy: Found in his
dead Body, among other things, a Schirhous Tumor, suppurated like unto a
Collection of Fat, under the skin, about the bigness of two Fists; having its
rise from the Inferior part of the Pancreas, which enclosed the Intestinum
Duodenum; so that, being covered with the Peritonaeum, it also resembled
another Ventricle.

You may read of a Cancerous Ulcer of the Pancreas, most worthy of note, in the
Curious Miscellanies Medico-phys, of the Germans, (which as in the year 1670.
by great Diligence, they began to bring to Light: So we altogether desire that
the great God, for Common benefit, may prosper their Endeavors:) Observe. 99.
where Dr. J. Fera. Heart. a Tottenfeld adjoyns these following things, which
they found in the Cavity of the Thorax in a certain Chyrurgion after Death.

Coming to the Lower Belly, we saw that Flesh perforating the Diaphragma to be
the Pancreas, which was the length of two Spans, and breadth of two Hands
transverse, being putrid, and corrupted; which, by its Corosive Acidity, did
not only perforate the Diaphragma, but did also so corrode the Spina Dorsi,
that a Cancer-like Ulcer was produced, with a light stroke the whole Spina
Dorsi might easily be broken. Lastly, it corroded the very Vena Cava it self,
which runs into the Spine; by which the Blood, flowing through the Diaphragma,
brought Death by impeding the Motion of the Lungs. This Cancer of the Pancreas,
by creeping further, did also corrupt both the Kidneys, and caused them to be
most black and putrid.

We add more-over, that which the most Famous Highmore, Corp. Hum. Disq. Anat.
lib. I. part II. writes that he observed, In a Noble Woman, which being
Ancient, labored with Convulsions, Epilepsie, and the Hysteric Passion; and
at length, after Exquisite Pains and Torments, changed Life with Death; in
whose dead Body, being opened, we found the Pancreas only evilly affected and
exulcerated.

They which desire more Examples of Exulceration, let them read Barthol. Hist.
Johan. Dan. Horstij Observe. Anatom Salmuth, Tulpium, Blasij Comm. in Synt.
Anat. Vesting* and others. That this Pancreas had obtained a stony hardness, in
an Ancient Roman. Woman, is witnessed by Dr. Panarol; as is likewise to be seen
in Dr. Blasius, in his Commentaries, even now cited page 40. In like manner, in
the Year 1667. the following History was Communicated to us at Paris, Bona
fide, by Dr. Gajen, a Chyrurgion, and Famous Anatomist, by him before observed:

A Noble Man, aged about thirty, being Melancholy, was Obnoxious to Catthars,
by the intemperate use of Wine, and Fruits; continually assumed, fell into a
Vomiting, and Diarhaea, whereby after some space, there followed a Flux of
Blood; from whence, more and more failing in Strength, the Tenth day he Changed
Life with Death. His body being opened, he found in the Pancreas, about the end
of the Ductus Pancreaticus going into the Intestines, seven or eight Stones,
having the bigness of the largest Pease; some of which being given us by
himself, we keep among our Rarities.

Nevertheless, this Observation to us, seemed not so wonderful, who believe
that Stones are generated in all the Glandules of the Body, especially in the
pineal Glandule: because in it we have more than twenty times observed Stones
in men, extinguished either by a gentle Disease, or a violent Death; which
thing happens more frequently in France, than in Holland; a more profitable
account whereof, we do not see, than that the Anima of the French, as by Nature
more Volatile, may be bound to a more firm Residence in their Bodies.

We have also found in a certain Dog, in that part of the Ductus Pancreaticus,
where the Ascending concurs with the Descending, and is only simple; a
Cartilagineous Excrescency, about the Ductus and its end, which like a Nipple,
did hang out into the Intestine, to the bigness of a Finger, in the middle
whereof a sufficient passage was afforded to the sliding Pancreatick Juice.
Riolanus l. c. found the whole Pancreas hardened like a Cartilage.

We might be able to infer many Diseases of the Pancreas, were it not already
sufficiently evident by what has been said, That the Pancreas also may be
afflicted with common Diseases; neither that its evil Constitution follows
the affections of the Liver or Spleen: For, sometimes the other Bowels being
unhurt, the Pancreas alone, has been the cause of Death, for Reasons (already)
sufficiently alleged.

For which reason, it is manifest that the Pancreas is necessary to Life, which
is also confirmed by an Experiment made by us at Paris, in the Year 1667. when
in the House of Dr. Bourdelot, where, every Monday, the most Curious of
Physicians and Philosophers did meet, we had for three Months together exposed
this little Book, in the French Tongue, to public Examination, some being led
by Speculation alone, asserted that* Animals might live no less without the
Pancreas, than the Spleen: For which cause, before all that Company, we
extirpated the Spleen, and also most exactly the Pancreas, of a certain Dog:
The Abdomen again being closed, Dr. Bourdelot commanded his Servants to keep
the Dog most diligently, who, notwithstanding all their Diligence, in a short
time Dyed.

Those Vices being declared, which sometimes befall the Substance of the
Pancreas, we shall proceed to those things which may happen to its juice; from
whence, not a few Natural Functions depending upon its Natural Disposition, are
wasted and hurt. First of all; The Pancreatick Juice offends when it is more
sparingly effused into the thin Gut, which sometimes comes to pass by the more
sparing Generation, or Separation thereof in the Pancreas; or when there is an
Obstruction in one or more of its lateral Branches; because, for a time the
Juice is therein stagnated, till at length the Obstruction is opened.

It is more sparingly generated, when the Matter thereof is more or less
deficient in the blood, and not being restored with convenient Aliments; or
when the same is carried off another way; or when it is more strictly conjoined
with the blood, that it cannot be sufficiently separated from it. One or more
of the Ducts of the Pancreas are obstructed by a pituitous, and viscid Matter,
together with the Matter of the Pancreatick Juice, separated in the Pancreas,
and translated into, and detained in those Ducts.

Secondly, The Pancreatick Juice does also offend, when it is carried into the
Intestines in greater plenty, whether it be generated more Copiously, or for a
time being detained by Stagnation, in one or more of the Laterall Ducts, is
then more plentifully Effused, when the Obstruction is Dissolved.

It is generated more plentifully by reason of the Liberal use of acid
Aliments, or at least of Condited Acids; for example, sour Wine, Vinegar,
Pomecitrons, etc. as also, by reason of some Vice of the Glandules, by which
the Separation of that juice, from the blood is promoted; as also, sometimes
perhaps, because of more larger Vessels tending into the Pancreas, and as is
usual, affording a larger Matter to the juice.

Thirdly, When it flows inequally into the thin Gut, that is, at one time more
abundantly, at another more sparingly: Which, first of all, pens by an
Obstruction of one or more of the Lateral Ducts, which continuing, nothing
flows out from them; and therefore a more sparing juice is then effused into
the whole:

By the said Obstruction, any way removed, presently that which was stagnant in
the middle Duct, together with the rest of the juice, is effused into the thin
Gut; from whence, on the contrary, the Excretion of the Pancreatick juice is
then more plentiful.

That such an Obstruction may sometimes happen in the Lateral Ducts of the
Pancreas, Reason does persuade, and Experience it self confirms, even as we
shall more clearly evince in the following Discourse of Intermitting Feavours.

Fourthly, It offends when it is more Fluid and Liquid, than Natural: which
happens by reason of such blood, or animal Spirits, more Copiously mixed
therewith.

Fifthly, It offends, when on the contrary it is more Viscid; by reason of
the Blood, likewise Viscid, and abounding with much pituity.

Sixthly, The said Pancreatick juice offends; when the Natural Relish thereof
is changed:

Whence it is one while less acid, another while more acid; one while salt,
another while austere; sometimes of a simple Taste, or else Compounded of those
before-named.

The Nominated Juice is less acid, either bebeause of the animal Spirits, more
plentifully carried to the Pancreas, or for want of acidity in the Blood;
whether it may come to pass, by reason of assuming things unfit to repair the
acidity taken away, or by the use of such things as infringe, concentrate,
obtund, or extinguish acidity.

The acidity of the Pancreatick Juice augmented, for the most part, is to be
ascribed to the Redundancy of acid Humors in the Body; sometimes to the
Impedited Afflux of the Animal Spirits to the Pancreas; at leastwise, to that
part of the Juice which is stagnant in the Lateral Ducts; or other-wise,
perhaps, by reason of the Animal Spirits, being Exhausted. An acid Humor is
wont to abound in the Body, for the most part, from assumed Aliments, Sauces,
or Medicaments, which are sharp, with sharp Wines, such as for the most part is
Renish, Mosellanous, etc. as also, because of a more Cold Air, and North Wind,
Sorrow of Mind though not over much, etc. The motion of the Animal Spirits, to
the Pancreas, is impedited, when the Animal Spirits are defective; or being
more dull or slow throughout the whole Body; also, when the Nerves are
obstructed, dissecated, or compressed.

The Succus Pancreaticus is made Salt by a Marine, or Fossile Salsitude, in
like manner, because of the Serosity of the Blood likewise Salt; perhaps by a
like Fault of the Glandules concurring; for which reason, the Secretion of the
Saline parts from the Acid, cannot be absolved: For, our common Salt consists
of two parts, to wit, a Lixivious Salt, and an Acid Spirit joined together. The
austerity of the Pancreatick Juice seems to us, to be deduced from the more
gross, or Terrene Particles, with which its acid Particles are involved; which
appears, not only in Fruits, being first sour, afterward, when by the
gentle Heat of the Sun, they are Ripened, they are made a little more acid; and
at length, when the more gross Particles thereof, by the Agitation of Heat, are
more exalted, they become Sweet.

But moreover it is manifest, that those things which are sower, it is by their
Syncrisis and Diacrisis: So D. Paisenus has noted in Thesi. XXI. C. that the
juice of Ribes, being powered to Coral of a grateful acid, becomes austere.
Vitriol and Alum distilled, yield an acid Spirit: Likewise an acid Spirit may
be distilled from sealed Earths, Bole Armeniack, and the like; but how Bole
Armen. may by the help of Nitre and other things, be made more astringent, is
to be seen in Le Febre, in his French Edition. Page 649.

CHAP. VIII. The Functions which are vitiated by the Pancreas, or it is Juice
evilly disposed.
HAving declared the more grievous Vices wherewith the Pancreas and its Juice
are wont to be affected, every man may see, that from that Fountain very many
Incommodities to Mortals do proceed; all which things, seeing we have proposed
to handle them in order, we shall first judge of those which proceed from the
Pancreas it self, by subjoyning those things which are wont to flow from its
juice.

If the Pancreas acquire a Schirrous substance resembling Stones, and also
weighty in the place where it should defend the Sanguinous Vessels, as some
would have it, lest they should be hurt by the Vertaebrae, or other parts, it
will greatly afflict them by Compression, and will hinder the circular motion
of the Blood, from whence diverse Distentions, Inflammations, Obstructions, and
other things arise, and spring up, fit to impedite the Common use of the
Bowels. Besides also by its weight, it will not a little hinder the Stomach
from performing its Office by compressing it; but when it is inflamed, or
Aposthumated, for the most part it will cause the same Incommodities with the
other Bowels, being afflicted with the same Vice. But some may say, if such
grievous Effects happen to the Pancreas, how can the use thereof be so
necessary, and how do we hitherto live so long with them? Then may we also
demand how those men may live, to whose Brain, Heart, Liver, and other bowels
necessary to Life, the same, or the like things happen, and we shall further
enquire of them, by what reason such may live well or ill? The Histories above
do certainly testify, that such live a miserable life, and when the Evil shall
be increased, those also for no other Cause have changed Life for Death: So
that from that part can nothing be inferred against our Hypothesis.

Having unfolded the Incommodities arising from the Parenchyma of the Pancreas
it self, it remains, that we also run through the functious Hurt, which the
evil Qualities, or Vices of the Pancreatick Juice, or other Humors existing in
the thin Gutt, do draw after them.

Therefore the Pancreatick Juice being driven to the Intestines in a lesser
quantity, will not sufficiently free the Gutts from the superfluous Humidity in
them, and so will occasion many Obstructions, as the Learned R. Lower, who
judges this juice to be ordained by Nature to cleanse the Chyle; he writes in
his Treatise of the Heart, Chap. 5. page 215. that by the defect thereof, he
has observed Obstructions of the Venae Lacteae, in these very words.

It seems to me most true, that that great Glandule (namely the Pancreas) is
seated in that place; and that Ductus to be opened into the Intestines, that
the Lympha (for so he calls the Pancreatick Juice) being there separated, may
be mixed with the descending Chyle, whereby it may more readily enter, and more
expeditely pass through the narrow Channel of the Lactean Veins; and indeed the
Chyle in the Milkey Vessels, either because of its crascitie, or for want of
potulent Liquor (which ought to be for its Vehicle) may sometimes be apt to be
stagnant, and so concrete, and by the same reason, to stop, and altogether fill
up those Vessels, as in a Dog, whose Pancreas was obdurated I once observed.

Neither also will it sufficiently promote the Natural, and due Separation of
the Chyle from the Excrements, and that especially if the Aliments be more dry,
or of a more difficult Fermentation: Hence necessarily follows a diminished
Nutrition of the whole body, as also a universal Languishing; so that, such may
rather be said to draw Life, than to live. But the Pancreatick Juice, being
separated in a larger quantity; and brought to the Intestines, will, as it
were, pare off, not only their superfluous Pituity, but also that necessary
part which should defend them from Injuries like a Curry-Comb; and besides, it
will separate more than it ought, from the assumed Aliments, so that, sometimes
the unprofitable, and excrementitious parts, together with the profitable, may
be conveyed to the Mass of Blood; sometimes only the profitable Parts, but in a
larger quantity than they should, may be carried by the same ways: From
whence, if here we say a Pethora will happen, and thence a Cacochymy, Who can
overthrow our Assertions? More-over, we think that the Lancionations, in the
left Hypocondria, first molested by courses, do proceed from too great a
quantity of the Bile and Pancreatick Juice, separated from the Blood, by a more
vehement Motion of the Body, and the stirring up a greater Effervescency.

For, it is most certain, that Running, or any other vehement Exercise of the
Body, does accelerate the Motion of the Blood, through the whole Body; which,
seeing it is the cause of the Separation of these or other Humors, then it is
also necessary, that those Humors be deposited into the Guts in a greater
plenty; which, being separated in a Natural Quantity, and Quality, if, as we
have already proved, they may excite a natural and friendly Effervescency to
Nature, may not the contrary happen when they are otherwise disposed by
exciting an Effervescency, greater, and troublesome to Nature? After a
wonderful manner does that place confirm this our Opinion, in which those
pains are perceived by course, and very ordinarily, though unjustly, are
ascribed to the Spleen; because the Spleen is not in that place, where those
pains do in us excite a Molestation, but has its seat more down-wards; because
in that place those pains do manifest themselves in the Anteriour part of the
Hypocondria, where the thin Gut M, emerging under the Mesentery N, does lie by
the Peritonaeum, as is to be seen in the first Table, where we have Delineated
to the Life the Situation of that Intestine.

The inequal separation of the Succus Pancreaticus, and propulsion thereof, to
the Intestines, produces various Mutations in the Guts, and elsewhere,
concerning the sudden Happening of which, no man will ever assign a fit
Reason, who will not give heed to those things. Hence we think to be deduced
the sudden Deliquiums of the Wind sometimes advening, erratick Fevers,
intermitious of Pulses, etc.

The Pancreatick Juice being more fluid, will more dilute the Pituity of the
Guts, and perhaps sometimes occasion the Flux of the Belly; especially if it be
conjoined with a Salsitude, by whose acrimony the Guts are provoked to their
Contraction; and unless that Flux of the Belly follow the Peristaltick Motion
of the Guts, it will necessarily express a greater Quantity of Chyle into the
Venae Lacteae, from whence the same incommodities will arise, which we have
deduced from the Pancreatick Juice, separated in too large a Quantity.

The more Viscid Pancreatick Juice concreting by the least external Cold, will
occasion Obstructions, as also intermitting Fevers, and likewise astringe the
Belly. Concerning the sensible Qualities, and first of the Relish, there is
sometimes produced a Pancreatick juice less acid; from whence there is neither
a due Effervescency in the Duodenum, and therefore not a necessary Separation
of the profitable parts from the unprofitable, nor a desired Consistency
bestowed on the Blood: and therefore they, in whom such Blood is, have been
less able to resist Pestilential Venom, than those in whom, by the laudable
Acidity of their Pancreatick Juice, have also a more Laudable and greater
Consistency of their Blood. Hence the reason is also clear, Why Melancholy Men
are less afflicted with the Plague, than those who are endued with a Bilious
blood.

For we think that no man may be infected with the Plague, so long as the
Natural consistency of his blood is preserved: We assert this the more freely,
because we see the blood in all persons infected with the Plague to be altered,
and obtain a far more fluid consistency: So that if sometimes by chance,
Negligence, Ignorance, or any other urging Cause; as for example, too great a
Plethory, spitting of blood bringing a present danger to Life, let a Vein be
opened, the blood flowing out although refrigerated; nevertheless, is in no
wise coagulated, neither can it acquire a due consistency, even as sometimes is
wont to happen to the animal Spirits, being loosed from their Fetters, and
dissipated from the acidity existing in the blood, wherefore also such a blood
by diverse Practitioners is called putrid.

We commonly say, because it may so happen, that the whole Mass of blood, not
as yet equally infected, the laudible part of the blood in the cutting of a
Vein, may only flow out, the blood remaining in the body being depraved; the
which thing Practitioners daily observe to happen in Venae-Section; we do not
only think with other Practitioners, that the blood remains fluid, without the
bodies of those who are infected with the Plague; but do also affirm the like
fluidity in the bodies of those extinguished by the Pest, as we have learned by
Experience, which perhaps may seem strange to those who know not the Nature of
volatile Salts, but not so to us, who have very often mingled it with the
blood, and the blood always remained fluid, the which cannot be certainly
expected from the commixture of any other thing, with the blood, then volatile
Salts.

But on the contrary, if you mingle any acid Spirit with the Blood Dictum
Factum, the Blood will be more or less Coagulated, according as that Spirit
shall be more or less Acid; as for example, if to try the Experiment, we take
Oil of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur per Campanum, Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regia, etc.
Besides, that the Blood will presently be Coagulated by them, it also acquires
a Ches-Nut Color. But if we take the Dulcid Spirit of Salt, Juice of Lammons,
Distilled Vinegar or the like, whose acid Spirit is more Temperate, the Blood
will only acquire the Consistency of a grosser Syrup, with its red Color
remaining unhurt.

From whence it is evident, the use of Acids may preserve men from the Plague,
not, as according to the Opinion of many Authors, that they cut and attenuate;
but as they preserve the natural Consistency of the Blood, and do hinder its
being infected, with a more sharp Volatile Salt, which we, together with the
Air, suck into our Bodies: For this cause, the most Famous Dr. Sylvius, who
likewise has Constituted the Venom of the Plague, in a more sharp Volatile
Salt; when, some Years since, in the great Plague at Amsterdam, which he
foresaw, he took a Crust of Bread, imbrued with white-Wine-Vinegar, in which
Mary-Golds had likewise been steeped; by which Alexipharmack he so well
preserved himself, that he never was infected with the Pestilential Venom. But
when, through too much have, he omitted the said Alexipharmack, as soon as he
entered into an infected House, he was infected with a pain in the Head; from
which, at other times, he was free.

Which things being rightly considered, every one may see that the Pestilent
Venom is not endued with any force of Coagulating, as the most Learned Willis
has stated it, in his Treatise of Fevers, C. 13. But seeing that Dr.
Dela-Font has sufficiently cleared this to all Opposers, in his Discourse
concerning the Pestilent Venom, Chap. VIII.

We shall not spend any more time, either to the Reader, or our selves, but
wave the further Disquisition of those things; because it is (besides) our
purpose in this Treatise, accurately, to describe the Pestilence: Wherefore we
will leave the rest to a further Occasion, seeing it is time that we return to
the Incommodities flowing from the more Acid Pancreatick Juice.

The Pancreatick Juice, being more sharp, is the cause, first, of every
Internal Cold, being first of all felt in the Region of the Loins, and
afterward dispersed into the whole Body; as for the most part, we observe in
the beginning of the Fits of Agues, or Intermitting Fevers. Secondly, Of all
Cutting pains, as well in the Hypocondria's, and whole Belly, as in other
parts of the Body. Thirdly, Of all manifest pains in the Belly, from whence
the Sick is sometimes tormented after a wonderful manner. Wherefore we deduce
all the black and aeruginous Bile from the same, more Acid, Pancreatick Juice:
Because sometimes being put into a Pewter Chamber Pot, or Brass Basin, they
Corrode the same, and send forth a sharp Savor; and also excite a manifest
Effervescency; which every man, who has saluted but the threshold of
Chemistry, knows, cannot happen from any thing but Acids: From whence, they may
be compelled to confess their Error; who affirm, That all black Choler,
proceeding from Vomitting, or Dejection of the Belly, comes from the Follicles
of the Gall, or the Spleen.

All these things are not a little confirmed, by the following Experiment,
sometimes made by us in a Dog; in the Section of whom, being alive, having
opened the Duodenum, we found a greenish Liquor among the black, such as the
Ancients have depicted to us for Atrabilis: that we might pursue a more
Intimate cognition thereof, we examined diligently all the ways through which
any thing might be transferred to that Intestine; and seeing that besides the
Bilar Duct, the Pancreatick, and the Ventrile, there was no way perceptible to
the sight, through which any notable Quantity of Humors might be afforded to
the Intestines; we judge therefore, that in one of those, the matter thereof
must be obscured: Wherefore we examined all those ways; in the first whereof,
we found the Bile, naturally Constituted, that waxing Yellow from a Green: In
the second we found the Pancreatick Juice most limpid, like to Distilled Water:
In the third we found the Aliments half crude, having the Color of White Ashes.

Seeing therefore that neither the Liver, nor the Pancreas, nor also the
Stomach, carried that Atrabilis to the Intestine, we began to suspect whether
that Atrabilis might not emerge by the Union of two or three of those Humors,
being mingled together by course: Concerning which thing, that we might attain
to a greater Certainty, we affused Spirit of Vitriol to the Bile, drawn forth
from its Vesicle, and placed it in the heat of the Sun; from whence there was
commonly excited from the Black, a Greenish Liquor, such as we first found in
the Duodenum: Hence we concluded the said Humor, called Atrabilis, not to flow
from this, or that part, but to be generated in the Duodenum. Namely, as the
Natural Color of the Bile has been transmitted into Black, and Green, by the
Concourse of the more Acid Pancreatick Juice.

Seeing that the Pancreatick Juice, by the ordinary Law of Nature, may
continually be mingled with the Bile, and the Intestinal Pituity, we will a
little propose the same, as joined with those Humors. If it chances that the
more sluggish Pancreatick Juice, bounds with a sharper Bile, and the Intestinal
Pituity rightly Constituted, the strength of the Pancreatick Juice, in that
Concourse, will be altogether infringed; and the Exhalations, which are excited
by the Effervescency of those Humors, will ascend, not so much with Acid, as
Lixivious Particles; which, when they reach to the Stomach, by infringing its
Fermentation, they will hinder the Concoction of the Aliment, and destroy the
Appetite: but if it happen that those Exhalations ascend to the Jaws, there,
amongst other Incommodities, they will induce a Dryness of the Mouth,
especially if they infect the Spittle with their Salsitude: But if they proceed
further, through the Milky Veins to the Heart, from whence, with the blood,
they may pass through the other parts of the body, they will also produce a
Heat in those, as at first in the Intestines; and there more troublesome, where
those Exhalations are most sharp.

If a more sharp Pancreatick Juice concurreth with a sharper Bile, there will
presently be a mighty Effervescency excited in the Duodenum, whereby the
Intestines are sometimes so distended, that they threaten a Ruption; which
thing we have very often observed, whilst we applied our selves to our Study in
Leyden, whilst we mixed together diverse Liquors sit for Fermentation in two
little Vessels, in part of the Intestine intercepted by Ligatures, (even as D.
Schuyl has expressed it, Fig. B. in his Treatise, De veteri Medicina)
wherefore we judge, in the first instant Emission of those sharp Exhalations
which way soever turned about, that, that Effervescency will excite very many
grievous Incommodities; many whereof will also presently cease by the
Dissipation of those Exhalations, because either Humor being enervated after
that Intestinal Conflict lays down its force, and cease from further
contention; for in such an Effervescency the acid Particles are so joined with
the Saline, that without great difficulty they are never to be separated;
wherefore as unworthy they are expelled from the body for Atra-bilis, if the
acid over-grow the Salt, and get Dominion; in the mean time, they most
miserably afflict the body, no otherwise than as Hostile Soldiers, the place
through which they pass, by Eroding, and Ulcerating, etc. From whence Fluxes of
the belly, Vomitings, Tenesmus, Dysenteries, and six Hundred other
Incommodities springing from the Atra-bilis will proceed, and those the more
grievous, or more gentle, as the acidity of the Pancreatick juice shall remain
more or less, intemperate after the said Conflict.

If besides the Bile, and the Pancreatick juice offending even now spoken of,
much Phlegm sticks in the Gutts, and if the same phlegm be viscous, by reason
of the Incommodities already declared, there will happen Flatulencies, the
force and energy of which, whereby they are obnoxious to men, he that desires
to be informed, let him read J. Fiennus, and others, who have professedly
Written of Flatulencies.

If a sharper Pancreatick Juice concurs with a more sluggish Bile, it will not
excite so manifest an Effervescency, but by its Acrimony will stir up wringings
of the Gutts, Erosions, etc. but if being more intemperate, passing through the
little Channels of the Lactean Veins, it touches the first and last residence
of life, it will produce the Auxiety of the Heart, Syncope, and many other
Incommodities hereafter recited, whose symptoms will be of larger continuance
than those which we have deemed to arise from Exhalations, and from thence a
greater Intemperance of the Pancreatick Juice may be feared, when the Bile,
wherewith it is wont to be attempred, is sluggish and insipid, as the most
learned Glisson, amongst other things writes, that he has observed in his
Anatomy of the Liver, at the end of the 39. Chapter, where he says: There was
with us a Woman Cachectick, in whose Biliar Vesicle we found a serous Humor a
little pale, little bitter, or rather insipid, but next to a sweetness.

The like to which we have also observed in the Icterick, or those Afflicted
with the Jaundies, in the Year 1664. being Dissected by the famous Sylvius, in
the Hospital of Leyden, whose Bile, whilst we more accurately examined, in the
House of D. Elsner, in the presence of D. Kohnius, we found it plainly serous,
and so little endued with a Yellow color, that a Linen Rag being put into it,
would scarcely be tinged with any Yellowness, and to the Tongue exhibited
little or nothing of Amaritude.

CHAP. IX. The Diseases proceeding from a vitiated Pancreatick Juice.
EVen as from the Vitiation of the Pancreatick Juice, we have showed that
diverse Functions are hurt; so from the same Fountain do we judge that various
Effects may be derived: Amongst which we shall deservedly assign the first and
chiefest place to all Agues, and intermitting Feavours, because we judge the
Accesses thereof to be ascribed to the Pancreatick Juice, being stagnant in one
or more of the lateral Ducts, by reason of an Obstruction made by Phlegm, and
by reason of the force of the Acrimony increased, one while sooner, another
while later, prepares a passage for it self through the obstructing Pituity,
then causing a vicious Effervescency in the Duodenum, and being translated to
the Heart, produces a preternatural pulse.

Which Opinion, seeing that hitherto it has been known to few, to avoid
confusion in the end of this little Book, we have set a part an entire Chapter,
wherein we will treat of intermitting Fevers, to which we send the Reader,
whilst in the mean time, we go forward to the other Diseases, springing from
this more intemperate juice.

It seems probable to us, that the cause of the Arthritis (or Gout) derives its
original from the said acid Pancreatick Juice; namely, when its elevated
acidity, either with Phlegm, or the Serum of the blood is carried to the
joints, and lies in them; the symptoms also concurring, seems to persuade the
same thing to us; for those pains for the most part are wont both to invade,
and be exasperated with a Paroxysme of a Fever, but according to the diverse
manner, wherewith the Bile and the intestinal Pituity are affected; so those
pains of the Joints do also manifest themselves after a diverse Mode, with the
rest of the concomitant Symptoms.

The same thing is testified by the Urine, which once for curiosity sake, we
tasted with Doctor Roosendael, in which we found a notable Acidity. We have
also observed (which seems not a little to confirm this our Opinion) in these
Regions, that Wine, especially Renish, is exceedingly adverse to those who are
obnoxious to this Distemper; the which we judge to happen from the same,
because that Wine contains in it a greater acidity than other Wines.

That this more acid Pancreatick Juice does increase Hunger, and stir up and
insatiable, and Dog-like Appetite; few hereafter will doubt, who have
considered diligently, that the Pancreatick Juice, and the sharp Exhalations
thereof do ascend even into the Stomach, as is manifest by the Sower Belchings,
violently breaking forth, and sometimes by the Vomiting forth of Humors, more
or less acid.

If they say that that juice which is effused into the Intestine, the breadth
of four Fingers below the Pylorus, cannot ascend through the Pylorus into the
Stomach, it being naturally shut; we may also ask how the Bile (which by all is
granted) may ascend to the Stomach, which issues into the Intestine by the
same passage: If they say it comes to pass by the in verted peristaltick Motion
of the Intestines, we then say, that by the same Motion, the Pancreatick Juice
may also ascend, to which we shall add that Exhalations do far more easily
ascend into the Stomach than the Humors.

More acid Exhalations being excited, from the Pancreatick Juice, through its
Effervescency, and altogether with Flatulencies, carried through the Venae
Lactae to the Heart, and from thence to the Lungs, and there sticking, do not
only cause a difficult Respiration, but also a dry Cough; the Confirmation of
which, we have not only seen in the Hospital of Leyden, but elsewhere: For, in
the diffecting of Dead Bodies, we have often found the Parenchyma of the Lungs,
and its Vessels, as yet distended with Wind. If a Viscid Pituity accompanies
those Windy Exhalations, and be detained in the Lungs, what does it then
produce but the Species of an Asthma? But if those Exhalations, and
Flatulencies, do tend further to the Head, the pains thereof will produce
Alienation of the Mind, and sometimes infinite other Discommodities; every man
may believe, That the Epileptick Invasions of Children, which they call
Stuypiens, i. e. the Dutch.
does proceed from the said, more Acid, Pancreatick Juice, who has accurately
attended to those Invasions, and the Symptoms accompanying them, and the way
of Cure: For, besides that Acidity, which does very often breath through the
Mouth, they suffer the Gripings of the Belly; the Milk may likewise be
perceived to be concreted, both upwards, and downwards; the Excrements of the
belly are more Green, and give forth a sharp Odor: they are also cured by the
tempering of Acidity: as for Example, with Aqua Feniculi, Aqua Lillioru^
Conuallium, Spir. Salis Armoniaci, etc.

The same, more Acid, Pancratick Juice, carried to the blood, through the
Lactean Veins, will give it a greater Consistency; whence the Blood, less
Rarifying, will produce a lesser Pulse: From which, Vice highly exceeding, we
judge a Syncope, sometimes to be produced, which is not a little confirmed by
that Example which Lazarus Riverius relates in Lib. VIII. Fol. 358. of his
Practice concerning that Syncope, which P. Salius, as he reports, Lib. De
Afect. Practic. Cap. IV. observed in a Girl of 14 Years of Age: Who, after a
days suffering of Heaviness of the Head, Vertigo, and grievous Anxieties, the
day following suddenly dyed: Afterward her Body being diffected, the whole
blood in the great Artery and the Vena Cava appeared to be Concreted, and so
changed that it might entirely be drawn out from the Vein, and Artery, even as
a Sword out of its Scabbard.

Concerning which thing, if any doubt, either by ours, or others Examples, let
him take an acid Liquor, and pour it, by degrees, into the Vein of any Living
Dog, and he shall not only observe the Blood, therein, to be so Coagulated, and
Concreted, that the greater bloody Vessels may be transversly cut, without the
Effusion of the blood; but also when the acid Liquor shall come, in a notable
Quantity, to the right Ventricle of the Heart, that it will presently
extinguish, and kill the Dog. Also, no man will deny, that Convulsions, for the
most part, proceed from an Internal Cause, from the Acrimony of Humors,
irritating the Nerves, and causing, by a greater Influx of the animal Spirits,
into the Muscles, Involuntary, and also Violent Motions: But when there is a
two fold Acrimony of Humors, viz. Acid, and Salt, some perhaps may doubt,
which of these do most frequently produce those Convulsive Motions: But, for as
much as we can observe, they rather proceed from an acid Acrimony, than a Salt:
because we see that Aromatic Medicaments, and those abounding with a Volatile
Salt, do very much conduce to their Cure; which would never come to pass, if
they drew their Original from a Saline Acrimony. Besides, they are accompanied
with such Symptoms, which are wont to be the Concomitants of Diseases, arising
from an acid Acrimony: Yea, the Effects of Acids are allowed to be far more
powerful, as is to be seen in Helmont De Lithiasi. Cap. 9. Page 725.. 71. where
he relates, that he saw a Chemist, which, after he had been much Conversant
about making of Aqua Regia, he fell into the Palpitation of the Heart,
Convulsions, and many other Incredible Dolours, by reason of the acid
Exhalations, which mingled themselves with his Blood. From the same Acidity we
steadfastly believe, That the Strangury is very often produced, seeing that,
together with other Students, we have sometimes found the Urines of such as
have labored under the Strangury, in the Hospital of Leyden, to be Acid; and
also seen the same Persons cured with such Medicines, as temper Acidity.

The which if you are minded to try, says Helmont, De Pleura Furente. 14.
Whether or no the Strangury may not proceed from Acidity, mix some Drops at
least of sharp Wine, with the Urine, lately sent forth without pain, and inject
it again by a Syringe, and you shall find, to your Pain, that what I say, is
true. Also, that from the more acid Pancreatick Juice, Ulcers do sometimes
break forth in the Skin, corroding the same, as also producing very great
pains, they will not deny, who, following the Opinions of the Ancients,
determine them to arise from the Atra-Bilis; seeing that the Atra-Bilis of the
Ancients (as we have above Demonstrated) has its Original from the more acid
Pancreatick Juice.

We are like-wise plainly persuaded, that the more acid Pancreatick Juice,
especially if it has any Austerity conjoined with it, produces a greater
astringency of the Belly.

For, if the Bile, by its Acrimony irritating the Guts (as is granted) may
excite the Flux of the Belly, why may not that, which is contrary to such a
Bile, produce a contrary Effect? Notwithstanding, if the belly be bound by a
Viscid Matter, then we think, likewise, that a Flux may happen from the sharper
Pancreatick Juice, as it has a power of inciding, and attenuating, the Viscid
Pituity: From which it is manifest, that the Pancreatick Juice, according to
the Diversity of Humors, concurring with it, does very often produce a diverse
and contrary Effect; which thing we would have well noted, lest we should seem
to contradict our self, in explicating the Effects of this juice.

As yet we think, even as we seem to have already said, that the Atra and
Eruginous Bile is excited from the more acid Pancreatick Juice, and a certain
sharp Bile concurring; and consequently all Diseases, which Authors deduce from
them; and therefore they are not cured by other Medicaments, than those which
are fit to correct the more acid Pancreatick Juice: Which, as it is Consonant
with Reason; so it will not appear Incredible to those, who will consider the
things above spoken by us, with a more attentive Mind.

But perhaps some will say, after what manner does the Pancreatick Juice
produce the Atra-Bilis, seeing that we have ascribed the Whitishness of the
Chyle, after the Effervescency, in the thin Gut, to the acidity of the
Pancreatick Juice? To which we answer, That Acids, according to the Diversity
of the matter wherewith they are mixed, do also produce a diverse Color; for
example, pour an acid Spirit to common Sulphur, dissolved in a Lixivium, and
its red Color will be changed into white. Antimony Calcind, with Nitre or
Chalk, being boiled in Fountain Water, and any acid thing, being affused to its
clear Colature, will presently acquire a Saffron Color.

A clear Infusion of Galls, mixed with the Solution of Vitriol, makes Ink, to
which, if you add the acid Spirit of Vitriol, that Ink will lose all its
blackness, and become clear, like to Fountain Water. The Blew Tincture of
Violets, being mixed with Oil of Vitriol, will wax into a Purple. The Wood
Acanthus brought from Brasile, being infused in Common Water, does freely yield
a red Tincture, which put to Distilled Vinegar, acquires a Color like to
White Wind. A Knife, after it, has cut a Pomecitron, in the Middle, unless it
be wiped, and cleansed, from the Sour Juice of the Citron, in a short time
will be reduced to a nigrous Color. And why from the same acidity too much
exalted in Ulcers, the Cyrurgions Probe may not be stained with a certain
Blackness, (as we have very often observed) and such Ulcers be happily cured by
Temperating of the acidity, (as Helmont admonishes De Blase humano,. 53. we
leave to the judgment of others?

It may here suffice for us to have proved, that from one and the same acid,
permixed with diverse things; one while a White, another a Black, another a
Yellow, another a Purple, and so moreover other Colors may arise. He which
desires to excite many Colors in the Solution of Minerals and Vegitables
endued with no Color, let him go to that most curious Treatise which D. Willis
has written, concerning Fermentation, where page 88. Edit. Ang. he may find
very many Mutations of Colors not unprofitable; and being about to assign the
Reason thereof, he says in the following page: If the reason of this
Phaeno-mena be enquired, it ought altogether to be deduced from those minute
particles within the pores of every contained Liquor; which according to the
situation and position, being after a diverse manner altered by the Infusion of
another Liquor, do diversely transmit the beams of the light, and manifoldly
break, or reflect it, and so cause the diverse appearances of Colors, etc.

Having now unfolded the Diseases risen from the more acid Pancreatick Juice,
we seem in our selves to hear some in short to ask the Question, from whence
the acid Humor in the body may proceed, if we do not use any acid things? To
which we answer, that we can in no wise want those things which abound with an
acidity. For there is an acidity in the air, which appears, if the Caput
Mortuum of Vitriol be exposed to the air, which from the same eliciteth a new
acidity. Also, that the air is full of Nitrous particles, Gassendus, Entius,
Digbaeus, and others, which professedly, or otherwise ingeniously treat of this
Matter, have proved: But no man is ignorant, that Nitre contains in it self
an acidity. There is also an acidity inherent in Aliments: For in Kitchings, if
flesh, or other Aliments, begin to corrupt, their Broth does wax sower; yea, we
have collected an acid Spirit in quantity sufficiently large, from the sweetest
of Condiments, to wit, Sugar, by chemical Art.

There is also an acidity inherent in Drink; for Beer, or Ale, as also Wine,
being left to themselves, without the addition of any other thing, do wax
Sour: From whence, it is no wonder, as Hippocrates witnesses, Lib. De Vet.
Med. Text. 24 that there should be an Acidity in Men. But, it being granted,
that there is an acid Humor in our Bodies, some one, more desirous of Truth,
may ask, How it comes to pass, that it does not only corrode the parts of our
Bodies, but also Copper, and Tinn, as we have showed above? To this we shall
also answer, That the Fermentations, continually happening in our Bodies, is
sufficicient for this thing: For, we daily see that by their help, many things
are very sharp, which before were sweet, or at least Temperate: Whether now
this may happen by the Dissipation of the animal Spirits, or by reason of any
other inward Cause, we leave to the Judgment of others. Likewise, Experience
testifies, that Men, feeding upon a cold Diet, do sometimes, for the same
Reason, and Cause, fall into burning Fevers.

We have also deservedly ascribed the Uterine Suffocation, or Mother-fits, so
called, to the Pancreatick juice diverse ways vitiated, but especially the
Austere: The following Observation seems to give us no small light into the
Truth of this Matter, which our Friend Elsnerus, in the Year 1667. sent to us
from Paris to Andegave: We opened (says he) a Maid, extinguished by the
Suffocation of the Womb, in whose dead body we found nothing at all, to which
death might be ascribed, but the blood coagulated in the Ventricles of the
Heart, beyond the order of Nature. Which too much coagulation of the blood may
not be deduced from any other cause, than from an acid Juice, as we have
sufficiently proved.

But the reason why we judge that this Effect is not produced by the
Pancreatick Juice, being simply acid, is, that all women which have a sharp
Pancreatick Juice, are not affected with that Disease: And therefore we do the
more easily believe, that there is an austerity, or harsh Sowerness present
with it; because we have known almost the like Disease excited from the
Pancreatick Juice, being austere, in a certain Bitch, as also in a Famous Man,
the truth of which the following Testimony freely exhibiteth to us; done in the
Year 1663. as it was communicated to me by the most expert Dr. Sylvius: I
tested the Pancreatick Juice, and found it (first) as it were Saltish; but
afterward, the Relish being somewhat changed, it seemed then to be Sub-acid,
with a light Austerity; There was such a Stink produced in my Mouth, that two
of my Acquaintance, which were with us, admonished me concerning it: The Stink
was like to that which rises from Muddy, and strinking Water. My Mouth, and
Jaws, were not only exsiccated, or dried, but also so constringed, that I
seemed to be suffoccated; which like thing, I suffer by a Disease familiar to
me: And all these things vanished not suddenly, but remained, and endured for
a while, till they left me by Degrees, and of their own Accord.

The Bitch's Juice was brought to the Famous Dr. Sylvius, and exhibited to his
Taste, in our presence. From this, and the like Observations, it seems not
absurd to assert, That Men may some-time be affected with a like Hysteric
Suffocation; especially, when its nearest Cause happens, not from the Womb,
but from the small Gut; in which, by reason of the Vicious Effervescency of
concurring Humors excited, Exhalations, and austere Flatulencies are stirred
up; which, as often as they arise through the Oesephagus, or Gullet, and come
to the Arteria-Asperia, or Windpipe, they so constringe those parts, that the
Sick think themselves to be in the peril of Strangulation, or Choking.

That diverse Species of the Hypocondriack Affection may be produced by the said
Pancreatick juice diverse ways vitiated, the Books of Practical Physicians do
testify, and the symptoms confirm. But that we stay no longer upon the more
acid, and austere Pancreatick juice, and the effects from them arising; we
think fit to deduce at least one effect from the said juice more Salt, imagine
a serous Diarrhaea, which by its saline Acrimony, produces a more violent, and
more frequent peristaltick Motion of the Gutts.

These things being rightly considered, we doubt not but that by a diligent
tract of time, by the Observation of those who happen to be conversant about
the Sick, many effects will be made more manifest: And if there be more of Art
in knowing than in curing Diseases, who sees not that this Pancreatick juice
being altogether known, the cure of many Diseases may be performed more easily,
more speedily, and more profitably. First of all in this Treatise, we have
described the Diseases taking their Original from a more acid Pancreatick
juice, because they more often occur, and produce greater trouble, than those
which derive their Original from this juice by any other way vitiated, for the
acid Humor excelling the rest, Witness Hippoc. lib. de Vet. Med. Text. 42. 14.
of all others is the most Incommodious.

CHAP. X. How the vitiated Pancreatick Juice may be Corrected.
SEeing that it is not sufficient to have said in what manner the Pancreatick
Juice may offend, Namely, by exercising too great an Acidity, Salsitude, and
Amaritude; we have not restored it, says Hyppocrates, before that the same be
purged, and overthrown by the admixing of other things, Lib. de vet. Med. Text
34.

But with what Medicaments the Vices of the Pancreatick Juice, above declared,
may more easily be tempered, or evacuated we shall now handle in brief.

The more sparing Separation, or Excretion, of the Pancreatick Juice, happening
by reason of Viscidity, will be cured by Medicines, correcting any Viscidity;
such are Volatile Acids, as also Salts, as well Volatile as Fixed; especially
the Volatile Salt of Amber seems to agree with our business; which, besides the
Volatile Salt, also contains certain Acid Particles: But, as often as the
Pancreatick Juice is thought to be less acid, then use pure Acids, on the
contrary, as often as the Acidity thereof exceeds, then Salts are most
conducible. When the Excretion of the Pancreatick Juice is more sparing, by
reason of an Obstruction happening in one or more of the Lateral Ducts, the
Medicines, but now spoken of, are also profitable; for, except they loosen,
cleanse, and cast forth the Obstructing Pituity, or Remedy the Viscous Crudity
of the Blood, they will certainly profit nothing, as we shall endeavor, more
largely, to explain the same in the subsequent Chapter, when we shall treat of
intermitting Fevers.

The more Copious Increase of the Pancreatick Juice, will be Cured, as well by
abstaining from much Drink, especially such as is sharp; also by using such
Medicaments as may expel it from the body by the belly; as also Sweats, and
Urines. But, among such Medicaments, as educe it by the Belly, such as
Purge-Water, are convenient above others; by help whereof, the Serous Humors
are purged, more than the Bilious: which, some years since, we have observed in
not a few Dogs, to whom we exhibited, as well Hydragogues as Cholagues; and,
seeing that they excellently deponed the belly, we suddenly opened the Abdomen,
at the very time of purgation; the Dog's as yet living; which done, we could
observe, although difficulty, in those to whom we had given a Cholagogue, viz.
one Dram of Diagredium, that the Bile did flow in a far greater Quantity, from
the Intestinal biliar Duct; but in another, to whom we had exhibited a
Hydragogue, namely, of Powder of Jallap two Drams, we observed that the
Pancreatick Juice did break forth in a large Quantity, from its Ductus into the
Intestines, although then the Bile also did issue forth in a great Quantity;
and in another, to whom we had given a Cholagogue, the Pancreatick Juice did
also flow forth in a greater Quantity, than usual; nevertheless we are able to
collect, that the Bile is far more Copiously purged by Cholagogues, and the
Pancreatick Juice by Hydragogues.

In these Experiments, performed other things, did yet occur, worthy of note;
for first of all, at the very time of purgation, there was nothing deposited
through the Meseraick Arteries into the Cavity of the Intestines; but what so
ever of a Liquid matter remained in them, after expression, was sucked up by
the Venae Lacteae, or Meseraick Veins. Secondly, That those Ducts, in whom the
Lactean Veins appeared not: After 3. or 4. Hours Exhibition of Aliment, we cut
the Abdomen in them; neither the Bile, nor the Pancreatick Juice, was carried
to the Intestine, in a more than usual Quantity. Concerning which, seeing that
other things, as yet remain to be spoken to, we shall defer it to another
occasion, until by many Experiments, more surely made, we shall more perfectly
(also) understand the force of other Medicaments. The Pancreatick Juice, over
Fluid, will be corrected by the prudent assumption of Viscid Aliments; such are
Pills of Hound's Tongue, and other things which incrassate.

In reference to the Qualities of the Pancreatick Juice, perceptible to the
taste, if it offends by too much Acidity, Austerity, or Salsity, it will be
cured, First, With altering Medicines, as Hippocrates has rightly taught us,
De Vet. Med. Tex. 31. 20. where he says: And I perceive all other Fluxes,
which happen by reason of the Acrimony, and Intemperances of Humors, are
restored by their tempering and Cocting. But that will easily be absolved by
the Administration of the Medicines, even now spoken of.

The more Acid Pancreatick Juice will be cured, First, With a pure Volatile
Salt, as an Aromatic, by tempering the same.

Secondly, It will be cured with a Lixivious Salt, as well fixed as Volatile,
by infringing its Power.

Thirdly, It will be cured by Crabs Eyes, Coralls, Chalk, Shells, especially
being Calcined, fileings of Steel, and the like, by concentrating it.

Fourthly, It will be cured, by Oleous Emulsions, as also, by diverse Oils,
made as well by expression, as Distillation, as it were Wrapping about it, and
Blunting the Edge thereof. [I know not how to render Obvoluo and Obtundo
better].

Fifthly. It will be cured with water, and watery things, washing and weakening
it. But here no Purges are to be exhibited; because, hitherto, none are known;
which, without great difficulty, do educe the Acid Humors, not tempered; so
that, Aphorism of Hippoc. 22. Sect. 11. which says, Things cocted not crude,
being brought forth by a Purging Medicine, are not crude in their beginning,
unless they swell: But many do not swell; does rightly here take place. The
austere Pancreatick Juice will be cured by Volatile Salts, as first, by the
Distilled Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, after the addition of Salt of Tartar, and
Water; to which also, may be referred Castor, and its Tincture.

The Salt Pancreatick Juice, and a Diarhaea, from thence arising, may be cured
by the Diascordium of Fracastorius, Pills of Hound's Tongue, Coralls, burnt
Hart's-horn, Bezoar-Stone, and other things Incrassating, and also
Concentrating Salsitude.

CHAP. XI. The History of Agues, or Intermitting Fevers.
BEcause we have before promised, in the Nineth Chapter, that we would, in this
place, demonstrate, that Intermitting Fevers have their Original from the
Preternatural Disposition of the said Pancreatick Juice, we cannot but annex
their History; not because, the difficulty of Explicating these Fevers, is
obscure to us, nor shunneth none of the most Expert Physicians; So as,
hither-to, they have not satisfied the Curious in their Explications: So that,
being by most passed over with a dry Foot, they have left behind them a Series
of innumerable Difficulties; but, because we judge it to be a thing of so great
moment, that as many as hither-to have given themselves to the search of
Intermitting Fevers, have still desired to this Labor, the further Industry
of other Learned Men: For, very many Diseases do every day occur in our
Practice, wherein that Fever either proceeds, is concomitant, or does
follow; So that, sometimes it requires an entire Method of Curation, for it
self.

Which, seeing it is so, we think our Cogitations, and Experiments, not to be
ungrateful to the Curious Searchers of Nature, especially if we hold their
minds not long in suspense, by rehearsing the Sentenses and Opinions of many
Authors, as they ordinarily have done, who have gone before us, in the same
kind of Study: or retain those things, by showing an entire Series of
Questions, relating more to Curiosity, than to the necessity of the thing to be
known; but we shall presently expound, in a few words, as much as is possible,
those things which we judge concerning this matter.

Seeing that Aristotle has rightly said, Lib. 2. Physic. Cap. 13. That there
can be a sure Knowledge of nothing, the Cause, or Original whereof, is not
known: We, contrary to the Common Order, shall endeavor to pursue the Nature
of Intermitting Fevers, by searching out their Signs and Causes.

Seeing that all Physicians, which have hither-to written of Intermitting
Fevers, cry out that their Pathognomick Sign is a more Frequent, and
Preternatural Pulse; to know the Nature, altogether of Intermitting Fevers, by
searching into the Causes of the Pulse, we judge with the never sufficiently
praised Fran. de le Boe-Sylvius, that the Cause of a more Preternatural Pulse,
is either (first) the too much, and Permanent Rare-faction of the Blood,
arising from a more Potent Fire, breaking forth from the Effervescency of both
Bloods. Or, Secondly, because of any sharpness, being at one time Acid, at
another Lixivious, another while brinishly Salt, driven through the Veins,
with the Blood, to the Heart, and Internally gnawing the Parenchyma of the
Heart. Or, Thirdly, something halituously Flatulent, and like-wise carried with
the Blood to the Heart, or excited, by the Effervescency, in the Heart; and
increasing the Explication of the Ventricles of the Heart. Or, Fourthly,
something sharp, or hard, either in the Peri-cardium, or elsewhere existing,
and externally gnawing, or pricking the Heart.

These few things being premised, there is none but may see, that the cause of
continual Fevers, is continually carried to the Heart, but the cause of
Intermittents by Intervals. It is not our purpose here to speak of Continual
Fevers, those that are desirous of searching out, and knowing of the Nature of
those, we recommend them to the Practice of Dr. Sylvius, where, amongst other
things, accurately delivered, they may find the exact Description of those
Fevers, Chap. 29. Page 407. And we, in the mean-time, being about to deliver
the Description of Intermitting Fevers, shall say, That such a Focus, or
Minera, of Intermitting Fevers, is required, which is apt to transmit the
cause of a more frequent, and Preternatural Pulse, by Intervals, to the Heart.

Sundry men have sought this Minera, in diverse parts of the Body; some have
immagined they have found it in the Mass of Blood, which, to some others seemed
less true, to whom the Continual Motion of the Blood, was known; because the
Circulation of the Blood is performed once, twice, or four times a day: For,
the most accurate Dr. Lower, in his Treatife of the Heart, Fol. 156. proves,
That the Blood of a Man, well disposed, circulateth through the Heart, in the
space of one Hour, thirty times: But being granted, (which in no wise, may be
denied) that the Mass of Blood, of the whole body at least, sometimes in a Day,
does flow back to the Heart; part of which, if evilly affected, as often as it
transiteth the Heart, would produce a Fit of a Fever; and so, from the Blood
naturally following, neither a Tertian, or a Quartan Fever may be deduced,
unless they say that the Blood does absolve this Tragedy, being preternaturally
detained in any part of the body; which like-wise, does not alike appear to
those, to whom it is known, how easily the Volatile Spirits exhale, by the
Detention of the blood, and the remaining Particles of the blood being made
more sharp, do suddenly excite, mutually, among themselves, a Heat and
Inflammation of the Part; to which, if an Aposteme be subjoyned that will affect
the Blood, passing through its Circuits continually, and not by Intervals:
Whence if a Fever follows, it ought not to be called an Intermitting, but a
Continual Fever.

If they say that the obstruction is not expected to the generation of
intermitting Fevers, but to furnish the phlegm which is of that nature that
daily, the yellow Bile which. every third day, and the Atra-bile which every
fourth day may produce a certain ebullition: many of a higher ingenuity, may
ask first whether or no those humors such as they are described in the Schools
can be Demonstrated to be in the mass of Blood, seeing it is evident by what is
already said the Atrabilis derives its original from the yellow Bile, and more
acid pancreatick Juice. Secondly, how does that seem probable that a humor
more cold, tenatious, and unapt for motion, as phlegm, daily, and a hot humor
being more fluid and being fit for motion as yellow Choler, should every other
day only excite a feverish Ebullition in the Blood; Thirdly, how intermitting
Fevers may be changed from quotidians into tertrans, quartans, and the
contrary. Fourthly, to what humors they can ascribe Quintans, sextans, or
those which have more seldom periods (of which Fernelius lib. 4. cap. 14.) if
they determine that each Feavour draws its Original from a certain peculiar
Humor.

But they which have held the minera of intermitting Fevers to be latent in
some part of the Body, have most of them sought it in the Abdomen; for
nauceousness, loathing of Food, Torments, Colds, Horrors, Rigors, and other
preludiums of the fits conspicuous to none but such as are more attentively
disposed, do show the Abdomen to be evilly habited. A vomiting excited either
by Nature or Art, and very often, presently asswageing the fierceness of the
fits, shows the principal ways or passages thereof to be evilly habited. The
Cure it self of the Abdomen also in the beginning of the access declares the
same according to Fernelius de sede intermittentium lib. 4. cap. 10. for
Fomentations applied to the Hypocondriaes procure a remission of horror, rigor,
and other Symptoms.

But what part of the Abdomen in these Fevers is evilly affected, has wearied
the brains of many; for so confusedly have they sought their minera, that
nothing of certainty can be concluded from their writings or opinions; for some
have sought it in the meseraick Veins, some in the Branches of the vena porta
between the Liver and the Spleen, some in other Vessels, yea also in the great
Colon, the duplicature of the Omentum which is under the ventricle, and in
innumerable other things have they determined the focus of intermitting
Feavours, whose Clouds of falsity in these our more happy times the sun of
Truth has so discussed and dissipated, that they want not our improvement.
Therefore least we consume our own, and the Readers time, by writing more
things obvious as well in the Books of the Ancients as in the Moderns, we shall
willingly pass them by: Seeing that the cause of all intermitting Feavours
seems to us to be contained in the pancreas alone.

The reason of this Opinion is this, that having considered the parts of the
whole Body of man, which by intervals only may transmit the Cause of these
Fevers to the heart, none can be found in the whole body to which not only the
Focus of intermitting Fevers, but also the causes of all their symptoms may
be imputed besides the Pancreas.

But some perhaps may say, that heat, thirst, ulcers, breaking forth in the
lips of the Feverish, bitter Vomitings, Choleric Excrements, and other
symtomes wont to accompany tertain Fevers do declare the bile to be primarily
offended, wherefore the Cause of all intermitting Fevers ought not to be
ascribed to the pancreas alone.

But truly this objection will fall of its own accord, those things being known
which we shall speak of in the following Discourse concerning the Reasons of
diverse Symptoms; for we know that in tertians the bile is very often
predominant, but it is to be noted that its abundance does not cause an
intermitting Fever; because that is perceived after it has excited a vicious
Effervesency by intervals with the pancreatick Juice, in which if the bile gets
Dominion, the signs thereof even now declared do sometimes manifest themselves;
but because this Effervescency proceeds from the pancreatick Juice
preternaturally disposed, that Fever is not ascribed to the Bile, but to the
Pancreatick Juice, as, by the Sequel, shall more plainly appear. We judge the
cause of Intermitting Fevers to be an Obstruction, made in one or more of the
Lateral Ducts; because of Pituity, carried thither in too large a quantity, and
there detained: Which thing seems to us to happen for the following Reason; to
wit, For as much, as the Pituity, of the thin Guts, especially that sticking to
the sides, lest they should be hurt by the abounding Humors, being in too
great a quantity, by reason of the immoderate Exercises of the Body, and
perhaps by an overmuch use of hot Aliments, or by some Error, committed in the
six Non-Naturals, is dissolved, and with other Humors, carried to the Heart,
by the Milky Veins: From whence, by the Order of Circulation, this Phlegmatic
Matter, together with the rest of the Blood, is driven to the Pancreas; and
being separated in its Glandules, with the Pancreatick Juice, it enters the
Lateral Ducts of the Pancreas; in which, either by the External Cold, or of
that Bowel it concreteth, and is Coagulated; by which reason, it obstructeth
either one or more of the Laterall Ducts.

We think the accesses of intermitting Fevers, ought to be ascribed to the
Pancreatick Juice, stagnant in one or more of the Lateral Ducts, by reason of
an Obstruction; and one while sooner, another while later, preparing a way for
it self, through the Obstructing Phlegm, by its Acrimony increased; and not
only causing a Vicious Effervescency in the small Gut; but being every way
carried, especially to the Heart, produces a more frequent, and preternatural
Pulse.

Which, that it may more clearly appear, we shall spend a little time in the
unfolding thereof.

That Coagulation, which we have mentioned to happen in the Pancreatick Juice,
we have some-time observed in a Dog, whose Juice we endeavored to collect in
the Winter time; which, by the cold of the Ambient Air, was so thickened, that
only a little would flow forth, and of a gross Consistency, until the Dog,
being placed before the Fire, between two Pillows began to grow hot; from
whence the Pancreatick Juice did flow more Fluid, and more Copiously. We have
observed, that the Coagulation of the Pancreatick Juice has excited
Obstructions, in the Lateral Ducts, of the Pancreas, as in the Year 1663, with
the Famous Dr. Sylvius, in a certain Woman, laboring under an intermitting
Fever, into whose Ductus Pancreaticus, after Death, we injected, by a Syringe,
a very Volatile bluish Liquor; which, out of the great Duct, into which it was
cast, did penetrate into most of the Lateral Ducts, whilst in a few, although
more near to the Intestinal great Duct, by reason of an Obstruction, it was
stopped: From whence, by the said Color, the Substance of the Pancreas it
self, was tinged in one place, and not in another.

The Pancreatick Juice, being stagnant in one or more of the Lateral Ducts, by
reason of an Obstruction, by its delay becomes more sharp, and at length,
perforating the Obstructing Phlegm, prepares it self a passage, through the
Obstruction, into the common or middle Duct, until all the detained Juice,
being effused, the Phlegm as yet adhereing to the sides of the Duct, grows
together again, and by its mutual Reunion, renews the Obstruction: Whence at
length, the Pancreatick Juice is Collected for the following Fit; which again,
by its delay, being made more sharp, does again perforate the Obstructing
Pituity, and produces a new Paroxysme; which Fits, return always at the same
time, as often as the Pituity, causing the Obstruction, does occur, in the same
Quantity, and Viscidity, with the Pancreatick Juice, of the same Acidity, and
Acrimony.

The Pancreatick Juice is made more sharp by Stagnation, in as much, as the
Animal Spirits do not so straightly embrace it, but leave it obstructing: Hence
therefore, by the dissipated Spirits, wont to attemper it, there redounds a
greater Acidity of the Pancreatick Juice. Would you have a Simillitude? We will
grant it: New Ale, included in Hogsheads, Whether or no, by a certain delay, it
does not lose its Sweetness? Consider, that all Wine turns to Vinegar, the
Spirits being dissipated; also that Vinegar it self, by delay, is made more
sharp.

For, every heat, dissipating the Animal Spirits, causes every sharp thing to
be more sharp: So that, it ought to seem strange to none, if we say, that the
Pancreatick Juice, by stagnation, deserteth its genuine Disposition, and
passes into a more acid Acrimony. But the Pancreatick Juice, being made more
sharp by stagnation, and effused into the thin Gut, with the Flegmme and Bile,
stirs up a vicious Effervescency; and indeed, by reason of such a Pancreatick
Juice, stretchings, yawnings, and horrors are produced, and everywhere a sense
of Cold, especially in the Region of the Loins, in which the Fit begins.
Neither is that first called a Fever, which either the Pancreatick Juice, it
self, vitiously Effervescing in the small Gut; or at least, Exhalations from
thence arising, and at length, carried to the right Ventricle of the Heart;
and, after a certain manner, irritating it to a more frequent Contraction of it
self. But we judge that the Pancreatick Juice, by its acid Acrimony, performs
this thing; although nothing hinders, but that something of a Saline Acrimony,
arising from the Bile may concur: because we daily observe, that Exhalations do
ascend in the Effervescency, between Acids and Salts; which, being moved to the
Nose, by its Acrimony, causes Offense. Intermitting Fevers by the reason
already given, proceeding from the Pancreatick Juice, are divided into Simple,
and Compound; the Simple, by reason of their Fits, returning at diverse times,
are distinguished into Quotidians which daily, Tertians which every other day,
and Quartans which on the fourth day, Quintans which on the fifth, etc. do
return.

Those are called Compound which excite diverse fits in one and the same sick
person, and they are either of the same Species: as double quotidians, double
or treble tertians, double or treble quartans, etc. Or they are of a diverse
Species, as a Quotidian with a Tertian, a Tertian with a Quartan, etc. We shall
say nothing in this place concerning those Fevers which are compounded of
intermittents and continual, tho we know they are daily to be observed by
practitioners; for he which has known and inspected the Nature of intermitting
and continual Fevers, may consider that this complication carries nothing of
difficulty to our Opinion, which is clearer than the Meridian Light. They are
also distinguished by reason of an urgent cold, and heat into cold, and burning
Fevers; although for the most part the cold is wont to go before, and the heat
to follow, Vanhelmont in his Treatise of Fevers Chap. 1.. 5. Writes that the
sick are sometimes troubled with cold alone, and experience also witnesses the
same.

Hence unless we be egregiously Deceived, we may infer with the surest
Foundation, that the essence of Fevers consists not in heat (as many lead by
speculation, more than by the verity of the matter, do boldly maintain) because
then heat would be allways present with the Fever: neither could the Fever be
existent without heat, which nevertheless, they do, or may observe daily, who
least of all attend to the practice of Physic, do but visit the sick: I say
they may observe in the beginning of most intermitting Fevers, when the bodies
of the sick are terrified and shaken with cold, that cold alone is troublesome.
Nevertheless, lest it should seem a new and unheard of thing, which we speak,
that the Essence of Fevers does not consist in heat, besides experience, we
shall bring the Authority of Hypocrates which seems to teach the same thing
lib. De Vet. Med. Text. 30. 7. where he says:

I think this to be the greatest sign that men do fall into Fevers not simply
because of heat, neither is this simply the Cause of the affliction; but it is
bitter and hot, and hot and acid, and salt and hot, and infinite other things;
and again cold conjoined with other faculties. These therefore are the things
which hurt, etc. But if any one notwithstanding be so captivated to his
prejudices, that he denies a trembling and a horror to be the beginning of
intermitting Fevers, let him also persuade himself, as he must, that those who
at the time of that cold do die (as others have often seen, and our self also
within this eight days) expire without a fever; which nevertheless to men
conversant in Physic, will seem no less false than ridiculous.

Perhaps no man will deny that in some fevers, tertains especially, no Cold
being perceived, and by reason of heat alone continually urging at the time of
the fits, they may be called burning fevers, and although any through a desire
of Contradiction should deny that burning, such fevers will not therefore
cease to be observed.

Forasmuch as no fever makes its progress alone, but for the most part is
accompanied with diverse symptoms, some of which do torment the sick no less
than the fever it self, they are distinguished, or at leastwise may be
according to the diversity of symptoms manifesting themselves with each fit
into Syncopals, Hystericks, Colical, Raving, Greedy, Astmatical, Arthritical,
Catharral, Emeticks, Catharticks, Salivals, etc. If any demand a Reason, why
the fits return one while daily, another every third day, another every fourth
or fifth day, and that so certain as the hand of a Dial goes not more exactly?
We shall say that all the diversity depends, partly upon the diversity of
obstructing phlegm, partly that of the stagnant Pancreatick Juice, for as there
is found in the lateral Duct obstructed more or less pituity, and as it is more
or less viscid, and the Pancreatick Juice more or less sharp, so the pituity
causing the obstruction, will sooner or later be perforated by the Pancratick
juice being made sharp by stagnation.

And although the beginnings of fits mutually following one another, are not
always distant 24. 48. or 72. hours; but sometimes 18, sometimes 24, sometimes
30, sometimes 36, and 40 Hours, etc. Nevertheless Physicians are wont to
distinguish the fits according to days; so that by quotidians they intend not
only those which return every 24. hours, but these also which make their
accesses in 18. yea, 30 hours; the former of which they call Antiponents or
going before, the later post-ponents. [which word is generally understood] So
those fits which return every 48. hours are truly esteemed for tertians, but
not those only; for they also which are returned every 36. or 40. hours are
called tertians, but anteponents, as also those which are repeated every 50.
55. or 60. hours are called Tertians, and likewise Post-ponents.

The Cause of this inequallity of the fits, seems to us to proceed from the
obstructing phlegm being more or less viscid, or the whole Pancreatick Juice
more or less sharp, and that by reason of the diverse use of the six
Non-naturals.

By this reason it is not difficult to us to unfold how Quotidian fevers are
changed into Tertians, and Tertians into Quartans, Quartans into Quintans, and
the contrary; which thing they find very difficult, who determine that
Quotidians arise from Phlegm, Tertians from Yellow Choler, and Quartans from
Melancholy.

The Fits return so long, as the obstructing Pituity is not totally removed
from the Duct, but remaining therein is again compelled to renew the
Obstruction; But when the Viscid Phlegm, either of its own accord, or by art,
is so evacuated, that nothing thereof remains, which may be joined together,
whereby the obstruction may be renewed; then also the Fevers are Cured. But as
often as only one of the Lateral Ducts is obstructed, so often is one, and
indeed a simple Fever, produced. But as often, as many of the Lateral Ducts
are obstructed together, so often are many and manifold Compound Fevers
produced; which are either of the same, or of a diverse Species: Obstructions
are of the same Species, when they are of the same Nature, and Pertinancy, in
diverse Ducts of the same Magnitude. Obstructions are of a diverse Species,
when they are of a diverse Nature, and Pertinancy, in diverse Ducts, in like
manner differing from one another in Magnitude. We say in diverse Ducts of the
same, or a diverse Magnitude, seeing that as often as the Obstruction arises
from a like Pituity, in diverse Ducts, of the same Magnitude, and Amplitude: So
often the Pancreatick Juice, being made sharp by stagnation, will, in an equal
space of time, perforate the obstructing Pituity; and also, in an equal space
of time, will produce the Fit: But as often as Ducts, of a different Magnitude,
and Amplitude, are equally obstructed by a Viscid Phlegm, so often shall we
see a Diversity in the Fits; in as much, as it may sooner, and more amply, wax
sharp, in one Duct, and thence the Fit may sooner return, and more grievously
afflict than in another; or as often as obstructions do happen in Ducts, of the
same Magnitude, from a Pituity, not alike Viscid; so often, like-wise, may the
Fits invade the Sick at diverse times; for as much as the Pancreatick Juice,
equally waxing sharp, will sooner perforate the less viscid pituity, than that
which has a greater Viscidity.

From those things, which we have now propounded, it will not be difficult to
explain, How in a double Tertian, or other Compound Fevers, one Fit may,
unexpectedly, come in an Hour or two, after another: For, the obstructions may
happen in Ducts of the same Magnitude, from a Pituity alike Viscid; so that,
one obstruction may be excited the first Hour, and another the fourth Hour; the
which, if in Tertians, (unless some fault, as we have said, be committed in the
six Non naturals) the first will again return on the third day, the first hour,
and the second at the fourth Hour, etc. Which, in our judgment, affords no
small difficulty to those who hold, that Intermitting Fevers, are brought to a
Turgescency, by Congestion, from an evil habit of the Blood, or of the
Alimentary Juice, depraved: as for example, seeing that the Alimentary Juice,
depraved, does excite, by its Turgescency, a feverish Effervescency in the
Blood, in the first Hour, Why may not that Quantity of the (depraved)
Alimentary Juice, serving to produce another Fit, which like-wise begins to
swell, in the same Blood, being in the same Effervescency, be enkindled, and
consumed? Truly, we favor not that Opinion; neither also, can we conceive
how, in those which are fasting, the Feverish Fits so often, beyond measure,
could be returned at the same time.

From what has been said, the reason is also manifest, wherefore in a double
Tertian, or Quartane, etc. the fit does precisely anticipate, or succeed, an
Hour; no other-wise, than as they arise from one, and the same, Lateral Duct:
For, as the whole Pancreatick Juice, and the obstructing Pituity of both, grows
more or less sharp; also, the Pituity of both, more or less Viscid: the Fits of
both do equally return sooner or later. There are Fevers, whose Species by
some, are difficultly distinguished; as for example, a Quotidian, from a double
Tertian, or Triple Quartan; for, of those three Fevers, each daily excite one
Fit; which distinction, nevertheless creates no trouble to such as are
attentive to the matter: For, a Quotidian does ordinarily invade the Sick,
either at one Hour, or equally sooner, or later. The double Tertian, for the
most part, so has its Fits, that the first access answers to the third, and
the second to the fourth, etc. But in a Triple Quartan, the first Fit answers
to the fourth, and the second to the fifth, etc.

Which things being rightly Considered, every one may easily distinguish these
Fevers, mutually from one another, unless some external fault disturb the
order or frame of the Body, either in whole or in part. The diversity of those
Symptoms so variously occurring, does not overthrow those things which we have
propounded concerning intermitting Fevers, especially of heat and cold seeing
that diversity depends upon a diverse Constitution, of the rest of the
Humors existent in the Body. For otherwise a fit of a tertian Fever,
happening to a Body replenished with much Bile, and that sufficiently sharp,
would last far longer than a fit happening to that Body where but little bile,
and that as yet temperate is remaining. Also a greater or lesser quantity of
phlegm, as likewise plenty of other humors abounding in the body, may not a
little augment this diversity.

But because it may not suffice to have said, that the primary Symptoms of
intermitting Fevers are heat and cold, it behooves that we here also, annex
our Opinion concerning their Cause and Original We Judge that the cold of
intermitting Fevers, draws its Original from the more acid Pancreatick Juice,
and heat especially from a more acrimonions Bile; the former is evinced by the
assumption of acid things, as Galen proves in a thousand places from things
helping and hurting, that acids are cold, and do produce cold, and that not
only in the sick, but also in the sound; in which sometimes we see alike Cold
to have been excited, as those which are feverish are wont to suffer, and any
one may observe, if acids be taken by those which are feverish in the time of
the cold fit, that the feverish cold will be increased after a wonderful
manner. He that refuses to believe these our observations, let him read Galen
De Simp. Med. Facult, where he says: Every Acid, as it is only acid, is
plainly cold; whether it be a Pear or an Apple, the Juice of Grapes or
Rasberies, or Mulberies, punick Apples, or any other Fruit, or Juice, or
Plants, as sharp pointed Dock or Sorrel; for that it appears to the taste that
there is a vehement Acidity inherent in it, neither may any thing be preferred
before it; for its Acrimony, you shall find this Juice altogether cooling, etc.
as also in the same Book Cap. 7. and in infinite other places he teaches, that
Acids are cold, and produce cold in our Bodies.

That the qualities of Humors are to be known by their effects, Hyppocrates
Lib. De Vet. Med. Text. 39. 5. does diligently inculcate: Know that the chief
Forces of Humors is in their acid Faculty; which likewise in the 23. of the
same, from manifest things which behooves to be Learned without the Body, he
manifestly teaches. Moreover, Lib. de Locis in Homine Text 56. 10. He says,
that Acids are also pituitous, which in Lib. de Natura Humana Text. 12. 2. He
manifestly declares to be most cold of all things existing in the Body: The
which, unless it were true, untowardly would Galen in his whole Book concerning
Food in acute Diseases, and those who are his diligent followers, prescribe an
acid medicamentous Diet, in acute Fevers.

Although no man perhaps can easily deny, heat to proceed from the Bile, in
regard we see that our natural heat is much augmented by the assumption of
bitter, and aromatic Aliments and Sauces, augmenting Choler and making it more
sharp. Besides, both is proved by the Remedies exhibited, diminishing or taking
away those Symptoms; For we see clearly, that by medicines infringing the
Acidity, the Cold is attempered and taken away; and we likewise observe that by
medicines tempering the Bile, especially Acids, the heat is lessened, as we
shall presently in many things further Demonstrate.

From whence every one may easily imagine the Reason, why for the most part the
fits of intermitting Fevers, are begun with a sense of Cold, and terminated
with heat: For the Pancreatick Juice being made more sharp by stagnation in one
or more of the lateral Ducts; after which flowing into the thin Gut, there
exciteth such an effervescency with the Bile, wherein the Succus Pancreaticus
by its predominant Acidity every way emits or sends forth acid Exhalations,
affected with a sense of Cold; which when they touch the Gallbladder by their
acrimony provoke it to its Contraction, from whence the Bile breaking forth
into the Intestine, in a more than usual quantity overwhelmes the Pancreatick
Juice, and raises therewith such an Effervescency, in which the Bile
predominating Excites heat, by sending every way its exhalations or Emissaries.

This our Opinion, is in a wonderful manner confirmed by the Vomitings, which
very often happen to the Sick, at one time so cold and Acid, that brings a
stupor to the Teeth; and again on the contrary, another while so hot and
bitter, that they believe they Vomit nothing but pure Choler.

But some perhaps may ask, why we deduce Vomitings and acid belchings, rather
from the Pancreas, than from the Stomach? We answer, because it is agreeable to
experience, that the Pancreatick Juice is Acid, and seeing that the searchers
of Nature, do as yet dispute concerning the ferment of the Stomach and its
Generation, we judged that it ought to be determined, rather from a certain
than an uncertain Cause: And if it shall be evinced by further search in the
stomach of Men (we speak not of Birds who require a stronger fermentation to
digest Stones and other things of a hard consistency for the Generation of
Shells) that any other ferment is generated, besides the Spittle continually
swallowed, and that to be Acid, then shall we be so much the better able to
prove an Effervescency to be excited in the thin Gut, between the Bile, and the
Pancreatick Juice: Seeing that the Temperate, or Natural Acidity of the
Pancreatick Juice, would be helped by the acid Ferment of the Stomach; and from
thence, the Effervescency would be the more powerfully performed.

It is further proved, that the Acidity, cast forth by Vomitting, does not
proceed from the Stomach, but from the Intestines, by Vomitories, exhibited out
of the time of the Fit; by the help whereof, first an insipid Matter,
afterward, by further straining, an Acid, and Bilious Matter, is vomitted up;
the contrary of which would happen, if the Sour, and Choleric Matter, did
proceed from the Stomach. Concerning the manner by which Acids may get to the
Stomach, no man, of a sound mind, will doubt, who determines the Bile, ejected
by Vomiting, to proceed from the Intestines: Seeing that the Pancreatick Juice
may, and ought to be driven through the same ways, as the Bile, flowing to the
Intestines, by their inverted Peristaltick Motion, with the same ease to the
Ventricle, as we have above demonstrated.

Neither does the place a little confirm this our Opinion, in which, a
Feverish fit beginning, is for the most part perceived Cold, then Hot; as
also, a most fierce pain: We understand the Region of the Loins, in which the
first part of the thin Gut lies, under the Mesentery, as is to be seen Tab. I,
wherein the Confsux and Effervescency of the Bile, and the Pancreatick Juice,
is Celebrated; from which, the Particles of those Humors, being agitated upon
the Ligaments of the Mesentery, and other Nervous, and Membranous parts, they
dash against them, with an Impetuous force: So that, that Effervescency may
sometimes be perceived by the Touch in the Sick, as we have above demonstrated.
Nor does the Pancreatick Juice, being made sharp by stagnation, only exercise a
tyranny, in the Region of the Loins; but also sends forth its acid
Exhalations, both upwards and downwards; Who doubts that from the one the
Torments of the Belly, and from the other Acid belchings, do proceed? But if
those Exhalations penetrate through the Venae Lacteae, to the Heart, by
Incrassating the Blood, gives an occasion of a lesser Pulse; which,
nevertheless, by its corroding Acrimony, produces one more frequent. The Acid
Exhalations, being subdued in manner aforesaid, Salt and Bilious Exhalations
do follow; which again, by attenuating the Blood, do no less excite a great,
and sometimes also, a more frequent Pulse, by irritating the Heart; and that so
long till their Acrimony being spent, they can no longer irritate, or provoke
the Heart: Which done, the Vigor and Natural pulse of the Heart is returned:
So that, very often the most skilful can hardly judge, whether they have a
Fever or no.

We will not here speak (lest this Chapter should swell too much, with that
which we purposed to finish in few Words) concerning six Hundred other
Symptoms, which are wont to accompany Intermitting Fevers; seeing we are
persuaded there are none, at least, of those who with an attent mind, have
considered, that the Juice, or its Emissaries, after a diverse manner disposed,
does perambulate the whole Body, and may produce diverse Symptoms; but may,
from these things, deduce them by their own proper Industry.

Which seeing it is so, we leaving those small Circumstances, shall rightly
pass on to the Cure of intermitting Fevers, which as it Primarily consists
in taking away Obstructions, and correcting the Pancreatick Juice, and other
Humors if they be Vicious; so it may be most succesfully performed, first by
Medicines inciding and attenuating tough Phlegm, and sometimes expelling it
from the Body.

Secondly, By adhibiting Remedies, which are endued with a force of correcting
and temperating the Pancreatick Juice, offending by its Acrimony.

Thirdly, By correcting other Humors in the Body, this or that way so peccant
that they may Cherish the Vicious Effervescency excited in the thin Gut between
the Bile and the Pancreatick Juice. For the taking away the Obstruction,
temperating the more acid Pancreatick Juice, and the diminishing the Cold, from
thence proceeding, these following Medicines do much conduce, viz. Water of
Parsley, Fennel, Baume, Simple Treacle-Water, Salt of Wormwood, of Centary, the
lesser, Syrup of Carduus Benedicttus, or the five opening Roots, and the like,
being mixed according to Art, especially if taken half an hour before the
feverish Cold invades the Sick, who ought to be kept in his bed, or other warm
place, that Sweat may be a little promoted, or at leastwise that the operation
of the Medicine may not be hindered.

We say half an hour before the feverish Cold invade the Sick, because Reason
teaches, and Experience proves, that cutting and attenuating, as
unobstructing Medicaments do then with a far more happy Success absolve that
for which they are Administered, than if they were exhibited at any other time;
the Reason of which seems to us, because those Medicines begin to operate at
that time, wherein the Pancreatick Juice by its Acrimony does molifie the
Obstruction, and so by a united force, may more strongly and more happily
dissolve the Obstruction, than if either of those only were opperating:
Moreover, It very much diminishes the Feverish Cold, which as yet would be
performed with greater success, if to the mixture even now described, you shall
add a drop or two of Oil of Cloves, because as yet we see no medicament that
does more powerfully take away Cold than that Oil.

If a great Heat follow the feverish Cold, to attemper that Medicines called
Refrigeraters, among which aqueous things diluting the Bile seems to us most
agreeable, but especially Acids with which the acrimony and volatillity of the
saline Bile exceeding, producing Heat and burning is best infringed. For as
Doctor Minrotus says page 36. in his Treatise of Malignant Fevers, Acids do
repress the inflamabillity of a Sulphurous Matter without the Body, so also
within the Body they bridle the inflaming Bile.

So Hippocrates, De Victu Acutor. Text. 29. 9. manifestly Teaches that Acids
do infringe and mitigate the Bile. And this is the Reason, why the most
skilfullest Physicians do daily prescribe Acid Julips for the temperating of
that feverish Heat; as for Example, by the Decoction of Barley, or coolling
distilled Waters with Syrup of Limmons, Mulberies, or Barberies, etc. By adding
Spirit of Vitriol, Oil of Sulpher per Capanum, or other Acid Spirits in a
sufficient quantity to give it a grateful Acidity. For the same end they also
sometimes prescribe Apozems of the opening Roots, the Herb Sorrel, Lettice, the
greater Housleek, Tamarinds, etc. by adding after the boiling, some Acid
Syrrups, and an acid Spirit sufficient for a grateful Acidity, that the sick
may now and then take a small Draught thereof to temperate the Heat.

If a great Thirst afflict the Feverish at the time of Heat, half a Dram of
Lap. Prunella may be conveniently dissolved in the aforesaid Apozeme, or in
small Ale, or in a convenient Julip, for it excellently extinguisheth Thirst;
and therefore those to whom Drink is hurtful, may dissolve the same Medicament
in Water, but in a greater quantity, to wash the Mouth. Here it is well to be
noted, that at the time of the Heat, it is not necessary that the Sick should
abstain from moderate Drinking, which at the time of Cold is altogether
required; because we daily see, that if Drink be assumed at the time of the
Cold fit, that it is augmented, and the Sick more troubled.

If the Medicaments, even now mentioned for Example, do not take away the
Fever, in the Intervals wherein they are not vexed with the Fever, this
following mixture will much avail. R. Fennel Water three Ounces, Simple Treacle
Water six Drams, distilled Vinegar three Drams, Crabs Eyes prepared half a
Dram, Syrup of the five opening Roots, half an Ounce mixed. Of which most simple
mixture, let one spoonful be taken every two hours; for altering Medicines do
operate far better if they be taken by Intervals, then if they be taken
abundantly together and at once. If vehement Pains and Watchings do accompany
the Fever, Mixtures are to be used in the Intervals, to which is added, one
Grain of Laudanum Opiatum, which Medicament we do believe has also a force of
temperating the accimony of the Humors, because we see that Pains arising
from the Acrimony of Humors, remain not after Sleep procured by the prudent
assumption of Laudanum Opiat; which in our Opinion could not happen, if that
Laudanum had not a force of temperating sharp Humors.

If a pain of the Head accompany the Fever, in stead of fennel water, that of
bettony, or burrage, may be substituted; and in place of the Syrup of the five
Roots, Syrup of Diacodium, or white Poppies. But if the Stomach be evilly
affected, Water of Mint or of Carduus Benedictus will be used with better
success. If the menses flow not, Water of Peniroyal, Syrup of Mugwort, etc. may
be exhibited. If a suffocation of the Womb be present, in stead of those, may
be added Spirit of Sal Ammoniack, Tinct of Castor, etc. if the Sick be
tormented with flatulencies, Spirit of Nitre may be added; which remedy does
greatly help those which are troubled with a colic Passion, or any other
flatulent Diseases; especially if some Drops thereof be prudently mixed with
some Arromatick Waters, and the aforesaid Carminatives. If the Appetite be
prostrate by Reason of too great a quantity of Bile carried to the Stomach,
which will be known by the Appetite suddenly Destroyed, by bitter Belchings and
Choleric Vomitings, two Scruples of Elixir Proprietatis Paracelsi may be added
to the last mixture. But if the said evil proceeds from a vicid pituity
detained in the Stomach, which will be known by an aggravated pain in the
Stomach, half a Dram of the dulcid Spirit of Salt instead of Elixir
Proprietatis will be more Conducent if it be mixed with the foresaid mixture.

To the same intent may be directed also diverse Apozemes, and other medicate
Wines, Powders, Pills, and medicaments against the said Obstructions:
Nevertheless you must diligently diligently Note, that Apozemes and other
Medicaments especially refrigerating which promiscuously they daily compel the
Sick to swallow down in a great Dose, sometimes so debillitate their Stomachs
that the Appetite is thereby not only Destroyed, but sometimes fall into a
disdain or Loathing of Aliments, from whence a new Affliction is added to the
Sick, and the latter Error is also very often worse than the first. But if
notwithstanding before the Physician has attained his desired end, he thinks
some other Humor does offend by too much plenty, that may be diminished with
convenient medicines.

The Diet according to the diversity of intermitting Fevers, must sometimes be
changed, because Tertian Fevers accompanied with the greatest Heat, do require
a Diet more Cooling than Quartans which very often afflict the Sick with
intolerable Cold and Trembling: For we see the moderate use of French Wine,
which we are wont to forbid in all Tertians, sometimes to be granted in
Quartans. But such a Diet as may be agreeable to all intermitting Fevers,
every one may gather from what we have already spoken.

We would have further propounded some other Remedies as well accomodated to
intermitting Fevers as to their Symptoms, had not the most Famous Doctor
Sylvius in the first Part of his Praxis already Printed, proposed many, and the
most excellent of them.

From my Study, Feb. 2d. 167 5/6. at the Sign of the Globe, and Chemical
Furnaces, in the Postern, near Moor-Gate, London.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have taken notice of many People (especially of the Poorer sort) who are
afflicted with tedious Agues, and many more, who labor under those Deplorable
Fits, commonly called the Fits of the Mother, and Spleen; as also, the Falling
Sickness, Grievous Convulsions, etc. And being well satisfied, (as well by the
means of Curation, as the undeniable Experiments, and valid Reasons in this
Book, confirming the same) that those Diseases, with many more, derive their
Original from the Vicious Alteration of this Juice, of the Sweetbread: I, for
the sake of poor People, that they might have help at an easy Rate, hereby let
them know, that (amongst many other) I have two Medicines, which are certain in
the Cure of the forementioned Diseases. The one will dissolve the Conjunct
Matter of all Ague-Fits, with great Celerity; it being of such Subtle Parts,
that it quickly penetrateth, and opens those Obstructions in the Lateral
Branches of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread, from whence those Agues proceed. The
which Medicine alone (with the help of a proper Purge, to carry off the Matter
after it is dissolved, and attenuated) will, in a short time, Cure the Fits of
any Ague whatsoever. It is put up in Glasses, and sold at the Price of half a
Crown each Glass, with Directions for the use thereof; one Glass being
sufficient for the Cure of an Ague that is but of a short Continuance.

The other Medicine is a Specific Remedy, against the Fits of the Mother,
Hypocondriack Pains, and Melancholy, Vapors arising (as is generally said)
from the Spleen, and Womb: As also, against Convulsion Fits, Falling Sickness,
and Vertigoe, or Giddiness of the Head: In which Cases, those who have made
frequent use thereof, have found it to answer their Intention. This is also
sold at half a Crown a Glass, with Directions for its Use. These Medicines are
sold at my own House, and at no other Place; Where also may be had all Chemical
Medicines in use, truly prepared; such as are safe, and effectual in Operation,
and able to abide the Test of the most Curious Examiners: This being added for
the Information of Physicians, Chyrurgions, and Apothecaries, who may have
occasion to make Use thereof.

From my House at the Sign of the Globe, and Chymical-Furnaces, in the
Postern-Street, near Moor-Gate, Feb. 16th. 167 5/5.

THE INDEX.
THE necessity of Anatomy. page 1. The Commendations of those who have enriched
Anatomy with new Inventions. 2. The Invention of the Venae Lacteae ibid. The
Invention of the Ductus Thoracicus. 3. The discovery of the Circulation of the
Blood. ib. The Invention of the Lymphatick Vessels. 4. The Invention of the
superior Salival Ducts. ib. The Invention of the Inferior. ibid. The
Invention of the Pancreatick Duct. 5. What moved the Author to write. ibid. The
Institution of this Book. 6. The Etymology of the Pancreas ibid. Asellius, What
he understood for the Pancreas. 7. The Substance of the Pancreas. ibid.
Situation. ibid. Color. ibid. The Figure, as it is found in Men, and Beasts.
page 8. Quantity. ibid. Longitude. ibid. Latitude. ibid. Thickness. ibid.
Weight. ibid. The Number and Rise of its Vessels. 9. The Description of the
Pancreatick Duct. ib. The First Table, exhibiting the Figure of the Pancreas,
delineated by the Author to the Life. 10. The Insertion of the Pancreatick
Duct, and how the number varies in diverse kinds of Animals. 11. Animals which
have a single, double, and treble Pancreatick Duct. 12. A rare Observation
found in the Gall, about the Folicles thereof. 13. In what Animals the
Pancreatick Juice is disburdened into the Stomach. ibid. The passage of the
Pancreatick Duct in Man. 14. How difficultly it admits the Style. ibid. The
various Sport of Nature, observed about the Pancreatick Duct does not destroy
the Natural Use thereof. ibid. The Opinions of diverse Authors, concerning the
use of the Pancreas, examined 15. What Vesalius, with the Ancients, judged
concerning the use of the Pancreas. 16. The Opinion of the Ancients refuted.
ibid. The Opinions of Bartholine, Riolan, and Vesling. refuted. 17. The
Experiment of the Lord Van Horn, about the use of the Pancreas, why suspected.
p. 18. The Opinion of Bartholinus, concerning the use of the Pancreas, why it
pleases not the Author. ibid. That the Spleen affords nothing to the
Pancreas, is proved by the collection of the Pancreatick Juice, after the
Extirpation of the Spleen. 19. The Opinion of Lindanus, concerning the use of
the Pancreas, refuted. 20. The Opinion of Wharton, concerning the use thereof,
why not pleasing to the Author. 21. Various Experiments, instituted in vain,
for the collecting the Juice of the Nerves. ibid. The dropping of the Nerves,
from whence it comes. 22. The word Excrement, with what Signification it may
agree with the Pancreatick Juice. 23. The Reasoning of Sylvius concerning the
use of the Pancreas. ibid. Why it pleased the Author. 25. The Pancreatick
Juice, what time at first discovered by the Author. ibid. In what manner the
Pancreatick Juice is found. 26. The true way of collecting the Pancreatick
Juice. 28. A Description of the Instruments whereby the Pancreatick Juice is
collected. ibid. A Second Table, representing the Instruments whereby the
Pancreatick Juice is collected. 29. The manner of applying the Instruments
described. page 31. How to avoid the Noise of a Dog in living Dissections.
ibid. The Third Table, demonstrating the manner and place where the Instruments
are to be applied. 33. The Qualities of the Pancreatick Juice are described.
34. The division of the Glandules into Conglobated, and Conglomerated. 35. The
Description of the Conglobated Glandules. ibid. The Description of the
Conglomerated Glandules. 36. The Difference of the Nominated Glandules is
demonstrated to the Eye. ibid. The Motion of the Lympha is from the
Circumference to the Center. 38. The Invention of the Bronchial Artery. ib. The
difference of the Humors separated in the Glandules. ibid. The Humor of the
Glandules, whether it may be said to be profitable or unprofitable. 39. A
Reason proving the Humor of the Glandules not be Excrementitious. 40. The
Humor of the Glandules how generated. 41. Wherefore the Acid Particles are
separated in the the Pancreas, rather than in the Reins or Liver. 43. In how
many parts the Pancreatick Juice consists. 44. An Objection against the Natural
Acidity of the Pancreatick Juice, answered. page 45. That a Salsitude, found in
the Pancreatick Juice, does not exclude its Natural Acidity. 46. That the
Liquor of the Glandules is necessary in the Body. ibid. That the Juice of the
Conglobated Glandules serves for Sanquification. ibid. That the Liquor of the
Conglomerated Glandules, of the Mouth, is subservient to the Fermentation of
the Aliments. ibid. That the Pancreatick Juice does ferment with the Bile. 47.
The Quantity of the Pancreatick Juice cast into the Intestines. ibid. The Cause
why the Pancreatick Juice, and the Bile, ferment together. ibid. It is
Demonstrated, that Salt is inherent in the Bile. ibid. That Acidity is inherent
in the Pancreatick Juice, is evinced by Reason, Experience, and Authorities.
49. The Pancreatick Juice in man Collected by the Author. 50. Difficulties
proposed against this Effervescency, answered. 51. That Acid Particles are
sometimes inherent in insipid Liquor, is showed. 52. That Acids diluted do
sometimes the more powerfully Effervesce with Salts. 53. Wherefore the Bile is
first mixed with the Aliments propelled to the Intestines, then the Pancreatick
Juice. ibid. That the Effervescency is more powerfully promoted by Natural,
than Artificial Heat. pa. 54. The Effervescency, between the Bile and the
Pancreatick Juice, why not visible without the Body. 55. The Salsitude, found
in the Pancreatick Juice, Why it hinders not the Intestinal Effervescency. 57.
That diverse Tastes, found in the Pancreatick Juice, does not exclude its
Acidity. 58. The Effervescency, between the Bile and the Pancreatick Juice, is
demonstrated by Experiments. ibid. What Effervescency may sometimes happen in
the Sick. 61. That there is a hot and cold Effervescency, is evinced by
Observations, and Experiments. ib. What Effervescency happens in the Sound.
62. Wherefore the Effervescency is not perceived in the time of Health. ibid.
The Palpitation of the Heart, 63. The first Vtility of the Intestinal
Effervescency. ibid. The Effects of diverse Effervescencies are propounded. 65.
The greater or lesser Affinity of Acids, with things dissolved. 66. The Reason
is examined, Why acids do more powerfully join themselves to these, than other
Liquors. 67. How the Aliments in the Stomach differ from those in the Guts.
ibid. That the cause of that Mutation is to be ascribed to the Pancreatick
Juice or Bile. p. 68. The white Color of the Chyle, from whence it proceeds.
69. The Second Vtility of the Intestinal Effervescency. ibid. An Objection
against the Alleged Vtility from the Effervescency. 70. The Solution of that
Objection. ibid. The Separation of what Particles may happen by the sole
Fermentation of the Aliments. 71. What Particles of Aliments are necessary to
Life. ibid. The Vtility of the Intestinal Effervescency is farther described.
72. The way whereby the more Subtle parts of the Humors penetrate to the
Heart from the Intestines. ibid. The Natural Consistency of the Blood, from
whence it proceeds. 73. Whether or no the Pancreatick Juice may afford a
Ferment to the Stomach. 74. For what reason the Pancreatick Juice does
incrassate the Bile. ibid. For what reason it attenuates the Bile. 75. What the
Pancreatick Juice effects being well, and what being ill disposed. ibid. That
the Pancreas is the cause of many Diseases, is witnessed by famous Physicians.
76. The Order of their Calling. ibid. The Diseases wherewith the Substance of
the Pancreas is wont to be infested. 77. The History of the Pancreas of
Thuanus, grown into an admirable Magnitude. 78. That the Pancreas is not the
Vicar or Helper of the Spleen. 79. Various Abscesses of the Pancreas found in
dead Bodies. ibid. Cancer. 80. The History of it concreted into a stony
Hardness. 81. Stones. ibid. That all the Glandules are Obnoxious to Stones. 82.
That the Pineal Glandule is more frequently afflicted with Stones in France,
than in Holland. ibid. That the Pancreaas does not always follow the evil
Affections of the Liver or Spleen. ib. The Vices of the Pancreatick Juice. 83.
The Pancreatick Juice, wherefore more sparingly driven to the Intestines. ibid.
Why more copiously propelled to the Intestines. 84. Why inequally divided into
the Guts. ibid. Why it may be more Fluid. 85. Why more Viscid. ibid. The Vices
of the Pancreatick Juice, perceptible to the Taste. ibid. the lesser Acidity of
the Pancreatick Juice, from whence. 86. Its Acidity increased from whence.
ibid. Its Salsity from whence. ibid. The cause of Austerity is searched into.
87. The Faults of the Pancreas, what Functions they hurt. 88. The Faults of the
Pancreatick Juice, what Functions they hurt. 89. If it be sent to the Guts in a
lesser Quantity. ib. If it be carried to the Guts in a greater Quantity. 90. If
it be inequally moved to the Guts. 92. If more Fluid. ibid. If more Viscid. 93.
If it be less Acid. ibid. Running-Pain in the Left-side, from whence it
arises. ibid. Wherefore Melancholy men are less subject to the Plague than
Choleric. ibid. Why the Blood of those who are infected with the Plague, will
not Coagulate. ibid. That Volatile Salts do make the Blood more fluid. 94. That
Acidity is the cause of the Blood Coagulating. ibid. That an Acid is the best
Preservative in the time of a Plague. 95. That a more Acid Pancreatick Juice is
the cause of Cold in the Region of the Loins. 96. Of Pain and Torment of the
Belly. ib. Of Black and Eruginous Bile. ibid. That the Spleen does not generate
Atra-Bilis. 97. A rare Observation, demonstrating to the Eye the Generating of
Atra-Bilis. ibid. The Pancreatick Juice together with other Humors, is jointly
examined. ibid. What Effervescency is excited between a dull Pancreatick Juice,
and a more sharp Bile. 98. A more sharp Pancreatick Juice, meeting with a
sharper Bile, what it effects. 99. What Effervescency is excited between a
sharper Pancreatick Juice, and a more dull Bile. 100. The Diseases arising from
the Pancreatick Juice. 102. The cause of Intermitting Fevers to be ascribed to
the Pancreas. ibid. A more Acid Pancreatick Juice the cause of the Gout. 103.
The cause of a great Appetite and Hunger. ibid. The Cause of difficult
Breathing, and a dry Cough. 104. The Cause of those outrageous Epileptick Fits,
which the Dutch call Stuypiens. 105. The Cause of Contraction of the Pulse and
Swounding. ibid. The cause of Convulsions. 106. The cause of the Strangury.
107. The cause of Malignant Ulcers. ibid. The cause of the Adstriction of the
Belly. 108. The cause of Melancholy, and Diseases from thence proceeding. ibid.
An Answer to an Objection, That it cannot excite the Atra-Bilis. 109. It is
demonstrated by Examples, that Acids may stir up diverse Colors. ibid. The
reason thereof searched into. 110. How Acidity may abound in their Bodies, who
are not conversant in the Use of Acids. 111. It is demonstrated, that the
austere Pancreatick Juice may be the cause of the Suffocation of the Womb. 112.
A wonderful Effect of the Pancreatick Juice, being tasted. 113. That men do
sometimes labor under the like Hysteric Suffocations. ibid. The Cause and
manner of the Generation of Mother Fits. 114. The cause of the Hypocondriack
Affection. ib. A Salt Pancreatick Juice is the cause of a Diarhaea. ibid. How
the Pancreatick Juice is to be corrected. 116. If it be effused more sparingly
by reason of Viscidity or Obstruction. ibid. If it flows more largely. 117.
Purgers Electively given. ibid. Nothing of Excrement driven by the Purges
through the Meseraick Arteries, into the Instines. 118. That Purging
Medicaments may operate, as happily, by the Venae Lacteae. ibid. The Correction
of the over-fluid Pancreatick Juice. ibid. Its too much Acidity corrected. 119.
The Correction of its Austerity. 120. Its Salsitude rectified. ibid. The
History of Agues, or Intermitting Fevers 121. The Pathognomick Sign of a
Fever. 122. The cause of a Fever determined to be fourfold. ibid. That there
is a different cause of Continual, and Intermitting Fevers. 123. What the
Minera of Intermitting Fevers is, 124. That it is not to be found in the
Blood. ibid. The Swiftness of the Bloods Circulation. ib. That the Stagnation
of the Blood cannot produce the cause of Intermitting Fevers. ib. The cause
and manner of the Generating of Inflammations. ibid. That all the Humors
described in the Schools, are not to be found, neither do they ever raise a
manifest Effervescency. 125. That the Focus of Intermitting Fevers has been
by many rightly sought in the Abdomen, but ill ascribed to the Miseraick Veins;
the Duplicature of the Omentum, the Intestine Colon, etc. ibid. The Focus of
Intermitting Fevers to be ascribed to the Pancreas alone. 127. The reason
thereof examined. ibid. An Objection against it answered. ibid. That an
Obstruction of the Ductus Pancreaticus is the cause of Intermitting Fevers.
128. The Generation of an Obstruction in the Pancreatick Duct. 129. The cause
of the Fits access is the dissolution of that Obstruction. 130. The Pancreatick
Juice accompanied with Viscidity. ibid. An Obstruction of the Pancreatick Duct
found after Death, in one who dyed of a Fever. 129. For what reason the
Pancreatick Juice grows more sharp. 130. In what manner it is made sharp, and
carried to the Intestines, and there effervesceth with the Humors. 131. When
that Effervescency may be called Feverish. ibid. The cause of a more frequent
Preternatural Pulse. ibid. The Division of Intermitting Fevers into Simple and
Compound. ibid. A Sub-division of the Simple, into Quotidians, Tertians,
Quartans, etc. 132. A Sub-division of the Compound, according to the Feavors,
of which they are compounded. ib. A Division of Intermitting Fevers into Cold,
and Burning. ibid. The Essence of Intermitting Fevers, consists not in Heat.
ibid. A Division of Intermitting Fevers according to their Symptoms. 134. The
reason of the return of the Fits, sometimes daily, other-while every Third, or
Fourth day. ibid. The inequal Intermediate Space of Intermitting Fevers. ibid.
The cause of that Inequality. 135. How long the Feverish Fits may return, and
when wholly cease. ibid. The cause of Intermitting Fevers, both Simple and
Compound. 136. The reason of the same, and of a diverse Species of Intermitting
Fevers. ibid. Why in Compound Intermitting Fevers the Fit of one does
precede, supervene, or follow the Fit of another. 137. That Intermitting
Fevers cannot proceed from an evil Diathesis of the Blood. ibid. The reason
why the Fits of Compound Fevers sometimes come sooner or later than their
usual Hour. 138. How Quotidians, Double Tertians, and Trible Quartans may be
known. ibid. The diversity of Heat, and Cold of the Fits, from whence. 139. The
cause of the Feverish Heat and Cold, inquired into. ib. That acids are Cold,
and do produce Cold. ib. That the Bile exciteth Heat in the body. 141. Why the
Fits of Intermitting Fevers do usually began with Cold, and Terminate with
Heat. ibid. Why Acid Vomitings and Belchings are rather to be deduced frrm the
Pancreas, than the Stomach. 142. The Symptoms perceived in the Region of the
Loins, in the time of the Cold Fit, signify the Male affection of the
Pancreas. 143. In what manner the Cure of Intermitting Fevers is to be
performed. 145. Medicaments tempering the Feverish Cold. ibid. Wherefore
Medicines, against the Fever are to be exhibited in the very instant of the
Fit. 146. Medicaments tempering the Feverish Heat. 147. To assuage the Thirst.
ibid. When drink is to be allowed the Feverish, and when not. 149. What
Medicaments are to be given out of the time of the Fit, and how to be
accommodated to the Symptoms. ibid. What Diet is to be prescribed for those
afflicted with a Fever. 150.
FINIS.

