GRAMPIUS CONGRATULATION In plain SCOTS LANGUAGE TO HIS MAJESTY'S Thrice Happy
Return.

Printed Anno Dom. 1660.

GRAMPIUS CONGRATULATION To His Majesty's thrice happy Return.
A SCOTS Rhyme.
OF twelve sad years, one tedious night
We'ave had, and now the day grows light,
Our Sun is up, awake my Muse,
Thy drowsiness I Will not excuse.
We have been dead, and now we live
Again, and shall we no thanks give?
In our next life, if we give none
To God, Why Resurrection?
Are we redeemed then from the tears
And torments of these twenty years?
And from the Egyptian bondage free?
And are we all past the Red sea?
And shall not one midst all this Throng
Remember upon Moses Song?
Let this be Purim to our Priests,
Although our Church allow no Fiests.
But Bacchus She priests here we bar,
Our mirth with fury we'll not mar,
Let them their Trietericks vent
To a Triennial Parliament.
And since profane men are discharged,
(By him for whose cause we are enlarged)
Ranting against the dead Commonwealth,
Or drinking their own Masters health,
Whom they so by their rude louse tongue
More than their hands could help, did wrong:
What shall we, poor we, do that dwell
By Chyrra, and Agamppe well?
What if we mirrie made by water,
Mingled with Enthean fire shall clatter?
No Treason's here: our noise and din.
Shall greater be far than our sin.
Were we not then all this past while,
Cimmerians since our Kings exile?
Have we not lived in Holes and Caves?
And dig'd in Minerals like slaves?
To pay th'usurpers of the Crown?
And buy Swords to had our Selves down?
But now since Jove amongst us Feists,
Like the honest Corybantes Priests,
Let Us Leap and Dance all in a round,
Our Heads shake, and our Cymbals sound,
Till the French follow this our folly,
Who pitied not our Melancholy.
With God, our King a God we'll call,
More's in Him than our Armies all:
They brought us Toil and Husks for diet,
He Milk and Honey with much quiet:
When we by War our Peace did mar,
Then Nole sought Peace by 'nlawful War. Pa^ quaeri^^^ ^ello.

But still behooved he to keep's under,
And we must Pay or he must Plunder.
Five several times the Scots made head
To make amends for one misdead;
Five times our Fire still turned to smoke,
And all the Kingdoms bore the yoke:
But what was in this wondrous thing?
Strong Armies could not help the King,
Nor rescue from Hells yauning jaws
Religion, Liberty, and Laws.
Was It not because still Achan's wedge
Was by some of us kept in pledge?
And the cursd thing was never purged,
So the poor People ay were scourg d.
And with the truth if we may jump,
Our Scots House sometimes had its Rump,
And likewise a fanatic blood
Made some heads think that ill was good.
But now that brain-sicknesse, (great odds)
Is turned down to an Emerauds:
So if our Royal Doctor please,
To obviat the like disease,
Let us be purged, and Leeches set,
While the ill is at our Postern gate,
Lest it break back again, and breed
Some new distemper to the head.
The body of the Land, like men
Condemned, and then repriv'd again
By the grieved Party, taste some grief
Mixed with the joy of their relief:
And were it not this weight did still us,
The ecstasy of joy would kill us:
We grieve, our interprises missed
The success which our Souls had wished;
That our efforts made to repone
The King, had thus failed one by one.
When the Restorer from us went,
He knew this by our hearts consent
In offers free: And yet we wring
Our hands, that our selves did not bring
The King home: But since he is home brought,
Theirs be the Guerdon who best wrought.
Whither we take the work from Heaven,
Or add it to the wonders seven,
Or learn, that England never would
Take King, nor Reformation hold
Of us, Let us be well content
TO applaud unto the Instrument.
George whom ill los'd, we all confess;
By providence was nothing less.
He served in Egypt; so it fell,
He proves the prope of Israel.
He is our David, and he took
But five small sling-stones from the brook;
And with the G'ants own sword indeed,
He has cut off Goliah's head.
His Club has made more Monsters fall,
Than Hercules his Labors all.
He has the Hydra's heads down born,
And gives us Achelous horn.
Of Philistines a greater crew
A'has quashed, than ever Samson slew.
His finger has drawn down their house,
And yet both saved himself and us.
Thrasibulus he has excelled,
Though thirty Tyrants he expelled.
And this act shall Eclipse the Glory
Of old Saint George his Legend Story,
As far's the King's and Kingdoms three,
Outvies a poor Maids jeopardie.
And of all those, though brave and good,
Not one like this was done but blood.
Then; to Heaven's let us praises sing,
Thank George, and Pray, God Save the King.
FINIS.

