THE NONCONFORMISTS VINDICATION, Or a Testimony given against the Indulged
Assembly of SEPARATISTS: WHEREIN The false Calumnies, and Aspersions cast upon
the Suffering PRESBYTERIANS, are Answered and Confuted. ALSO The Heads and
Causes of Separation are Opened and Explained, together with an illustration of
the Erastian State of the present CHVRCH.

John 3. 21. But he that does the Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may
be made manifest, that they are wrought in GOD. Ezekiel. 43. 10. Thou Son of Man,
show the House to the House of Israel: that they may be ashamed of their
Iniquities, and let them measure the Pattern. Truth and Reason
Are no Treason.
Libera Gens.
Libera Men's.
Printed in the Year 1700.

Mock Verses put forth (in Room of Confutation) against the Au^^. by Mr. Thomas
Black, Indulged Preacher at Perth*
TO die obscure, most be a dismal Fate,
Since Mortals Purchase Fame at such a Rate.
As Burning Cities razing Regal Seats,
Destroying Temples overturning States.
But Meaner Spirits whom Destiny Contracts,
Not to aspire unto such Glorious Acts.
Yet Phaetons in conceit will be content,
Ere Fame be Wanting to be Fools in Print.
The Authors Answer
SIN to reprove does much some Men offend,
When Worldly Interest is their chiefest end,
The Bramble shade shall be one Day brought Low*
When your Erastian Church will get it is fatal Blow.
Both Fools and Wise shall known be or long,
Tho now you say your Mountain stands strong,
At your Poetry I need not further hint,
Who sit's above knows who are Fools in Print.
The NONCONFORMISTS VINDICATION.
Prove* 18. 13. He that answers a Matter, before he hears, it is folly and
shame unto him.
MAN is a sociable Creature by nature (as said the Philosopher) end therefore
desires company which way so ever he tends, be it to He^ven or be it to Hell,
he is loath to go alone. No wonder then to see Union and Love so common a
Plant, growing almost in every Garden, amongst the Bad as well as among the
Good. True it is among the Godly it is a duty Commanded, as in John 15, 12
and also commended Psalm. 133. 1. Likewise it is the property of a Church well
constitute; also it is the duty of all Believers to seek for unity and Love:
Yet this mark is not inseparable, for it can be among Unbelievers, as in Rev.
17, 13 These shall have one mind, and shall give their strength and power to
the Beast: And this also can be among Professors going on in a course of
defection, as we have the Example of Israel Exodus 32. Who with one consent,
said, These be thy Gods O Israel. And no wonder it be so, if we consider that
Sin is a work of Darkness, and therefore cannot abide the light, as in John 3
21. For every one that does evil hates the light; and so cannot endure that
there should be any light or witness against themselves or Sins; which witness
makes them ready to cast foul aspersions and Accusations on the Faithful, who
will not go on with them in their sins; Like to Joseph's Mistress who did falsely
accuse him of her sin, by raising the hue and cry after him, as in Genesis 38, 14.
even so is the case this day with the Faithful of the Land, who will not,
neither dare go on, in defection and separation (from the princ^pals and
practices of the Church of Scotland) with the Erastian, indulged in their
Backsliding courses of Perjurie by unity and concord. So that when they cannot
obtain their desire, they most bitterly cast their Sins upon us, accusing us
of separation and division; We acknowledge, that Union and Love are to be
sought with endeavou^ by all that professes Truth, but it must be in the Lord,
and not in aniething sinful: Otherways our Happiness should be of no better
stamp than Israel's was Exodus 32. when the People with one consent did say.
These be thy Gods O Israel. Now we acknowledge, Union to be good in it self,
when righdie exercised, and cannot but praise you ^or these pertinent places
and passages of Scripture you urge for the obtaining of it: Acknowledging your
Doctrine to be sound in the abstract. but indeed in the Application we
disagree. For there is no command in Scripture to unite our selves to Sin, and
obstinat defenders thereof. I mean such as have made defection from the
Principals and practices of the Church of Scotland, by turning to Erastianism;
and that not only in one simple Act, but persevering therein from one step to
an other. But I shall not insist on general assertions, but shall procced to
plain and particular Probation; and in order thereto, I shall confider the
heads of the controversy (contained in your seasonable admonition as you call
it) as they are set down in order.

1 Where first, we have the description given of the Church in her doctrine, to
which we well agree in the Theo^e and speculative part. But differs in practice
and application.

1 Now first you say, you own the Confession of Faith and Catechism so do we
acknowledge the Confession of Faith in the whole Heads and Articles thereof.

But it objected by Malignants, that the Confession of Faith is contradictory
to the Covenants and Coronation Oath. In that it is said in the 23 chap
Infidelity and difference in Religion does not make void the Magistrates just
and legal authority: And therefore by consequence Papists or Intid^ls may be
our Lawful Rulers. Answer on such consequence may be drawn from the word
Infideliry, this being the abstract name and an Infidel The concret. So that
the difference is great: For Infidelity pointe^h only at personal Faillings
such, as sins of deadness and infirmity acting indifferendie from simplicity
(but not obstinat to faithful warning) from which faillings, it is said in the
following part Eccle^iasticall persons are not free as in Chap: 25. Sect. 5,
Rev. 2. 3. Chapters* So that from this it is concluded that faults and
faillings such as formerly mentioned does not Non Magistrate a Ruler or depose a
Minister from the exercise of his office, so that this is the true and genuine
meaning of this place.

2do. We do likewise believe and own, that Jesus Christ is ^he only Head and
King of his Church, and that he has instituted in his Church Officers and
O^dinances, O^der and Government, and not left it to the will of man; Magistrate
or Church to alter it at their pleasure, either by a sinful limited Indulgence
or yet by a Bastard Toleration, contrair to the sound Principals of
Presbyterian Government and our Lands Engagments.

3tio We own likewise order in Discipline, conform to the word of God, in
admission of Persons to offices and privileges in the Church. We own no other
Rules than the institutions of Jesus Christ, and the example of the Prophets
and Apostles, for censure or reproof either in Doctrine or Discipline. And we
own that Persons of all Ranks, are to be censured and reproved without
partiality, according to the degree of their of^ence. Moreover we acknowledge
prudence to be required in the exercise thereof, and that conform to the word
of God, that the Transgressor be dealt with by the Spirit of meekness and love,
and in such a way as may most advance the good and Edification of the Church

4 We own, that it is the mercy of our Land that we are a Land in Covenant with
God, and we desire to lament for the breaches thereof in some, by turning to
Popery and in many to Prelacle, and many now by Erastianism and Separation:
And particularly by continuance therein, going on from one step to another
adding sin to sin. We bless God though the Land has dealt treacherously with
him, yet he has not forsaken us, but ha^h kept some faith^ul in the midst of
all these defections, who has nor complied with these Abominations, which is
the Glory of the Land, although by Backsliders it is acknowledged a shame.

Now having set down our Judgment, what we own as our Principals. Therefore I
shall in the next place, speak to that great controversy, which is so much
agitated by Backsliders, viz. Separation And I most say, to me it is a thing
very strange, to see Men professing Conscience, endued with Reason, qualified
with Learning; so wilfully ^o precipitat in Judging and Censuring others, who
are innocent of that Sin that they themselves are Guilty of; Seeing the Sin may
be easily found out, and who they are that are guilty thereof, if we would take
the Right method of seeking, which is described by Learned Men for finding out
the Solution of a Contraversie, which consists in an accurat defining of the
subject, and of the predicat; that so it may appear if there be any Connection
to be found betwixt the two, and then it shall appear, Whether Separation is to
be ascribed to you or us.

^. Therefore I shall consider in the first place, wherein Separation consists.
I say Separation imports a change; which change must consist either in
defection from Truth, or else in Excess beyond Truth. Now (1) In Defection. let
it be impartiallie considered, by the para^king and receiving of that sinful
Act of Indemnity, after Bothwel, in the Year 1679 or by that Toleration
Suplicat and Petitioned, under your late King: And also this Bastard
Toleration, now under your present King (which neither does, nor yet can run in
a Channal of a Covenant o^ Reformation) Whether you who have complied with
these, or we who have refused them, be most Guilty of De^ection and Change,
from the Principals of Presbyterian Government, our Covenants, Coronation Oath,
and Fundamental Laws. Certain^ie where the Defection and Change is; there must
be the Separation. But I shall have occasion afterward to speak to this, when I
come to the Sins and Accusations led against you: Therefore I will not insist
upon it at this time

Bat on the other hand, if in excess you can lay any thing to our Charge (since
your Separation from us) we are willing to cast our courses into scanning, by
examing the Matter* And likewise for the present, we shall take your Premises
to Consideration, which you lay out against us, by the Writings of these two
famous Godly Learned Men, viz. Mr. Rutherford and Mr. Durham, whom you led out
as Witnesses against us; Judging that we will be found within the compass of
Rigid Separatist; who in excess do separat from the Church without any
sufficient ground.

Therefore I shall consider the instances you insist upon.

1. First you say, was there not as great defects and faults in some of the
Churches of Christ mentioned in Scripture: As in Corinth, Galatia, and some of
the Churches of Asia* And yet no warrant to withdraw from them. Ans, In respect
of it is extent, it cannot be so said of all these Churches, That they had
Sinned totallie and universallie as on Man as we charge you; or if by some of
these Churches it may be said, That they were under an universal Decay and
Deadness, as to the Exercise of Discipline; yet from Scripture it cannot be
said; that they were obstinat, wil^ul Defenders and denyers of their Sin, as ye
are; who by consequence are disorderly Walkers, from which the Apostle gives
command to withdraw 2 These: 3, 6. And if we are warranted to withdraw from the
di^orderlie Brother, T^en may I argue (by way of Induction) also from a
disorderly Assembl^e. who are perseve^ing in their sin, So that in this our
singularity does not appear, neither from Scripture; Nor yet from your own
Concession as in Page 5 You say if any Church profess or pract^^e what is sin
on the Matter, we ought to withdraw, which is the Case of the present
Controversy, as I shall afterward make it appear. Further you con^i^ue ^o
amplify the ab^urd^tie of our singulari^ie, by interrogating, while we seperat
from you: What Church is there on Earth with which we would Communicate and join
in Worship with? To which I Answer, What if it were yielded in Thesi? That
there were no Church on Earth with which we could join with, no more than with
you; would this be any thing absurd? Or against which of all the Atri^utes of
God (either Communicable or Incommunicable) would this take up a con^radiction?
True it is the Lord ha^h D^creed to have a Church; But whether to preserve or
keep them Faithful, as to few or many; is left to the freedom of his own H^lie
will and pleasure. Whether to include them within the Family of an Noah, or to
limit them to the Family of an Joshua, is all one with the Lord I mean (for a
small j^nctur of time) in that degre^ of Faithfulness, which is agreeable to
God's word. But this is not our case, we can join with other Church Abroad,
although we dare not join with you, we acknowledge that the Corruptions are great
in many things, which now to insert all were tedi^us, we acknowledge that they
are lying under an Erastia^ deadness and infirmity, which sin differs far from
your Erastian obstin^^ defection; (...) shall afterward make ie appear. But how
ever we (...) Join with them in so far as they are reformed, and not involve
our selv^^ in breach of Covenant; they not being under our Covenant engagments,
our Covenants not engageing us to reform without Land; except in our personal
practice neither can we charge them with these things; that we can charge you
with, can we charge them with breach of Covenant, who were never under it? or
can we ^ccuse them of the Erastian Indulgence and Toleration? which
overthrows the principals, and practices of Pres^y^erian Government; or can
we accuse them of the Backsl^^ing perjured actings of this Bastard Toleration,
under this present Revolution* who never had the Tentations, nor trials of the
lik^ sin's as ye have had, who has made separation from us, by such
de^ections. So that in th^^, ^o absu^dity does appear in our not joining with
you, and yet with others.

Que^t: Why will you join with others, in so far as they are Reformed? And not
join with us, in so far as we are Reformed: Resp. Our joining is not to ^e
understood a constituting of our selves with them: But only an approving of
their Doctrine, in so far as it is agreeable to the Word o^ God; and the
Constitu^ions of the Reformed Church of Scotland Likewise we can approve of
your Doctrine to be sound, when considered in the abstract, as it may be
distinguished from you: But Subjective^ie considered in you as to practice, and
application, in this we differ, as I shall afterward make it appear when I come
to the impurity and unlawfulness of your worship.

Quest What is the difference betwixt these Chu^ches in Holland, Geneva,
Garmany: and the present E^astian Church.

Res: The Churches abroad are under an ^m^erfection in that they are not come
to the hight of Reformation requi^ed of in the word of God, such as the
constitutions and Covenanted engagments of the Church of Scotland And therefore
they are under the Lords wrath and fatherly anger (being under an E^astian
Deadness and infirmity) ever and while they Reform as in Rev 3 2. S^rengthen
the things which remain and are ready to die: for I have not found thy works
perfect before God Now seeing the Lord req^ires per^ection in Reformation, in
it is sincere endeavor; then ought we not to constitut our selves in assisting
any Church in war, until they come to our Reformation (either in practice or
promise) let us not be pleased, where God is angry. But on the other hand the
Lord deal^th, as an angry Judge toward a Church going on obstinatlie in
defection: And therefore, they are diametrically opposite one to another, as in
Heb. 10 30. If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. So
that when all this is considered, then it will appear, That the difference is
very great betwixt an imperfection and a defection, and that both in Practice
and Doctrine.

Now we declare, That we dare not join with you in your worship: And that
because it is contrair to our Faith and Conscience.

1. First, In respect of your mission, by reason of the changing of your
holding, in taking your power and liberty, (as you call it) (1) From the Bloody
Magistrate Charles the Second (in the Year 1679) by that sinful Act of Indemnity
after Bothwel, where ye left the Fields, and came eo the Houses; And likewise
did endeavor to observe the Limitations contained in that Act: And also did
acknowledge him to be your lawful King (in Prayer before God) although a Declared
Tyrant, and stated Enemy to the Work of Reformation; For which Tyranny, you
ought at that time to have joined with the Suffering Party, in casting him off;
rather than to have hearkened to that sinful Act: The end of which, was to
break the Church (This you did contrair to the advice of the wise Man, Pro. 23
3 6, Eat not the Bread of him who has an evil Eye: neither be desirous of his
dainties, for they are deceitful meat) (2) and now ye have taken your
Constitution from the Corrupt Tolerating Magistrate, who neither has taken the
Covenants, Coronation Oath; nor yet can take it, as he is now Circumstantiated;
being clothed with Prelacy: And therefore your Assemblies, and Ordinances, are
Bastard and Evil Begotten, because they neither do, nor yet can run in the
Channal of a Covenant of Reformation. So that in this, the Foundation and Being
of your Church, is not consonant to the state of our Church, in the days of
our Ancestors; And therefore from the consideration of this, we dare not in
Conscience acknowledge your power and mission.

2. As to the effects, I mean the power of Conversion. which you ascribe unto
your selves in converting, in this we differ, and that because, it is condemned
in Scripture, ae in Jer. 23 22. But if they had stood in my Counsil, and caused
my People to hear my Words: then should they have turned them from the Evil of
their ways, and from the Evil of their doings. We acknowledge, that you may
beg^t Children of your own kind, to believe and practice with your selves, in
your Era stian Backsliding courses, by putting on a naked external Profession of
Presbytrie, with natural and moral piety, flowing from a natural Conscience,
making them fit stones for your Erastian Building: But to make them fit Stones
for the Lords Church, by leting them see the Lands Sins and De^ections; and the
Perjured actings of Covenantbreaking that you are guilty of, both as to time
past and now present; this you will not do your selves: And therefore will not
suffer others, like to these spoken of. Mat. 23 13.

Obj. But it is objected, that this too hard a Sentence; will we Condemn all?
How prove we, that Conversion is not be ascribed to the present Church? Ans.
Far be it from us to condemn any, but these whom the Holy Ghost condemns,
and describes for Wicked and Ungodlie Men; See for proof of this, Psalm, 1 and
2. And consider i^, and then you will see who is the Christian, Psalm, 1. 1. and
who are Christ's Church, Psalm. 2, I say the Godly Man is said, not to sit in the
counfel of the U^godly, nor yet to stand in the way of Sinners, which cannot be
said of vo^, who has taken the Indulgence and Toleration, under your late Kings
and has given no Testimony against them (the which defect, is a silent
consenting and approving of the thing) But on the other Hand (in prayer besore
God) did acknowledge them to be your law^ul Kings, which was a sitting in the
Counsel of the Ungodly, by approving that the Persons elected to the Throne
were lawful, and these who did elect them, were, the true and lawful Sons of
the State, in whom the power was, which to affirm is false, for both of them
had divested themselves of that power that belonged to them, as Men and
Christians, by stateing themselves Enemies to God and Godliness; as was to be
seen in their setting up of Prelacie and Supremacy, and in sheding the Blood
of the Godly. Now when all this is considered, does it not appear that you
belong to the Categorie of ungodlie Men, described here in this Psalm.

But in the next place, I say conversion is a leaving of Sin, and turning to
God; Now to ascribe this to you, were to affirm a contradiction, that is, That
a Man may be Godly and Ungodlie; simul et semel, that is to say, Once and
together, in that he may serve two opposites, viz. Christ, and the Idol of
Supremacy, which to affirm is false For the Lord will not dwell under the Idols
Roof; as in Cor. 6 15. Moreover Psalm. 2, you see who are Christ's Church. I say
they are these who owns Jesus Christ as King and Head of his Church, and
maintains his Laws, Doctrine and Discipline, whose opposite Wicked men are, for
they will not submit to Church Discipline, nor incorporat themselves under
Christ's Banner, as in verse 2. 2. But this indulged Church declares the
contrair, in that they cotporat themselves with these who are not under Christ's
Bands (I mean Discipline) And ^or all this, continue the Church of Christ,
although clearly condemned in this Psalm. But how rightly this is applied; Let any
tender Conscience Judge,

3. We differ from you, as to the extent, because your Preaching does not reach
to all Sins and Deffections; I mean not sins unknown, and never Preached
against by our Church in former times: But only these Sins, I say that were
inanimously condemned by all the Ministry, I instance the late unlawful
confederacy in joining with Idolatars, contrair to the Writings of faithful
Mr, Gilhespie* Also these black Articles contained in that confederacy, drawn
up by your King and his Confederats, where liberty of Conscience was proposed
as the end thereof, and then falsely calling it the work of God, etc. With many
other steps of of Backslidings formerly mentioned. So that in this your Worship
is impure, being limited; And therefore noways agreeable, or consonant to the
Gospel, in the days of our Ancestors; And therefore we cannot in Faith and
Conscience join with it.

4. Fourthly the impurety of your Doctrine appears, in that your Religious
Fasts, (as you call them) Petitions and Prayers, are both Sinful on the matter,
and also contradictory to Scripture, Oh! how contradictorie is this to the
command of God? And the Example of the Godly to pray for a Blessing, on that
Work which the Lord has pronounced a curse, viz. Associating and joining in
War with Idolaters such as Papists, who are the Enem^es of God, and subjects of
Antichrist, and was not this your case in this late War. How many Fasts had
ye^ in order for Humiliation (as ye said) for a Blessing upon the War, although,
clearly condemned, in the Example of Jehosaphats joining with Ahab in War, who
was an Idolator: And if the Lord powered out his Judgment on him for his Sinful
Association, as in the 1 Kings 22 and 2 Chro. 19 2, Then how could the great
Assembly pray for a Blessing on this late Association? Does not such Prayers
draw to a Blasphemous consequence? which would have the Lord to declare himself
changeable in his Nature, to bless that which he has declared in his word,
that he will curse; He being in his Nature Holy, and of Purer Eyes, than to
behold Iniquity, Hab. 1 13, Oh! How Monstrous is this practice, and abhored of
by Malignants, who can spy such Sins with the Eye of Malice and Envy, that
the great praying Assembly cannot do, nor will not do; Alas! That Men
professing Conscience, should walk so contrair to hight: Or that they should be
permitted of God; to do that which the wicked Sorcerer Balaam would not do,
Number. 23 20. Behold I have received a Commandment to bless, and he has Blessed:
and I cannot reverse it: But you are walking contrair unto God, by seeking a
Blessing on the cursed thing. Now let any unbyassed unprejudged Persons Judge,
how dear bought your deliverance is; with no less price, than price o^
Conscience; For without this wickedness, you could not have your present
temporal prosperity: Now when all this is considered, may it not be said, That
none of Tender Conscience dare join with you in your Worship.

Obj. But some will object and say, If there were two Robbers Fighting, and the
one were Strong and Cruel; and the other weak; were it not a Duty, to help the
weak against the cruel one? And the reason is if the strong Robber prevail, he
will next fall upon us. Ans. we must not help a Robber in an Act of Robbery,
for this is contrair to Scripture, As in 1 Timothy, 5, 22. [be not partakers of
other men's Sins] and 1 Peter. 1: 15 [be not abussie body in other men's
matters,] that is in men's private intrests, in an action wherein the glory of
God, and the good of the Kingdom is not seen; which is the case this day
betwixt the King of France and the Emperor; They are fighting for the Cown of
Spain in order to set up a popish. King to murder the Souls of the poor
subjects, by their damnable doctrine. Now I think no Christian this day in
Scotland considering our fundamental Laws, and engagements; which are that no
Popish King shall reign over us, and if not over us? then why should we
consent, that they should be over others, contrair to Axiom or Carmen. Quod
tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, that is to say that which you would not
have done to your selves, do not so to others. Now as to the second branch of
your objection viz. that you join with the Emperor in order to bring down the
King of France* Answer you should not do evil that good may come of it Rom 3,
8. for in so doing you make God your enemy, when you take unlawful means: so
that in this you rather make that cruel Tyrrant strong, than weak for sure I
am unlawful means, will always bring forth Judgments, as I have already held
out in Isreal's case.

5 But Fifthly the impurity of your Doctrine appears in the misapplying of it,
and that falsely both as to mercies and Judgments. (1) as to mercies let it be
considered what you were a people laying in sin, enjoying the benefit of your
sinful Toleration, under your late King, and acknowledging him to be your
lawful King in prayer before God; although afterward in a printed declaration
in the year 1689 the Crown was acknowledged to be Vaccant, by reason that he
was a Papist, and had had not taken the Coronation Oath; But formerly you did
acknowledge, that he was an Instrument to open the doot of liberty to your
Gospel (as you called it) So that in this you acknowledge your deliverance to
be begun, and him to be Instrumental in it; And if this was then how you could
cast him off? and be so unthankful for your Mercies. But if you own that
Declaration of the States, in the Year 1689; Then you must acknowledge your Sin
in owning of him any manner of way: And that either by Addressing of him for
your Liberty; or yet confessing him to be an Instrument of Deliverance,
otherwise you cannot date your Deliverance, nor yet point out the Instrument
of it, seeing it cannot be ascribed to two opposite instruments, viz. the present
and late King. So that in this you Mercies are contradictorie, both as to the
instruments, and also the time of deliverance; and by consequence one way or
other, according to your own confession, and practice, must be misapplied. So
that in this, no tender Conscience dare join with you. But further let it be
considered, who are the object of Mercy; and then it will appear, to whom the
deliverance belongs, I say does not Mercy belong to these that are in
Misery; I mean these who sees and confeffessess themselves so to be, as in 2
Chro. 7 11. If my People which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves
and Pray and seek my Face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear
from Heaven and will forgive their Sins, and heall their Land. So that it
appears, from this that deliverance belongs only to a penitent People. Also
in the Book of the Judges, it is said of Israel, That they cried unto the Lord;
that is by Repentance and Confession of Sin (for no other Prayers are heard of
God Jo. 9 31) And he sent them a Deliverer: So that from this you see that the
object of Mercy, is only the Penitent, that confesses their Sin: which cannot
be said of you, who hitherto has never acknowledged your Erastian courses of
defection, in the matter of the Indulgence and Toleration, contrair to the
Example of the People of God in former times, who were plain and particular* as
in Ezera 9 2. The strange Marriages are confessed: But no Confession to be seen
of the strange Marriages, that has been made with the Enemies of God, by you
in the forenamed Sins. Alas* Then how can you apply Deliverance, seeing ye have
no warrant from Scripture so to do; when all circumstances are considered, and
whatever you have done or may do in this; Yet be asured that your Application
of Deliverance is not of any other nature than that spoken of in Jer. 14 12. A
false Vision and Divination and, the deceit of your own Heart. Now this being
your state and condition, then is your present temporal prosperity, not any
other thing, but an Judgment, like to that spoken of Jer. 13 13, 14 verses,
viz. Fair flourishing providen^es in answering you according to the Idols of
your own Hearts, and then bringing a Battle upon the back of it. Now seeing
Mercies and Judgments are misplaced, and that by calling Evil Good, and Good
Evil; then may we refuse such Worship: For it is not the Voice of Christ: but
the Voice of Strangers; which Voice we ought not hear Joh. 10 5.

Moreover in the next place, you further proceed to ampli^ie our alleged Sin, by
affirming that our practice is altogether contradictorie, by reason that it it
stricketh against our selves; in that we are subject to failing, for you say,
can we affirm, that we are pure? might not there be Recriminations against you,
but these things does not make for peace nor Edify. To which I answer, I yeald
there is Sins amongst us, committed by some and Remonstrat by others: But what
although we were all Guilty, would that blot out yours: Or will two Blacks make a
White, or will our fallings warrant us to walk contrair to light, by laying
aside our Testimony against you. But you say these things make no^ for peace
nor edify. Ans. This I deny, for to search ou^ sin, and to examine our
practice by the Line and Rule of Gods Word, is a duty both Commanded and
Commended in Scripture, and is good in it self, that is Bonum perse; And that
which is good in it self ^^th alwise good effects; and if any bad consequence
or even^ follow upon this duty. it flows accidentally from the Corruptions of
Men* I mean from some rough unpolished Stone, that does not answer Line and
Level* For the same is ascribed to the Gospel, as in Luke 2 14. It is said to
bring peace on Earth and good will toward Men, this is in in it is own nature*
But accidentally it is said Chap. 12 51, Suppose ye that I am come to send
peace on Earth; I tell you nay: but rather Division. So that this slows from
the Corruptions of Men. Further you say, you will forbear these things. Ans. We
dare not do so; But most follow the Mark and Character given by our Savior,
John 3 21. But he that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may
be made manifest that they are wrought in God. Indeed you would have our
alleged Sins buried, in order that you may get your Backsliding courses of
Defection Buried, but we will not do so: And therefore desires to be foremost
in Ripping up of our Sins, and in examining of our actionts by the Word of God:
Otherwise our Zeall will be of a Bastard kind, if it be not* universal against
all Sin: So that in this we will not pass by one Action (that ever has been
done* since your separation from us) without trying it by the Word of GOD, and
the approven practices of our Ancestors.

Now in the first place, if we have done any thing that we are not bound and
engaged both from the Word of God, and our Covenants, expreslie to do: Them we
shall take with our Guilt.

Secondly, If any thing be done, that an absolute necessity or
indispensabilitie, did not calll for.

Thirdly, If the Mercies or Deliverance of the Church, hereafter for the time
to come, shall run in any other Channel: Than what we have Espoused; then
shall we acknowledge our selves Transgressors.

So that we are willing to reason the Matter, and to put our courses into
scanning; That it may appear, clearly to the World, who are in the wrong ye, or
we, Now we say, we will not pass by one action, that has been done since your
S^paration from us, without trying it by the word of God, and the approve^
practices of our Ancestors. Therefore I shall in the first place confider the
Separation, in it is rise and progress, as to the time when it first began, and
that was in the Year 77 and 78, This Erastian Weed, did then appear in that
Presbytrie at Edinburgh and Dunscore, where Mr, Richard Cameron was Censured
for his Preaching against the Supremacy and the indulged Ministers (who
received the Indulgencie after Pentland, in the Year 67, and when accused besor
them, he declared that his Accusations did prove him to be a Presbyterian, for
he had done nothing, but what was agreeable to Gods Word, and the Constitutions
of the Church of Scotland: And therefore he would decline any such Presbytrie
as lawful, who would so accuse the Innocent of Guil^; which they could not
prove. I say at that time the Twins began to struggle in the Church Womb; as
did appear by the Malice, Clamor, and Reproach, that these Ministers did vent
against Mr. Cameron for his declining of them, they thought this was a sin of a
deep dye. But alas! no Lamenting for Truth, that was wronged by the Indulgence,
and the defense thereof, as appeared by their giving by Names to all these who
were against the Supremacy and Indulgency, calling them Cameronions. Now as
this Erastian weed did still grow among these: So likewise the Faithful did
still adhere to Truth; as did appear at Bothwell, by their casting off the
Tyrrants Interest, declaring a War against him, and all the Men of his
Practice, as stated Enemies to the Church of Christ. But the other Party who
favored the Indulgencie and Supremacy, emitted a Declaration contrair to the
former, taking in the Tyrrants Interest, acknowledging him to be their lawful
King, Notwithstanding of all the Tyrranie that had been done by him against the
Work of Reformatson, from the Year 61 to the Year 79. where he did appear in
War, against the Interest of Christ. So that you see that it was a
Contradiction to them, to say that they would defend the Interest of Christ,
and the Interest of his Enemies, they being opposite, the one to the other,
Alas! this was the cursed Achan in the Camp' for which Israel could not stand
before the Eumie; as in Josh. 7. So that from this you see, that the Separation
was materialie begun before Bothwell; But not formallie brought forth (in all
it is Circumstances) until the Act of Indemnity afterward was proclaimed; which
Proclamation the indulged did willingly accept, at which time they separated
from the Faithful. From which time we are willing to examine our Actions, ever
since the Year 79. and that because in your National Fast in the ^ear 1690, ye
accuse us of dangerous principles, and undiscreat Zeal. Therefore we are
willing to cast our courses into Scanning, by examining the Matter. As

1. First, If we have done any thing, that we are not bound and engaged, both
from the Word of God and our Covenants to do; then we shall take with our Guilt.

Now I shall give a Narration and Account of our Proceedings, in that sad Day
of the Church calamity, under the indulgencie in the Year 1680, It Is said Job
17 8 9 Upright Men shall be astoni^hed at this, and the Innooent shall stir up
himself against the Hypocrite. The Righteous shall hold on his way, and he that
has clean Hands shall be stronger and stronger. That is shall add Strength:
Now this was the Case of the Faithful, who were keeping clean Hands; they did
bestir themselves against Hypocritical Backsliders, by showing their love to
the Crown and Interest of Christ, and to the Land, in cleaving to our Covenant^
and Lands Engagments. Judging that although others had embraced the Tyrrants
interest. and had corporat themselves under his Banner: Yet they were engaged
to perfect the thing begun, viz. To cast off that Tyrrant and declare a War
against him, and all these of his practice. And this they did in as legal a
way, as the present Circumstances could permit. For the Faithful, who were
adhearing to the Laws and Liberties of the Church and Nation, did call a
Representative, and did invest themselves with Authority; by virtue of which
they did emit a Declaration at Sanquhar, which is as follows, The DECLARATION
and TESTIMONY of the true PRESBYTERIANS, ANTIPRELATICK* ANTIER ASTIAN
Persecuted Party in SCOTLAND,
Published at Sauquhar June 22 1680.
IT is not amongst the smallest of the Lords Mercies to this poor Land, that
there has always been some who have given their Testimony against every
course of Defection, we were guilty of; which is a token for good, That he
does not intend to cast us of all together, but that he will leave Remnant in
whom he will be gracious, if they throw his Grace keep themselves clean, and
walk in his ways and methods, as they have been walked in, and owned by
Predecessors of truly worthy Memory; in their carrying on of our noble work of
Reformation, in the several steps thereof, both from Popery and Prelacie: And
likewise from Erastian Supremacy, so much usurped by him (who, it is true so
far as we know) is descended from the Race of our Kings: Yet he has so far
deboared from what he ought to have been; by his Perjurie, and his usurping in
Church Matters, and Tyrrany in Matters Civil, as is known by the whole Land;
That we have just reason to account it amongst the Lords great contraversies
against us, that we had not disowned him, and the Men of his Practices (whether
inferior Magistrates or any other) as Enemies to our Lord Jesus, his Crown and
true Protestant and Presbyterian Interest in these Lands, our Lords Espoused
Bride and Church. Therefore though we be for Government and Governors, such as
the Word of God and our Covenants allows: yet we for our selves and all that
will adhere unto us The Representatives of the true Presbyterian Church, and
Covenanted Nation of Scotland; considering the great hazard of lying under sin
any longer. Do by thi^ presents diso^n Charles Stuart, who has been Reigning
(or rather we say Tyr^anizing) on the Throne of Britain, as having any Right,
Title, or Interest ^o, or in the said Crown of Scotland or Government, as
forefaulted several years since, by his Perjurie and Breach of Covenant with
God and his Church, and U^urpation of his Crown, and Royal Prerogatives: and
many other Breaches in Matters Ecclesiastic, and by his Tyranny and breaches
in the very Leges regn^ndi, in matters civell* For which reasons, we declare
that several years since, he should have been denuded, of being King, Ruler or
Magistrate, or having any power, or to be obeyed as ^^ch as also we under the
banner of our Lord Jesus Christ the Captain of Salvation; do declare a war with
such a Tyrant and usurper, and all the men of these practices, as enemies to
our Lord Jesus Christ, and his cause and and Covenant, and against all such as
have any way strenthened him, in his usurpation and Tyranny civell and
Ecclesiacstick, yea and against all such as shall any way strengthen, side with
or acnowledge any other in the like usurpation and Tyranny: far more against
such as would betray, or deliver up our free: Reformed Church, into the
boundage of Antichrist the Pope of Rome; by this we homologat our Testimony at
Rutherglen the Tuentie nynth of May 1679. and all the Fai^hfull Testimones of
these that have gone before us: As also we do disclaim that Declaration
published at Hamiltoun the 13 day of June 1679, chiefly because it takes in the
Kings intrest which we are several years since loused from: As also because of
the foresaids reasons and others; that we may after this; if the Lord will,
publish, as also we disown, and resent the reception of the Duke of York a
professed Papist, as repugnant to our principales, and vows to the most High
God: and as that which is the great tho alas! the just reproach of our Church.
we also by this protest against his succeeding to the Crown; as against what
ever has been done; or any are essaying to do, in this Land, given to the
Lord, in prejudice to our work of Reformation. And to conclude we hope after
this, none will blame us, or offend at our rewarding of these that are against
us, as they have done to us, as the Lord gives the opportunity. This is not to
exclude any who has declined, if they be willing to give satisfaction,
according to the degree of offense.



Now the lawfulness of this Proceeding, being denied by some, upon the Matter;
and the authority thereof questioned by others: It was acknowledged to be a
duty indispensi^le in the year 1681) to ratify and approve all that was done
at Sanquhar: (Considering the Parliament that then was, where the Duke of York
sat Commissioner) and likewise to testify against the unlawfulness of that
Parliament; and all others preceding, since the Year 1661, did publish a
Declaration at Lanerk, which is as follows, The Act and Apologetick DECLARATION
of the true PRESBYTERIANS of the Church of SCOTLAND. January 12 1682.
Although we ought to take in good part, whatever God in his Infinte Wisdom, has
for the Punishment of our sins carved out unto us, and eye and acknowledge him
alone in it, and although we alwise ought to acknowledge Government, and
Governors as ordained by him, in so far as they rule and govern according to
the Rules, set down by him in his word, and Constitutive Laws of the Nation,
and ought to cast the Mantle of Love on the lesser errors of Governors, and
give the best countenance to their Administration, that the Naure of their
Actions will bear. Yet when all these Laws, both of God and the Kingdom
Conditional and Constitutive of the Government, are cassed and anuled by
pretended Law; and the highest of Usurpation, and an inexplicable prerogative
in matters Ecclesiastical, and Arbitary Government in Matters Civil is arrogat,
when a Banner of impiety, Prophanness, and Atheism is avowedly displayed
against the Heavens, and a Door opened to Abominations, of all sorts and sizes,
and the remedy thereof still denied by him, who should be as a Sun and Shield
to the People: when the Parliaments who ought to be the grand trusties of the
Kingdom to whom it belongs in such a Case, to secure the Civil and Spiritual
interests, are so prelimited by Law, as no true Son of the state, and Church
has liberty to sit and Vote there. So that the Parliamen^s and all places of
public trust, and offices of the Kingdom from the highest to the lowest, are
made up of none, but these who are corrupted, oyerawed, overuled and bribbed;
what shall the People do in such an extremity? Should they give up their reason
as Men? Their Consciences as Christians? and resign their Liberties, Fortunes,
Reason, Religion, and that all to the inexorable obstinacy, incurable
wilfulness, and Malice of these who in spite of God and Man. And
notwithstanding of their many Oaths, and Vows, both to God and his People, are
resolved to make their own will the absolute and sovereign Rule of their
Actions, and their strained Indulgencie, the measure of the subjects hope and
hapiness. Shall the end of Government be lost throw the Weakness, Tyrrany, and
Wickedness of Governors? And must the People by an implicit submission and
deplorable stupidity, destroy themselves? And betray their Posterity; and
become objects of reproach, to the present Generation, and pity and contempt to
the future. Have not they in such an extremity, good ground to make use of that
natural and radical power they have? to shake o^f that yoke, which neither we
nor our fathers were able to bear. which accordingly the Lord honored us, in a
general and unprelimited convention of the States and several shires of
Scotland to do: a convention of unperlimitted members. Aconvention of men who
had only the glory of God; the good of the common wealth before their eyes. The
like whereof the present reigning Tyrant, could never since his home comeing
pretend to. At which convention he was most legally and by general consent cast
off; by the Declaration afterward published at Sanqubair, by special warrant
from the said convention. But that we may not seem to have done that; or yet to
do the like, upon no grounds or yet upon few or small grounds, we shall hint at
some few of the many thousands of the misdemaners of the now cast off Tyrant,
in his overturning of our Church and state. And First at his very entry, as if
he had attained to Neros desire at one blow in his first Parilament, he cut of
the neck of that Noble constitution of Church and state; which our noble and
worthy Auccstors had made, and not thinking it enough, treacherously and
falsely to perjure himself; he made consitutions and Laws (if it be not an
abuse of language to call them so) as none but fouls of his own feathers, and
such as would run with him to the same excess of riot should have access to the
very meanest place or office in the Kingdom, and though that in it self is
enough; yet not the Thousand part of what he, has done Secondly did he not
take to himself a licentious sphere exceeding all measure divine and humane
Tyrannical obtruding his will for a law, both in Matters civell and
Eccelesiastick making us a lawghing stock to the Neighboring nations, who
imagined that what he was doing (however Tyrrannious in it self) to be
consonant to our Laws, blaming the badness of our Laws, instead of the badness
of the Governors, whereas there is nothing less cousonant to the Tenor and End
of ours and all others, Divine and Humane. For we have reason to praise the
Lord, who so eminently assisted our Ancestors in framing our Laws; So that we
may upon good grounds say, That there is no Nation (in civilibus) has beter,
and (in Ecclesiasticis) so good as we, having by Gods great Providence attained
unto a more excellent Reformation than any Nition. The observing of which Laws,
was the very constitutive and absolute Condition, whereupon he was admitted to
the Royal Office, and without which, he was not to have the exercise of his
power; And to which he was most deeply and solemnly Sworn, oftener than once,
with his hands lifted up to the most high God, himself declaring the subjects
^y no longer to remain or continue, than the Ends and Constitutions of these
Governments were pursued, and preserved by him: All which are contrair to his
engagments foresaid, by his pretended, (and as soresaid constitute Parliaments)
cassed and annuled and these Laws no more made their rule, but his own will, by
his Letters: So that we are made the reproach of the Nations; who say only that
we have the Law Letters, instead of the Letter of the Law.

Thirdly, Has it not been his constant method to Adjourn and Dissolve
Parliaments at his pleasure, when they (tho his own Creatures) were so sensible
of his Misdemanors, as that they began to question, and when questioned by
them; ye may easily conjecture what they were*

Fourthly Has he not stated himself as Supreme head over all persons in all
causes Civil and Ecclesiastic; and by virtue of that arrogantly arrogated
power, fabricated a Chimerick Government Peagantry in the Church, with such
Ludibrious eminence, Pompious power and pride, through the vanity of Men's
deprived imaginations, the grievous and misterious abyses, from whence have
eshewed all the calamities and woes, all the languishing sorrows and
confounding shames, and reproach, which in this day of blackness and darkness,
has involved, polluted and pestered the Church and Kingdom, and thus have
approven himself to be Defender of the Faith, under which the Godly party true
Sons of the Church and Nation, have been groaning these twenty Years bygone,
and great numbers Murdered and slain in the Fields, and led as Lambs to the
Slaughter upon Scaffolds, ^mprisoned, kept in Irons, and with exquisite
Torters Tormented, Exilled, Badished, and sold as Slaves amongst Savages; All
which they endured most patiently a long time, or ever they offered to appear
in publict Arms against them. And all this they have met with as a reward;
First upon the Lords part, tho unjust and ungreat as to his part, for their too
great and inordinat love wherewith they prevented him, in the day of his
distress, being the first and only beginning of his unhappy Restoration.

Fifthly, Time would faill us to narrate what exorbitant impossings, taxings,
cessings, and every way impoverizing of the Subjects, and Grinding of the Faces
of the Poor, Delapidating the Rights and Revenues of the Crown, for no other
end, but to employ them for keeping of a Bordel rather than a Court: Since
there is no Court in the World, has attained to suc^ a height in Debauchry, and
Deprivedness, as that Court by his Example has done. For the whole Nation
follows the Kings example. R^gis ad exemplum totus componitut orbis*

Sixthly, As it had not been enough to exercise, such a Tyrranical and Arbitary
power himself; He by a la^e Parliament such as the former; intends that his
Cruelty and Tyrrany shall not dye with himself, but that he shall in his own
time instal such an one (if not worse) than himself contrair to all Law,
Reason, and Religion. And in that parliament to unhing very Protestanism it
self by framing a Test, such as no Protestant (how corrupt so ever) can take,
and so ridiculous, as that it is made the Laughing stock even of Enemies
themselves; is it then any wonder considering such dealings (and many Thousand^
more) That true Scots Men (tho we have been always, and even to the extremity
sometimes loyal to our Kings) should after Twenty years Tyrranny, break out at
last, as we have done, and put in practice, that power that God and Nature has
given us, and we having reserved to our selves, all our Engagments, with our
Princes; having been alwise conditional, as all other Kingdoms are implicitly,
but ours explicitly: Let none therefore object against the legality, either of
what we have done, or are doing, for observe how inconsiderable so ever we are
said to be, to prove our selves to have done nothing against our Ancient Laws,
Civil or Ecclesiastic, against any Laws or Divine^ whatsoever, our Ancient
Laws beinp Judges, and we having safety to pass and repass, if the public
Faith after so many Breaches, can be trusted for that effect. So then let no
Foraign Kingdom or Churches throw misinformation or false copies (as they are
many) of what we Act or do, because we have not access to the Press, as they,
we say let them not take up a wrong opinion of us or our Proceedings. For we
are only endeavoring to extricat our selves from under a Tyrrannical Yoke, and
to reduce our Church and state to what they were in the Year 1648. 1649.

Therefore we here conveened in our Name and Authority ratifies and approves,
what has been done by the Rutherglen and Sanquhar Declarations. And by their
presents rescinds and annnles, and makes void whatsoever has been done by
Charles Stuart and his Accomplices in prejudice to our Ancient Laws and
Liberties. in all the prelimited Parliaments and Conventions; since the Year
1660, and particularly the late Parliament holden at Elinburgh the 28 day of
July 1681 (by a Com^issioner professedly Popish, and for Villainy exilled his
native Land) with all the Acts and Laws there Statued and Enacted, as that
Abominable, Riduculous, and Unparalel^ed Soul Perjuring Test and the rest,

We therefore Command and Charges you to pass to the Market Cross of Lanerk,
and in Our Name and Authority, to Publish this Our Act and Declaration, as ye
will be answerable. Dated the 23 of December 1681.
Let King JESUS Reign and all his Enemies be scattered.


NOW considering the Miseries the Land was in at that time, by reason of that
cruel and intolerable Bondage, which was exercised over the subjects, by their
Laws; which was, That none should have their Lives or Lioerties: But these who
would sell Soul and Conscience, and either comply or connive at their
Abominations, or else suffer Death. Now in such a case, I think no Man of
reason, but will acknowledge that we have done nothing, but what we are bound
to do from the Word of God, and our Covenants, which is to preserve and defend
King and Rulers, in the Defense and Preservation of the true Religion: But no
further as is abundantly proven in our Declarations. Now if any shall raise
Objection against the manner of our Proceedings, As.

First, that the Representative power of rejecting Tyranny belongs not to
private Persons; but only to the OPTIMATES REGNI, that is to say, to the Peers
of the Land such as Nobles Barons Burgesies And therefore they are Custodes
legis, the keepers of the law; who are to see to the Laws and saftie of the
Kingdom in defending the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects. Answer. Indeed
it would become them best but they failing in this. by their defection and
compliance, silence and connivance at the Tyranny committed in this case, it
becomes the subjects (although private persons) to assume to themselves that power
of defending the Laws and Kingdom, which they have Forefaulted. As for Example,
if a City were Besieged by an Enemy, and the Magistrates and these who had the
power would conspire in one, with the Enemy to destroy the Citizens, were it
not their duty, to take the power (which they have abused) and defend
themselves their Lives and Liberties. Now this being our case, then no
reasonable man, I think will condemn what we have done, considering the grounds
and reasons abovementioned. Now this Representative power was firmly owned and
avowed, by all the Nonconformists in the Year 1680. 1681, and 1682. But in the
Year 1633, they began to faint the eminent godly, in whom the Life and
substance of this dut^e was, were in a great part taken away, by suffering in
Fields and Scaffolds; and the remaing party who were Faithful protested
against these failings, but were not heard: So that at length, they denied that
they acted Authoritatively in these Declarations above mentioned, where the
judicious Reader may discern the contrair, by such congruous expressions, as is
used for expressing the nature of the Action. But now this hopeless party of
Nonconformists, has turned their Testimonies to Protestations; That when Kings
and Queens comes to the Throne, they enter a Protestation against them: But
what is that to the purpose? What if all the Shires in Scotland would send a
Thousand Armed Men to the chief City of every Shire, to declare against them?
And there rest on their Protestations, would thus effectuat any thing?
Certainly no, the only duty is to call a Representative, and put on Authority
and take to them that power which they have Forfaulted, and by virtue of that
power they may proceed against them, with the Sword of Justice; and this power
belongs only to the faithful of of the Land, who are the true Sons of the
Church and State. Alas! this fainting did arise from the weakness of their Love
and Faith; they thinking, this was a work too hard for them (who were so few)
to carry on against so great a Generation of Malignants, and Backsliders.
Likewise that it was mocked at by wicked Men and carnal Proffessors; as a thing
desperate, that would bring forth much Blood and Confusion: Whereas a duty is
still absolute and indispensible; and therefore to be gone about in Faith,
trusting to the alsuffiency and faithfulness of God, for throwbearing. Faith
being the same now, that it was in the days of Noah: And therefore we ought to
obey the Command of God, whatever the effects may be: For surely that which is
duty, will bring forth good effects, when waited for with patience. And sure I
am these Testimonies abovementioned, has Foughten the Throne of Britain, more
than Three Hundred Thousand Armed Nobles could have done; both as to the
present and pastime, and likewise will be for the time to come (however
insignificant the Actors may seem to be) and the reason is because they are
agreeable to Gods Word: And therefore have the promise of the Lords presence,
and if God be with us who can be against us?

But this shall more appear in the, following head, which is That if any thing
be done, that an Indispensability or absolute necessity did not not call for?
then shall we acknowledge our selves transgressors; and this I endeavor to
prove by several Arguments; as (1) from the nature of the ordinance, Magistrates
being servants, to the common wealth, and nourishing fathers to the Church; so
that they are made for the peoples good, as in Rom: 13. and not the people for
their Tyrannical Lust and use. Ergo from the nature of the ordinance it is a
duty indispensiable to cast off Tyranny.

2d^. Secondly from the holiness of GOD, God is holy in the Heav^ns, holy in
the Earth, holy in his Church, ho^y in his civ^l ordinances. Ergo, by
consequence we are to have his Ordinances holy; because we are commanded so
Lev. 19. 2. ye shall be holy for I the Lord your God I am holy if we be not for
keeping Gods Ordinances holy how can we pray, that his will be done on Earth as
in heaven.

3. The Magistrate has the sword of justice put in his hand, and is to Judge for
God, being Gods Minister and vicegerant; And therefore no Tyrant as in the 2 samuel: 23. he that rules over men must be just in ruleing in the fear of the
Lord. Ergo its an indspensible duty to opose Tyranny, this being agreeable to
Gods will and word.

2. But Secondly the abselute necessity flows from the inevitable Judgments of
God upon the neglect of this duty, of reforming and repareing this broken down
hedge as in Ezekiel. 22. 30. I sought for a man among them that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the Land, that I should not destroy
it; but I found none and ver^ 31. therefore have I powered out my indignation
upon them I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath: So that from this you
see that where their is no testimony against sin, the Judgment of God will
come, and this is abundantly confirmed in that pertinent passage 1 Samuel 3 13.
I have told him that I would Judge his house for ever, for the in iquiy which
he knows because his sons made themselves vile and he restrained them not Eli
did give ^esti^ony against his sons Cap. 2. 24. 25. but it was not such as the
Lord required or as the nature of his office did call for as a high priest he
ought to have cast them out of their office and to have deposed them and cut
them off from the Congregation of the Lord for their Sin. 2. as a Judge he
ought to have punished them with the sword of Justice (according to the Law of
God) for their Adultery. All this they deserved, so that you see that the
Testimony must always be proportionable to the o^tence, otherwise we must
partake of their Sin, and consequently of their Judgment. Now let the Judicious
Reader consider this, and then he will see, that we have done nothing, but what
is just and right and agre^^ble to Gods Will and Word, in our casting off of
him; who had manifestly cast off God, as you see by what is said above. So that
when all this is considered: I think the lawfulness of the duty is
sufficiently proven from its essential Atributes, which is indispensability and
absolute necessity.

Now I shall in the next place speak to the third head, which is that if the
Mercies and Deliverance of the Church hereafter, for the time to come, shall
run in any other Channel: than what we have espoused, then shall we acknowledge
our selves transgressors.

1. Now this I prove, first from the Mercies of God, in that they do not extend
toward unbelievers, such as the impenitent. (I mean Fatherly Mercies) but only
toward the Faithful, who are keeping Covenant with God, and adhearing to their
Vows and Engagments: Such the Lord has promised to be with, as in 2 Chro. 15 2.
The Lord is with you while ye be with him.

2. Secondly, To repair and build a civil state (that is defaced and ruined by
reason of Tyranny) is a work of Gods Mercy and Love, and does terminat only
in Believers, so that they are the Instruments in and by whom the Lord will
build this work, they being led by his Word and Spirit, and the promise
belonging only to such, as in Zach. 4 6 Not by might nor by power, but by my
Spirit says the Lord of Hosts. Now seeing they are the instruments; Then let
none carp at the manner of this Duty, for we have done nothing but what is
agreeable to Gods Word and Will. as I have clearly held out. But on the other
hand let these who condemn this duty, consider that what we have done, will
not fall to the ground, or be buried. For certainly there is no Action, but
must either be Sin or Duty. I say there is no Action situat in individuo,
That's to say, considered subjectively as to its rise, progress, object and end,
but must be morally good, or else morrally evil (indifferences lays in certain
degrees or circumstances) then by consequence this Action, must be either put
among the Sins of the Fathers or else among the duties of the Fa^hers; for
certainly one of the two must be. And I think it is impossible to make this
Action a Lands Sin, considering the invincible grounds and reasons given above.

Now having held out the lawfulness of our rejecting, and casting Tyrany off,
and that the Mercies and Deliverance of the Church, cannot run in any other
Channel.

I shall in the next place, speak to the manner of Government, and Governors,
that we contend for: Which is found in that Covenant, drawn up by Mr. Cargill,
in the Year 1680, where we do declare that we shall set up over our selves, and
over what God shall give us power of Government (and Governors according to
the Word of God, and especially to that word Exodus 18 21) viz. That we shall no
more commit the Government of our selves to one single Person, or lineal
Succession, That is Monarchy Government: But the Government we incline to is a
Common Wealth; but whether ARISTOCRATICAL or DEMOCRATICAL or a mixture of both,
we will not at present determine: We seeing that Monarchy is very liable to
incoveniences, and apt to degen^rat into Tyranny, as long and sad experience
has taught us, this flowing from the natures, humors, and inclinations of the
People, and especially the Nobility, who hitherto has driven Kings to Tyarnnie,
insinuating themselves in their favors, by their making a Sacra^ice of the
Lands rights and Liberties to them, that thereby they may partake of the spoill
of the Poor subjects, of which we can give innumerable and sure inflances* But
that we may see that if their be any thing that stands in our way? of changeing
rhis Government. There are but two things that seems to have weight.

1 First if the deed and obligation of our Ancestors? can bind us to Monarchy
Government by lineall or hereditary Succession.

2 Secondly, if it be in the power of people to choice any form or kind of
Government? that they please.

Now as to the first I say the contract and Obligation of the fathers (simply
considered as an Obligation of the fathers) can never bind the posterity; and
that because a Contract or Covenant is called by POLITICIANS, Vinculum
pe^sonarum, that is to say, a bond of persons. Now the Children not yet
existing, cannot be said to be Agents in this bond neither can it bind them*
seeing all men are born free: that is to say, with the free exercise of reason,
to choice that which is good, and to refuse what is evil. I say all our
O^ligation flows ex natura rei, that's to say from the nature of the thing. in
so far, as that Obligation tends to the glory of God, and saftie of the
Kingdom, in preserving maintaing, and carrying on of Religion and virtue in the
Land, in this we are bound, this being the chief and principle end of all our
Actions. But on the other hand, when this end cannot be obtained: Then are we
free from the Contract and Obligation of the Fathers; this Contract being
conditional, so that now it is loosed, and that ex natura rei.

Secondly, If it be in the power of the People, to choice any form or kind of
Government that they please? That's most for the good of the Land, and safety of
the Kingdom. It is affirmed.

First, The reason is, because we are not bound to Monarchy Government, and
lineal Succession, by a Divine Precept, as the Hebrews were: for this was
Typical of Christ, and promised to them from Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not
depart from Juda, nor a Lawgiver, from between his Feet until Shiloh come. Now
from their Example, it cannot be proven that we are tied, to that particular
kind of Government. Otherwise, if by their example this had been, then should
it have ^yed every individual Kingdom, to this kind of Government: But the
contrair is seen, and also taught by all found jurists: For People are to
choice any kind of Government, that they see most convenient for the nature of
the People, and saftie of the Kingdom, in which Religion and virtue may most
flourish and grow.

Secondly, All sound Politicians acknowledges, that under the Yoke of Tytanny,
the People may either change the Government or the Family. Now the Family is
only to be changed, where Monarchy suits well with the Kingdom. But alas! by
sad experience, the contrair has been seen in Scotland (ye^ unto this day) how
that Kings, has been encouraged, and driven on to absolute power and Tyranny,
by corrupt Noblemen: I mean such as Pensioners, who partake with them in the
spoil of the poor Subjects: So that from this experienced Misery, it is most
convenient to change the Government, according to the Judgment of all sound
Politicians*

2. Moreover in the next place we declare, That these Governors, that we
contend for, Shall be able Men, such as fear God Men of Truth, hating
covetousness, as in Exodus 18 21 Ilay their Qualifications, principally are
contained in these three things. 1 That they be Men of sound principles. 2.
That they be such as exercise themselves in G^dliness, viz. In praying and
Meditating on Gods Word, seeking counsel and direction from him; otherwise they
will never be fit for Government. 3. That they be free of scandal, that's to
say, that they be lying under no known sin, without Repentance. And that these
Men whom we shall set over us, shall be engaged to govern us principally by
that civil and judicial Law (we mean not that Law which is Ceremonial and
Typical) given by God to his People Israel, and that we shall be governed by
that Law, in matters of Life and Death, and in all other things al^o, so far as
they reach, and are consisting with our Christian liberty, established in all
Christindom, etc.

Moreover as to the electing of these Governors or Judges, that are invested
with the Qualifications abovementioned, who are to be put in principal places,
of great and weighty business in the Land, such we say are to be chosen by
lots: And to be gone about by prayer and fasting, as our manner was in the year
80* for no other way can better remove envy, ambition and contention among a
People, then this way can do, Now I think from the Grounds and Reasons
abovementioned, it will appear, That the Government we have chosen, is the only
^itest Government; And likewise that the Qualifications of the governors are
agreeable to Gods word, and consequently to his will; and therefore to be
embraced by all these who desires the safety and wellbeing of the Kingdom.
Therefore I shall lay down three considerations (as motives) flowing from the
miseries of choising any other kind of Government, or Governors, than what we
have espoused.

First, I say to these who contends to have one King with England, let such
consider the Miseries that will follow upon this choice, and let these be
grounds and motives to diswade any wellwisher to the Kingdom from embracing of
them.

1. As to matters of Religion, consider the corruptions of that Kingdom, by
reason of the prevailing power of Prelacie, rooted in that Land* and the small
inclination that the Presbyterian Party has to a Lands Reformation, by
Covenant Vows and Engagments, in order to cast out Prelacie: So that by this
neglect the prelatick Party are strong in power, which makes their Kings
Jeroboam like comply with them, thinking they cannot possess the Crown and
Kingdom, if they do not so. Now Scotland having cast off Prelacie, and sworn
against it; can never embrace and receive that King who complyes with Prelacie;
and invests himself therewith; neither can a King serve two Masters at once:
For this were to build and destroy simul and semel, which is a complete
contradiction. Therefore none Godly, whose Consciences are not biased and
prejudged, will ever subject themselves to such a King, although they should
suffer the utmost of Cruelty.

Secondly, As to virtue and exercise of Trade, how much is this Land opposed,
hindered, and imprisoned by that Nation of England (as sad experience has taught
us) they having the Seat of the Throne and Sitting at the Helm, Advising and
Counselling their Kings, not to Countenance nor assist Scotland in the exercise
of Trade. But on the other hand to declare Enmity againg them, of which we
have had a late instance. But I will not insist upon this head, seeing both
Noblemen and ^everal others, has spoken Learnedly and reasonably upon this
head: And I think it is approven by the whole Land; except only by these few,
who are by assed, prejudged, and bought for Self Interest, to the Selling and
betraying of their Nation. Now from the Consideration of what is
abovementioned, I think we may be moved to reject that King: And if we may
refuse and reject him upon the account of Prelacy: Then much more may we refuse
that Popish Prince (who pretends to a Heredetarie Succession, contrair to the
Lands Engagements and Laws) upon the Account of Popery, whose intention without
doubt, is to pollu^e and d^si^e the Land with Idolatry; and therefore to be
resisted and oppo^ed, to the outmost of our power by all the Inhabitants of the
Land.

2. There is a second di^siculty that do occur to these, who would be for the
continuing of Mon^rchy Government, and for choi^ing a King from among our
selves. The difficulty is this, the Mould of Kingly Government is lost, by that
unlawful and intolerable Privilege and Prerogative that is given to Kings,
which is a Negative Voice, which is not proper to Kings; but to the Parliament,
as Learned Buchannan, and Mr. Rutherfo^d, gives an Account in his Rex Lex,
concerning the power of Parliaments, where he gives instances, that under the
days of Peagantry, the Parliament had the Negative Voice: And downward under
the Christian Faith, yea to the days of our Reformation: So that it is out of
late crept in, bu^ how unlawful this Negative Voice is, let Men of
understanding Judge; for by that they call and raise Parliaments, and not any
thing can pass in Act, but what they please, likewise in matters of Life and
Death, and this is done contrair to the Law; and cons^quently to a Faithful
Parliament; For the Law and Faithful Parliamenters does not distinguish: That
whosoever opposes the one opposes the other. And this usurped prerogative is so in
use in the Land, and h^s been dispensed with silence and connivance: So that
now it is difficult to find the Mould of Kingly Government or to persuade M^n
to embrace it: And therefore easier to change the Government, than to set it
up. I have spoken this in a Politic way by manner of civil Policy.

3. There remains now only this on mean to make use of in order to set up
Government in the Land, viz. A Common Wealth, and this must be done by counsel
and direction from Gods word: Otherways the Building will be in vain Psalm. 127.
Except the Lord Build the House, they labor in vain that Build it. Now you
must either Build on the Foundation already laid, or else you must make it
unlawful, and disagreeable to Gods word. But this will not be, as is
abundantly proven from the invincible grounds and Reasons given above. For
surely what we have done, must either be approven, or disapproven, for as I
have already told you, that there is no Action situate in individue, but must
be either good or evil, that is, It must be either rancked up among the sins of
the Fathers, or else among the duties of the Fathers. And I think when this is
Faithfully done, it shall appear that the Mercies and Deliverance of the
Church, shall not run in any other Channel than what we have espoused So that
in this I think I have brought this contraversie to a point. Now let this
Generation play their Game as they will: Yet surely this deserted cause will
arise coast what it will; And has the Lord been at such pains (if so I dare
speak) to keep his Church in the Fu^nace of Affliction near Twenty Years, from
the Year 61 to the Year 79, inorder to oring forth this duty. Then c^rtainly he
will bring them to the same Wilderness, and plead with them there, as in Hosea
2 14. I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offense, and
seek my Face: in their Affliction they will seek me early. Has the Lords
Church been under the Feet of cruel Boody Tyrants (in Scotland) already. I fear
there is worse days coming, in which this Land shall be brought under the Feet
of cruel Bloody Papifts. And then Backsliders shall be Robbed of their Idols of
Erastian Indulgence; and it may be Burried, Convictions will arise, though more
than Twenty Five Years in the Grave, and that with Joseph's Brethren some will
say, as in Genesis 42. 21. We are verily Guilty concerning our Brother, etc. Now
you have thought that such a duty a^ this, would have brought forth much Blood
and Confusion in the Land: But it will be found, that the neglect and omission
shall bring forth greater: But none believes nor sees Judgments, but these
who sees sins. Now having commented at large upon these three heads, because in
them, the most material and substantial part of the Contraversie did lay: I
shall in the next place, proceed to consider the premises, that you lay out
against us (in your Phamphlet called the Seasonable Admonition) taken from the
Writings of Mr. Durham concerning Scandalous Divisions, which Premises, I
shall speak to in order as they lay. Ye say we may and ought to endeavor
Union, though there be many things defective: This likewise I acknowledge, for
no perfection is to be obtained Heir on Earth.

1. But first you say. Though there be differences of Judgments in many things,
namely in such things as are consistent with the Foundation and Edification. It
may be interrogat what Sins can consist with the Foundation* I Answer. Personal
sins, sins of ignorance, infirmity, deadness in wanting Zeal and Courage: But
no wilful deliberat contented sin, that's obstinatly defended nourished and
maintained can be said to consist with the Foundation; And that because the
Attribut^ and Properties of duty are given unto it, which properly belongs to
the Foundation. So that here, Durham understands sins of ignorance of duty,
because he says, Men's understandings are not perfect, nor of equal reach. Now
ignorance or simple infirmity, can never be cause of Separation: Seeing
Separation consists, either in Defect or else in Excess. Now it cannot be said,
That a Man in ignorance has made Defection; because he never knew no better,
nor yet was ever further reformed; and therefore no ground there is to withdraw
from him, nor yet from any Church that owns him as a Member. so long as his
ignorance is not obstinat and wilful, and that in opposition to all warning:
But this does not touch our controversy, it being about Truth, Revealed, and
received by the Church of Scotland, and therefore not sins of ignorance or
simple infirmity.

2. But Secondly, You say though there be dissatisfaction with many Persons,
whether Officers or Members? To which I Ans. Personal sins, can never make any
separat from a true Church, who does not aid and assist them in their sin, nor
yet from the guilty Persons themselves, unless they be obstinat Desenders
thereof: But indeed if they shall refuse ^o be reproved and warned of their
sin, and if the Church shall Benjamin-like Espouse their quarrel, then may we
withdraw from them: But we acknowledge that a Church is not to be separat from,
so long as there are any Remonstrators in it* yea if it were but one; for so
long ^^ there is one Remonstrator in it, God and Christ has not left that
Church, and therefore Man should not leave it.

3. Thirdly he says Union may be consistent with many particular failings and
defects in the exercise of Govrnment, as spareing some corrupt members and
censuring others unjustly. To which I Answer, it would be interrogat, if the
Assembly understands these defects? in sparing of some, from the rod of
discipline to be simple deference flowing from the sin of infirmity and
deadness, not obstinat; but subject to faith full warning, if this be? then
their ought not to be sepration But when the exercise of Discipline is not only
defered, and delayed out deneyed, and the deney all thereof becomes an
essential pillar of the building: so that the free exercise of discipline is
inconsistent with the being thereof, which is the case of your Church this day,
and Therefore when this is, then their is cause of separation; so the
contraversie is not about defering of discipline but the denaying and laying
aside of it in its free exercise as to all Persons and Ranks without exception,
which is your case this day. Moreover we acknowledge that no Church can be
without failings and faults, for no perfection is to obtained in the Church
militant here on Earth But however the endeavor of duty, is not to be laid
aside, for we ought to seek perfection, withal Christian sincerity and
prudence, Although we may faill and come short therein.

Further you say there was in the primitive Churches a tollerating Iezabel and
the Nicolaitans to which I answer: it cannot be denayed but it was so: however,
was it not in them a defect and sin? and was it not displeasing in the sight of
GOD, as in Revelation 2, Chap 15, 16, and does not the Lord highly praise and
commend the faithful exercise of discipline in the primitive Church? as in
Rev. 2 2 I know thy works and thy Labor and thy patience, and how thou can
not bear them? which are evil and thou have tried them which say they are
Apostles and are not, and have found them liars what shall I say then in this?
does the great Assembly Glory in the defects and sins of the primitive
Churches; endeavoring to like them in evil, or say you that your case, and
theirs is one, if this ye say, then I do deny.

1 Their sin was not obstinat and maliciou^ly desperate in opposition to all
warrning and Admonition as yours was and is, have not you Sitten twenty years
warning (some of you) of the faithful whose sufferings and blood (with heads
and hands) are crying to you to deliver up that Bloody Church renting, Land
Destroying, Soul Murdering, Sin of Indulgency and Errastianism, unto the Sword
of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and yet ye will not do it, but renders us evil
for good, in crying out against us, charging us with Separation: because we
will not consent to your Sin; and can we exercise any greater Act of Love
toward you? Than to testify against your Sin, by our withdrawing from your
destroying courses. Oh! how miserable would this ^^nd be? If we were all
jointly going on in Sin, and resting satisfied with our Deadness and
Toleration: Can ye say then that the sins of the Primitive Churches were in
opposition to all warning, I mean after that the holy Apostles did Write unto
them; and if this you cannot do; then ye ought not to defend the state of your
Church, from their Example. But 2. Can it be said that the exercise of
Discipline, in the Primitive Churches was inconsistent with their being and
Foundation, certainly it was not, for they could extend the Exercise of
Discipline toward all that were Baptized and received into the Church, without
respect of Persons, as all Faithful Churches may and ought to do: But the
Exercise of Discipline is inconsistent with your being and Foundation; by
reason that you dare not Censure and reprove the Sins of all Ranks of such as
are Baptized, which Sins and Persons, I shali have occasion afterward to speak
more particularly, when I come to the Sins and Accusations led against you.

4. Fourthly, Ye insist further and says, That such Defects as do not make
Communion in a Church, and in its ordinances sinful, will not warrant a
Separation. Ans, These def^^^s that does not warrant a Separation are Personal
Defects; Or the defects formerly mentioned, But the Defects we charge you with
are Total and Universal, we charge you wholly as one Man to be Guilty And
that both as to your Foundation, and Application, and also with obstinate
Perseverance therein. Now this 6 Rule ye speak of in page 323, viz. When Men
may unit^ without Personal Guillt or accession to the guilt of others there may
and ought to be Union. This I say, does coincidat with the following Objection
annent the incestous Person: Therefore I shall leave it while afterward.
Moreover in Page 324. Ye say if a Man be put to condemn anything he thinks
Laufwll in his own practice, or the practice of others. or 2. if he be put to
approve the deed or parctise of others, which he counted sinful, or affirm
that to be truth, which he counts error, these ye say may hinder union, this
is likeways personal sins. Now consider the nature of the sin wha^ the man is
to condemn ye say that which he thinks lawful in himself or, others, or to
approve that which he thinks unlawful in others. I say no private man can
Separat from any particular Person upon alleged offense without revaling the
case to the Representatives of the Church and if the offense be clearly decided
already to be sin by the Church: Then the Church is to Act Faithfully in it;
and the Accuser ha^h exonered himself; But if it be some particular light in
the Accuser, or Speculation of New Reformation, then he is to Communicate it to
the Church, that it may be jointly gone on in, and not by Separation from the
Person Accuesed.

Secondly, Ye instance Mr. Rutherford who speaks of them who have the pure word
of God Preached, and the Sacraments duly Administered, what if many of them led
a Life contrair to what they profess? and yet the Governors use not the Rod of
Discipline to censure them; Then whether should the Members separat from that
Church, yea or no? Answer, A contrair practice can never be said to subsist in
Exercise (if strickly taken) without a contrair Profession, when Tried and
Examined: For the will must be active either in choising or refusing, or
approving, or defending; or else dissapproving. Now when Sin is defended, then
a Man does join his Profession to it by the defense of his Practice, declaring
that his Sin, and he is Friends, So that his former Profession is nothing else,
but a shadow, because i^ wants the practice, from which the Man is to be
defined: For Man is no more than he practices, neither will get any other
Testimony a^ the last Day as in Matthew. 25, 21. But however it is acknowledged
here, that it is a duty to Censure such; and the omission is a Sin. The
Question then is, What shall the dissatisfied do, whether separat or no? Answer
When duty is neglected, in such a case, they are to use all Christian means and
prudence in the first place, to awaken them out of that neglect and deadness:
And that by admonition again and again, by holding out the Burden, that is on
their Conscience by reason of that neglect. All this must be done, before they
separat: For Separation can not be, but where Sin is obstinatly defended,
nourished and maintained; and that not only by a part, but by the whole. For
certainly the Governors must either approve or disapprove this neglect; if
they approve the neglect and abuse of Discipline, received and owned of them
formerly: Then they fall in defection from their first Love, which is a sin
that the Lord has threatened to punish, with no less than his leaving and
departing, as in Rev. 2. 5. And when the Lord leaves the house, why should Man
abide in it?

Further it is urged, That the incestuous Man's Sin not Censured infected the
Church, the infected Church infecteth the Worship. Ans. This Objection is most
subtle, being hung up in the Abstract a part from Exercise; but hour let us
first consider the ^ncestuous Person by describing and desining him as he is in
his Sin. I say the incestuous Person obstinatly defending and impenitently
Persevering in his sin, belongs materially (though not formally cast out) to
that Body and Corporation, of which Satan is the head, the Church not
consenting, nor approving; but hating and abhoring the sin, belongs to that
Body of which Christ Jesus is the head. Now let them be cast into a Categorical
Mould* What form shall come forth? Only two pure Negatives or two Particulars,
between which there is no Connection, that's to say, The incestuous Person is not
of the Church; and again the Church has no affinity with the incestuous
Person, and if no connection? Then consequently, no conclusion can be drawn,
the sin being Personal, and therefore no just cause of Separation from the
whole.

Now we are confident, That what is said anent these premises, drawn from
these two Learned Pious Men, viz. Mr. Rutherford and Mr. Durham, concerning the
practice of riged Separatists; it may appear to any that are not biased and
prejudged, that we do not come within the compass of Riged Separatists, seeing
we do acknowledge, That Separation is not to be stated, but where sin is
obstinatly maintained, nourished and defended, and that not only by a part; but
by the whole; and that in opposition to all warning as yours is. So that from
this you shall never defend your selves by the Example of the Churches of
Corinth, Galatia, Philadephia, Ephesus, Thytira, Sardis and Laodecia* unless ye
can prove, that they did resist all warning by defending their fin; and so were
still to be the Spouse of Christ. Oh! does not the Lord threaten to remove his
Candlestick from among them; except they repent, as in Rev. 2 5. Think ^e that
the Lord will dwell where sin is obstinatly defended, Is he not of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity, as in Hab. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16. What concord has
Christ with Belial? or what part has he that Believes with an Infidel? or
what Agreement has the Temple of GOD with Idols?

Now I shall in the next place proceed to the complaints and sins led against
you. Where first it is said we complain of Ministers Conversations, that some
are light and frothy. Answer. This complaint is unpertinent to the present
contraversie; our contraversie not being about Personal sins, but about your
foundation and being. I say personal Accusation, belongs to a Church right in
its constitution, and pertains to the well being of it; So that we are not to
think that any Church ever was, or ever will be (though never so pure) without
Personal guilt, so long as the Church Millitant is upon Earth. Therefore I do
reject this complaint, as being unfit for the present contraversie.

Secondly, Ye say there is many complaints of the Exercise of Discipline and
Government, such as it is much neglected, or but partially Exercised:
Insufficient Ministers admitted, and Scandalous Elders. Ans^, This complaint is
rash and evil concocted, being a Remonstrance belonging to a true Church, right
in its Foundation and Constitution, and nowayes belonging to an Erastian
Church. As for the neglect and partiality of Discipline. I shall speak to it,
when I come to illustrat the present state of this Erastian Church, by showing,
that neglect and partiality are the essential Pillars and Props, on which this
Church stands; and that the Faithful Exercise of Discipline, is inconsistent
with the being thereof. As to the admitting of insufficient Ministers and
Scandalous Elders. I Answer, This is a Circulating in affirming, that Scandal
admits of Scandal. Now yield, that Ministers and Elders were sufficient, and
free of all Scandal, dot not their joining with the present Church? make them
scandalous, and does not our practice in withdrawing from them? declare it so
to be, by our not hearing nor owning them as lawful Ministers. But I hope this
rash confounding, of Remonstration, will be acknowledged to be wrong after
consideration, and so will be amended by my Brethren.

As for receiving of Currats, and not Excommunicating the Prelates. Answer, This
same Remonstrance is Genuine with the former; for who can lawfully
Excommunicat; But the Faithful, I mean these that has not changed their head
Christ Jesus: For i^ this Church might Excommunicat the Prelates; and the
Excommunicating of them were a valid duty in the sight of God, and coun^inanced
of him; then should all of us be present at the hearing of this duty. But take
head Brethren what our Lord says, Luke 6. 42. First cast the Beam out of thine
own Eye; and then shall thou see clearly, to pull out the Mote that is in thy
Brothers Eye. So I say, let the Ministers of this Erastian Church, first cast
out the Sin of the Erastian Indulgence and Toleration (under their late Kings)
by humble acknowledgment of the guilt thereof, in its high Aggra^ating
Circumstances: And then they shall be in case for Excommunicating the Prelates,
and when this shall be, then let us give our presence to the Action with Heart
and Hand.

Thirdly* You say the instances we chiefly insist upon, are the accepting of
the Indulgence and Toleration, that these are either justified, or not
confessed and condemned. Your Answer. is (1) You say that it is undeniable,
that there were different Sentiments and Practices annent these things, amongst
them that were Reputed, Learned and Pious, and had suffered for their cleaving
to the Government of this Church. Answer. I wonder that the great Assembly, who
professes to have so much Gospel purity and simplicity; should so jugle and
shuffle over such a great contraversie with such ambiguity and boutgates as to
speak of different Sentiments without specefieing the Sentances. What does the
Assembly mean by their Sentiments? if they do understand inconveniences and
incommodities, about certain degrees and circumstances: Then may I say, no
Action ever was, since there were Plurality of Persons in the World; but had
different Sentiments: Some sees more inconveniences, some less; And how often
does it run that length? Quot capita tot Sententiae, that's to say. How many
Heads, so many Sentances; So that every one almost has their peculiar and
proper Speculations. Now on the other hand if ye understand these different
Sentiments to be about the sinfulness of the Indulgence and Toleration: Then
why have ye not been plain and particular on the matter; by holding out the
Heinous Aggravating nature thereof, in order to the satisfying of our
Consciences. Certainly the Spirit of God (who knows all things, and the Burden
that is on us by reason of that sin) never led you to such ambiguity as to
speak of different Sentiments.

You say that is not the controversy of our day, there is no matter nor
occasion of debate annent them now, nor any practice annent them now, that may
be an offense to any Ministers are no where now settled by Indulgence or
Toleration. Answer, This I deny, for still the contraversie remains ay and
while the Sin be confessed and forsaken. True it is the Indulgence is over; but
what change is come in its roum, not a change from sin to duty, but from one
sin to another, from one Erastian Toleration to another (as I shall make it
appear afterward) still ye are going on in the same sin, which is an argument
sufficient in place of all other arguments, to prove the Indulgency and
Toleration to be a sin; because ye are deserted of God by reason of the guilt
thereof, as in Isa. 59. 2. So that ye are never in favor with God, nor
honored of him to own duty, but still goes on in the same sin: For what can
obstinat Sinners do? but sin, seeing the Lord is not present with them, to lead
them by his Spirit. Further I would interrogat the great Assemby, how they
parted with the Indulgency and Toleration? that is to say, Whether they parted
with it as Enemies to it; or as Friend^, you have parted as Enemies to it: Then
surely you have particulared both the Enemy and the Enmity, by holding out the
high Aggravating nature and circumstances thereof, as a Man uses to do, with
his Enemy, he will ever say the most and worst, he can so should ye be
particular about your sin, according to the Example of true Penitents in
Scripture, as in Psalm. 51. 14. Deliver me from Blood guiltiness, and in Ezera.
9. 2. The strange Marriages are confessed, but no confession of the Indulgency
and Toleration; neither in your National Fast and Humiliation, in the Year
1690, you have not so much as once named the sin. True it is ye speak in
Scripture Language, but they are general Scriptures, and general Confessions,
and binds your selves to them, and so burieth the Sins in contraversie: yea and
in this present Testimony, you cover and hids this Sin with Boutgats and
ambiguity, by speaking of your different Sentiments: So that when all this is
considered, then it may appear that the Assembly has not parted with the
Indulgency and Toleration, as Enemies to it, but as Friends: And therefore by
consequence the contraversie betwixt us remains.

Thirdly, You say when pious and peaceable Divines treat of the peace and Unity
of the Church, they advise to forbear the reviving the debates of former times
among the Godly, or engaging to declare Men Sentiments annent them; as being
con^rair to the peace and Edification of the Church, when present duty is not
concerned: Or when it is not about a Fundamental truth or Necessar duty: And
the forbearance does not mar any duty, that the Church in general is concerned
in, or in danger the Salvation of Souls, throw the want of clearness therein.
Ans. When debates are not about a Fundamental Truth and Necessar duty? Then it
is not to be revieved: But our contraversie is about a Fundamental Truth and
necessar duty, being about the Kingly Authority of Christ Jesus, that he is the
only King and Head of his Church; and so by consequence the Bloody Persecuting
Magistrate has no power to prescribe and give a limited Indulgency or
Toleration. For 1. I say consider the Church in her ^ssential parts, consisting
in Authority and Obedience. I mean the Head and Members, which is one body. How
then can this Body admit of two distinct Authorities, or how can Obedience
consist with it? I say can the Church which is Christ's Body, serve two Heads?
would not this make the Church a Monster? to admit of two distinct Authorities,
and does not this overturn the nature and Vows of Baptism? we being received
into the Church as Members, and subjects to become obedient to the Doctrine,
Discipline, and Kingly Government of Christ Jesus, How then can any of the
subjects become a Head contrair to Baptism? or how can any within the Church?
give obedience to that Head, or can their obedience (though under great
pretenses of Liberty) be called any thing, but sin and bondage, because that so
long as this Authority is retained and kept; still there is limits set to the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church; by reason that although the Discipline
were Exercised toward all; yet it cancannot reach this Head: And therefore at
best the liberty is but a Bondage, and then by consequence this liberty, (as
they call it) is inconsistent with the free, and Faithful Exercise of
Presbyterian Government, and does overturn the Foundation thereof, which is the
case of the great Assembly in the matter of the Indulgence, and the late and
present Toleration.

Obj But some will object and say, Why may not a liberty be taken from a
Persecuting Enemy; as for example, If the King of France would proclaim a
Liberty to all the Banished Protestants, were it not duty to them to embrace
the offer? Ans, This I deny, and the reason is, That this he must do either as
an Enemy or absolute Master over the Church, or else as a Friend and Subject to
the Crown and Kingdom of Christ. Now as an Enemy retaining and adhearing to his
Popish Idolatry, without repenting of his cruel Bloody Tyrranny formerly
committed, in this he cannot give a liberty to the Gospel; Because it involveth
a contradiction, by reason that he cannot serve two opposites, viz. The Gospel
of Christ Jesus, and his Popish Idolatry: For this were to build and destroy
simul and semel, that's to say once and together, which is a complete
contradiction according to our Saviors Words Matthew. 6. 24. No Man can serve
two Masters: for either he will hate the one and love the other: or else he
will hold to the one and despise the other. That's to say, He cannot with full
D^ligence* single love, and fidelity, serve them both (they being opposites)
for Love and Fidelity terminates only in one single object; So that from this
you see, that as an Enemy he can never give liberty to the Gospel.

Secondly, As a Friend and Subject to the Crown and Kingdom of Christ, he
cannot retain an Authority over the Church, that is Supra Sacra, by
prescribing Bounds and Limits to the Doctrine, Discip^ine, and Kingly
Government of Christ Jesus. But on the other hand as a Subject, he is to
exercise his power Circa Sacra, that is that the power of Doctrine and
Discipline be Faithfully exercised (in the Land) by these to whom the power is
committed, and that according to Gods Word without partiality, and respect of
Persons. And when this or shall be, then he declares himself to be guilty of
Death, by reason of his former sins, in sheding the Blood of Innocent Persons,
by reason that the Law of God requires that such shall die, as in Number. 35, 31.
Ye shall take no satisfaction for the Life of a Murderer, which is Guilty of
Death: But he shall he surely put to Death. And Verse 33. The Land cannot be
cleansed of the Blood that is shed therein, but by the Blood of him that shed
it. Now if the King of France Act as a Friend and Subject, then he will
acknowledge his Subjection to the Kingdom of Christ* And then by consequence
will deny any Authoritative Superiority over the Gospel.

Moreover in the next place, Protestants can never embrace that Liberty (as
they call it) and the reason is. 1. it sets limits to the extent of the ^ospel
in its Doctrine, which is to go throw all Nations (and consequ^ntly all places
of the Kingdom) and teach them to observe all things whatsoever, I have
commanded you, Matthew. 28. 20. Now if they shall declare this Command
Faithfully, viz. That Popish Idolatry is to be rooted out of the Land, and not
to be permitted, and Tyrrannie to be cast out, and that the Throne and State
are to be Reformed, and that Men of Truth Fearing God and hating covetousness,
are to be invested with the present power, that Justice may be Execute on the
Guilty without respect of Persons. Now I think this will overturn their
Liberty, and make it null: And no otherwise can they Faithfully do, if they
observe all that is given them in Commission as Faith^ul Ambassadors (in the
Name of God and Christ) who are to declare the whole Will of God unto the
People. So that from this you see, that a sinful Indulgence is inconsistent
with a Gospel Liberty: And therefore nowayes to be embraced, by any that
professes Jesus Christ to be King and Head of his Church, and that by reason
that it cuts off the Doctrine, Discipline and Kingly Government of Christ
Jesus, by their Su^jecting to that Government, which distinguishes from the
Government of Christ, so that in this they are the Servants of Men.

Obj. But some will object and say, If a Heathen King would proclaim a Liberty
to the Gospel, were it not a duty to embrace it. Ans. A ^^athen has no Law:
And therefore we are not to proceed in Law against him, either for his past or
present Practice; For the Scripture says where is no Lw there is no
Transgression, Rom, 4. 15. That's to say ^hey cannot be accused of Defection
from that Law which they never received, and consequently cannot be punished
(whatever judgments the Lord may inflect upon them for their ignorance and
misery) Now Papests or Malignants professes the name of Christ and pretends to
be under Law: therefore we are to see to the right manner and exercise of that
Law; that it be according to the will and word of the Lawgiver. Moreover as to
a heathens proclaming of liberty, in this we are not to give ear. For belivers
hes this in commission already to go throw all Nations: also it is Christ's
right and prerogative Psalm. 2 8, I shall give thee the heathen for thin
inherietance Now all that Belivers are to do in this, is that the occasion and
encouragement is the stronger* but but not their commission.

Moreover in the next place you say there are three Doctrinal Mistaks that
occasion our divisions (1) because we think a thing to be duty therefore it is
to be done at all Seasons, and we consider not that a thing may be good on the
matter, which is not to be done at all times. I Ans. we acknowledge prudence is
to be exercised in going about Duty; but however it has a time, which time we
fear you would deny if put to it, or if ye should go about this duty I fear
according to your former practice it would be unseasonable, as for exemple in
the matter of your late King, ye did never cry out against his sin so long as
he was in power commiting them but when his back was at the wall, and the Lords
judgments powering down upon him; then ye did give witness, which witness was
unseasonable, by reason of your unfaithfulness.

The other is that we cannot maintain union with any that differs from us, and
comes not up to our mind in all things. Ans. we denay to have any proper or
peculiar judgment or mind but what has been received, owned and avowed by our
Ancestors in the Confession of faith, and Covenants and if there be any new
step of Reformation started by you or us, for the time here after, we desire it
may be prudently and tenderly carried on and not by Division.

The third is, that where we apprehend persons guilty of sins we cannot have
communion with them unless they explicitly and publicly confess the same.
Answer: we denaie likewaies to have any peculiar apprehension of guilt* but
only what the Scripture condemns, and the Acts and Constitutions of our
Church: And is not agreeable to Scripture that Sins publicly committed, are to
be publicly confessed, as in 2 Cor. 2, 6. 1, Tim. 5, 20. Them that Sin rebuke
before all, that others also may fear. I hope the Learned Assembly will
acknowledge that Sin must be confessed and forsaken or else the Lord cannot in
justice forgive, and that because the promise belongs only to such, as in Prove.
28. 13, He that hides his sin shall not prosper: But whos^ confesses and
forsakes them shall find Mercy. Indeed if any Transgressor shall find Mercy of
God, and be honored of him in the way of duty: Then ought we not to stick
precisly on the manner of his confession; for assuredly the Lord has blotted out
his sin, and therefore let not man again set it on the score.

Further we charge you with three mistakes, which are the Rocks on which our
Church hitherto has spli^ed.

The first is, That you acknowledge a thing to be duty in it self, such as
Fidelity in Doctrine and Discipline: But the Exercise of it most not come
within Doors; but must be Shouldered to the Door with carnal prudence, and
indulged exigences, because as in Page 19. You say the Church will have more
prejudice by the exercise thereof; than benefire. Now whether obedience to
please God, or obedience to please Men, brings most loss or benefit to the
Church, let any tender Conscience judge.

The second is, more Tenderness toward Transgressors, than toward the Truths
of God: So that Truth shall be dashed in pieces, rather than the Bulk of
Professors should be broken. Alas! this sin has been Epidemick in this Land to
the ^uine of the Church.

The third is, confident trusting and Relaying on Mercies and Deliverance,
without Repentance and confession of sin; Forge^ing that threatening, Ezekiel. 17
15. Shall he prosper, shall he escape that does such things, or shall he break
the Covenant and be delivered.

Moreover you say, you ^ind among our G^ievances, yet two more heavy
Accusations. The first is that there is corruption in the Constitution as it is
now established, being under the bondage of an Erastian Yoke submited to. I
Answer* For investigating of a more ^nited harmony and Concatination of the
controversy. I shall Translate the handling of this Grievance to the posterior
place: and therefore shall first speak to the Oath of Allegiance.

Where I shall speak to the Oath of Allegiance in the abstract from the present
contraversie. I say the Oath of Allegiance when Lawful, is cordially to be
taken by the subjects; and is a piece of a Religious work, and becomes
Ministers well to take Qua Subjects, and tends nowayes to their Qualifications
Qua Ministers; but only as Subjects: Therefore we do nowayes carp at an Oath of
Allegiance when Lawful.

Now the Question is, Whether the Oath of Allegiance to the present King be
lawful, yea or no. The Assembly affirms but we deny. And that 1. Because the
Person on the Throne, did at his first Entry to Britain Invest and Cloth
himself with Prelacy, and that contrair to his former practice and Education.
And this was done by the English Prelates who were the principal moving
Instruments in this Revolution, in bringing him to the Throne? So that as they
did countinance him to his upseting; so likewise he did countinance them to
their defending and maintaining. as is to be seen in his present and past
practice, how he has owned that Antichristian party, by erecting some to
Bishoprics, which is a thing very clear, that his setting up of such, and also
his hearing and Communicating with them in Worship, declares that he has
invested himself with Prelacy; and so has divested himself of the
Qualifications of a lawful King according to our National Covenant, Solemn
League and Covenant, and Coronation Oath, where Kings are engaged to swear, to
maintain Presbyterian Government, and to the utmost of their power to oppose
Antichristian Prelacy and all falls Religion. Now seeing that he has invested
himself with Prelacy; then how can any Faithful subject acknowledge him as
their King; or swear allegiance to him: without being guilty of the sin of
Prelacie by their consenting to set it upon the Throne. Is not thi^ Breach of
Covenant and perjure in the Subjects to elect a Person to the Throne, who has
not the elective properties, such as the Qualifications contained in our
Fundamental Laws. For at best his Qualifications are but exercised
indifferently, either toward Prelacy in England, or this supposed Presbytrie
in Scotland, and therefore does not leave to the one, more than to the other,
but invests himself with both, according to the inclinations of the People:
Which practice is contradictory, for how can one serve two Masters? And
therefore no Godly Faithful Subject can in Conscience elect and choice that
which is contradictorie; seeing the Elective properties are wanting; and so by
consequence no Oath of Allegiance can be given without Sin and Perjurie.

The second reason is, Because he did not take the Covenant at his Entry to
the Throne. Now according to the practice of our Ancestors who in the Crowning
of their Kings; did first cause them swear to the National Covenant, the Solemn
League and Covenant. I instance the manner of the Coronation at Seoon in the
Year 51. Where Charles the second did take the Covenants; And likewise did
swear and engage to endeavor the Reformation of Religion ^n the other two
Kingdoms; that when it should please the Lord to restore him to his Government
there* that he was bound to endeavor the establishment of the Work of
Reformation there, as well as to maintain it here. But nothing of this has
ever yet been: I say the entry to the Crown has not come throw the Channal of
a Covenant of Reformation: And therefore how can any Subject swear to be loyal
to him who has not sworn to be loyal and Faithful to the Crown and Interest of
Jesus Christ. Certainly our obedience and loyalty to Kings must be in the Lord;
and not in ma^ters sinful and unlawful, either as to the Burieing, or yet as to
the bearing down the Covenanted work of Reformation, which our Ancestors did
make a principal mark of a lawful King Anointed and Qualified of God; for
ruling in righteousness. Certainly where this is either wanting, or yet denied
in a King: Then the Oath of Allegiance in the Subjects is Sinful and Unlawful
according to our Fundamental Laws.

A third reason is, Because the Persons who did elect him* did not take the
Covenant, and therefore were not the lawful Representatives of this Covenanted
Land: And seeing we may refuse a King upon his not taking the Covenant, then by
consequence we may refuse these Representatives. As for example, this the
present Generation holds good in Thesi. as to the manner; For they acknowledge
that the present Ministers has no right to their Stipends; unless the Persons
who elect them be qualified, with the Oath of allegiance. Now if I may argue
from their concession as to the manner: then much more may I argue from the
matter and ground above mentioned, that king and people; ought in such a great
work to qualify themselves by entering ^n Covenant with God, according to ^he
Example of the Lords People in former times, as in 2 Kings 11. 17. And Jehojada
made a Covenant between the Lord and the King: and the People, that they should
be the Lords People. So that from this you see, That a Covenanted Land, ought
to renew their Covenant with God, in such a work as this. I say both King and
People, if they expect the Lords presence, and bles^ing: But if otherwise they
do not this; then may they expect that challenge in Hose^ 8. 4. They have set up
Kings, but not by me, they have mude Princes and I knew it not. That is not by
my direction and approbation: As if the Lord had said, Ye never sought my
council in this, neither did come before me with confession of sin, and
Humiliation for your defection: In order to leave your sin, and cleave to a
Covenanted work of R^formation: And therefore says the Lord I know it not,
that's to say, I have no affection to it so as to approve it; and when the Lord
disproves, why should Man approve? for certainly where there is no just right
or title to a Crown, then it may be expected, that, That Government and these
Governors, are full of Misery and of short continuance, according to that
triplicat threatening Ezekiel 21 27, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it
shall be no more until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. So I
say we cannot acknowledge these Rulers to be lawful, or yet lawfully chosen, so
long as the Covenant is laid aside: And therefore from the consideration of
this, the Oath of Allegiance must be unlawful, and that both according to
Scripture and our Fundamental Laws.

The Fourth reason is, because he cannot take the Coronation Oath, as he is now
stated, being invested with Prelacy; according to our Fundamental Laws, Kings
are to Swear to maintain the true Religion of Christ Jesus; the which Religion
is Presbyterian Government, in it is power and purity: And also shall gainstand
and abolish all false Religion contrair to the same; under which false
Religion, Antichristian Prelacy is comprehended, which I think the great
Assembly will not deny: True it is in the Year ^6. the Coronation Oath was
proposed to the Person on the Throne (being sent by the hand of a private
Person) to take, but whether or no taken it may be doubted, seeing he walks
contrair thereto, by denying all practical obedience. But however the sin is
greater in breach thereof; both by the Taker and Proposers of this Oath, than
it had never been, and that I prove from Scripture, Eccles. 5. 5. Better is it
that thou should not Vow, than that thou should Vow and not Pay. Now in
the breach of this Oath, there is a silent contended resting thereon by both
Parties, without Exhortation or Admonition from the one; or endeavor after
obedience in the other. Is not an lawful Oath seriously to be performed, seeing
that the the taker finds it to be a duty: And therefore to be gone about, as in
Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might Now if
he shall with full power and might maintain Presbyterian Government, then
Prelacy shall get no aid nor assistance. And I hope the Assembly will
acknowledge, that Prelacie is no where to be Entertained; and that the
maintainers thereof, are Enemies to the Crown and Kingdom of Christ; So that it
is not enough to countinance Presbytrie now in its shadow; or yet I say in its
substance in Scotland, unless that it be countinanced both in England and
Ireland, according to the Tenor of the Coronation Oath, which is to abolish and
gainstand all false Religion; and therefore Popery is no where to be Tolerated.
But in this Revolution, there is a Toleration of false Religion; and therefore
the present Person on the Throne, can neither be owned as a lawful King; nor
yet be looked upon as a faithful Instrument of Reformation: Seeing he sends out
contrair streams from the same Fountain to their Kingdoms. Now according to the
Judgment of the Assembly, if it shall be yealded? that this is a deliverance
and liberty, yet it is contradictorie to Scripture as in James 3. 11: Does a
Fountain at the same place send forth sweet Water and bitter. This the Apostle
denis, so I say can streams of Liberty and Blessedness proceed from your King
to Scotland and bondage and Thraldom to England and Ireland. Certainly no, our
Liberty can never be purchassed with our Brethrens and Neighbors Thraldom. And
now let this liberty be never so large in this Land, yet if it be not
universal throughout the whole Kingdoms, in its sincere endeavor, to the
maintaing of Presbytrie, and to the abolishing of all false Religion contrair
to the same, then it cannot be said, that the Coronation Oath is in the least
observed to one more than to another, for all comes under his Toleration; And
so by consequence this Oath is made null; and therefore no Subject neither
Minister nor People can Swear Allegiance to him, without involving themselves
in Perjurie and Breach of the Fundamental Laws.

But some will object and say, That the Covenants and Coronation Oath, does not
engage us to reform without the Kingdom. Answer* Yield it be so, yet it binds
us to reform our selves and King. 1. Our selves, in that we are not to suffer
any Prelatick Person, or favourer thereof o^ Conniver at any false Religion, to
be set upon the Throne, without being guilty either of direct or indirect
compliance therewith. I say direct compliance, when there is a consenting and
an aiding him in his upsetting, without evident signs, and qualifications for
the Authority. 2. Indirectly, when there is a neglect of a Faithful Testimony
against the sin, which sin will (if not prevented) destroy the Soul, because it
is Rebellion and Enmity against Jesus Christ to entertain Antichristian Prelacy
and Popery. For what can one be said to be, who owns Presbytrie (if so it may
be said) in the one Kingdom, and Antichristianism in the other, but half Loyal
to the Crown and Kingdom of Christ, and a Person half Loyal is but at best an
Enemy; and so consequently becomes liable to the Wrath and Justice of God, And
therefore it is the duty of a Faithful Assembly to forwarn the forementioned
guilty person of his sin, in order to make out of the way of Wrath* Otherwise
they will be guilty, as in Ezekiel. 33. 9. When I say unto the Wicked Man thou
shall surely die, if thou do not speak to warn the Wicked from his way, that
Wicked Man shall die in his iniquity; but his Blood will I require at thine
Hand, So I say unless that there be Faithful warning given, and that in
Doctrine, both as to Admonition and Exhortation, and likewise to the highest
degree of censure and Discipline in case of obstinacy: Otherwise we cannot be
free of this guilt? nor yet be innocent from Perjurie, seeing that the King
(according to the Faith and Practice of the present professing Generation) is a
lawful King and nourishing Father to the Church, and so by consequence is a
Member of the Church, and therefore Subject to the Laws thereof, which I think
the Assembly will not deny, considering that his Mercies comes under their
inspection as is to be seen, by their praying for prosperity and a Blessing to
his undertakings: And why should not his sin, and misery, llikewayes be marked
and testified against, or else we shall never reform our selves.

But some will object and say, that the King has owned and countinanced
Presbytrie in Scotland and declared Enmity against Prelacy. Answer. This he
has done by way of an Erastian Toleration; and that from Self Interest; as is
to be seen: Because they Tolerat his sin, and beco^es obedi^nt to his corrupt
unlawful Commands, by keeping of sinful Fast days, and Thansgiving days and
the like. And that both contrair to Scripture and the principals of Presbytrie,
which the Prelatick party out of wilfulness will not do; So that from this his
Faithfulness does not appear, unless that his Zeal were universal against all
the Prelatick party. I say in other places as well as here. For certainly it is
to be followed with Zeal and hatred in the other Kingdoms, as well as here, it
being evil in it self and according to that true Axiom quod Malum est per se
non mutatur a Circumstantjis, that's to say, That which is evil in it se^f
cannot be changed from circumstances of place, So I say unless that this Zeal
be universal, it can noways be sound and real.

But it may be further objected that there was good reforming Kings in Judah who
did not take away the high places: And why may not our King be owned, as a
Lawful Reforming King, although Prelacy be not altogether abolished. Answer.
The difference is very great, As (1) The Reforming Kings of Judah were never
Anointted or brought to the Throne by the Priests of the High places: But your
king was brought to the Throne of Britan, principaly by the English Prelates,
the Lords spritwall as they were called (2) the priests of the high places,
were never in court, or near to the Th^one with the Reforming king of Judah:
But the English Prelates are (3) the kings of Judah never bult the high places,
in the time of their Reformation but your king hes set up Prelates in England
since his coming to the Throne. I instance Mr Gilbert Burnet, (4) we never read
that the kings of Judab Sacrificed in the high places in the time of their
Reformation But your king hears and communicats with the prelatick party in
worship (5) the Reforming kings of Judah did never swear to defend the high
places, in the time of their Reformation; by opposing and hindering these that
would have destroyed them: But your King has Defended the high places, for the
past and present time, from these that would have destroyed them. So that from
this you see, that your Kings practice does nowayes quadrat with the practice
of the Reforming Kings of Judah* And that because in them it was a sin of
deadness and infirmity: But in him a willful deliberat contented sin, as is to
be seen by the laying aside the endeavor of the duty; and much more the
Perfection thereof in its sincerity.

Further you say, do we not think him our lawful King and is he not a blessed
Instrument in Gods Hand, to work so great Deliverance for you and us. Answer,
This we have clearly denied from the forementioned grounds and objections, and
we think any single eye, that is not by assed and prejudged will assent to what
we have said. And if any be of that judgment (which I am not) viz, That it
might please the Lord for a time to continue Kingly Government in this Land,
and to raise up a King to rule in Righteousness; for the good of his Church and
People. I say, then it might be expected, that he should be set upon the Throne
with cleaner hands, than Blood shedors, Test-takers, and Eras^^an Indulged
Proffessors, who has never yet acknowledged their sin: Nor yet prepared
themselves for Mercy. And whatever you may think of this Revolution, in calling
it a Deliverance: Yet far be it from us to think so, as to let such Dreams or
Delusions enter into our Heads or Hearts, seeing there is no promise from the
word to believe so.

Now from what is said above, I think it shall appear that the Oath of
Allegiance, cannot not be given to the present Person on the Throne, nor yet to
any Successor who shall walk in his steps: For what is applicable to the one,
shall still be applicable to any other of the same practice.

Now I shall in the next place proceed to the Grievance given against you;
which is that there is corruption in the Constitution, as it is now
established, being under the bondage of an Erastian Yoke submitted to. Which
charge you deny as false: And then interrogates, if we know what Erastianism
is. It is likely you say, few of us do* Ans Some of us knows as much of
Erastianism, as can be said by some of the most famous Learned Divines in
Europe. And I think our Faithful Ancestors has not le^t this contraversie in
the dark, as is to be seen by Learned Mr. Gilhespie in his Aarons Rod, where he
penteth out Erastianism so full, as that the capacities of the Vulgar may
understand. Further you say, do we no^ consider, how sinful and highly
uncharitable it is to Accuse, Judge and Censure the Godly Ministers of this
Church. who formerly wrestled against Erastianism, as so contradictorie to
themselves and Treacherous to their Master, as to betray his Interest and the
Church Privileges to an Erastian Yoke. Ans. This is no argument to prove, that
they are now Faithful, because that they once were so. Are not the best of Men
subject to sin and fallings? And can do nothing of our selves, without the
Lords Assistance, and the help of his holy Spirit? And has not some of the
Godly Kings of Judah, Built again that which formerly they Destroyed, as
Solomon, Asa, Joash, and has not many Professors in our days walked contrair
to their Profession? They who once were Remonstrators formerly against
Erastianism, were seen publicly to appear in the Street of Edinburgh in the
Parliament Closs to the derision o^ many hundreds, putting up an Address and
Supplication to a Po^ish King, for an Erastian Toleration, and Lioertie (as
they called it) Now this was the sin of a great many, which sin has been
Benjamin like Espoussed by the whole Assembly. First in their complying with
the Benefit (as they called it) and then being passed over with silence and
connivance, which should have been confessed; Yea and in a well constitute
Church should have been Censured and Punished, with the Sword of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. But with you there is no Testimony given against the sin,
proportionable to the offense; for at best your Testimony has been, but like
to that of Eli to his Sons 1 Samuel 2, 24, 25. Which Testimony will never be
approven of God for Faithfulness, as in Chap. 3. 13. Because his Sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not, So that now you see, we charge you
with Erastianism upon sufficient grounds; although the Indulgence and present
Toleration had never committed? but when all is considered; then how great is
the ground of Accusation against your Erastian practice.

But further you say, what are the instances brought to prove so grievous an
Accusation. Ans. For proof of your Erastian Constitution. I shall first lay out
to your your consideration the being of your Church, as it is founded on the
Oath of Allegiance to an unlawful King, who walks contrair to our Covenants,
Coronation Oath, and Fundamental Laws* And therefore does distinguish from a
Lawful King and Faithful Subject, to the Crown and Kingdom of Christ, who
should be a nourishing Father to the Church, and Terror to Evil doers; But
according to the forementioned Ground and Objections; there is a contrair
walking; So that obedience and subjection to him is not Subordination to the
Lord, as to a Magistrate that exercises his power Circa Sacrat And therefore no
Minister nor Subject can swear to him without being guilty of changing their
head, Christ Jesus: And also of making a Sacrafice of the Rights and Liberties
of the Church, by Burieing our Covenanted Engagments; and giving up the
Fundamental Laws unto the Will and Lust of Man: So that your present state, and
Liberty, is, not any thing else* but a sinful Toleration purchassed by price of
Conscience founded on a mutual Tolerating of one another; which makes a joint
Conspiracy against Christ and his cause, by making, I say a Sacrafice of the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church; by your partiality and silence at the
sins of the Throne (1) I say in Government the Intrinsical power of the
Tolerating Magistrate does appear, in that the Will, Awe, and fear of the
Magistrate, Rings, Rules, and Principalie is followed in your Assembly by that
Negative Voice of your King, in that you dare not Act or do any thing, though
lawful and necessar, until the Tolerating Magistrate think fit to Tolerat* I
mean in things external and easy, which does not strick against the sins of
the Throne. Yea how often has the Assembly meet together and gotten little or
nothing done, and all for want of the will of the Magistrate to preceed and draw
them.

But Secondly, The intrinsical power of the present Magistrate appears in
Doctrine, in your Infidelity, in Burieing the sins of the Throne, As 1. In
Tolerating Prelacy and Popery throughout the Kingdoms. 2. The black Articles
contained in the late War by joining with the Popish party, contrair to the
Writing of Mr. Gilhespie, which was owned and approven by the Church in the
days of our Ancestors. 3. The wasting and Impoverishing of the Land in time of
Peace by Cesses, and Impositions, spending these Exactions in pride and Lust:
bestowing a great part of them on corrupt Members of Parliament in order to
make them ^ervicable Instruments for carrieing on those sinful actings. 4. The
change that's in Doctrine, Prayer and Practice by the command of the Magistrate,
as to the desisting and leaving of the War with the King of F^ance in the Year
98 and 99. Now let it be yealded that the War was lawful on the matter: Which
cannot be denied, he being an oppressing Tyrant and stated Enemy to God and
Godliness: And therefore the necessar causes and circumstances of War being
found in him; which is Aggression on the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects,
which was completed on them; though ^ot perfected on us: From which Aggression
the absolute necessity, and Indispensability of Militating did flow. Now this
being, then the causes of War was good and valide on the matter, the end being
the Glory of God and saftie of the Subjects and Kingdom: Then why should it not
have been proceeded in a right manner by seeking the Lords power and Presence,
and by refusing sinful Association: Either with Protestants who were not
willing to come up to the height of our Reformation: Or yet with Papists or
Malignants who were Enemies to it. Also in a good Action there should be
perseverance therein: Seeing there is more diligence required in the end of an
Action; than in its beginning* There being no change in the Enemy, he being the
same now if not worse; than in the time of War: For still he Persecuteth the
Protestants; therefore peace, should not have been made with the Enemy,
although there might be sad loss; according to the Example of Israel in the
matter of Benjamin, who after they had fallen twice enquired of the Lord the
causes thereof, by Weeping and Fasting, and searching out their fin; So ought
you to have done: But both matter and manner are abussed and laid aside by the
Command, Fear and Awe of the Magistrate, So that he whose overthrow (in prayer
you sought, and Tyrrannie you confessed, must now be passed over with silence
and connivance: allthough he be the same now that he was then. And all this is
done by the command of the Tolerating Magistrate, whose Servants ye are tossed
with the wind of their power: like to these spoken of in Psalm. 1. 4 much of
this obedience is to be seen in your fast days, and thanks giving days; which
manifasts the Intrinscicall power that the Magistrate has in making you obey
contrair to the word.

But thirdly the Intrinscicall power of the Tolerating Magistrate: appears in
the neglect of Discipline in that you dare not do any thing in the Assembly in
order to the censuring. Confessing and setting of days of Humiliation a part
for the sins of the Throne: Such as manifest Perjurie in the Breach of the
Coronation Oath; the joining in War with the Popish party, the sad Oppressions
in the Land, by Cesses and Impositions, the Tolerating of Popery and Prelacie
throughout the Kingdoms. Now in a well constitute Church, all these Sins ought
to be confessed, and in case of obstinacy to be Censured and Punished with the
Sword of Ecclesiastical Discipline, to ^he height, even to Excommunication;
Seeing that the Assembly acknowledges that there should not be partiality in
Ministers: and therefore without respect of Persons they are to reprove Kings;
as well as other Men, they being Subjects to Christ; and received into the
Church by the Vows of Baptism: But all this is laid aside, through fear and awe
of the Magistrate; by your obedience to the Supremacy; they ruling intrinsically
in you, as to matter of practice: as is to be seen in your Assemblies, how that
your King has the Negative Voice, which declares that the Supremacy is yet
infit in this Land (although not screwed up to that height in all its
formalities that it was in the Year 61. 62. and downward) For your Kings
Commissioner has so far the ascendant power, that nothing shall pass in Act in
your Assemblies; but what he pleases: And no otherwise can you enjoy them. So
that from this it does appear. That neglect and partiality of Discipline, is
not a sin of deadness and infirmity; but a deliberat contented Omission and
neglect: And therefore partiality and infidelity are made the Pillar of
prudence and essential Prop, on which your Erastian Church stands: Now when all
this is considered, may it not be said upon grounds that your Church is
Erastian and not Presbyterian*

Obj. But it may be Objected by some, That the present Ministers does Preach
sound Doctrine; and that both Learnedly and Ela^o^aily, and does noways Teach
Erastian Principles. Answer, The difference is as great betwixt Preaching and
Practice, as betwixt true Piety, and painted Hypocrisy: For a Man may Preach
and profess sound Doctrine, and yet be a stated enemy to the practice thereof;
Like to the Foolish Builder spoken of by our Savior, Matthew. 7. 26. And every
one that hears these sayings of mine and does them not, shall be likened to a
foolish Man, which built his house upon the Sand. Now by hearing, these sayings
are to be understood a Believing and an understanding of them so that by this
it does appear that men may be well qualifed with the art and Skill of
Building, so as to make a comely form and structur of an bulding and likeways
to have it seemingly well decored within; so that, it may be pleasing and
taking to the eyes of the beholders; and yet for all this not deserve the name
of a Bulding, the Foundation being wanting, ffor their is not any thing that
our Savior ch^lenneth, but the Foundation, which presuposeth that all things
for art and ornamen^ might, be in this house. For without doubt if any other
thing had been wanting, our Savor had not omitted. So that from this you see
that Gods Sacrafices must be on Gods altar, Gods word in Gods house and
therefore not in the jdols Temple: For you cannot worship and obey God and the
idol of Supremacy at once I say such has no right to Gods word: who are
walking obstinatly on in sin as in Psalm: 50. 16. But unto the wicked God says,
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes? or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth, seeing thou ^atest inst^uction etc. that's to say it does
not become such to propose Gods Word; neither can they apply it, but falsely:
And therefore not to be owned as the Chaste Bride and Spouse of Christ. But on
the other hand as false Builders and Teachers, whose Building is within the
Flood ma^k of the Wrath of God, and will one day be swept away with Judgments:
And therefore it is the duty of all Believers, to come out from among them;
least they be partakers of their Sins, and consequently of their P^angs, as in
Rev. 18. 4

Further you say graut there were Encroachments on the Churches rights and no
Testimony against it; That is weakness and want of courage; but is not just
ground of Separation from worship in a true Church. Answer, This overturns the
Faith of the great Assembly; and that because an universal deadness and
infirmity cannot be found, but in a Church dead and deserted; or else dying or
declinning, dead and deserted the Assembly will not acknowledge* Seeing they are
received into Mercy (as they say) being delivered from their former bondage
and misery: And therefore by consequence has obtained the favorable presence
of God, which gives Courage and Zeal. 2. Dying and declining this cannot be
the Assembly, being flowrishing in the bud of their Reformation; And therefore
cannot so suddenly lay aside their Zeal, as to be overcome with an universal
deadness; So as to suffer Encroachments on the Church Rights, without the least
Testimony of Remonstration. It would be expected that Reciprocal Duties were
to be found in such a Church: I mean in Love and Zeal for the kindness and
mercy you have received and found, in being delivered (as you say) But however
we acknowledge that deadness and infirmity, deference and delay of Duty
cannot because of Separation. But the Question is If Faithfulness, courage and
Zeal in the exercise of duty in maintaining the Churches Rights can consist
with the state of your Church, yea or no. So that the contraversie is not about
deadness and infirmity, deference and delay: but if the Faithful exercise of
Zeal can consist with the present and future state of your Church.

Now therefore in c^lm Blood and from Conscience we pose you, as in the sight
of God, the Judge of Quick and Dead, before whom you and we must stand and give
an account of our words and Actions; that you take to consideration the
Accusa^ions led against you; and that you may vindicat^ your selves if it be
possible with the standing of your Church; by execising Faithfulness in
Doctrine and Di^cipline, that it may be manifest before God and the world; that
you are not guilty of E^astianism. And for p^oof hereof in order to your
Vindicating, we desire you may satisfy us in the^e following premises and
proposition^ which we shall lay down; for trying of your Faithfulness and
soundness as to the state of your Church.

Experiment, As first we desire an particular answer anent the Indulgence, in
that you would either approve or disapprove of it: If it may stand with the
being of your Church: Seeing that it is a necessar duty in a Faithful Church to
make a Separation betwixt the clean and unclean, the holy and prophain the
neglect of this being sadly reproved and threatened with Judgments, as in Ezekiel.
22. 26. They have put no difference between the Holy and Prophain: neither have
they showed difference between the unclean and the clean, and verse the 31.
Therefore have I poured out mine Indignation upon tbem, I have consumed them
with the Fire of my Wrath. Now therefore take warning of this threatening, and
jugle no more with God, by speaking of your different Sentiments; But be
particular in specifieing the contraversie, that so it may be manifest to the
World, whether you approve of it as a duty, or disapproves of it as it is a sin.

Experiment 2. We desire the like answer annent the late Toleration under your
late King: If that Address and Supplication (given in to the Popish Chancellor)
by a great part of your Ministers, be lawful, yea or no, Or whether or no you
did partake of that Liberty and Benefit (as they called it) or hitherto has
Benjamin like Espoused the quarrel of these Transgressors; by denying that the
like Act deserves to be Censured and Punished with the Sword of Ecclesiastical
Discipline; or else as publicly to be confessed before God and the World, in
it is high Aggravating circumstances as it was committed.

Experiment. 3. If it can consist with the State of your Church, to walk in the
steps of your Ancestors, that you and your King (or any Successor hereafter
whatsoever) may enter in Covenant with God; by renewing the National Covenant,
the Solemn League and Covenant; That it may be manifest to the World, that you
deliverance is not Bastard and Evil Begotten, but can run through the Channal
of a Covenant of Reformation: And indeed we shall not carp much at the
deference of it; if there shall be any possibility for the time to come to
accomplish this work.

Experiment 4. Fourthly, We desire if it may stand with the being of your
Church: That the sins of the Throne may be confessed, and particularly
acknowledged, and Faithfully reproved in Doctrine, censured by Discipline, and
punished with the Ecclesiastical Sword in case of obstinacy. Particularly these
forementioned sins, Namely* (1) The manifest Perjurie in Breach of the
Coronation Oath in countinancing and Tolerating of Popery and Prelacie
throughout the Kingdoms. 2. The black Articles contained in the late
Confederacy, where Liberty of Conscience was proposed as the end; and the
Persons confederat with were Idola^rous Papists, which is contrair to Scripture
and the Testimonies of our Ancestors to join with such in War. 3. The
impowerishing of the Land by Cesses and Impositions in time of Peace. Now we
think the consideration of these Propositions cannot in Conscience be denied;
seeing they are agreeable to Scripture, and consonant to the judgment of all
sound Divines: That sins of all sorts of Persons, both High and Lo Kings as
well as the meanest Subjects; are Faithfully to be reproved and Censured by
Discipline: or else the Church cannot be obedient and Loyal to Christ Jesus,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and has given command unto his
Messengers to teach all things whatsoever he has commanded them as in Matthew.
28. 20. and Jer. 1. 7. For thou shall go to all that I will send thee, and
whatsoever I command thee thou shall speak. And does not this command reach the
sins of Kings, as well as other Men; the word being sent unto them. I hope the
Learned Assembly will acknowledge that p^r^iality is to be avoided being
reproved of God, as in Mal. 2. 9. And therefore let none stumble at the
Faithful reproving, and censuring of these ^ins mentioned; seeing that it is a
duty Commanded of God: and commened by the Example of the Holy Prop^ers, who
Faithfully reproved Kings without partiality; then let the Assem^lie, if they
be what they profess imi^ate the P^actise of the Holy Prophets by laying aside
par^ialitie; and the slavi^h fear of Men: That it may be manifest to the World
that your Church is built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, Ephesians* 2. 20 If otherwise ^ou shall
refuse this dut^e and wilful^^e out of carnal prudence l^y aside Z^al courage
and Fidelity; then shall (...) be guilty of Erastianism by declaring your
selves to be the Servan^s, and slaves of en.

But some will object and say, if the sins of the Throne may be so marked
reproved and censured: Then it would (...) that Pre^by^^^^an Government cannot
agree with Monarchy, I Answer* the lawful (...) and exercise of Kingly
Government, can well agree with Presbytery: But not the abuse and unlawful
exercise thereof, and that because it brings the Lords Wrath and Judgment, both
on the Throne and Church, in case of silence and connivance thereat.

Therefore we desire that you would consider impartially, and without prejudice
the Accusations, Grounds and Objections led against you; that so it may appear,
how hateful and abhoring a sinful Union is? Oh! what sin is more reproved and
forbidden than Union in iniquity, as in Ephesians. 5, 11. Have no sellowship with the
unfruitful Works of Darkness: but rather reprove them, and in 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15,
16. What fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness, and what Communion
has Light with Darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what
part has he that believes with an unbeliever? or what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? and verse 17. Wherefore come out from among them and
be separat says the Lord; and touch not the unclean thing and I will receave
you. Moreover has not the Lord declared the Imposibility of Union with sinners
by the Mouth of his Prophets, as in Amos 3. 3. Can two walk together except
they be agreed. Oh* can Union be in sin and defection? or would you be in a
happy condition if you obtained it? Alas! no more, than Israel was in their
defection, Exodus 32. When with on consent they did say, These be thy Gods O
Israel which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. And does not an
universal sinning bring universal Judgments on a Land and People: Therefore
consider this and lay to Heart your defection, and be awakned with the
Judgments of God upon the Land, by the Plague of Famine, that has been these
Years bygone, and now present and seek out your sins, and the causes of the
Lords Wrath; why he thus contends with the Land, according to the Example of
the Godly in former times, as in 2 Samuel 21. And there was a Famine in the Days
of David three Years, Year after Year, and David enquired of the Lord; and the
Lord answered and said, It is for Saul and for his Bloody House: because he
slew the Gibionites. So that you see, the causes of the Famine was Breach of
Covenant and Bloodsheding, which certainly is the causes of this Famine: And
did David enquire after the causes while there was three Years Famine, then let
the Assembly and all of us enquire after the causes: Now while there has been
six years Famine. And I think the causes thereof will be found to be the same;
that it was in the days of David, viz. Breach of Covenat and Bloodshed, which
the Assembly are deeply guilty of by their past and present practice; as I
have plainly held out in the forementioned Grounds and Accusations led against
you. Therefore examine your selves and consider what you have done, and are
doing by your going on in Breach of Covenant and Perjurie, and by your
trampling on the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs, in condemning and burieing
their Testimonies, and maliciously and falsely accusing the Faithful of
Separation, because they will not go on with you, in your Soul Murdering
courses, to the ruin of the Land and their own Souls.

But in the next place we desire you to consider, what it is you have to
justisie before God and the World in defense of your continued Defection, in
going on in your Erastian courses. Have you this to say that you are in
Judgment sound Presbyterians and professes sound Principles? Whereas in
practice you deny it, by subjecting to the fear, awe and unlawful commands of
the Tolerating Magistrate: Like (...) these spoken of, Isa. 29, 12. This People
draw near to me with their mouth and with their lips d^ honor me: but have
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me are taught by the
Precepts of men. Or like to these 2 Kings 17. 33. Who feared the Lord and
served their own Gods Or what more have you to boast of by your Learning and
external form of piety? or yet by Elabourat painful Preaching: when in practice
you are despisers of the Building; like to these Jewish Doctors' who could
Learnedly hold out the signs, tokens, and marks of the Messiah; Yet when they
did see him to whom their own signs did agree, they would have none of him. Oh
then! shall it so be with you? will you still go on in a wilful malicious
despite against the cause of Christ, and the followers thereof? I say, beware
lest your wilful hearted of Truth arising from envy, bring some in the end to
fall into the sin unpardonable, as did these Jewish Doctors.

2. We desise you to consider, who it is you have to deall with in your
contending, I say it is God, not man that you have to deall with; therefore
take head what was spoken to Paul. Acts 9. 4, 5. It is hard for you to kick
against the Pricks* I say Truth maintainer is Omnipotent and cannot sin; and
therefore will see to the cause of the Afflicted and right of the Poor, Psalm.
140. 12. And will teach his Truths Doctrinallie by his Judgments on
Backsliders, i^ walking contrair unto them* while they walk contrair unto him,
as in Lev. 16, 17. And will get himself honor upon your Idols, by overthrowing
them, and by destroying the bramble* under which Backsliders are sheltering, as
in Judges 9. 9. And seeing the Lord will be glorious in his judgments? then do
not build, that which he will destroy: neither insult confidentlie over the
desolations of his House and People, thinking now the Witnesses are dead and
buried; and now you have go ten the Victory, consider that place of Scripture,
1 Samuel 2. ^6 The Lord Kill^th and he makes alive, he brings down to the Grave,
and he brings up. Therefore we exhort you in the sight of God to lay aside
these weapons of War, by which you cover, and defends your sins and defections,
viz. These four painted complexions, namely Personal sins, sins of infirmity,
deadness, want of Courage and Zeal, and lay to heart your sins, by confessing
and forsaking of them; seeing the Lord is willing and ready to receave you, and
is not the suffering remanent ready to embrace Union and Communion with you
upon Repentantance and Confession? But if you shall refuse this, and continue
obstinat in defending of your sin, and will not hear; then let us spread out
your case before the Lord, seeking his assistance to mourn over them, that our
Hearts may be affected with grief, and our Souls made to weep in secret places
for your pride, and our eyes made to weep sore and run down Tears for all the
Abominaations done in the Land.

So let all thine Enemies Perish, O LORD: but let them tha^ love him, be as the
Sun, when he goes forth in his might. Judges, 5, 31.
FINIS.

