St. PAVL's CATECHISM: OR, A brief and plain Explication of the Six Principles
of the Christian Religion, as recorded Heb. 6. 1, 2. WITH Some Considerations
of the Principles of Natural and Universal Religion: As previous, and yet
subservient to the Rules of Revealed and Positive Religion.

Containing also, The Duties of Children to their Superiors. Written chiefly
for the Instruction of Young Christians, Children and Servants in all Christian
Families.

By THO. GRANTHAM.

2 John v. 4. I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy Children walking in
Truth, as we have received a Commandment from the Father.

London, Printed in the Year, 1687.

To all Parents and Masters of Christian Families. Grace be multiplied, etc.
Beloved in Christ;
AS you are expressly bound by Gospel-Rules, to do that which is right unto your
Servants, and to bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord; so I am very sensible, that the capacity of many well-meaning Christians
is very low, to methodize their Instructions in this behalf.

And having a desire to serve you in what I may; I have here presented you with
some Brief Rules (from the good Word of God, which is able, through Faith and
Love, to make our Children wise to Salvation) which, by the Blessing of God, I
have found to be useful in my own Family.

Be exhorted to tender the Salvation of all that are under your care, above all
other Considerations, lest their Blood be required of you. Teach them the Fear
of God betimes, with their Duties toward their Superiors in every state of
Life; for this shall be a means to preserve them from many dangerous Erros in
these days, and also adorn the Gospel of God our Savior, to whose Grace I
commit you, and remain,

Your loving Brother, T. GRANTHAM.

The INTRODUCTION.
To Children, and Servants, concerning the Knowledge of the True God.
THE Question, Whether there be any God? is so wicked and absurd, that none but
Fools will admit the Debate.

For he that shall once say in his Heart there is no God, the next thought in
him may be, that he himself is God, seeing there is no Creature known to us
above Man. The Heavens, Earth, and Seas, do all serve Him.

But seeing He made not himself, nor any of these things; it must be, that He
that made Man, and all things that are made, is above all, and to be obeyed in
Love above all, Rev. 14. 6, 7.

Remember therefore your Creator in the days of your Youth, and dedicate the
prime of your strength to his Service. Content your selves with such a knowledge
of God, as is held forth to you in his Holy Word and Mighty Works, and as shall
be wrought in you by the Spirit of Grace, as you adhere to Him.

The sum of that Revelation which God has made of Himself, to us in his Holy
Word, may briefly be comprehended in these ensuing Particulars; eac^ (...)
which I have confirmed, by some of the most clea^ Testimonies, as they relate
to these Particulars respespectively. I desire you to read and search the
Scriptures, to see whether these things be so.

I. That God is One, or there is but one only true and living God. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
Exodus 20. 3. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6. John 17. 3.

Who has revealed himself in the Gospel, by the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. And these three are one, 1 John 5. 7. Isa. 6. 3.

II. That the Essence or Being of this God, is revealed by Christ to be a
Spirit. God is a Spirit, John 4. 24. 2 Cor. 3. 17.

III. That this God is Eternal, without Beginning, and without End, he abides
the same for ever. Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Psalm. 90. 1, 2. Isa. 57. 15. Psalm. 93. 2. Isa.
63. 16. Hab. 1. 12.

IV. That God is Omnipotent, he can do whatsoever he pleases; there is no
restraint to the Almighty. Exodus 6. 3. Job, Chap. 38, 39, 40, 41. Psalm. 62. 11.
and 66. 3, 5. Jer. 10. 12.

V. That God is Omniscient, or knows all things, none of our Thoughts nor
Actions can be hidden from his sight, Psalm. 139. 1, to the end. Isa. 45. 21.
and 44. 7. Prove. 15. 11. Heb. 4. 12.

VI. That God is Holy, Righteous, and True, he will judge the World in
Righteousness, and there is no Unrighteousness in Him. Josh. 24. 19. 2 Samuel 2.
2. Psalm. 5. 6. Dan. 9. 7. John 17. 25. Zeph. 3. 5. Rev. 16. 5. Acts 17. 31.

VII. That this God is very gracious and merciful, no Cruelty is in him; He
delights in Mercy. Exodus 34. 6. Psalm. 145. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 20. Isa. 27. 4. Romans
5. 20, 21. Jam. 5. 11. Tit. 2. 11.

VIII. That God is perfect without any weakness, having no dependence upon any,
He only is perfect. Isa. 40. 12, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22, 28. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Jer. 2.
5. Psalm. 75. 3. James 1. 17.

IX. That the Place of God's Residence is in Heaven, yet not confined to place,
but is present every where as he pleases. Mat. 6. 9. Isa. 66. ^. Psalm. 123. 1.
1 King. 8. 39. Psalm. 139. 8, 9, 10. Isa. 57. 15. Psalm. 68. 16.

X. That nothing can be done without the permissive Providence of God: yet many
things are done contrary to his Will. Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 6. Jer. 44. 2, 3, 4.
Levit. 26. 23, 24. John 19. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 17. Mat. 10. 29.

XI. It is unlawful to form any Shape, Image, or Representation of Almighty
God; no, not so much as in our Minds or Imaginations. Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19. Exodus 2. 4. Psalm. 106. 20, 21. Acts 17. 29. Isa. 40. 15, 16,
18. Romans 1. 24.

XII. That the complete knowledge and enjoyment of this God, is not to be
attained till after the glorious Resurrection of the People of God; then, and
not till then, shall they know him fully. John 12. 26. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 12,
13. 1 John 3. 1, 2. Mat. 13. 43. Job 11. 7, 8, 9.

This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their Minds.

Having their Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God,
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their Heart.

Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness witb greediness.

But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be you have heard him, and have been
taught by him as the Truth is in Jesus.

The Lord give you understanding in all things.
St. PAUL's Catechism, etc.
IT may be convenient that this Catechistical Discourse be formed between the
Father as Teacher, and the Son as the Learner; and thus we proceed.

Son. Sir, I desire to know the chief End for which I have a being in this
World?


Father. The chief End for which Man had his being, was, That he might bear the
Image of his Creator, to govern this World, Genesis 1. 26, 27. and to live in
Obedience to his Creator, Genesis 1. 26. and 2. 17. In the enjoyment of all good
Things.


S. Did Man answer this chief End of the Almighty in his Creation?


F. No, Adam (the Man we speak of) did break the Covenant of his God, and
brought himself and all his Posterity under the Sentence of Death, and the
Curse or Condemnation of the Almighty. Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19. Romans 5. 18.


S. Did God leave Adam and his Posterity in this condition, without any means
of recovery?


F. The Mercy of God did intervene or come in between Adam's Sin, and the
Sentence due to him for Sin, Genesis 3. 15. by which he was put into a state of
recovery from his dreadful Fall.


S. Did this favor of God extend it self to Adam and all his Posterity?


F. Yes verily, whole Adam sinned, and whole Adam had this tender of Mercy. For
as the Offense abounded toward all Men to condemnation, so the Benefit
abounded toward all Men to justification of Life, Romans 5. 18.


S. What was Adam's Duty now in relation to his Creator?


F. To love his merciful Lord, and to serve him, by obeying him in Duties of
Religion, and to walk humbly with his God, Mich. 6. 8.


S. What is Religion?


F. The word Religion signifies, an holy Tie, Bond or Covenant, by which all
Men stand obliged to love and serve Almighty God, their Creator and Preserver.
To you, O Men, I call, and my Voice is to the Sons of Adam, Prove. 8. 4. He has
showed thee, O Adam (or Man) what is good -- to do justly, love mercy, and walk
humbly with thy God, Mich. 6. 8.


S. Was Adam left in a capacity to do this after the Fall?


F. By the free Grace of God, he and all his Posterity are left or put into a
capacity to obey God, so as he will accept them, when and in what he requires
their Obedience, else they could not sin by not obeying him, Romans 2. 1, 2, 14,
15, 16.


S. Surely, if God Almighty do indeed require the Duties of Religion of all
Men, then there is undoubtedly a possibility of Salvation for all Men, this
gives me some hope. I beseech you therefore make this plain, that God requires
the Duties of Religion of all Men.


F. 1. Undoubtedly all Men are concerned in the Duties of Religion, as their
chief Business; otherwise they should not much excel the Beasts of the Field.

2. That Knowledge which Man has, or the Reason which God has given him, being
only employed about earthly things, would only make him the most excellent
Animal: and yet some Animals, or sensitive Creatures, would seem to outdo him
in some things; and particularly the Hony-Bee, both in the gathering of Honey,
and preserving of it; and in the Government she maintains in her Commonwealth,
to the due imitation whereof few Monarchs could arrive, if any at all have done
it.

3. Whilst Man may suppose himself the most excellent Creature in the Gift of
Invention, etc. yet when the admirable quickness of Sense, Agility of Body,
with the Foreknowledg which is in many of them of Times and Seasons, and the
necessary Provisions which they make for themselves accordingly, without any to
instruct or exhort them thereunto, is duly considered, it may much abate the
Pride of Man, who indeed has learned much more of them, than they of him; and
yet they can and do learn many things of Man also.


S. I see plainly, without God to be our God, and Religion to be our Business,
we are as the Beasts of the Field. I desire a further Demonstration.


F. If all Men be not concerned to mind the Business of Religion, with hope of
the acceptance of God therein, they are exposed to as ill a condition as the
Devils, or fallen Angels. For it is certain, Man is a very sinful Creature as
well as the fallen Angels; and if he must be irreligious too, (as he must be
so, if God require it not of him) then God has made him only a fit Companion
for the Devils, of whom it is certain God requires no Duties of Religion.

We see then, the chief, and indeed the only thing that is truly valuable in
fallen Man, above all Creatures here below, and above the fallen Angels, is
this, That he is capable of the Mercy and Knowledge of God, and by the Mercy of
God made capable to serve God, in such a religious walking with God, and a
dependence upon him as therein to please God, and to find acceptance with him.


S. I desire to know what Religion this is which God requires of all Men?


F. The Prophet Micah tells us, it is to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with God. St. Peter says, it is to fear God and work Righteousness, Acts
10. 34, 35. St. Paul tells us, it is to glorify God, according to the knowledge
or manifestation which Men have of God, Romans 2. Whether this be taken from the
Works of his Hands, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. Romans 1. 20. Or from his more common or
amazing Providence, Exodus 18. 11. John 1. 15, 16. Or from the Work of God's
Righteous Law written in Men's Hearts, Romans 2. 1^ 11, 12. There shall be Glory,
Honor, and Peace, to every Man that works good, to the Jew first, and also
to the Gentile, for there is no respect of Persons with God. For as many as
have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law; and as many as have sinned
in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. And by a parity of Reason, they that
have sinned in the Gospel, shall be judged by the Gospel; see Jer. 9. 23, 24.


S. It is true indeed, this is the sum or main Body of true Religion, but this
is mentioned in the Scripture; how does it appear that the Nations know any
thing of it who have not the Scripture?


F. It appears from the very places which I have quoted, because the Prophets
and Apostles here, do not speak of Religion as then newly instituted, but as
that which had been of long continuance, even in every Nation. And the
Scripture further shows, that the Way of God had been made known to all Flesh
in the old World, Genesis 6. 11, 12. else they could not have corrupted it. This
way of God was again renewed to Noah, Genesis 9. 8, 9, 12. for an everlasting
Religion to the whole World. All are bound to take notice of, and to depend
upon the Lord as a gracious God, and to do justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly
with their God.


S. But can Man please God, under any of these manifestations of himself,
without an Assistant?


F. No, he cannot, therefore God provided an Assistant, the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, to take away the Sin of the World, John 1. 29. Rev.
13. 8. whom he placed as a Mediator between himself and Man, 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4, 5,
6.


S. But how shall any Man have benefit by this Lamb of God, or this Mediator,
who have not the means to know him by his Name, nor his Offices?


F. 1. Many who never had the means to know the Mediator particularly and
distinctly, must yet have Salvation by him, or else none of the Infant-race,
dying such, could be saved.

2. All that know the Lord to be such a God as does exercise Loving Kindness,
Judgment, and Righteousness in the Earth, do know this Mediator virtually, and
believing on the Lord as such, do know him savingly, Jer. 9. 24. Psalm. 86. 5.

3. All the common Providence of God are given chiefly for this end, to direct
Men to seek the Lord; because it appears from St. Paul, they have a capacity to
feel after him, and to find him. For he is not far from every one of them,
because in him they live, move, and have their being.

4. And as to their ignorance in things, which they had not particular and
distinct means to know; it is expressly said, The Lord winked at it; that is, he
graciously passed by their weakness, and would not exact the utmost Farthing,
Acts 17. 26, 27, 30. See and consider Job 37. 23, 24.

5. But when Men grow presumptuous and unthankful, and give the Honor of the
incorruptible God to created things, or things of their own devising, they thus
unmanning themselves, and forgetting that they are the Offspring of God, then,
and not till then, does God withdraw his Love from them, and suffers them to be
filled with their own ways, as is most clear, Romans 1, 2 Chapters, and also Dan.
5. 22, 23, 24.


S. I see it is not good for us to pride up our selves against the Nations,
which have not the Gospel as we have. But it seems to be an Argument that God
loves us more than he loves them, because he gives us greater means of Grace
than he gives them.


F. 1. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any. Let this Truth take place
in thy Heart, Job 36. 5. And then admit the Love of God to be much more to some
than to all, yet it is sufficient to all.

2. Yet I must inform thee, that when we consider Mankind as they are all the
Offspring of God, and as he has appointed the bounds of their Habitations,
that you should seek the Lord. Then like as we may not conclude, that a good
Father does therefore not love his youngest Son, so well as he loves his eldest
Son, because he gives him but half so much of his Estate, as he gives the
eldest Son. So neither may we conlude that God loves England, France, or Italy,
better then he loves America, because we have greater means of Gospel Light
than they. He that improves one Talent well, shall be accepted as well as he
that improves five.


S. I am well satisfied in this enquiry, I see that God expects the Duties of
Religion of all Men, according to what Light and Knowledge he has given them,
in all Ages and Nations, And that through the Mercy and justice of God, whoever
worships God, and does his Will, according to the manifestation which he has
given Men of his Will, shall be accepted of God.

I pray now inform me concerning the true way of God's Worship, or the true
Christian Religion according to the Gospel; Lest whilst we seem concerned for
others, we be found to neglect our own Salvation.

And, first, I defire to be instructed, whether the Holy Spirit, or the Holy
Scripture, or the Holy Church, must be our guide in these Soul-concernments?


F. There is no doubt but these three agree in one Testimony: For the
Scriptures are the Testimony of the other two: Being indeed the Inspirations of
the Holy Spirit, and the Prophets or Ministers of the Church of God, receive
those Inspirations, and gave them forth in Writings, which Writings are the
Holy Scriptures.


S. Is this Church always to be receiving and giving forth Inspirations of this
kind?


F. No, in no wise, for so every Age might Produce a new Bible. Wherefore that
our Rules might not be too burthensom, it pleased God, that but few of the
things which Jesus himself did, should be written, and that we believing
according to the Scripture might have Life, John 20. 31. 2 Pet. 3. 2. That ye
may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the Prophets, and of
the Commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior. If any come unto
you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house. 2 John v. 10.


S. Seeing some pretend to the infallible conduct of the Holy Spirit in
whatsoever they Decree in Council; and others think they preach by infallible
Inspiration.

I desire to known how we may best make trial of these Spirits, to know the
Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Error?


F. We may know the Spirit of Truth by these Rules.

1. The Holy Scriptures being long since confirmed, all true Ministers of
Christ, who are led by the Spirit of Christ, will always magnify the Authority
of the Scripture above what themselves deliver as personal Ministers, though it
be never so true. For so did Christ himself magnify the holy Scriptures, John
5. 45, 46, 47. And so did St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 16, to the end.


S. Is it clear, that by the more sure Word of Prophesy, is meant the Writings
of the Prophets?


F. Yes, it is very clear by the very reading of the Place, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21.


S. What is this dark place which this word of Prophesy is said to shine in?


F. It may be well meant of the Jewish Church, which understood not the voice
of their own Prophets, which are read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day:
Or, it may be true of us, by how much we are slow of heart to understand and
believe all that the Prophets have spoken, Luke 24. 25.


S. What is the Day Star which is to arise in our Hearts?


F. By a diligent attending upon the Testimony of the Prophets, God gives Light
to those that sincerely seek for it: ye shall know, if ye follow on to know,
Hosea 8. 3. and God gives his Spirit to help our infirmity.


S. I am satisfied in this exposition of the place. I pray proceed to further
Rules by which the true Spirit may be known.


F. 2. The Spirit which is of God, does not speak of it self, John 16. 13. So
as to contradict what Christ has said, but he takes of Christ's Words, and
shows them to his People. It delivers no new Ordinances, nor nulls, nor changes
Christ's old ones; But magnifies Christ as the Lawgiver, that was to teach us
all things, John 4. 25.

3. The Apostles by this Spirit have left us the whole Council of God, Act 20.
20, 27. and by that Doctrine they knew that to be the Spirit of God which led
to it, and that to be the Spirit of Error which dissented from it, 1 John. 4. 6.


S. I see there is no safety in adhering to my self, or any other, under
pretense of having the infallible Conduct, or Inspiration of the Spirit. I
shall beg the influence of the Spirit of Grace to quicken my Judgment and
Affection in the search of the Holy Scriptures, the most infallible Records of
God and his Church. But yet I desire a little help, How I may best satisfy my
self, or others, that the Holy Scriptures are the undoubted Oracles of God?


F. To satisfy thy Soul in this enquiry, thou have God's own Testimony, who
everywhere speaks to thee in them, by Doctrine, and by Miracles. If any deny
the truth of those Records, they only deprive themselves of the Authority of
all Records that are extant in the World of former Ages: for the truth of the
Divine Scripture has the highest Testimony of all other; and if these fall, all
must fall with them.

2. Thou have the Testimony of all the Prophets, and of the Apostles, and above
all, the Testimony of Christ and his Angels, that the Old Testament is the
Scriptures of truth.

3. Lay aside the New Testament, and then no Man can preach any thing of the
Gospel, respecting the Birth, Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
Assension, or second coming of Christ.

4. We have the Testimony of the first Churches, that these Books are the
undoubted Oracles of God; and if their Testimony be not of credit, the
Testimony of the present Church will signify nothing.

5. These Scriptures must either be of God, or of the Devil. But who dare say
they are of Satan? They are the most destructive of his Kingdom, and Designs,
of any Books whatsoever.


S. These Considerations must needs be satisfactory to all that pretend to be
of the Christian Faith. I desire therefore to be instructed in the true
Christian Religion, especially in such parts of it as are necessary to our
walking with God in a Church Way, that I may have fellowship with God and his
People, in the orderly profession of the Christian Religion.


F. In the Name of God, then let us begin there, where our Lord Christ began to
preach, and let us follow him whom our Heavenly Father has given to be a
Witness to the People, for a Leader, and for a Commander to the People, Isa.
50. 4.


Of the First Principle of St. Paul's CATECHISM: Or, Repentance from dead Works.
Son. I Desire to know, what were the first Things preached by Christ and his
Apostles, and to be learned by their Followers?


Father. The first Things which Christ preached were Repentance, and Faith, as
it is written, Matthew. 4. 17. Mark 1. 14.

Whose Heavenly Doctrine is more fully set down, and gathered into six
Principles by St. Paul. Heb. 6. 1, 2. and thus declared. Repentance from dead
Works, and of Faith toward God; of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on
of Hands: and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment.


S. Seeing these are the Foundation-Principles, how must I understand the
Apostle when he says, learning the Principles?


F. They are words respecting the order of Discourse, and bear this sense; that
St. Paul would leave at that time to speak further of these Principles; and go
on to more perfect or higher Mysteries, and so he ^roceeds to discourse of the
excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the Aaronical Priesthood, Chap. 7, etc.


S. I confess, if we should otherwise leave these Principles, we should leave
God himself, for without Faith and Humiliation we cannot please God. But does
not Faith go before Repentance?


F. We must distinguish of Faith. There is the Faith of Mankind, who generally
do believe there is a God, that will punish the Wicked, and reward the Just.
This Faith must go before Repentance, Heb. 11. 6.

But the Faith here spoken of, is the Faith of actual Justification; and this
Faith must needs follow Repentance, Romans 3. 25. and 5. 1. thus God is the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Impenitent Sinners are so far from
Justification, that Christ tells them, Except they repent, they shall all
perish, Luke 13. 2, 3, 4, 5.


S. I thank you for this distinction; I see the necessity of Repentance. Pray
show me the true Nature of Repentance, and how I may obtain Repentance unto
Life; And whether it be the Gift of God?


F. That Repentance unto Life is the Gift God, is very clear, Acts 5. 31. and
11. 18. It is a special Mercy flowing from the goodness of God to all Sinners,
Romans 2. 3. for he might in justice have denied the Riches of his Grace to the
Rebellious, which yet he has not, Psalm 68. 18. Acts 17. 30. Thus God gives
Repentance, both graciously and preceptively.


S. But does not God also give Power, with his gracious Precept, to repent?


F. That God gives Repentance potentially, is true; Jer. 31. 18, 19. Turn thou
me, and I shall be turned: surely when I was turned, I repented. Yet this Power
is not irresistible, but it is sufficient, either to effect Repentance, or to
leave the Sinner without excuse, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Romans 1. 32. compared with Romans
2. 1.

Christ was sent to turn every one of the Jews from their Iniquities; and there
was a sufficiency of Power in the means which he used to do it. But yet they
resisted the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Jesus, and were destroyed in their
Iniquities, Acts 3. 26. and 7. 51. see Mat. 12. 41.


S. I see plainly we may not look for in irresistibl^ Power to convert us to
God.


F. The Gospel, as it is the ministration of the Spirit, is to us the Power of
God to Salvation, as well as it was to the Jews, Romans 1. 16, 17.


S. I desire to know what are the Parts of Repentance unto Life?


F. The Parts of Repentance unto Life were principally three. 1. A through or
due sense of Sin, in the sinful Nature of it. 2. A godly sorrow for our Sins;
chiefly, because we have committed them against the Will and Commandment of
that gracious God, by whose Mercy and Goodness we live and enjoy all good
Things. 3. It consists in a holy resolution and endeavor to forsake all sinful
ways.


S. Pray explain the first part of Repentance, by showing me what Sin is, that
I may have a due sense of it?


F. The Scripture tells us, That St. Paul had not known Sin but by the Law,
Romans 7. 7. And that by the Law is the knowledge of Sin, Romans 3. 20. and that Sin
is the Transgression of the Law, John 3. 4. And where no Law is, there is no
Transgression. And that the substance and work of this Law is so far revealed
to all the World, that all the World is under it; and that by the breach of
God's Law, every Mouth shall be stopped, and all the World be found guilty
before God, Romans 3. 19, 20, 23.


S. I confess, if all the World be not under some Law of God, they could not be
guilty of Sin against God. But my desire is, to know what Law we are under, who
have the Holy Scriptures amongst us?


F. We are under the Law of God, as it is given to Mankind universally, (being
of the Gentile Race) that is, the Principles of Right Reason, and the
Instructions of the Book of Creation, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. Romans 1. 2. whereunto
it has pleased God to add this great Blessing, that we have the Divine Law, as
contained in the Holy Scriptures, by which more excellent Things are made
known; which are also explained and confirmed to us by Jesus Christ in the New
Testament, whom we are commanded to hear in all things. And thus we are under
the teachings of the Law, both Natural and Divine.


S. Where shall we find the Substance of the Law, Natural and Divine,
recommended and explained to us?


F. In the Ten Commandments, Exodus 20. which are explained in our Savior's
Sermons on the Mount, etc. Mat. Chap. 5, 6, 7. and comprised by him in the two
great Evangelical Precepts; that is, To love God above all; and our Neighbors
as our selves, Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. Upon these two Commands hang all the
Law and the Prophets.


S. How may a Man know that he is guilty of the breach of these Laws?


F. 1. By considering the quality of that Love which we owe to God, and to our
Neighbor, respectively: For our Love to God must be of the superlative or
highest Degree; less than this he will not accept.

2. Our Love to our Neighbor must be of the Possitive Degree, even as we love
our selves; and by how much we come short in these, by so much we sin and come
short of the Glory of God, or of glorifying him as God.


S. What are the true demonstrations of Love to God?


F. 1. When God is chiefly and most delightfully in our thoughts of all things
whatsoever, Psalm. 43. 4. Psalm. 25.

2. When his Word, and chiefly his Commands, are not grievous but delightful to
us, 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5.

3. When Sin is the Object of our hatred, because it is contrary to the Nature
and Will of God, Psalm. 37. 10. Jude 23. Rev. 2. 6.

4. When we hunger and thirst for the gracious, and for the glorious enjoyment
of God, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. John 14. 8.


S. What are the true Demonstrations of Love to my Neighbor?


F. They are many, some are continual, and some are occasional; and they flow
from this Spring. A hearty desire of their good, or constant Prayer to God for
them; for this keeps our Heart open in love toward them, not only to avoid all
things that may do them harm, but also to pity and help them in their
Necessities, as we are able, both in things Temporal and Spiritual. This is
that Charity, without which the highest Pretenses to Religion are nothing.


S. By these brief Rules, I perceive how greatly Sin has prevailed against Men
generally, and against my self in particular, whilst we have followed the
desires of the Flesh, and of the Mind, neglecting both God and our Neighbor.
What manner of Repentance is that which you call the second Part?


F. It is a godly Sorrow, or sorrowing for Sin after a godly sort, 2 Cor. 7. 9.
and arises in the Heart from this Consideration; That whilst a gracious God
has been following us with Mercies, from day to day, we have consumed these
Days and Mercies in ignorance of God, and in sinful Courses in the sight of
God, and against Heaven, Luke 15. 18. And the truly Penitent, do often meet
with David's experience, Psalm. 51. 4. and 77. 2, 3, 4. Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. In the day of my trouble I
sought the Lord: my sore ran in the night, and ceased not: my Soul refused to
be comforted.

I thought upon God, and was troubled: I complained, and my Spirit was
overwhelmed. I am so troubled I cannot speak. And in this Conflict, the Sinner
will remember his sinful Original, Psalm. 51. 5.


S. Is Original Sin cause of Humiliation?


F. Yes undoubtedly; For all Flesh was, and is defiled by it, (Christ only
excepted, Heb. 4. 15.) and should have perished under it, had not Christ, the
Lamb of God, been in God's Decree slain from the Foundation of the World, to
take away this Sin of the World in the condemning power of it, John 1. 29. Romans
5. 18.


S. I would gladly know how to attain this Godly Sorrow, which works
Repentance unto Salvation.


F. 1. Consider, in order thereunto, That the Holy God hates those who
presumptuously go on in their Trespasses, Psalm. 7. 11, 12, 13. and 68. 21.

2. But if any say I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not; he shall deliver his Soul from going to the Pit, Job 33. 27,
28.

3. Think often of the Judgments of God against obdurate Sinners, and of his
Mercy in sparing thee so long. And let his Goodness and Forbearance lead thee
to Repentance, Romans 2. 4.

4. Pray much to Almighty God to be thy help herein; Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God.


S. May these Directions be blessed to me, I shall then have my desire. But
what mean you by the third part of Repentance?


F. I mean, 1. a holy loathing and abhorring all Sin, because it is of the
Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And because God hates it, and because Christ died for it,
or because of it. 2. Abstain from the act of Sin, in Desire, Word, and Deed, as
much as possible; Jonah 3. 10. God saw their Works, that they turned from their
evil ways. Break off thy Sins by Righteousness, Dan. 4. 27. Repent you
therefore and be converted, Acts 3. 19. This is to bring forth Fruit meet for
Repentance.


S. Has Man any liberty of Will, and any measure of Power, thus to hate and
forsake Sin?


F. 1. By the Bounty of God, Man has some Liberty and Power this way, he is
not chained to his Sin of necessity; Josh. 24. 19. Choose you this day whom you
will serve. To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, Heb. 3.
7, 8. Mary has chosen the good part, uk. 10. 42.

2. Yet Man's Infirmity in the exercise of this Liberty and Power is so great,
that he is not to depend upon this Liberty and Power, but upon the strength of
God, in the use of them, Hos. 14. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 5.


S. I confess my self, and all Men indispensably bound to repent, and turn to
God. But I desire to know whether this Repentance will justify the Sinner, or
how far it is available hereunto?


F. Though a Sinner humble himself, and repent in Dust and Ashes, as truly as
Job did, Job 42. 6. Yet is he not thereby justified, but only prepared to
justification; for remission of Sin follows Repentance, Luke 24. 47. and is
made ours, freely by the Grace of God, through the Redemption which is in
Christ Jesus. For without shedding of Blood there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22.
and 10. 18. Romans 5. 9. We must therefore in no wise place our Justification in
our Repentance, for that were to place our Justification from the guilt and
condemning Power of Sin, in our Duty, and not in Christ Jesus, which God forbid.


S. I desire you therefore to show me this great Mystery of the Gospel, which
guides poor Sinners to the true Cause of Justification, from the guilt and
condemning Nature of Sin.


F. That I will endeavor to do in our con^ideration of the second Principle of
Christ's Doctrine, to wit, Of Faith toward God, or toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, Heb. 6. 1. Acts 20. 21.


The Second Principle of St. Paul's CATECHISM: Or, Of Faith toward God.
Son. I desire first to have a true definition of Faith; that is, I desire to
know what Faith is?


Father. St. Paul defines Faith thus, Heb. 11. 1. Now Faith is the substance of
Things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

It is also truly defined, of a firm belief of the Truth of God as made known
in the Scriptures; and particula^ly concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
John 20. 31. 1 John 5. 10, 11.


S. I perceive that the main design of the Holy Scriptures, is to direct us to
Jesus Christ; I do therefore desire to know what Record God has given of his
Son?


F. This is the Record which God has given of his Son; That God has given to
us eternal Life, and that this Life is in his Son. 1 John 5. 11. with John 1.
4. and 6. 51.


S. Was the Son of God ordained to procure the Light of saving Life to the
whole World?


F. Yes, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. And
the reason why many shall not see Eternal Life, is, because they believe not on
the Name of the only begotten Son of God, John 3. 16, 17, 18.


S. But how can they be saved by Christ who never heard of him?


F. Christ is the Lamb of God, slain in the design of God, to take away the Sin
of the World, John 1. 29. In whom God has offered such means of Light as to
him seemed convenient, Act. 17. 26, 27. that all might seek him, and be
reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 18, 19. And according to the due use, or
wilful abuse of his Mercy so offered, you shall all be acquitted, or condemned,
in the day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men according to the Gospel, Romans
2. 14, 15, 16. Now the Gospel shows that God is not an hard Master, he only
expects improvement of what he gives, he will not reap where he has not Sown,
2 Cor. 8. 12. Dying Infants never heard of Christ, yet they shall be saved,
Mat. 19. 14.


S. By this I perceive all Men are under the Mercy of God, as well as under his
Justice: and that none shall therefore perish for want of Mercy, but because
they turn the Grace of God into wantonness. Show me therefore what we, who have
the holy Scriptures, are bound to believe concerning God and Jesus Christ whom
he has Sent.


F. We are firmly to believe that God is, Heb. 11. 6. and that there is no other
God but one, Mark 12. 32, 34.

This one God is made known to us by three Denominations especially; The
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Mat. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
John 1. 14.

And that thou may know how this Great Mystery was understood by the Ancient
Church, about 1400 Years ago, I will here show thee their Confession of Faith,
published by a very great Council of the Christians in those days, wherein
were 318 Pastors of the Church, who thus profess their Faith.

The Nicene Creed
I Believe in one God the Almighty Father, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, Begotten of the
Father before all Worlds. God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God,
begotten, not made, of one substance with the Father, by whom all things were
made.

Who for us Men, and for our Salvation descended from the Heavens, and was
incarnate of the Virgin Mary, and became Man.

Crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate. Suffered and was buried;

And rose again the third day according to the Scriptures,

And ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand of God.

And is to come again with Glory to judge the Living and the Dead, and of whose
Kingdom there shall be no end.

And in the holy Spirit the quickening Lord, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son, and in like manner is adored and g^^rifyed with the Father and the
Son, and who spoke by the Prophets.

And I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolical Church. I confess one Baptism
f^r remission of Sins.

And I look for the Resurr^ction of the Dead. And the Life in the World to
come.


S. I much reverence this ancient Confession of Faith, for it is excellent
Brevity, and especially for the solidity of the Matter. But I desire you to
show me what Scripture-Evidence we have for some things contained in the second
Article, where it says, The Son of God was begotten before all Worlds.


F. In Heb. 1. 5. the Son of God is called the First-Begotten: and verse. 2.
it is said, The Worlds (that is, all Worlds) were made by him; and verse. 10.
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the Works of thy Hands, John 1. 1, 2, 3. is full evidence of the
same thing. And Colos. 1. 17. He is before all things, and by him all things
consist.


S. But how is it said, the Son is God of God, Light of Light? etc.


F. 1. The same Testimonies which prove He was God, and that he was before all
things, proves that he was God of God: because there was but one God, nor as
yet any other Essence but God. The Son was therefore begotten, not made,
because all things were made by him which was made; and sure he that made all
things was not made himself.

2. In 1 John. 5. 20. The Son is expressly called, Very God; and seeing there is
but one God, he must needs be very God of very God.

3. And for the same reason he is Light of Light; for God is that Light in whom
is no Darkness, 1 ^ohn 1. ^* and so is Christ, John 1. 5, 7, 8, 9. See also
Rev. 21. 2^* Heb. 1. 3.


S. It seems the great Council did not want Scri^ture-evidence to confirm this
great Article o^ ^he pr^existence of the Son of God. I pray explain the thi^d
Article, where the Son of God is said to be incarnate of of the Virgin Mary by
the Holy ^^ost, and became Man.


F. It pleased the Father Almighty, that his Son, who being in the form of God,
and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, should take upon him the form
of a Servant, and be found in the habit of Man, Col. 2. 6, 7.

And in this state, He that was above all Angels, Heb. 1. 5. was now made a
little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death, Heb. 2. 9. For he
took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham,
Heb. 2. 16. And in this respect, both he that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, are all of one, [that is, one Flesh] for which cause he is not
ashamed to call them Brethren.

And as Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise
took part of the same, that by means of Death he might destroy him that had the
Power of Death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.


S. This a great Mystery indeed; I desire to know how and when this was
fulfilled or accomplished?


F. The Lord Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, in the time of Augustus
Caesar, about the Year of the World 3962. And his Birth was thus effected by
the most High God. His Power overshadowed the Virgin, and by the Holy Ghost
coming upon her, she conceived, and was with Child, Luke 1. 35. Mat. 1. 18. And
at Bethlehem she brought forth her Son, and (as the Angel had commanded) called
his Name Jesus, which signifies a Savior, the same is called Christ, Mat. 1.
21. Luke 2. 7. as it was foretold by the Prophets, Isa. 7. 14. Mich. 5. 2.


S. Does any Testimony appear in humane Histories, respecting the Time of the
Birth and Death of our Lord Christ?


F. Our Faith must only rest upon the Authority of the Scriptures; in these
things nevertheless there is some things remarkable found in the Histories of
those Times.

Learn (says a Learned Writer) the Time according to the Prophecy of Daniel,
when Christ should come, is now exactly fulfilled.

(...) from the 2d Year of Darius Longamanus, when the Ki^^s Commandment went
forth, to bring the People to b^ild Jerusalem, Ezra. 4. 24. Hag. 1. 1. to the
beginning of Alexander's Monarchy, were 144 Years, according to the account of
Metasthenus the Persian.

From thence to the Incarnation of Christ was 309 Years by the judgment of
Josephus: And from Christ's Incarnation to his Baptism, was about 30 Years,
Luke 2. 23. Then count the Prophecy of Daniel 9. 25. After 70 weeks (a week
containing 7 Years) that is 483 Years, then shall the Messiah be cut off, viz.
two Years and an half after his Baptism.


S. I understand that Christ is the true Messiah, of whom Moses and the
Prophets did write, John 1. 41, 45. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Isa. 7. 14. I desire
therefore to know what I a^ farther to believe concerning him, that I may be
saved


F. Thou must with the Heart believe unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth
make confession unto Salvation, Romans 10. 10.


S. What do you mean by believing unto Righteousness?


F. There is a twofold Righteousness, which true Faith will lead thee unto.
The one is Imputative; the other is Practical. The first is called the
Righteousness of God, Mat. 6. 33. or God's Righteousness, Romans 10. 3. This
Righteousness is revealed by the Gospel, Romans 1. 17, 18. It is a Righteousness
to us without the Law; and yet witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, Romans 3.
21* It is the Righteousness of Christ, who is the Lord our Righteousness, Isa.
45. 24, 25. Christ made of God un^^ us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.


S. I desire to understand this more plainly.


F. 1. God having made a Righteous Law, it must be fulfilled; and none was able
to do ^his but Christ, and he did fulfill it in our behalf Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. Psalm. 4. 5, 6, 7. and thus the Rig^teousness of the Law is fulfilled in
the Children of God, because Christ's Righteousness is made theirs through
believing, Romans 10* 3, 4. Phil. 3. 9. And they are made the Righteousness of
God in Him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that is, a Righteous People to God.

2. The Justice of God cried against us for Sin committed; and Sin must be
purged by the Blood of Christ; He bare our sins, that is, the punishment of our
Sins, in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And thus we are justified by
his Death, and saved by his Life, Romans 5. 9, 10. He died for our Sins, and rose
again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25.


S. Where does God say, that Righteousness is a thing imputed to Man?


F. Romans 4. 6. David describes the blessedness of the Man unto whom God
imputes Righteousness without Works, says the Apostle.

Abraham being fully persuaded, that what God had promised, he was able to
perform. It was imputed to him for Righteousness. Now it was not written for
his sake alone, that it was imputed unto him. But for us also, to whom it shall
be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus Christ from the Dead,
Romans 4. 21, 22, 23, 24.


S. And is this wonderful Grace held forth to all Men in Christ?


F. Yes, The Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, or published,
being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the Righteousness of God,
which is by Faith of Jesus Christ UNTO ALL, and upon all that believe: for
there is N^ difference. For ALL have sinned, and come short of the ^lory of
God: Being justified freely by his Grace, through the ^edemption that is in
Christ Jesus; Whom God has set forth (...) be a propitiation [for our sins;
and not for ours only, bu^ also for the sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2.]
through Faith in his Blood; to declare his Righteousness for the re^ission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this
time his Righteousness, that ^e might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Je^us, Romans 3. 21, to 27.


S. It appears plainly, that the Righteousness of Christ, in and by Christ, is
free for all; but yet it is received by Faith. But does God require all Men to
be^^eve this?


F. Yes, Christ with all his Benefits was tendered to ^he Jews; but they being
ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not ^^bmitted themselves to the Righteousness of God, Romans
10. 1, 2,

^. So they would not come to Christ that they might ^ave Life, John 5. 40.

2. All are commanded to believe the Gospel, (which ^eveals this Righteousness
of God as the main of it) under pain of damnation, Mark 16. 15, 16. All Me^ are
therefore to believe that God has Mercy, and Grace and Glory in store for them
all, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6.


S. I desire you to give me the sum of the Gospel (...) few words.


F. This Gospel is briefly comprehended in this saying; Christ died for our
Sins, and rose again for (...) Justification, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Which is further
e^plained; 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. And the great Hol^ness which it teaches,
is set down, with the Glory co^sequent to it, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 1
Pet. 1. 4, ^*


S. Did Christ our Lord die and rise again for all Me^ without exception?


F. Yes, he did; For, for this cause Christ both die^, ro^^ and revived, that
he might be Lord both of the Dead and L^ving, Romans 14. 9. He gave himself a
Ransom for all, ^ Ti^ 2. 6. He tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2. ^9. (...)
bought them that deny him, and bring upon themselv^^ (...) destruction, 2 Pet.
2. 1.


S. These things cannot be spoken against. But (...) Christ die as he was God,
or as he was Man only*


F. Not as God; for if God should die, nothi^^ could live. Man cannot kill the
Soul of Man, much less the Divine Nature of Christ; our Savior was (...) to
death in the Flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 18. He died through wea^ness, 2 Cor. 13. 4. He
was made Lower than the Angel that he might suffer Death, Heb. 2. 9.

It was sufficient that an holy Man, perfectly jus^ without Sin, should die for
the unjust, that he mig^^ bring us to God.


S. To strengthen my Faith, I desire to know some clear Grounds or Evidence
that the holy Spirit is God.


F. 1. Because he is called the eternal Spirit, Heb. ^ 14. and is present in
every place, Psalm. 39. 7. He is e^presly called God, Act. 5. 3, 4, 9.

2. We are baptized into his Name, Mat. 28. But we are not to be baptized into
the name of a Created Spirit.

3. The Work of Creation is ascribed to him, and he has his procedure from the
Father and the Son, and is one with them, Genesis 1. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 104. 30. John
15. 26.


S. I am well satisfied, that the Righteousness of Faith is a great (...): I
desire to learn the Righteousness of Practice^*


F. Practical Righteousness is a holy walking with God in obedience to all his
Commands, to the best of our k^owledg and ability, 1 John 2. 4, 5, 6. For the
Gosp^^ of the Grace of God teaches us to deny all Vngodlyne^^ and worldly
Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and g^dly on this present Life, Tit.
2. 11, 12. Christians are ^^rictly obliged to observe all things whatsoever
Christ comm^^ded, Man. 28. 19. For they are God's workmanship, (...) in Christ
Jesus unto good Works, which God has (...) ordained, that they should walk in
them, Ephesians. 2. 10*

Christians are bo^^d to hear Christ their great Prophet ^n whatsoever (...)
shall say. Nor are they his true Friends, unless the^ do (to their best)
whatsoever he commands them, Act. 3. 22. John 15. 14.


S. Will not Faith save us without Works?


F. Although we are not saved by Works, yet we are not saved without Works. For
what does it profit, if a Man say, he has Faith, and have not Works, can Faith
save him? Jam. 2. 14. As the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without
Works is dead also.


S. What shall I do that I may work the Work of God?


F. 1. This is the Work of God, that you believe on him whom he has sent, John
6. 29. This Faith must be put into act, else it is not the Work of Faith with
Power, 2 These. 1. 9. Gal. 5. 6. Jam. 2. 22, 24.

2. True Faith overcomes the World, to wit, (...) Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust
of the Eyes, and the Prid^ of Life. For this is the victory which overcomes
the World, even our Faith, 1 John. 5. 4, 5. and 2. 15, 16.

This Faith purifieth the Heart in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, and
leads to every good Work, Act. 15. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Philip. 2. 12, 13. Colos*
(...) 10.


S. Is this Faith in the act, the Gift of God, or the Work of Man?


F. With the Heart Man believes, and it is Man that works Good, Romans 10. 10.
Romans 2. 10. But the preparation of the Heart in Man to these things is of the
Lord, Prove. 16. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 7. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Isa. 10. 23.


S. Does God work this preparation in Man's Heart irresistibly?


F. In some special Case it may be so, Genesis 20. 6. But God ordinarily works
upon the Heart, or Understandings of Men, by his Works, (...)* 4. 13. Isa. ^0.
26. And by his Word, Romans 1. 16, 17, 18* And by the motions of his Spirit,
ministerially and graciously, 1 These. 1. 5. Against which Men may and often do,
make resistance to their own destruction, Psalm. 88. 8. This whole Psalm shows
much of this to be too common, and so does Act. 7. 51.


S. I desire a short view of this excellent Grace of Faith.


F. 1. It is an hearty and universal Credence of the Truth of God, as revealed
or made known to Man in the Scriptures, or otherwise. Luke 24. 25. Deuteronomy. 1. 32.
Romans 1. 19, 20, 21, 22.

2. A cleaving to God and his Truth, as made known to us, in sincere Love,
Psalm 119. 31. 1 These. 1. 5, 6. 2 These. 1. 10.

3. A Showing the Fruit of Faith, by a ready obeying the Truth, and suffering
for it, when called thereunto, James. 2. 28. 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15.

4. An holy dependence upon God for the fulfilling all his Promises, for his
Grace and Help in this World, and for Glory in the World to come, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Heb. 10. 35, to the end, Romans 2. 7, 10, 11.


S. I can say, in some measure, I believe, and pray, that God may help against
my unbelief. What I pray, is the next Principle which belongs to a beginning
Christian.


F. The next Principle is, the Doctrine of Baptisms. Of which we shall treat
briefly.


Of the Third Principle of St. Paul's CATECHISM: Or, The Doctrine of Baptisms.
Son. WHy is the word BAPTISMS used in this place? Are there more Baptisms than
one pertaining to Christians?


Father. Yes, there are three distinct Baptisms pertaining to the Christian
Man. The first is the Baptism of Repentance for remission of Sins; This was of
divine Original, it came from Heaven, and was first administered by that great
Prophet and Messenger of Christ, John the Baptist, Mat. 21. 25.

The second, is the pouring out of the Spirit of promise; and in the ordinary
way of its reception, follows the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of
Sins. Act. 1. 5. and 2. 38. and 19. 5, 6. Ephesians. 1. 13.

The third is the Afflictions which attend Christians for the Gospel's-sake,
Luke 12. 50. Mat. 20. 22.


S. How is it said there is but one Baptism, seeing it is evident there are
three?


F. That is a gross mistake. It is not said, Ephesians. 4. 5. there is but one
Baptism, it is said, there is one; and yet Paul speaks of two of these Baptisms
in that very place, as verse. 4. There is one Body and one Spirit, as ye are
called in one hope of your Calling. And the Ephesians had received both the
Baptism of Repentance, for remission of Sins, in the Name of the Lord Jesus;
and also the Baptism of the Spirit, afterward, as is undeniable, Act. 19. 5, 6.
So that Paul should have spoken false if he had said there is but one Baptism,
and also must have contradicted himself in his Epistle to the Hebrews, where he
speaks of Baptisms in the plural Number.


S. I confess, the mistake of the Quakers, and some others, is hereby
discovered; I see indeed a threefold Baptism, I would learn them in every part:
And there fore I desire to know what God requires of all that are to be
baptized into Christ according to his Command.


F. God requires the substance of the two foregoing Principles, of all that are
to be baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, for the remission of Sins.
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, Act. 2. 38. They that gladly received
the Word, were baptized, Act. 2. 41. When they believed, etc. they were
baptized, both Men and Women, Act. 8. 12. In true Baptism, we are dead with
Christ, buried with Christ, and risen with Christ, Romans 6. 1, to 7. Colos. 2.
11, 12, 13. We are all the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; for as many as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 26, 27.


S. Did our Lord Christ himself establish this practical Baptism?


F. Yes, he established it diverse ways; first, in that he would not enter upon
his Ministry till he was (...) John in Jordan Mat. 15. 16. and 4. 17.


(...) (...) managed the Doctrine and Practice of this Baptism, more than John
the Baptist did, John 3. 22, 26. and 4. 1, 2. Jesus made and baptized more
Disciples than John.


S. How then is it said that Jesus baptized not, but his Disciples?


F. Jesus made the People Disciples by teaching them. To baptize them, was more
convenient for his Disciples or Apostles, because they were to be baptized in
his Name; Kings do not execute their Laws, because they are done in their Name,
it is more fit to be done by their Ministers.


S. It is plain, that Christ did propagate this holy Ordinance in his personal
Ministry. Did he establish it after his Death also?


F. Yes, In his perpetual Commission he does particularly establish it, to
continue as long as the Gospel it self, Mark 16. 15, 16. Mat. 28. 19, 20.


S. This is very clear; but suppose a Man have received the Baptism of the
Spirit, may not he be excused as to this Ordinance of Baptism?


F. No sure; the better God is to us, the more ready we should be to follow
Christ, who says, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness. Sure no Man
can suppose he is more holy than Christ. But to put the matter out of doubt,
Christ commands those that have received the Holy Ghost, to be baptized with
Water in his Name, Act. 10. 47, 48.


S. I perceive no Man may with safety neglect this Ordinance; I therefore
desire to know what is the profit which attends the sincere obedience to God in
this Ordinance?


F. The same profit which thou may expect in thy sincere obedience to God in
any other Ordinance: That is, pardon of Sin, and eternal Life, is made sure ^o
thee in God's way, (if thou art faithful in what thou do, as God requires thy
Faith and Obedience); For thus says the Lord, He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. Arise, why tarriest thou, and be
baptized, and wash away thy Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act.
22. 16. The like figure whereunto even Baptism does now save us, not the
putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Consicience
toward God, by the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead.


S. These are very high expressions; are we not saved by Christ only?


F. Doubtless Christ only is ordained of God to be the Savior of the World, 1 Timothy 4. 10. and especially of his Body the Church. And you are to know, that
it is Christ who is held forth in Baptism, which saves; even as it is said, we
are saved by Preaching, that is, by Christ held forth in preaching.


S. May not a Man have his place and privilege in the Church of Christ without
^aptism?


F. No, that cannot be ^or if one Man, then more may take the place, and assume
the Privileges of Members of the Church without Baptism, and then there may be
a true Church constituted without Baptism.


S. May not a company of Believers form themselves into a Church of Christ,
without Baptism in Water, upon profession of Repentance and Faith only?


F. No true Church can be formed by Man's device. There must be the Rule of
God's Word to direct us, or nothing is done well in the forming a Church.
Christ has given express order to form his Church by Repentance, Faith, and
Baptism, as we have showed. If he has also given order to form Churches without
Baptism, th^n he must needs be the Author of Confusion, which he is not.


S. I confess, I find no order from Christ to form or constitute a Church
without Baptism; I find the Church founded by himself, to be constituted in the
use of the Baptism of Repentance, for remission of Sin. I believe this Church,
formed by Christ at Jerusalem, to be the Mother Church, and that therefore her
Foundation-Principles are necessary for the true constitution of all other
Churches. I now desire you to show me the due form of Baptism.


F. The due form of Baptism, is by dipping the Repentant-Believer into the
Water, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat.
28. 19. And hence it was, That John baptized in Aenon near Salem, because there
was much Water there, John 3. 23. And they were all baptized in the River of
Jordan, confessing their Sins, Mark 1. 5.


S. Was Christ himself dipped in Jordan by John Baptist?


F. Yes, it is granted by the Learned, that Mark 1. 9. is expressed for it, the
Greek being (...); which they confess to be, word for word in English, And was
dipped of John into Jordan. And it is clear, When Christ was baptized, he came
up straight^^y out of the Water, Mat. 3. 16. Which Example alone should make
all Christians afraid to devise a Form contrary to Christ's own Pattern, and
his Testimony also, who says, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness.


S. But must the Party baptized, be naked or clothed when he goes down into
the Water?


F. He that is baptized, should be clothed, because God has required that all
things in the Church should be done decently and in order. And the Party to be
baptized, may as well be dipped in Water with a convenient Garment upon him as
without.


S. What Ceremonies has Christ appointed to be used in Baptism?


F. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that ^e might sanctify
and cleanse it by the washing of Water through the Word. There is no other
Ceremony by his appointment to be used in Baptism.


S. May not the Church alter the subject of Baptism, and change the manner of
administration, as the Papists (and others) have generally done?


F. No, The Lord Christ commands his Apostles to teach all his People to
observe all things whatsoever he commanded them, Mat. 28. 19. They delivered
that to the Churches, which they received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. The
Church is commended for keeping the Ordinances as they were delivered to them,
1 Cor. 11. 2. There was a Curse followed them that changed God's Ordinance,
Isa. 24. 5.


S. I see it a Duty incumbent upon all that will have due admission into the
Church of Christ-Militant, to be baptized with the Baptism of Repentance for
remission of Sins. I now desire to know the truth concerning the Baptism of the
Spirit, so much claimed in these days, tho some deny that there is any such
Baptism now to be expected.


F. That the Gift of the Holy Ghost (which is the Baptism of the Spirit) is a
right which pertains to the Church, or to Baptized Believers in their
successive Generations, is evident, Act. 2. 38, 39. It belongs to all that the
Lord our God shall Call. If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his, Romans 8. 9. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6. There is one Body, and
one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your Calling, Ephesians. 4. 4. The
Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5. Now we
have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things which are freely given to us of God.


S. Are these things meant of the Baptism of the Spirit, or of some lower
receivings of it?


F. These are the best part of the Promise of the Spirit, which whosoever receive,
are sealed thereby to the day of Redemption, and are the Earnest of our
Inheritance; and are therefore most fitly called the Baptism of the Spirit,
because the Spirit receives in the nine Fruits of it, Gal. 5. 22, 23.
transcends it is being received in the nine Gifts of it, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10.
The first are called the more excellent way of receiving the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.
ult. I had rather have that one Fruit of the Spirit called Love, then all the
nine Gifts of the Spirit.


S. But are not the Gifts of the Spirit ceased?


F. No such matter! unless our unworthiness deprive us of them. Are not these
Exhortations yet of force? Covet earnestly the best Gifts. Follow after
Charity, and desire spiritual Gifts, and rather that ye may prophesy. Covet to
prophesy, and forbid not to speak with Tongues. Sure these Exhortations inform
us, that as the Church has need, she may lawfully ask these best Gifts. But
let her remember there is a better part of the Promise of the Spirit than the
best of these Gifts.


S. I am satisfied the whole Promise of the Spirit pertains to the Church, and
that therefore the Baptism of the Spirit remains. I would know what ordinary
way God has assigned to wait upon him for so great a Blessing?


F. Indeed our receiving the Promise of the Spirit through Faith, Gal. 3. 14.
in the sanctifying operations of it, is the next great Blessing of the Gospel,
to our being justified by Faith in the Blood of Christ. And for a more full
answer to your enquiry, I refer you to what shall be said upon the Fourth
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ.


The Fourth Principle of St. Paul's CATECHISM: Or, The Laying on of Hands.
Son. SEeing this principle is expressed in the singular Number [Laying on of
Hands, not Layings on of Hands] I desire to know what Laying on of Hands is
here meant?


Father. 1. It cannot be a violent laying on of Hands [as some profanely
imagine]; our Savior taught none to lay violent Hands upon his People; and yet
the very act of Laying on of Hands here, is called a Principle of the Doctrine
of Christ.

2. The Greek, is, Epitheseos te Chiron, which signifies a gentle putting on of
Hands. The word which signifies a violent handling, is another word, as in Luke
21. 12. Epibalousin. But such is the great blindness of some, that they will
not see a difference between a Prophecy, as that is in Luke 21. 12. and a
Doctrine, as this is, Heb. 6. 2.


S. I am satisfied thus far, that it can be no violent Act. I desire to hear
the Truth.


F. It must be a Service which concerns all Christians equally, as they are
Babes in Christ, because it is called Milk for Babes, Heb. 5. 12, 13. a
beginning Principle, Heb. 6. 1. and placed among those other five Principles,
which do equally concern all Christians to know, as you are Babes in Christ.
And for these reasons it cannot be Laying on of Hands for Ordination, nor upon
the Sick. It must therefore be that religious Service performed by the
Apostles, Acts 8. 14. and 19. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6. for the promised Spirit, both
Gifts and Fruits, as God pleas^d.


S. But did not the Apostles give the Holy Ghost, by putting on of their Hands?


F. No, in no wise, God gave the Spirit to those who did obey him, Act. 5. 32.
The Apostles only prayed for this Blessing, which they knew belonged to
Baptized Believers as such, Act. 2. 38. and 19. 2. And faithful Pastors ought
to teach Babes in Christ; this Principle, as it respects the Promise of the
Spirit, and to pray for it on behalf of the Disciples, both Men and Women,
after the Example of the Apostles, Act. 8. 14. else they cannot lay the whole
of that Foundation, Heb. 6. 1, 2. nor teach Babes in Christ all their
Principles.


S. Was this practice of Prayer, with laying on of Hands, continued in the
Church of Christ in the Ages next after the Apostles?


F. Yes, it was religiously observed; Eusebius mentions it, as the ancient
manner, viz. Prayer, and Laying on of Hands, Lib. 7. c. 2. And so does
Tertullian long before him, Lib. de Bapt. his words are, After we are come out
of the Laver of Baptism, the Hand is laid on by Blessing, calling upon, and
inviting the Holy Ghost.


S. These things are very plain to such as are willing to be informed. I desire
now to be informed, what is the reason why so very few do receive these
Principles, in the native purity and simplicity of them, and especially these
two practical ones, Baptism, and Laying on of Hands?


F. 1. One great reason is, because a false Baptism, without Repentance and
Faith, and dispensed in a Manpleasing way: and likewise an outwardly Glorious
and Ceremonious Bishoping, has obtruded upon very many, by which they are
blinded, that they cannot, or prejudiced, that they will not see these Truths,
than which scarce any are more plain and easy to be seen.

2. Another may be this, The Wisdom of God knowing the Great pride of Man's
Heart, ordained these Ordinances, to try them, whether they would be obedient
to his Commands, how low so ever, or whether they would contemn the very
footsteps of Christ himself, the only Son of God. The Pharisees and Lawyers
led the way in this Rebellion against God's Counsel, Luke 7. 29. and many
follow them, rejecting the Counsel of God, against all Power in Heaven and
Earth, Matthew. 28. 17, 18. being not baptized in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.


S. I confess we have the footsteps of Christ most plain in the case of
Baptism; but have we any thing from him to favor us in the Laying on of Hands
with Prayer for the promised Spirit?


F. Yes verily, we have as much from his own Example herein, as the case could
bear; for Jesus, as soon as he was baptized, prayed, and the Heavens were
opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in the bodily shape of a Dove upon him;
and a Voice came from Heaven which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased.

The things which from hence favor our Cause in hand, are these. 1. Christ did
not ask this sealing and confirming Spirit, till after he was baptized: but as
soon as baptized, he prays, and receives the Holy Ghost. Here is nothing
wanting but the Administrator, which could not be found among Men; for who
durst pray for Christ that he might receive the Spirit? I could object upon
others, that in Christ's Baptism Repentance was wanting. Yet sure his Baptism
is very precedential to us, it coming as near us as the case would bear; and so
likewise he comes as near us in his waiting for the Spirit after Baptism as the
case will bear.


S. I desire to see the Grounds of those two Duties, Baptism, and Laying on of
Hands, in a few Particulars.


F. The Grounds on which these Duties may be asserted, and defended, are;

1. The express Command of Christ, or, the express Doctrine of Christ, they
being both Principles of his Doctrine.

2. Christ's own Example, or President, as far as the greatness and holiness of
his Person would bear it, to be exemplary in either.

3. The undoubted necessity of the chief Blessings, annexed to the religious
use of these Services respectively.

4. Sufficient Example of many thousands of Christians, Men and Women, at
Jerusalem and Samaria, etc. submitting to these Services at their Principles.

5. No repeal of these Services, or of either of them, since their institution
in the Church of Christ.

6. The undeniable consent of Antiquity for some hundreds of Years down from
the very days of the Apostles.

7. The Scriptureless, trifling, self-contradicting, and nonsensical
Objections, which hitherto have been brought against Sacred Baptism, or Prayer,
with the Laying on of Hands, for the Ends for which they were at first observed.


The Fifth Principle of St. Paul's CATECHISM: Or, The Resurrection of the Dead.
Son. WHat is the true definition of the Resurrection of the Dead, according to
Christian Doctrine and Faith?


Father. The Resurrection of the Dead is an Act of Divine and Almighty Power,
quickening dead Bodies, and restoring them to a state of such perfection, as to
have an eternal duration; but does not necessarily infer the happiness of the
Dead, so raised, but with respect to the Event of that Trial which they then
shall undergo. And therefore the Resurrection is distinguished into two parts,
by Christ himself, John 5. 28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming,
in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, to the Resurection of Life, and they that have
done evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation.


S. Shall the same Body in respect of it is Flesh and Bones rise again?


F. It must either be the same Flesh and Bones, or nothing, seeing there is
nothing else laid in the Grave that may be called Man. And this is the ancient
Faith of God's People, as appears in Job 19. 26, 27. Though after my Skin,
Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for
my self, and not another, though my Reins be consumed in me.


S. I confess this agrees with our Savior's words before mentioned, All that
are in the Graves, shall hear his Voice and come forth. But does not Christ
speak mystically of the Graves of Sin?


F. No, he had spoken of those that are dead in Sin before, verse. 25. The hour
is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God;
and they that hear shall live. This he speaks of the powerful preaching of the
Gospel to convert those that were dead in Sin. Then adds, Marvel not at this,
for the hour is coming, that all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice,
and shall come forth; but some of these to Condemnation, which respects the
Last Judgment, undeniably.


S. How then does the Apostle say, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 15. 50.


F. 1. He explains himself in the next words; neither does Corruption inherit
Incorruption; He speaks of Men in their sinful and mortal state; They must be
regenerate by the Work of the Spirit, and freed from mortality in the
Resurrection, or (as the next Verse shows) partake of a change which is
equivalent; or else they cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. It is certain our Savior was Flesh and Bones after he was risen from the
Dead, Luke 24. 39. Yet, he entered into Heaven it self, there to appear in the
presence of God for us. Heb. 9. 24.


S. I confess it must follow, that if no Flesh can enter into Heaven, then
Christ's glorified Body cannot be there, which doubtless it is. But have we
sufficient Testimony that our Bodies shall put off Mortality, and be glorified
with his glorious Body?


F. Yes, for it is written, This Mortal must put on Immortality, and this
Corruption must put on Incorruption, and so Death shall be swallowed up in
Victory.

And again, He shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto
his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21.


S. Are there any Examples, that any of the Dead who had lain long in the
Graves was raised?


F. Yes, there is a full Instance of that, Mat. 27. 52, 53. The Graves were
opened, and many Bodies of the Saints which slept, arose and came out of the
Graves, and appeared to many. Now these Saints doubtless had been long dead,
for we read of no Saints dying at Jerusalem about the time of Christ's
Suffering.


S. Are there any other Examples to confirm this great Article of our Faith?


F. It pleased God to give an Instance of his Power, and of his Will in this
behalf, near the beginning of the World, in that he translated Enoch that he
should not see Death, Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 11. 5.

2. God also took Elijah the Prophet up into Heaven, without tasting of Death,
2 King. 2. 1, 11, 12.

3. Elisha by the Power of God raised a dead Child to Life, 2 King. 4. 33, 34,
35.

4. By God's Power a dead Man was raised to Life, at the touch of the Bones of
the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 13. 21.


S. Are there any Examples of this kind in the New Testament?


F. 1. Our Savior raised a young Man, as he was carried upon the Bier to be
buried, Luke 7. 13, 14, 15.

2. He raised also the Daughter of Jairus, Mark 5. 40, 41, 42.

3. Christ raised Lazarus when he had been dead and buried, commanding the Dead
to come forth; and though he was bound hand and foot, yet he came forth by the
Power of God, John 11. 43, 44.

4. St. Peter raised Tabitha to Life, by the strength of Christ, Act. 9. 40, 41.

5. But the greatest Instance of all is, the Resurrection of Christ himself, by
which God has given assurance to all Men, that all Men shall rise again, both
the Just and Unjust, Act. 17. 31.


S. Was this Article of Faith received by the Prophets before the coming of
Christ?


F. The Prophet David spoke of the Resurrection of the Body of Christ, Psalm.
16. 8. and of the hope of his own Resurrection also. This was the hope of
Israel, Act. 23. 21. and 24. 15.

2. The Prophet Isa has these words; Thy dead Men shall live, together with my
dead Body shall they arise: awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the Dust, Isa.
26. 19. Augustine refers this to the Resurrection.

3. Daniel tells us, That many that sleep in the Dust of the Earth, shall
awake, some to everlasting Life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt,
Dan. 12. 2.

4. Hosea 13. 14. as interpreted by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. is very plain, I
will ransom them from the Power of the Grave; I will redeem them from Death: O
Death, I will be thy Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy destruction.


S. These Testimonies are very clear. I desire some further confirmation of
this Truth from the New Testament.


F. 1. For this I refer you to the serious reading of 1 Cor. 15. throughout;
where the Apostle, by diverse Arguments, confirms this Truth, and especially by
the Resurrection of Christ, and the importance of the thing it self, making all
Religion insignificant, unless there be a Resurrection from the Dead.

2. I will here insert this excellent Testimony to the Thessalonians.

I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that
Jesus died, and rose a^ain; then they also which sleep in Jesus, shall God
bring with (...). For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, (...) we
which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent (or
hinder the Resurrection of) them that are asleep: For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and with
the Trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are
alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet
the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4.


S. I bless God for these clear Testimonies. I desire now to be instructed
concerning the Eternal Judgment.


The Sixth Principle of St. Paul's CATECHISM: Or, The Eternal Judgment.
Father. THE manner of Christ's coming to Judgment is thus described: Then
shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven: And then shall all the
Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven with great Glory. And he shall send his Angels with a great
sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four
Winds, from one end of Heaven to another. Mat. 24. 30, 31.


S. This will be a terrible day! Who is this Son of Man?


F. This Son of Man is Christ Jesus; For God (...) se^d Jesus, who before was
preached unto you, Act. 3. 20 The same Jesus which you have seen go up into
Heaven, sha^^ so come in like manner as you have seen him go into Heaven, Acts
1. 11. Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they
also who pierced him; and all Nations shall wail because of him, Rev. 1. 7.


S. Why shall the Nations wail because of him?


F. Because, when the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy
Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory. And before him
shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as
a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, Mat. 25. 31, 32.


S. To what end shall Christ thus divide the Nations?


F. To give to every Man according as his Work shall be. For he shall set the
Sheep on his right Hand, and the Goats on the left.

Then shall the King say to them on his right Hand, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World:
for I was hungry, and ye sed me, etc. Then shall he say also unto them on his
left hand, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me no Meat, Mat. 25. 34,
35, 41, 42.


S. This is a glorious and terrible description of the Judgment of the World. I
pray, by what Records will Christ judge the Nations?


F. He shall especially proceed in Judgment with all Men, according to the
Gospel, that is, according to the means of Grace which he gave them, Romans 2.
15, 16. For this is the condemnation, That Light is come into the World, and
Men love Darkness rather than Light, John 3. 17, 18. And yet more particularly,
they that have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law; and they that have
sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. And those that have the Gospel,
the Word which Christ has spoken shall judge them at the last day.


S. There are several Books spoken of in Rev. 20. 10. What are these Books?


F. The Books are Metaphorical, and signify,

1. God's Omniscience; for he shall bring every Work to Judgment, with every
secret Thing, whether it be Good or Evil, Eccles. 12. ult.

2. The Consciences of Men which then shall be awakened to condemn them, or
acquit them, Romans 2. 15, 16. may here be called Books.


S. I desire to know what is meant by the Book of Life? and whether any that
were once written in it, may be blotted out of it?


F. The time when this Book shall be opened, will best resolve the first
Question. But thus much we know, That the Promise and Covenant of Life made
with Adam, renewed with Noah and with Abraham, and confirmed by Christ, is, to
us, the Book of Life, out of which Men may blot themselves, or render
themselves unworthy of Eternal Life by Sin, and especially by Unbelief, Mark
16. 16. He that believes not, shall be damned, Act. 13. 46. See and consider
Exodus 32. 32. Psalm. 69. 28. Rev. 3. 5. and 21. 17.


S. Shall the punishment of ungodly Men be perpetual? shall it never end?


F. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17.
Where their Worm di^th not, and their fire is not quenched, Mark 9. 44, 45.
They shall be punished with everlasting destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 19. The
Hellish Torments are for the Devils and the Wicked for ever. There is no
promise of any Pardon to the Damned; nor that their Torments shall have an end;
and therefore for any to say these Torments shall end, is presumptuous Folly.


S. Of what duration shall the Glory of the Saved be?


F. Their Life and Glory is every where said to be Everlasting, their Kingdom
incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away.

God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more
death, nor sorrow, nor crying; nor shall there be any more pain, for the former
things are passed away* Rev. 21. 4.

They shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars, for
ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3.


S. Shall the Children of God know one another, and so rejoice together in the
Kingdom of their Father?


F. 1. Yes, they shall be like the Angels, who know one another, and rejoice
together in Heaven, Luke 15. 7, 10. They shall be like Christ, for they shall
see him as he is; and as he conversed of the things concerning his Kingdom
after he was risen, He will tell them also of his Brethren, and what kindness
they showed to them.

2. St. Paul tells the Thessalonians, That they were the Hope and Crown of his
rejoicing in the Day of the Lord Jesus Christ; yea, his Glory and Joy. But how
this should be, and he not know them, is not easy to conceive.

3. The Communion of the Faithful in Heaven shall far exceed what it was on
Earth; but this cannot well be, unless they know each other.


S. Does the last Judgment agree to the Principles of common Justice and Equity?


F. 1. There is nothing in it contrary thereunto; for when Life and Death are
set before Men, and Men choose Death by choosing sinful ways against the known
Will of God, it is just with God to give them their choice.

2. If there were not a Judgment to come, wicked Men would go unpunished, for
in this World they commonly escape; they can bribe almost any wicked Action,
even Murder it self. Now all Principles of Justice cry for Vengeance in this
Case, both to the Offender, and he that covers Iniquities. And hence, the Last
Judgment is necessary, and agrees with all Principles of Common Justice.

3. If there were not a Judgment to come, the Just and Righteous People of God
would be of all Men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. for here they are oftentimes
exposed to the hardest things, and that for welldoing too. Now it is equal that
they should have a time of refreshing, and to this common Principles of Justice
do agree.

Finally, We can none of us perfectly understand how heinous the Sins of those
are, who reject the Grace of God in the Gift of his Son; and therefore we are
not able to measure what Punishment is proportionable to such Iniquity.

But here we must rest: That the Judge of all the Earth will do ^ight. For if
there were Unrighteousness with God, How then should he judge the World? Romans 3.
5, 6. But all his Ways are Judgment; a God of Truth, and without Iniquity; Just
and Right is he. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.


S. When shall be the Time of this Eternal Judgment?


F. God has not revealed that to Man; but in that our Life here is very short,
this Judgment is at hand in respect of us. For it is appointed unto Man once to
die, and after that the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27.


S. I am well satisfied concerning these Sacred Principles of the Christian
Religion, I desire some further Instruction concerning my walking with God in
the Communion of his Church.


F. Being thus a Christian, built upon this Foundation, Christ being the chief
Cornerstone, thou must continue in the Faith, Colos. 1. 23. and keep thy self
in the Love of God, praying in the Holy Ghost, Judge 20. walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 6. obeying all thy
Superiors.


S. I desire you to show me the Rules of Prayer; And also the Rules of my
Obedience to my Superiors.


F. These things are briefly comprehended in the Lord's Prayer, which he taught
his Disciples; and in the fifth Commandment, which is the first Commandment
with Promise, Matthew. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 6. 2. which in the next
Discourse we will consider.


Of the Duty of Prayer.
Son. WHo may warrantably pray according to Christ's Directions, in the Prayer
set down Mat. 6. 9, etc?


Father. Although it is the Duty of all Men to humble themselves in Prayer
before the Lord their Maker, yet these Rules were given to the Disciples of
Christ, to the Children of God.


S. In what sense are Christians the Children of God?


F. By Adoption and Regeneration; they are born of God, or of the Spirit, and
received into Grace and Favor.


S. I desire you to expound unto me the Lord's Prayer.


F. That I shall endeavor to do.

1. Our Father which art in Heaven. Christ teaches us, to put on Charity when
we pray; that is, to include our Brethren with our selves. When we pray unto
God, we must also pray in Faith, believing that he hears us, Jam. 1. 6, 7.
Mat. 21. 22.

2. Which art in Heaven. Here we profess that our God is in Heaven, as the
place of his special Residence. Hence our Savior in Prayer did frequently lift
up his Eyes to Heaven.

3. Hallowed be thy Name. We are to make the Honor and Glory of the Name of
God, the dearest to us of all things; thus Moses was more willing to die, than
that the Name of God should be reproached.

4. Thy Kingdom come. The Kingdom of God is to be considered, with respect to
his Church in this World. And then we pray, in this Petition, for it is growth
in Number and in Grace. We ought also to hope for the coming of Christ's
Kingdom in the Glory of it, and by Prayer to seek for it.

5. Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; It is evident here, that by
Heaven is meant Heaven in a literal sense, the place which is opposed to the
Earth. And in all Prayer we must submit our will to the Will of God, and to
beware that we do not act contrary to his Will, and so contradict our own
Prayer.

6. Give us this Day our Daily Bread. Here we acknowledge that our common
Mercies are all in the Hand of God to give them, or to withhold them. We are
also taught to live by Faith in these Enjoyments, and not only by some, because
God has promised that all these things shall be added to those that seek him
rightly.

7. And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. We learn here that the
best of God's Children are liable to offend, they never esteemed themselves
pe^^^ without all Imperfection: and they that offend, must pray, and that Daily
too, for remission of Sin; this teaches us to humble our selves daily before
God. We see here also a necessity of being merciful to such as offend us, and
to forgive with readiness all that trespass against us; specially if they do
turn, saying, I repent. Prayer for Mercy, without Charity in him that prays,
will not be accepted of God.

8. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. Here we profess
to believe, that God has the disposing of all Trials which do attend us in this
mortal State; And here we pray that he will not suffer us to be tempted above
what we are able, but that he will with the Temptation make a way to escape,
that we may be able to bear it.

9. For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever. Here we
profess our Faith in Prayer. 1. That the Kingdom is His; and that therefore we
depend on him for the prosperity of it, and for the glorious coming of his
Kingdom. 2. That all Power is his, and therefore we depend on him to provide
for, and to deliver us, according to his Will. 3. That the glory is
everlastingly due to God; and therefore we ascribe it, as the Church did, not
unto us, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory; this is also to praise God
in Prayer.

10. Amen. This word being truly expressed, shows the full assent of the mind
to the whole of the Prayer, whether expressed by our selves in private, or by
such as join sincerely with us in public.


S. Is it our Duty to use this form of words, or to pray according to the tenor
of the words?


F. Doubtless we are at liberty to use both; and for weak Christians, and
indeed for all Christians in their private Devotions, it is safe to use these
very words, so they be spoken with a Heart and Soul truly breathing after God,
When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2.


S. What other Ordinances has Christ ordained for the general use of his
Church?


F. Preaching the Word to Edification, Exhortation, Reproof, and Correction of
Offenders, and the comfort of the Sincere; And therewithal the frequent use of
the Holy Table of the Lord, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Act. 2. 42.


S. How shall I know a lawful Minister, one that is sent of God, that I may
hear the Word according to the Will of God?


F. Observe these Rules.

1. Know that no Man of true Christian Modesty, will pretend to be immediately
sent by a Commission from Heaven. And yet,

2. God must make Men Ministers by the Gifts of his Grace, illuminating their
Understanding, and capaciating them to speak to edification, before the Church
can make them Ministers.

3. No unbaptised Person, let his Parts be what they will, has any liberty to
be a Minister in the Church of God, because he is not yet imbodied with the
Church of God, nor can be without Baptism. And here remember our dear Savior
would not preach one Sermon till he was baptized.

4. When Men are competently gifted and qualified in point of Life, being
Church Members, they are to be chosen by the Church, and ordained to the Work
of the Ministry, by Prayer and Fasting, with the Laying on of Hands of the
Messengers and Elders of the Church, for such Offices as the Church finds them
most capable.

5. There is a liberty in the Church, for Brethren which are capable, to
exercise their Gifts to the edification of the Body; and Men thus called, or
privileged in the Church, thou may lawfully hear. If thou further go,
thou go without Rule.


S. What honor or respect do I ow to my lawful Pastors or Teachers?


F. 1. Thou art bound to honor them in Love, for the Work's-sake whereunto
they are called.

2. Thou must obey them in the Lord, as they declare to thee the Counsel of
God, and admonish thee.

3. Thou must pray for them, that God may make them a Blessing to thee.


S. Of what concernment is the Holy Table of the Lord?


F. It is an Ordinance of great concernment; being ordained by Christ himself
to show forth a perpetual Memorial of his Death, till he come the second time
without Sin to Salvation.


S. I pray show me the manner of its Ins^itution.


F. The Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took Bread. And
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body
which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.

And after the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; This do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye
do show forth the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.


S. What is required of all that partake of this Holy Bread and Cup?


F. 1. They must be such as continue in the Apostles Doctrine, and true
Christian Fellowship, Act. 2. 42.

2. They must examine themselves, whether they walk in the Truth with a good
Conscience, both toward God, and also toward Men.

3. They must labor to discern the Lord's Body, as the only Sacrifice for Sin,
as signified in this Service.

4. They must hereby testify true unity with the Church: who are hereby showed
to be one Bread, and one Body, for they are all Partakers of that one Bread.


S. What is the danger of eating this Bread, and Drinking this Cup unworthily?


F. They that eat and drink unworthily, receive condemnation to themselves, not
discerning the Lord's Body.


S. Is this Bread, and this Cup, the Real Body, and the Real Blood of Christ?


F. This Bread, and this Cup, is the Real Body and Blood of Christ, in a
spiritual and mystical Sense, but not carnally and corporally.


S. Are all Members of the Church to partake of the Cup, as well as of the
Bread?


F. Yes, they have express Command from Christ to take the Cup; for he says,
Drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26. 27. The Bread is the Communion of the Body of
Christ, and the Cup is the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and of this
Communion the whole Body Mystical, the Church, are partakers, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4,
16.


S. But were they not all Ministers that sat at the Table with our Savior?


F. When Ministers receive that Holy Bread, an^ Cup, they do not receive it as
they are Ministers, (...) as they are Members of the Body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. (...)
dispense the Ordinance as Ministers, but they partake^^ it as Members.


S. Whether are we to kneel when we receive the Holy Ordinance, or to sit at
the Table?


F. A reverent Gesture is necessary; but decently to sit at the Table of the
Lord is most warrantable, being according to the Example of Christ and his
Apostles at the Institution, Matthew. 26. 20. Mark 14. 18. Luke 22. 14.


S. What is the conclusion of this Service?


F. Giving thanks to God for his Mercy in giving Christ for us: and this is to
be done with Hearts fille^ with joy, and the Thanksgiving to be in the manner
of an Hymn.


S. Must this Hymn, or Thanksgiving, be in Meeter, and expressed by all?


F. There is no Rule for either of these;

And the first would infer the necessity of a Poet to compose the Hymn, which
is not to be supposed.

2. All pray and praise God when they heartily join with the Minister, who is
most sit to express the Praises of God in the Church.


Of Obedience to Superiors.
Son. WHat is my Duty toward my Parents by God's Law, and by the Gospel?


Father. 1. To love and reverence their Persons.

2. A pious Fear and Obedience to their Authority, Lev. 19. 3. Prove. 23. 22.
and 1. 8. My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law
of thy Mother. The just Commands of Parents are a Law to Children; Colos. 3.
20. Children, obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the
Lord.

3. To help them when they are in want; thus our Savior interprets the fifth
Commandment, Mat. 15. 4, 5, 6. Mark 7. 12.

4. Not to speak evil of your Parents, for he that does so, is in danger of
death, Mark 7. 10. Mat. 15. 5.


S. What is the Duty of Servants to Masters?


F. 1. Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke, count their own Masters
worthy of all honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed,
1 Timothy 6. 1.

2. And they that have believing Masters, let them not despise them because
they are Brethren, but rather do them Service because they are faithful, 1 Timothy
6. 2. The Gospel does not free any from the Duties of Morality, but makes their
Obligation to these Duties more strong. And if any Man teach otherwise, to open
a Gap to Disobedience to our Superiors, he is proud, and knows nothing, 1 Timothy
6. 3.

3. Servants are to be obedient to them that are their Masters according to the
Flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of Heart as to Christ, not with
eye-service as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of
God from the heart with good will doing Service as to the Lord, and not to Men
[because though we serve Men in these Duties of Life, yet God is he that
commands it] knowing (also) that what good thing any Man does, [in the honest
d^^charge of his Duty] the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be a
Servant or a Master, Ephesians. 6. 5. to 9.


S. What is the Duty of young Men to the Aged?


F. Thou shall rise up before the Gray Head, and honor the Face of the Old
Man, Lev. 19. 32.


S. What other demonstrations of Honor is there due to the Aged?


F. To speak to them reverently as to Fathers, and to give them the Civilities
of the Place.


Of the Honor due to the King.
Son. WHAT is my Duty to^^^ds my Prince or Sovereign?


Father. Thou art to honor the King next unto God, because there is none above
him in Authority over thee but God: Fear God, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. He
is the Lord's Anointed, for so was Cyrus King of Persia, Ezra 1. 1. Isa. 45. 1.

They are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. Fear therefore the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with disloyal Persons who are given to change, Prove. 24. 21. Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers -- for the Powers that be are
ordained of God, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3.


S. In what things am I bound to obey my Sovereign?


F. In all things which he commands, either Actively or Passively. Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto those that are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14. Thou must be ready to every good Work which they command, Tit. 3. 1.
Thou must in no wise rebel against him, Romans 13. 2.


S. What if God command one thing, and the King command another contrary to
God's Command, what then must I do?


F. Thou (...) do what God commands, and suffer patiently what the King
imposes, though it be Death it self; for so did Daniel, Chapter 6. 10. and so did
the three Children, Dan. 3. 16, 17. And the Apostles did the same, Act. 4. 19.


S. Wha^ must be the frame of my Spirit toward my Prince in such hard usage?


F. 1. Thou must not curse the King, no not in secret, for God will discover
it, Eccles. 10. 20. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor speak evil of the Ruler
of my People, Exodus 22. 28. Act. 23. 5.

2. Thou must give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's; Honor, Fear,
Tribute, etc. for so has Christ commanded, Mat. 22. 21. Romans 13. 7.

3. Thou must pray for him in love unfainedly; for this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.

4. Thou must do all this for Conscience Sake, suffering grief patiently,
Commiting thy self into the Hands of God, in well-doing, as into the hands of a
faithful Creator, Romans 13. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 19. and 4. 19.

To conclude, know this, that Religion is ordained to make us wise and good
Men. The Christian Religion is the best Religion: And the best Christians will
be the best Subjects to Princes, most obedient to Parents, most faithful to
Masters; for herein do they exercise themselves, To have always a Conscience
void of offenc^, both toward God, by walking humbly with him; and toward Men,
by doing to all Men as they would that Men should do to them. Act. 24. 16. Mat.
7. 12.


FINIS.

