THE Slanderer Rebuked: OR, The Vindication of Thomas Grantham against the
malicious Slanders of one Mr. Toathby, a Seller of Wool in the City of Norwich.
IT is now about fourteen Years, I think, since two of my Neighbors being
desired by me to coard or geld a Ram for me, one of them, (Robert Hareby by
Name) having Ground joining unto mine, finding a Ram (very much like mine) in
his Pasture, caught him, (verily thinking he was mine) and brought him to my
Yard, where my other Neighbor (Mr. John Lark by Name) did coard him, as I had
formerly desired him, and let him go, not doubting but he was mine, and they
both knew my Sheep as well as my self. This Account is testified under the
Hands of John Hareby (Brother to the said Robert Hareby) Mr. Roger Lark, (Son
to the said Mr. John Lark) Tho. Atkin, and William Bradshaw, Anno 1680. who all
are yet living ( except John Hareby).
But we were all mistaken, for this Ram proved a poor Man's, who dwelt near us;
and the Ram dying of his Gelding, the Owner complained, and desired my self and
Mr. Lark to consider his Loss, which I willingly did, and gave him half the
Value of his Ram, which was six Shillings eight Pence: and here was an end of
the Business without Suit or Trouble, though some ill Men advised the poor Man
to sue us, and to put us to Trouble.

But as ill Men desire to abuse the Innocent, so this Accident became a
Reproach to me; and from gelding a Ram, they turned it to stealing a Ram. But
my Neighbors knowing my Innocence, did vindicate my Reputation, so that the
Clamor ceased in those parts where I then lived, [which was at Ashby next
Spilsby in the County of Lincoln] insomuch that none but vile Persons would so
much as mention it.

Now since I came to dwell in Norwich, there came a Seller of Wool under the
Title of Mr. Toathby, (whom I could not see, though I went to his Inn as soon
as I heard of him) and he was pleased to reproach me by this Accident, in the
vilest manner that might be, (as the Innkeeper told me) and his Slander was
very pleasing to such as delight in Falsehood, insomuch as I found it needful to
detect this lying Slander, by the Testimony of such of my Neighbors at Ashby
aforesaid, who are yet living, and who very well know the Circumstances of this
matter. What I wrote to them, with their Answers, I shall here commit to
Posterity, to detect the Wickedness of such as have or hereafter shall attempt
to abuse me upon this occasion.

To my loving Neighbors in Ashby next Spilsby, Greeting, etc.
SIRS;
I am now settled (as the place of my Residence) in the City of Norwich; and
here came a Person out of Lincolnshire, a Seller of combed Wool, and defamed me
as a great Rogue, and a In Lincolnshire they call a Ram a Tup.
Tup-stealer. Now some of you being yet living to testify how innocent I was in
that Accident, which happened by the Oversight of Robert Hareby and Mr. John
Lark (our Neighbors,) in bringing up to my Yard, and coarding a Ram for mine,
which, unknown to them and my self, was another Man's, as you very well know. I
do therefore earnestly entreat you, to send me your Testimony of the Truth
concerning this matter, and of my Conversation among you, for I am much abused
by the false Report of this unworthy Person. You have heard Mr. Lark speak of
this matter, and his Son can testify the same. Thus with my kind Love to you
all, I remain,

Your Loving Neighbor, Tho. Grantham.
Norwich May 1. 1691.

The Testimony of my Neighbors in Ashby aforesaid, May 7, 1691.
THese are to satisfy whom it may concern, That whereas our Neighbor Thomas
Grantham, late of Ashby, in the County of Lincoln, and now Resident in Norwich,
has been defamed by some Person for stealing a Tup: We do here testify that he
is innocent as to what he is charged withal in that case, and that the said
Thomas Grantham did not intentionally nor actually do any unlawful Act or Deed;
and that in respect of his Behavior amongst us his Neighbors, he was always
accounted a very honest Man, and a good Neighbor.

Witness our Hands, George Coddington, John Robison, Thomas Atkin, Anthony
Robison. Note that these Gentlemen who have given these Testimonies, are all of
the Church of England, except one; and they offer the Testimony of many more if
it be desired.



May 7, 1691.
WE are here informed that Thomas Grantham, late of Ashby, and now at Norwich,
is taxed in his Life and Conversation, and particularly about a Tup. These are
to satisfy that the said Thomas Grantham always behaved himself well, and led a
very good Life and Conversation amongst us, and was always esteemed a very
honest Man.

Witness Ben. Smith, Edward Reed.


To the Right Worshipful the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Norwich; The
humble Petition of Thomas Grantham, Inhabitant in the said City.
Does show;
THat whereas many Abuses, Reproaches, and Affronts, have been and are daily
offered to my Person, Name and Reputation, insomuch that I cannot pass
peaceably in the Streets, nor be peaceable in my Habitation, nor enjoy my self
quietly in my Service to Almighty God, according to the Law of the Land, by
reason of the Rudeness of many of the Inhabitants of this Place, unknown to me
by Name; save that from one Mr. Harman's House in St. Martins, at the Unicorn,
a Report is spread abroad, that I did steal a Ram in the Place where I formerly
lived: which Forgery I have detected, by the Testimony of diverse of my
Neighbors, who have sent Certificates of my Innocence under their Hands
concerning that matter, (Copies whereof I have herewith sent to your Worships.)
And seeing the Rudeness of the People, and their Insolency to be so great in
promoting that and other Slanders, that I go in danger of my Life, I thought it
my Duty to spread my Complaint before your Worships, and to beseech you to do
for me what you lawfully may for my Preservation from Violence.

And your humble Petitioner shall pray, etc. Norwich May 28, 1691.
This Petition was received by the Mayor of Norwich, who was pleased to say,
they were satisfied the Report was false, and that he would do me Justice.

And seeing that Satan so violently rages against me, merely because I
endeavor to serve God and this Generation in my Ministry, with all possible
Fidelity, I doubt not but after my Decease he will by such base ways do what he
can to deface my poor (though sincere) Labors. I do therefore here, in the
Fear of God, challenge all the World, whilst I am yet alive, to bring a just
Accusation against me, if they can, in respect of my Conversation, from my
Youth to this Day: For though I am a Man of Infirmities (as all are) yet by the
Grace of God, I have been kept from all these things whereof I have by the
Tongue of Infamy been so unworthily accused.

Tho. Grantham.

FINIS.

