ADVICE TO YOUNG GENTLEMEN, In their Several Conditions of Life. By way of
ADDRESS From a Father to his Children.

By the Abbot GOVSSAVLT, Counselor in Parliament. With his Sentiments and
Maxims upon what passes in Civil Society.

Printed at PARIS 1697, and Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Leigh, at the Peacock against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, School.

THE PREFACE.
THE Advice that is given here, is of two sorts; one is general, and regards
all sorts of Persons of whatsoever Profession they are, without meddling with
their particular Employments and Actions; the other is particular, and
considers what ordinarily occurs in the Affairs of the World.

It is cettain, both the one and the other will not be unprofitable; and the
Methods of insinuating it into the Minds of the Reader, will not be
disagreeable.

It is a Father that gives Advice to his Children to make them worthy of the
Name and Family from which they come; and it is for that Reason that all the
Counsels design to inspire them with Sentiments of Honor and Probity.

It is a Father that thoroughly understands the World, and desires that his
Children should be truly Upright and Religious, and not remarkable for an
affected and seeming Devotion; and who desires at the same time, that their
Religion should not hinder them from having all the Qualities requisite to make
them esteemed and beloved of all they converse with.

It is a Father that joining the Light of Religion with that which a long and
consummated Experience in the Affairs of the World has given him, makes use
both of the one and the other, to make his Children to be distinguished by
their Christian and their Moral Virtues.

All that he speaks to them, is to subdue the Irregularities of their Minds and
Manners, and to teach them to lead their Lives contentedly, in all the Troubles
that their Employments and Business may give them. His manner of speaking
concisely and in few Words, he thinks to be the best means to make an
Impression upon their Minds, and the Truth is laid naked, and embraced for its
own sake; in effect it is made more familiar, being coucht in few Words, and
makes a more lively and natural impression upon the Mind.

I know that the Book which Monsieur Hoquette has writ upon the same Subject,
has been received with a general Applause; and that all Men of Wit, Learning,
and Probity, have had it in great esteem; heretofore I have read it with
Pleasure, and found it so well and considerately writ; that I must affirm, that
I have seen nothing of that kind for its solidity and composure comparable to
it; I have yet an admirable and advantageous Idea of it in my Mind: But it is
so long since that Book has been writ, that it is now scarce to be found, and I
thought that a little Novelty would not be displeasing. I add, that there
cannot be too much written upon this Subject, because it is so generally
profitable; and if I have had the same end that Monsieur Hoquett had, I have
certainly made use of different means to come to that end.

I have but an imperfect, though a noble Idea of his Book so that I cannot make
any advantage of what he has writ, and much less can I make use of what he has
thought.

Monsieur le Count de Bussy Raboutin, to name him is sufficient to praise him;
he is so well known by his Merit, that all the Learned, without contest, place
him in the number of those that have made themselves the most admired and
distinguished by their Writings.

Monsieur Raboutin, I say, has writ a Discourse to his Children, which has been
received; it is enough to say, like his other Works. But how Elegant and
Excellent soever his Book may be, I hope I may be permitted to say, that he
has not said all that may be said of the Subject, but something new of my own
Thoughts may be added. Moreover the Method I have used in treating of this
matter is so different from his, that I could not choose but publish my Thoughts
upon this Subject. My little Work was scarce begun, but his appeared in the
World, but that did not make me change my Design, but I followed my own way,
and at length have arrived at the end I intended.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. General Counsel upon all the Occurrences of Life. Page 1 Chap. ii,
iii. Upon the same Subject. 6. 11 Chap. iv. Advice concerning what kind of Life
ought to be chosen; and after what manner a Man should live in his Profession.
15 Chap. v. Advice how one ought to live in the World. 19 Chap. vi. Advice upon
what concerns Religion. 23 Chap. vii. Counsel in respect of the Company you are
to keep. 27 Chap. viii. Upon the same Subject. 33 Chap. ix. Advice concerning,
Reports. 37 Chap. x. Counsels upon Conscience. 42 Chap. xi. Upon the same
Subject. 48 Chap. xii. Advice upon all that has the Air of Courage, Choler, and
promptness to 1 quarrel. 52 Chap. xiii. Advice concerning the Judgment you
ought to make of the Words and Actions of others. 57 Chap. xiv. Advice
concerning what Thoughts we should have of Greatness and Riches; of our Losses,
and the Misfortunes of our Lives. 61 Chap. xv, xvi. Advice upon true and false
Devotion. 68 Chap. xvii. Advice against Covetousness, and all that relates to
it. 80 Chap. xviii. Advice upon Vanity and true Glory. 85 Chap. xix. Advice
upon Raillery. 93 Chap. xx. Of Charity and Alms which ought to be performed to
the Poor. 98 Chap. xxi. Advice upon Sincerity in Words, and the Way to know
when we should speak, and when we should be silent. 103 Chap. xxii. Upon Evil
Speaking or Slandering. 110 Chap. xxiii. Advice about Expenses, and the good
management of them. 115 Chap. xxiv, xxv, xxvi. Advice upon the thoughts of
Death. 118 Chap. xxvii. Advice upon Friends, and the concerns of Friendship.
ADVICE TO Young Gentlemen, In the several Conditions of Life.
By way of Address from a Father to his Children, etc.
CHAP. I.
General Counsel upon all the Occurrences of Life.
I.
MY dear Children, if you will be Happy, and be esteemed in the World; fear
God, be faithful to your Prince, and live like Men of Honor and Integrity.

II.
If any one comes a Mile to do you a Kindness, go two to do him the like, or
greater, in acknowledgment of it.

III.
If you want a Fortune, endeavor to merit one, and force blind Fortune to open
her Eyes, by your constant and industrious Well-doing.

IV.
Do not reprove publickyy, those whom you think you have Right to correct, lest
you be thought to hate them rather than their Weakness and Faults.

V.
You cannot be too circumspect in your Words; for oftentimes one word spoke
unawares, or in raillery, or even wittily, costs him dear that thought to get
Honor by it.

VI.
Make as many Friends as you can, for you will find but few true ones. You will
find your best Friends in your self, if you perform your Duty to God, and to
those you are to live with.

VII.
Do not fix your Affections upon the World, but proportionably to the time you
are to live in it: He that intends to Travel, does not stop at the first fine
City he comes at, knowing he must go further before he comes to the end of his
Journey.

VIII.
And in what condition soever you are in; make your self known more by your
Actions than your Words: The Honesty and Integrity of a Man, supports his
Quality better than all that can be spoken to his Advantage.

IX.
If you be in any considerable Employment, entertain none in your Service, but
Men of Experience, and such as are capable to do service to their Prince, and
Country: Promise nothing that you do not perform; and take Counsel of none but
such as are disinterested, and of good Judgment.

X.
Avoid Idleness, as the most dangerous Evil. When the Mind is not employed, it
becomes corrupt; but when employed, it becomes Spirit. A Man in Business
remembers what he is, but when he is Idle he forgets himself, and abandons
himself to Pleasure like a Beast.

XI.
Make known the bottom of your Heart by your Words; but your Birth and Quality
by your actions.

XII.
If you have Friends visit them often, but do not press to stay with them; that
would expose you to the danger of losing them.

XIII.
Labor every one in the Profession you are in, to deserve well. Merit is
esteemed of all the World, and is of so great price, that it cannot be bought
with Money.

XIV.
Hold it for certain, that there is no Trade so bad as to have none at all; and
there is no life so tedious, as that which is passed in Pleasures and continual
Visits: To be always tied to Company, and never alone, is in appearance to be
at liberty, but in effect and really a Slave.

XV.
If you be the Chief in the Company of Men of the Sword, or of the Gown,
remember that a Chief that well becomes his place, is an Example to the rest,
and ought to more than he speaks.

XVI.
If the Profession you have chosen, do not carry you to the study of Learning,
at least love Men of Letters; and if you be not learned your self, esteem those
that are.

XVII.
Have the same respect for all Men, that you desire they should have for you.

XVIII.
Be easy of access, and pleasant and agreeable in your Conversation, and so
every Man will delight in your Company.

XIX.
If you be upright and true to your Word, you will gain Credit with all the
World, and your Word will give you more facility in your Affairs, than all the
Writings of Notaries.

XX.
If any of your Family be discontented, conceal it by your silence at home; but
if it come to the Knowledge of others, hide it abroad by your good and gay
Humor; that will be the means to make it believed, that the Report of the
discontent is false, or at least that it is such, that it is not worth your
taking notice of it.

XXI.
You will have no greater Enemies than your self, if you abandon your self to
your Passions.

XXII.
Receive your Kindred and Friends with a cheerful and obliging Countenance; to
receive them otherwise, is not to enjoy them.

XXIII.
Put not an entire Confidence in any but those that have made themselves known
by their Merit, Wit, and Integrity; look upon them alone as fixed Stars, capable
to enlighten you in the darkness that the Affairs of the World has brought upon
the different accidents of your Life; look upon all others as wandering Stars,
that have some Light which they lose in a moment.

XXIV.
Modesty in your Apparel, Furniture, Equipage, and your Words, will make it
known that you have a Mind well governed, and a Heart without Passion.

XXV.
The ill Conduct of a Man, consists more in what appears, than in what is
concealed; and make use of this Advice: Trust not to a false outside, sooner
or later it will betray you, and make you known for what you truly are

XXVI.
Riches make many unhappy; as well those who have them not when they desire
them, as those that are afraid to lose them when they are in their Possession.
It is in your power to avoid both the one and the other.

XXVII.
It is not your Birth, your Riches, or great Employments, that can make you
happy and considerable in the World; but the use of them will do it.

XXVIII.
You may gain your Enemies by obliging and doing them service; but by
flattering your Passions, they become your Masters.

XXIX.
There are two gates of Life, one by which you enter, the other by which you go
out; the farther you go from the one, the nearer you approach to the other.
Think of it often, and make reflection.

XXX.
Live always as if you were Old, that you may never repent that you have been
young.

CHAP. II.
Upon the same Subject.
I.
MY Dear Children, Luxury and Play are the two Fountains of Misery. After you
have a little Knowledge in the World, you will know this better than I can tell
you.

II.
Learn that it is gain to know how to lose sometimes; and upon some occasions
that may happen, if you recede from your Interests, you will act like Wise Men.

III.
Never speak to any of the bad Condition his Affairs are in, except you have
power, and an intention to help him; it is imprudent to do otherwise, and to
grieve him, when he has given you no occasion for it.

IV.
To be angry without a cause, is a Mark of want of Wit, and that he that is so,
knows not how to live; therefore have a care you mistake not a point of Honor
with your Friends, upon any occasion: That is to break with them absurdly, and
to give a Lie to all the Friendship you have professed to have had for them for
many years.

V.
When you are in Company, do not report a hundred Follies that you have heard
or read; that would be a sign that your Judgments did not keep equal pace with
your Memory.

VI.
Disgraces of themselves are no great matter, when one knows how to suffer
them; they become troublesome when they make you discontented.

VII.
To be content, it suffices to have necessaries; Superfluities are
unprofitable, and oftentimes do more harm than good. This, perhaps, may not
please you, but let it not trouble you; for I do understand Necessaries in such
a manner, as you need not be afraid of; that is, I speak of necessaries
conformable to the condition and rank you hold in the World; all that you have
beyond that, may inspire you with Thoughts that I do not wish you should have.

VIII.
The World is not dangerous, but when it is loved too much; when what passes in
it is seen by a false Light, it is a continual Lesson to fly Vice and embrace
Virtue.

IX.
Buy not the Favors and Benefits of Princes by any baseness, unworthy your
Birth and Education.

X.
The Character of great Men is to be civil to all the World; they oftentimes
make themselves familiar in a surprising manner: The more you are pleased with
this Character, the better you will give an Idea of what you are.

XI.
Too great a gentleness comes near to stupidity and insensibility. Too great
Severity approaches to Cruelty; you must use both the one and the other, as
there shall be occasion. Prudence will show you the middle, that you run into
neither of the Extremes.

XII.
If you do not take care to make your self valued, you will never have the
Respect paid that is due to you.

XIII.
To have Heat and Vivacity without Judgment, resembles a Horse that has a hard
mouth, and runs away with his Rider, and exposes him to all manner of danger.
Restrain this Heat if you have it, and endeavor rather to pass for one that is
grave before your time, than for a young Fool that speaks any thing that comes
in his Head, without seeing the Consequence.

XIV.
If you be possessed with any violent Passion, Preaching to you will do you no
more good, than Victuals do a Sick man that cannot digest them.

XV.
You may be remarkable for your Air and good Mien; for being handsome and
well-shap'd; if your comportment and Manners do not agree with your outside,
you may be compared to bad Pictures, put into rich Frames.

XVI.
It is not enough that you are Brave upon occasion, but with it you must have
Conduct. One good Head is more serviceable to the State, than a hundred well
Armed Hands; and one Experienced Captain more than a Thousand fearless
Soldiers.

XVII.
If by your Care and Industry you have heaped up much Riches, and make no
honorable use of them; they will say you are of those Lamps that are
extinguished by too much Oil.

XVIII.
Learn to gild the bitter Pills of losses and disgraces; that is, learn to
suffer Afflictions with patience.

XIX.
Do nothing that can disparage you; a bad Reputation follows at the heels of
bad actions; it is a smoke that shows there is a Fire.

XX.
If you have done a good action, which is known, it cannot want recompense; the
day will come that you will be treated as Mordechai, and the glory of the
Prince will oblige him to think of you.

XXI.
You must pardon a thousand small Faults in your Friends and Kindred, if you
will live well with them. Nay, I must say, you must pardon them, if you will
live at peace with your self.

XXII.
An Emperor repented the day he had not given some marks of his Bounty and
Liberality. You cannot master the World, without having the same Thoughts, that
all the days are lost, wherein you have not performed some good action.

XXIII.
Do not expect to receive marks of Honor and Confidence from your Friends; but
in so much as you give to them the like.

XXIV.
As long as you can live upon your own: and what your Employment may honestly
acquire, do not go into the Service of any Prince. It is a strange subjection,
to have dependence. Princes are like the Fire, it is not good to come too near
them.

XXV.
Make often Reflection upon the Rose that makes so fair a show, and spreads its
Odor at such a distance, yet it is environed with Thorns; this will teach you
there is no good in this World; no greatness, no Pleasure without pain.

XXVI.
The less rest you allow your self in establishing your Family, the more will
they enjoy it; the present Pains you take will procure your Ease for the time
to come.

XXVII.
When your Equipage, your Sports, and your Table diminishes, you will easily
find that your Friends do likewise so.

XXVIII.
There is no Employment that you may not pretend to, but there is none that you
can succeed well in, if you do not make profession of Honor and Honesty.

XXIX.
Make good choice of those you intend to do good to, for most People in the
World ordinarily make greater Esteem of the Presents and Benefits they receive,
than of their Benefactors.

XXX.
Do not look upon the pleasure of one Day (as pleasure) when it is followed
with the Repentance of many Years.

XXXI.
If you have no Merit but from your Name and Family, and not from your own
actions; then you are obliged to your Ancestors, but they not to you.

CHAP. IIII.
Upon the same Subject.
I.
MY Dear Children, what you give, give freely, that you may doubly oblige; and
refuse with such kindness and civility, that they may have reason to thank you.

II.
Keep your Promises with all the World. But do not promise for others, but with
Discretion, and as your Prudence, and the Justice of those you have to deal
with shall engage you.

III.
You ought not to have a Passion for any thing, but to have none at all; you
ought to have no greater pleasure, than that of renouncing and despising all
Pleasures.

IV.
Always tell truth; for where it is not loved, it is respected and feared.

V.
It is enough to be reconciled to your Friend, once or twice; but if it come to
a third time, you had better break Friendship.

VI.
Do all things with Discretion, Prudence, and Integrity; and all things will
succeed well with you; and without designing it you will draw that which the
World calls Fortune and Destiny, on your side; that is, your merit will plead
so well in your favor, that at length they will do you justice, and
acknowledge your worth.

VII.
Troubles, Losses, and Afflictions, have been in all times, and all places;
remember there are none exempt from them.

VIII.
Have a care of your Business your self, if you desire it should succeed well.

IX.
The greater happiness you have in this World, the more danger you are in to
lose it.

X.
Your Tongue and your Heart ought not to be divided; all that is within you
ought to agree. Take heed that your Words and Actions do hold perfect
correspondence; and let what you say be maintained by what you do.

XI.
If you have not a Fortune, what matters it? one may live without it; it is
oftentimes better to deserve one, than to have one.

XII.
The greater Figure you make in the World, the more will your Faults be taken
notice of; a Man of Quality cannot make great ones without losing himself. The
higher his Rank is, the less will be forgotten his Errors, and what he was
capable of.

XIII.
You were born Master of your Eyes and your Tongue, let not the Corruption of
your Manners make them your Masters.

XIV.
If you have any good Qualities, do not praise them your self, for your own
word will not be taken.

XV.
Do nothing for your Friends against your Conscience and your Honor; for you
ought to love your selves better than your Friends.

XVI.
You ought to fear the least beginning of an ill habit; for disorder is like a
Snow-ball, it continually grows bigger.

XVII.
If you will have no difference with your Friends and Kindred, do not sell them
Horses, or Goods; and buy nothing of them.

XVIII.
The love you may have for Wine, and Play, at first may seem to you a Pismire,
that you may easily crush; but in time, this Love will seem an Elephant that
you dare not combat. What do I say? you will flatter your self so in this
Passion, and you will disguise the Affections you bear to it, so well, that you
will think it is vain to endeavor to overcome it.

XIX.
If you desire a perfect quiet of Mind and Content, seek it where it is to be
found, for the World only knows the Name of it.

XX.
True Glory proceeds from Knowledge, a good life and Virtue; this is the only
thing I desire you should have, and the only thing that merits your serious
Thoughts, to find the Means to acquire it.

XXI.
The difference betwixt an Honest Man that lives at his Ease, and an Honest Man
that has much ado to subsist, is, that one gives freely of what he has, and
the other has no anxious Desires for what he has not.

XXII.
When a Man is not spoken of at all, it is a sign that he has neither Merit nor
Virtue; that they are not distinguished by their good Qualities, they are
neither envied nor subject to the jealousy of any. If you be, let it not
trouble you, it is a good Sign.

XXIII.
You will live at ease with the Goods you possess, if you desire no more; this
is like a Brook whose Waters are pure, and runs smoothly; it will change its
nature, if by violence you increase its Waters, and make a Torrent.

XXIV.
Do not begin to speak before you know what to say, and why you speak; Words
are like Arrows, that ought not to be shot without aiming at a Mark.

XXV.
If you are Covetous, Vain, or Choleric, you will make your House a frightful
Solitude; and for that little time that you live in Disorder, all reasonable
Men will avoid your Company; and you will be visited by none but Libertines.

XXVI.
Think often what you have been, and what you shall be; two or three serious
Reflections of this nature, will be more to your advantage, than a Thousand
made upon other matters.

XXVII.
Not to be content with what you are, nor with what you have been; is an
Insolence that complains of God and his Providence. I believe you are not
capable of such a Crime. Praise God only that you are in a Condition to live
without dependence, and acknowledge your own Happiness.

XXVIII.
Riches are given you, that you may pass your life easily; but Life is not
given you that you should heap up Riches.

XXIX.
Take care that Honesty always accompany your Pleasures, so you will relish
them the better, and never be afraid of their Consequences.

XXX.
Recover in your riper Years, what you have lost in your Youth; and if you have
gone astray through the whole course of your Life, take a good Guide toward
the end of your days.

CHAP. IV.
Advice concerning what kind of Life ought to be chosen; and after what manner
a Man should live in his Profession.
I.
MY dear Children, consult with Men of Honor and Probity, before you resolve
upon the establishment of your kind of Life. Consult your own Inclinations upon
the nature of your good, and satisfaction of your Mind. But that which I
recommend to you chiefly, is to be persuaded, that a quiet life passed in
tranquillity, is preferable to that which is passed in the troubles of Business,
and the perplexities of the World.

II.
When you are throug persuaded of this Truth, it will be no difficulty to
determine to lead a quiet and pleasant Life; it is not necessary to give your
selves over to pleasure; but likewise you must not refuse it, either to take
too much or none at all; this is not to understand nor love your self enough.
Hunting, Feasting, and Play are not Pleasure, where they trouble your quiet and
tranquillity of Life.

III.
The pleasures of good Company ought to be enjoyed, so that they do not hinder
those that you may sometimes take in Reading and Retirement. You will make them
perfectly agree together, when each of them have their turn, and you choose them
with prudence and moderation.

IV.
Every one of you ought to consider himself as a little Republic which he
ought to Govern with gentleness. Great and brave Resolutions are oftentimes
suddenly taken, and as suddenly vanish. You must not cloth your self with too
heavy a Garment; the weight of it will cause you to quit it. You must not cure
a small Sore with great Incisions. To avoid the passing of a small Brook, you
must not leap into a great River, and run the hazard of drowning.

V.
A Life that is forced and driven on by Avarice or Ambition, is not natural,
and by consequence cannot be pleasing. I dare say that every Man, that the
desire of raising himself, or becoming very rich, does push on, shall never be
content; he is not himself, nor his own Man, but his Passions. He does not
enjoy himself; but his Passion possesses him; he is always with the Money he
has had, or desire to have, or with the Employment he pursues, and is never
with himself.

VI.
A Man is Happy that is not obliged to Princes or great Men for what he has.
When our Parents and Kindred have received Benefits from them, we owe an
Acknowledgment to them whether we will or no; and without our knowledge, we
become obliged to their Persons; on these occasions we are not our own Masters.
And though we owe to God a Life that he has given us; yet it seems that we
likewise owe it to them, and that they have a kind of right to it, and to all
that we have.

VII.
Life is a Circle and Vicissitude of Good and Evil, to which we must
accommodate and accustom our selves. You may grieve and be troubled, but things
will have their course; your impatience and vexing will not change them.

VIII.
That which you suffer, thousands more have suffered, and will suffer as you;
the complaints of some will not authorize, or justify that of others. But
their patience, and calmly bearing them, may serve for a Lesson to you, to use
the same moderation on like occasions.

IX.
Do not imitate those, who in the Consolation they give to their Friends, are
more courageous than Seneca ever was; yet upon the least loss that befalls
themselves, they lose all patience and Virtue.

X.
The happiness of your Life does not consist in raising your self higher than
you are, but in leading a life in tranquillity and ease, conformable to what you
are.

XI.
Judge not of the happiness of a Man by one part of it; he is a Man of Birth
and Wit; he has great Employments; he is welcome to great Men. Yes, but has he
all that he desires? Uses he what he has as he ought? Health and Probity do
they go along with his Honor and Riches?

XII.
You shall always lead a sweet and easy life; if (of what Profession soever
you are of) you make your self esteemed and beloved by all that know you.

XIII.
In my Opinion, those that are most considerable for their Places and Employs,
are not always the most happy; and those who are always at Court, where the
Duty of their Places detain them, so that they have scarce a Moment to
themselves, in my Opinion, cannot live contentedly. We ought to live for our
selves, and not for others.

XIV.
A Life of middle and not high Degree, does not hinder a Man from entering into,
and considering himself. He does not easily lose the sight of what our
Infirmities, and the Principles of our Religion continually sets before our
Eyes.

XV.
When a Man travels, he does not usually load himself with heavy Burdens; they
trouble him, and hinder him in his Journey. Honors and Greatness ought to be
esteemed by you, of the nature of these heavy Burdens. He can have no other
Idea of them, that is of a sound judgment; and where Experience has undeceived
him in these Vanities.

XVI.
Do that by Virtue, which the Philosophers have done by Reason; set no value
upon the greatness of this World, and reckon it below you; you are born for a
more solid good; do not therefore terminate your Desires to possess that only
which is common to Libertines and Infidels.

CHAP. V.
Advice how one ought to live in the World.
I.
MY dearest Children, if God has not called you to a Monastic life, after you
have performed your Duty in respect to him, it is good that you think of
governing your Conduct about those things that the World will expect from you;
that you may live easily with those that live in the World as you do.

II.
One of the best Counsels, and the most constant Maxims, that I can give you
upon this matter, is, that you never disoblige any one; never speak ill of any
person, but to bear with the Faults of others; to esteem and praise those that
deserve it, and pay a civil respect to all those you Converse with.

III.
Never put on a proud and scornful Countenance; I mean such looks as will make
you be taken notice of for a vain young Man; do not endeavor to be taken
notice of by the number of your Footmen, and splendor of your Equipage; but to
be distinguished by the Merit of your Wit and Courage.

IV.
Do not love to hear your self talk, and never put a value upon what you speak
your self. To interrupt others when they are speaking, is ill manners; and to
speak continually is indiscretion; but to give opportunity to others to speak,
and to speak himself in his turn, is to do like those that understand to
Converse in the World. If you be faithful and constant to this Maxim, you will
make your self acceptable in Company, and be well received by all.

V.
It is better to extol the Thoughts of your Friend than your own, by this means
you will make it known, that you are capable of good things, and that they
please you; and that you give them the esteem they merit; and that you are not
an impertinent Lover of your own Opinion, and that you are not affected and
conceited with all that you say your self.

VI.
Remember often your Name and Family, what you are, and those from whence you
come, and there needs no more to Govern your Words and Actions.

VII.
The Lessons you may learn from this Subject are easy and natural: You need
but make good use of your Birth and Education. Call to your remembrance Men of
Quality, of Honor and of Probity: You will know enough by taking pleasure in
frequenting their Company.

VIII.
Accommodate your self as much as you can, to the Humor, the Wit, and the
Desires of your Friends, and Kindred, and of all those with whom you have
business, that will be the way to live well, both with the one and the other;
that will be the means that every one will desire your Acquaintance and
Friendship, and all the World will be well pleased with you.

IX.
It oftentimes happens that a good Behavior and genteel Conversation does not
take a Man so soon as a certain Air, and a sort of a civil and obliging Humor,
which a Man is taken with at first Sight, and finds a love for him as soon as
he appears. There are those that are handsomer than he, and indeed deserve
better than he, yet are not so well received; and a Man does not feel the same
joy when they appear, as they do with the other less deserving; but if you have
Merit, you shall be esteemed; but you shall be beloved at the moment when you
address with a smiling and pleasant obliging Air; so that a Man never meets you
but with Joy, nor parts from you but with Trouble.

X.
Do not value your self upon your Rights, Youth, and good Qualities; if you
have not the Gift of pleasing, you shall not be beloved: In short, if you
cannot be complaisant to others, others will not be complaisant to you.

XI.
Be always reserved and respectful to Ladies, and always prudent and discreet
with those of your own Age, Quality, and Profession.

XII.
Do not affront nor anger any Person whatsoever; be complaisant always, and in
all Company, that you may always be thought a Man ready to espouse the Interest
of your Friends: Never maintain your own Opinions with heat, but always give a
deference to the Opinions of others; and above all things, avoid contradiction.

XIII.
Receive kindly all those whom your Employment, Business, or Civility, obliges
you to see. Upon all occasions manage their Humors and Inclinations, and
approve, or at least excuse their Conduct; and your own Will always be
applauded.

XIV.
Never put any one to Charges; be civil without constraint, and without
Ceremony; never lose the respect due to your Friends, and those that come to
visit you; for that would trouble them.

XV.
Live with a certain Liberty that is respectful, but not too familiar; with a
certain liberty, I say, that the best bred Men have brought into Custom and
Fashion, and which is approved by all.

CHAP. VI.
Advice upon what concerns Religion.
I.
MY dear Children, you cannot be too Zealous in the concerns of Religion; not
in order to obtain your Desires, or to serve your Designs or Interest: You
ought not to consider your Employments or your Birth, but act according to your
Religion, and to depend upon it.

II.
The Libertines themselves do not renounce Religion; but they do not live
according to its Laws and Maxims. Men know what they ought to believe, and
likewise what they ought to do; and oftentimes they stop there: But do not you
content your self to believe, and defer, 'till your riper years, that which you
are at all times obliged to practice.

III.
Faith ought to be the principle of all your actions; which if bad, they
obscure and stifle it; hold it for certain, that disorder in your Life will
lead you further than you think; it is a Fire that you cannot extinguish when
you would; it is a Torrent that you cannot stop when you desire it; at first
you think it will go no further than the Corruption of your Manners, and do not
foresee that this Corruption will infallibly go further, and communicate it
self to your Faith. I desire that Experience may not make you know that Faith
cannot long remain sound with such corruption of Manners.

IV.
Adhear to your Religion, and not to the Persons that make profession of it;
and adhear to your Faith, but not to them that taught you it: It is hard to
separate Zeal from Interest; and it is often so well disguised, that one is
taken for the other, and the most able Men are mistaken in it.

V.
Although all the Christian Virtues make and entertain a Holy Commerce betwixt
God and our selves; yet there is a certain particular Virtue, whose proper
effect is to unite the Reasonable Creature to his Creator; and to submit, and
by authentic Marks, pay him Respect and Adoration; and this Virtue is Religion.

VI.
Never pretend that you can be an honest Man without Religion, for Religion is
the Chief of all Virtues; and you cannot doubt it, whether you consider it in
relation to its Object, or in relation to its Offices, or its end: You may be
assured that it includes all the Virtues by way of Excellency.

VII.
The Christian Religion is admirable in its Maxims, and the fundamental Truths
that it establishes are all Divine. In other Religions they ascribe some things
to Reason, much to the Passions, and almost all to Nature; but in ours we
combat the Passions; we destroy Nature, and submit our Reason.

VIII.
You cannot too much avoid the Company of the great Wits, that make Profession
that they believe nothing; look upon them as possessed with a Frenzy, and to
whom a burning Fever gives great strength of Wit; and believe it, that the more
they labor to make it appear, the more they are in danger of losing it: The
strength of Wit they show in this matter, ought to pass, not only for great
Weakness, but extreme madness.

IX.
To speak sincerely, I must say that there are few Persons of Quality, that
know well what their Religion is, and in what it consists. They are Educated by
their Parents, who make Profession of the Christian Religion; but for the most
part, they study more to live according to the Maxims of the World, and the
false Principles of a Worldly Nobility, than according to the Laws and Precepts
of Religion. You know, my dear Children, that my first and chief Care has been
to Educate and make you Christians; and I have always taught you, that that was
the principal and most important Duty. I cannot too often speak and repeat it
to you, and you cannot too often remember it, nor labor too much to profit by
it.

X.
The more you practice good Works, the more your Faith increases; and on the
Contrary; when you cease to practice, the fear of God grows less and less; and
when you cease to fear, you cease to believe. Tremble at what I say, and do not
flatter your selves in other Thoughts; he does not believe, that does not live
according to his Belief.

XI.
As there is but one God, so likewise there is but one true Religion, that is
the Christian Religion; the same is yours; be firm in it, and let nothing move
you from it.

XII.
Some make a deceitful Idea of Religion, and look upon it as an Enemy to the
Pleasures of Life; but that imagination is false, for Religion establishes no
Maxims but what are convenient for all Honest Men; and these Maxims are
Established for no other end, but to render the Society of Mankind more
pleasant and agreeable.

XIII.
Experience teaches us, the more Religious a Man is, the more he is esteemed
and loved in the World: The Reason is this, that the more Religious a Man is,
the more charitable he is to the Poor; just to his Equals, and respectful to
his Superiors. And, in a word, the more Religious a Man is, the more obliging
he is to his Parents and Friends, and does justice to all the World; it is the
means by which a Man of that Character (that is) a Religious Man, and that
lives according to its Rules, has the Esteem and Love of all Men.

XIV.
You can never too much apply your self to learn Religion; that is, to learn
what it teaches; what it obliges you to; what it forbids, and what it commands.

XV.
The Science of Religion is a Knowledge that few study, yet every one thinks
they know it; they go to Church, they pray to God, and they give Alms. This is
that they usually call Religion; and he that does this, is called Religious;
but if he live in any habitual Sin, if he be given to Drunkenness, and passes
the greatest part of his Life in Gaming, and the like Pleasures; it is certain,
that that Man has but the outside of Religion, and is ignorant of its Power,
its Precepts, and its Maxims. My dear Children, if you have Religion, you will
render to every Man what belongs to him, and do to all Men as you desire all
Men should do to you.

XVI.
How zealous soever you may appear for Religion; the exterior Proofs you give
of it will not be sufficient, unless it be joined with the essential Marks of
true Piety.

CHAP. VII.
Counsel in respect of the Company you are to keep.
I.
MY dear Children, you must apply your selves so to your Business, that you
must not quite deprive your Kindred and your Friends of your Company; you must
sometimes lend your self to the World, but not give your self away to it.

II.
Too much Conversation, and unprofitable Visits, will make your life soft and
Effeminate; much Business, and sometimes Company will make it Honorable,
Pleasant, and agreeable.

III.
Men's Minds have need of Refreshment, continual Application dulls them; and as
you ought, by labor to prevent the Evils that Idleness would bring upon you,
so you must likewise, by some diversion, ease the Pain that continual
Employment would give you.

IV.
A little mixture in your life re-establishes or preserves Peace betwixt the
Head and the Heart: Company sometimes will make you forget your Troubles, and
the present will take away the remembrance of what is past.

V.
The Life is like a Watch which is kept in continual motion, by several Wheels
that compose it; one Wheel is not sufficient, it will not make you Master of
the Functions of your Office; never to stir from it, that would make you a
voluntary Slave to it.

VI.
It is to take too much upon you, to mind nothing but your Business: Our Mind
is a fertile ground, capable to bear several sorts of Grain, but you must give
it rest: Or to come nearer; our Mind is a Farmer which we must use kindly, and
give him time that he may pay his Rent; when you press him too much, you break
and ruin him.

VII.
I can see nothing that will be so much to your advantage, as to know your
selves well. Ask nothing but what you know your selves capable of; and though
you be capable, ask it not too often, lest you be thought to boast of your
Talent.

VIII.
Every one has his share of Ability, you will always succeed, if you do not
pass the bounds of your own, and do not set them to Work upon other Men's
bottoms.

IX.
Perhaps you may find your self between those that give not enough to the
Entertainment of the World, and those that give too much; this happy mean ought
to make you content: If you condemn the life of the one, do not envy that of
the others; accommodate your Manners and Actions to your Humor, your Genius,
and your Temper, and wish no more.

X.
In Armies they use Fifes, Trumpets, and Drums, to excite and animate the
Soldiers upon occasion. But the Lacedaemonians, on the contrary, were so
valiant, and valued their lives so little in Battle, that they used Flutes, and
the like Instruments to restrain them, that by their soft and agreeable Music,
they might charm their Valor, and as it were, lay it asleep. The like is of
Men's Minds, some ought to be provoked and excited to take pains; others take
too much, and their activity ought to be bridled and moderated. There is
nothing, in my Opinion, that can make these sort of Men relish some pleasure,
so much as the Company and Entertainment they may have with their Kindred and
Friends.

XI.
Always to be boasting what a Man is, and how worthy he is, is to affront those
he Converses with; his own Merit and Advocate has not always his Pen in his
Hand, nor a Soldier his Sword; a Beauteous Woman desires sometimes to go
Masked. These are the Lessons that I would teach you, that you do not always
love to be employed in serious Business, but that you sometimes divert your
self with good and agreeable Company.

XII.
You may hate the World (I allow) when they talk of nothing but of Trifles,
Vanities, or business; but you may love it when it refreshes your Mind when
weary with Business, and make you pass some moments of your Life with Pleasure
and Delight.

XIII.
In my judgment, no Estate or Condition is like that which a Man acquires
himself, by an honorable Employment; and no servitude to me seems so great and
inconvenient, as that which a Man imposes upon himself, by reason of a great
Fortune settled upon him; and if you will make a serious reflection upon it, you
will be of my Opinion.

XIV.
It seems to me more desirable to have no business at all, than to have too
much; and to be always alone, than never to be so: To make your Life pleasant
and easy, you must use variety in passing it, and sometimes seek out Company,
when you have been long time without it.

XV.
Do not always do the same thing, that will make your Life tedious and
troublesome; you must join Pleasure with Profit, and make your Recreation tread
upon the Heels of your Labor; I mean, when you are wearied with much Business;
you must go see your Friends, and enjoy the pleasure of their Company and
Conversation.

XVI.
Never be troublesome to any Company; but if you chance to come into any that
have Business; do not stay to interrupt them; you ought to know how to enjoy
Company, and how to quit it upon occasion.

XVII.
Never accustom your self to the Company of Libertines and Gamesters; there is
nothing to be gained there. The loss of your Money and Time is the least thing
you have to fear amongst Men of that Character. You ought to avoid them with
much care and circumspection.

XVIII.
Do not use to make Visits to such as are always idle, and have never any thing
to do; they will repeat one thing a Hundred times over; their Discourse has no
end but trifles, and their continual leisure is an emptiness that they would
gladly fill, at the Expense of their Friends and Kindred; in a word, you can
never have done with them.

XIX.
Avoid, with a great deal of care, Men that are Hot and Quarrelsome; they will
affront you for nothing, and urge things beyond reason and measure, and you
will bring your self into Troubles with them, which you cannot free your self
from but with difficulty.

XX.
When you are in Company that entertains you with respect and civility, you
ought to expect no more (that is) you ought not to desire any further kindness,
but of such as either Kindred, Friendship, or Business, has more strictly
united. The outside of others ought to be sufficient; they are not obliged
always to speak out what they think; if they be civil and respectful, you ought
to be content.

XXI.
You ought not to believe that Men have an^ esteem and consideration for you,
because they say it; it is the manner of speaking of it, that ought to persuade
you: Three words when spoken with a pleasant and obliging Countenance, are more
than Twenty otherwise delivered; there is a manner of speaking things, that
makes you judge they come from the Heart, and that the Tongue is but a faithful
and obliging interpreter.

XXII.
To make your selves acceptable in Company, do not always speak what you think
curious and excellent, but entertain those that are with you, with what they
love and pleases them; and do you take pleasure in knowing how to please others?

XXIII.
You are not to avoid the Company of one of your Acquaintance, because he is
sometimes humorous and troublesome, being he may have his Intervals; and of
what use is your Reason, if you do not make use of it upon some occasions? This
Man has Faults that are troublesome, but he has other good qualities, pardon
the one for the others sake; and do not avoid his Company; pity his weakness
because he is generous, and has a great deal of wit; he has a Soul that is
upright and full of Honor; what you suffer by his defects, are not worth
taking notice of.

XXIV.
If you be so difficult in making choice of your Acquaintance, others will be
the same to you; if you be so exact in requiring so many good Qualities in
those you Converse with, others will require the same from you; and are you
sure they will find them? It is better not to be so nice in your Choice, it
will make your Life more easy and agreeable.

CHAP. VIII.
Upon the same Subject.
I.
MY dear Children, to see little or no Company, is to deprive your selves of
Pleasures that are innocent; but to spend your whole life amongst Women, and in
making continual Visits, is to lose your Stomachs by continual eating, and to
fill your self with course Victuals, and deprive your self of Delicacies and
Dainties.

II.
A Discourse, to be good and profitable, ought to be of things Moral Honest and
Christian. But it ought to be in the Company of a few and choice Persons; avoid
a Crowd.

III
Polite Learning, History, and all that relates to Arts and Sciences, are good
Subjects of Conversation, especially where it is practiced with good order and
decency, and not in a critical and pedantick Fashion.

IV.
Avoid, by all means, such Company as talk of nothing but Trifles and Follies,
and all their Conversation is upon the divertisements of the World; and upon
the false Reasonings of the Interest of Princes; Never be of the humor to take
pleasure in losing your time in hearing such trifling Discourse.

V.
When you meet in Company where some are too free and profane, let them know
that such Discourse does not please you; and do not join in Conversation of
that nature.

VI.
Be not ashamed of the Gospel on this occasion; and you will make them ashamed,
who forget themselves, and are not so reserved in their words as they ought to
be; put on a serious Countenance, and presently they will be silent.

VII.
Be always when you are in Company as you are at home, not changing your
Character (that is) be always Honest, Pleasant and Obliging; do not belly it by
your Words and Actions. In all places make appear that you are of an equal
Humor and Converse, and all Men will desire the Honor of your Acquaintance
and Friendship.

VIII.
In all Company where you are, speak of Virtue without Affectation, and
desiring to pass for a Devoto; speak of News without earnestness, or too much
Curiosity; and of that which passes in Company without Envy, Criticizing or
Jealousy.

IX.
Give your Advice without applauding it; declare your Opinion in any thing
proposed to you, without deciding it; say what you think, without pretending
that others should submit to your Wishes or Reasoning; maintain your Opinions
without Heat, and hear other Men's without Trouble.

X.
If you be of this Mind and Humor, you will be acceptable in all Companies;
and you no sooner enter, but every one will be glad; and when you leave them,
every one will look sad, and seem to say, the life of the Company is gone, and
now we seem all-a-mort.

XI.
If you maintain this your Character, you may make many Visits every Day, and
every one will reproach you, and tell you, you are sedentary, and love your
Home too much; your Visits will seem so rare and short, that they will
obligingly accuse you of forgetting your Friends, or they will believe that you
are oppressed with Business and Affairs.

XII.
It will please you to see, that wherever you go, you will receive a Hundred
Welcomes and Civilities; and you will be wished for wheresoever you do not go.

XIII.
When you are with your Friends, always endeavor to be agreeable, and to
please them, and never put on the Air of a Philosopher, or a Devoto.

XIV.
I must confess you cannot have too much reservedness in your Words, nor too
much modesty in your Actions. But you must likewise acknowledge, that with your
Friends you cannot be too pleasant and complaisant; that pleases them, that
gains them; that afterward one does what he pleases.

XV.
Do not make it your Business to have always much Company with you, that would
be to love others too much, and your selves too little; nor to have none at
all, for that would be to love your self too much, and to carry your
reservedness too far.

XVI.
Be with your Kindred as much as Decency permits you, and give your selves to
your Friends as often as complaisance requires it. But always without prejudice
to the Care that you ought to take of your Family, and Domestic Affairs.

XVII.
Make the duties of your Conscience agree with the Pleasure of receiving and
returning Visits. Visit your Kindred at one time, and your Friends at another,
and you will please them both.

XVIII.
Nothing moves so much as Example; what enters by the Ear, makes some
Impression, but that which is seen gains the Heart. It is for this Reason, that
Example is always efficacious; and it is looked upon as a living Book, that
teaches us incessantly what we should do; this that I say should teach you to
keep Company with none but Persons of Honor and Probity; that is the Model
that you ought always to set before you, and you cannot do amiss when you
follow it.

XIX.
You may easily observe the Rules of your Behavior, by that of another of good
Breeding and Conduct, whom you have much Converse with; his Prudence and
constant good Humor, and good Inclinations, will be of great weight with you,
to make you endeavor to imitate him in all things.

XX.
In Example of this well-read, and Man of Honor, will be as an Echo, which
will always tell you what you are, and what you ought to be: This Example will
be as a Looking-glass, to represent to you your Defaults and Defects, and will
be as a Drum and Trumpet to encourage you to do well.

XXI.
This Example will be as Meat to nourish you, and make you strong to live like
a Man of Honor and Probity; finally, this Example will be to you a Law, that
will impose upon you the happy necessity of living well.

CHAP. IX.
Advice concerning Reports.
I.
MY dear Children, never Report Stories, for that makes Business and Quarrels
amongst Friends and Kindred, and raises suspicions, which have very troublesome
consequences; it is seldom that Men of Quality, who know how they ought to
live, do it; but Men of Honor and Probity never.

II.
Be you steadfastly persuaded, that Reports do harm to him that makes them; to
those they are made to, and those they are made of; are like the stroke of a
Cimetar that kills three at once.

III.
You can never carry Reports, but with design to oblige him to whom you carry
them, or to satisfy your self in doing it: Those whom you make them of will
never be reconciled to you, and it is at their Expenses you make them, and they
will seek to revenge it.

IV.
And he whom you think to oblige by teling him, will by your means have a
thousand suspicions and jealousies in his Head, which may provoke him to Choler
and a precipitate Revenge; this is the Pleasure and Service you do him, when
you have the indiscretion to make and carry Tales.

V.
You likewise will not find your own satisfaction as you thought; for you will
make Enemies of all those you have reported Stories of: And for the other to
whom you carried them, they will make shameful Reflections upon you, who
disoblige those which never gave you cause, and perhaps are speaking many
things to your Advantage, at the moment you make malicious Reports of them: Men
of Honor and Probity are not capable of such Injustice and Baseness.

VI.
You ought not only to avoid the making of Reports, but you ought not to suffer
others to make them to you; the Maker of them is always looked upon with an
Evil Eye.

VII.
You cannot think to make Reports of any, but they will do the same of you, and
will pay you what you have lent them, with Pleasure and Usury; they will not
suffer any thing of what you say or do, to fall to the Ground; they will take
great care at all times, and all places, to make you known for what you are.

VIII.
Resolve to make it known upon all occasions, that Reports do not please you;
that you forget them as soon as they are told. Show that you are always
persuaded, that what is spoken of the absent, is for the most part to be
suspected for false and aggravated.

IX.
When you have made it known, that you are not pleased with such Reports; you
will discourage all those that have a Mind to trouble you with them; and the
Countenance you receive them with, when you hear them against your will, will
condemn both them that bring them, and those that caused them to be brought.

X.
A Wise Man never lends an Ear to such Reports, and by that means he shuts the
Mouth of all those that would make them. You will prevent many troublesome
Moments, by declaring your self against them, and by that means do good to them
that were of the humor to make them, and Cure them of a shameful Quality.

XI.
Never let either your Tongue or your Ears encourage these Reports. I do not
know which is most to blame, he that hearkens to them, or he that makes them;
but I know that nothing entertains a Man more in that unworthy Practice of
making them, than to give ear to them, and to be pleased with the hearing of
them.

XII.
You ought to put a Vail upon the Face of your Friend, to hinder him from
seeing any thing that may give him trouble; you ought, for his sake, to impose
a perpetual silence upon your self in those things that may vex him. There is
no pretext, how specious soever, can authorize you to make reports on such
occasions.

XIII.
One of the first Laws, not only of Friendship, but of Civil Society, is to
banish forever Reports of all kinds; there are a thousand things which concern
Families, that go beyond Friendship, and the ordinary Ties that a Man has with
his Acquaintance; it is to injure this Friendship, and these Ties, to make them
take such care and caution in this matter as may trouble their quiet.

XIV.
It would be imprudent in you, to report a thing that you know not, but by the
report of a particular Man, who may lie or aggravate the matter; and it would
be injustice to make others believe what you do not know, but on this manner;
yet it is an injustice that is too often committed, because they are not
cautious in that point; and they are prone to commit it upon the false
Principle that they are not concerned in it; but he that said it was reported,
ought to justify it.

XV.
The Infidelity of a Friend that has betrayed your Secret, does not give you a
right to do the same by him. Your Duty does not depend upon his; his Faults
does not authorize yours; he has violated his Faith in a Secret you trusted him
with; it is a fault inexcusable, yet you ought to consider him, not as he is to
you at present, but as he has been; the Secret that you owe him is an old debt;
it always remains so; you owe it him still, as much as you owe him Money which
he lent you long since, when you were all one.

XVI.
A trifling thing told by one of your Friends does not give you cause to break
Friendship with him. You must pardon this small indiscretion, and to make your
advantage of it, that will teach you to be more cautious hereafter, and not to
trust him so easily, especially in things of consequence.

XVII.
It is neither good nor honorable to make Reports; and if it be lawful to
think ill of those that speak them, from the time that one should make a Story
to me, I should think him capable to commit all sorts of faults, since there
are none which he might more easily avoid than this. Yet even one Story that a
Man should report to me, would give me an Idea of his Humor, and his bad
Inclination, which I should have much ado ever to forget.

XVIII.
Never suffer either at your Table, nor in your Walks, nor in your Pleasures,
them who are accustomed to carry Tales; look upon them always as Enemies to
Civil Society; as Persons that ought to be expelled all Company, and to be
pointed at; in a Word, as Men without Honor or Honesty.

CHAP. X.
Counsels upon Conscience.
I.
MY Dear Children, you cannot be too exact and circumspect in all that concerns
your Conscience; almost all the World pretends to be nice in this matter, but
very often they do not live according to that exactness they pretend. For this
nicety is but imaginary; and for the most part they make Conscience after their
own fancy.

II.
This Nicety of Conscience, which all pretend to, ought not to pass in your
Minds for imaginary; because it is easy to form an Idea of a scrupulous
Conscience, when it is not so; and oftentimes they are scrupulous only in some
enormous Crimes which they do not commit, or in such Vices as their
Inclinations and Humors do not lead them to.

III.
The most part of the World make their Conscience after their own fancy; and
make no scruple of Conscience in a thousand things that relate to their
Interest, Ambition, or Pleasure; and so they think themselves very
conscientious, because they make no Conscience of those things they have a mind
to do, but are very scrupulous in those things they will not do.

IV.
If you have no Conscience but after this manner, you will not long enjoy a
quiet Conscience; I do assure you, you will resemble the Sick that abstain from
Wine and Fruit, and, eating to excess all other sorts of meat, are in danger of
their Lives.

V.
All the World know that we ought to submit our selves to the Laws of God; and
it is our Conscience that makes us understand how far this Law extends, and
reproaches us if we transgress it.

VI.
Our Conscience is a looking-glass, in which we see our selves what we are; it
is in this Looking-glass that you discover your self; there is nothing of good
or bad which you have done that can be concealed from you; you may flatter your
self, but this Looking-glass is always faithful, and will represent you truly
as you are within, in your very Soul.

VII.
Our Conscience is a Book in which our Thoughts, our Words, and our Actions are
writ; it is a Register that keeps an Account of all things; this Book or
Register sometimes opens it self, and it is then when our Mind is troubled; and
the Reproaches which our Consciences make, move us to change our lives. But
this Book presently shuts again, because we do not make application enough to
make an advantage of these good Motions we feel within us; and these Motions do
not stay long with us, because they are not faithful and constant.

VIII.
I say further, our Conscience is a Sluice where all the ordure of our Lives
discharges it self; and this Sluice is sometimes so full, that it regorges; but
for fear that the ill Scent that comes out of it should be troublesome to us, we
presently stop it, and cover it with Flowers; that is, with vain Projects of
Conversion, and false Hopes of a true Hatred of our Sins; and for that little
time we stop it, we again return to our accustomed course of life; and are
hardened more than ever in our Evil Ways. And I wish you be not of the number
of those that make this ill Use of it; and I speak all this to prevent your
being so.

IX.
You need but open your Eyes and look up to Heaven, and hear his Voice, and
consider the Wonders of the Creator; you need but cast your Eyes upon your
Conscience, to hear it cry, that reproaches you continually, with the abuse of
your Health and Knowledge that God has given you, if you do indeed abuse them.

X.
Woe be to you, if you do not hearken to her, or if you make her speak as you
desire; since what injustice she counsels you to, or what pleasure she permits
you, you will be the greatest losers by it, and will be the greaest sufferers
in the punishment of it.

XI.
You cannot follow a better Rule than that which your Conscience gives you; but
do not corrupt it, and make it conform it self to your Inclinations, your
Humors and Weakness.

XII.
Wherefore do we see some of our Friends in good earnest, and true Converse?
and wherefore do we see others that do but seem so? Is it not because the one
makes a serious Reflection upon what Conscience Dictates, and the other a very
slight one; the one hearkens to it attentively, and the other in the middle of
the Noise of the World, and their Minds distracted with their Passions.

XIII.
He that will not pay what he owes, will not see nor hear his Creditors, but
flies them, and hides himself as soon as they appear; the same thing happens to
you in regard of your Conscience; if you will not look upon her, nor hear her
when she presents her self to you, you make use of a Hundred false pretenses,
as a Vail to hide your selves; and steal from her, and lose the sight of her
every moment

XIV.
The Conscience of an Honest Man is very different from the Conscience of a
Worldly, Covetous, or Voluptuous Man; the first continually examins his
Conscience, and no sooner knows its Dictates, but runs to execute them. The
other has never the Time, nor Will, to consult it, and much less to perform its
commands: Judge your self, and see what you are.

XV.
He that loves to play and see Comedies, makes no Conscience to spend almost
all his time in the one, and lose many Hours in the other; on the contrary, he
that makes profession to live according to the Rules of Justice and Religion,
makes Conscience of making play his daily Business and Employment, and looks
upon Comedies as a divertisement unworthy of his Care and Time; he hates
gaming, and despises Plays.

XVI.
Gaming and seeing Plays are two different things, in regard of the one and the
others Conscience; and why? because the Conscience of the one is more fearful
and cautious than the other; and the one hearkens to his Conscience
continually, and the other never; the one prefers the Duty of his Conscience
before all the Pleasures of his Life, and the other the contrary.

XVII.
Both the one and the other have the Commands of God and the Church to observe;
but the one looks upon them with an Eye different from the other.

XVIII.
Take care that your Conscience be not too scrupulous, and likewise that it be
not scrupulous at all; prudence and discretion ought to govern you in this
point.

XIX.
We are not all called to the same kind of Life; so the Conscience ought not to
be the same to all Men; there are Duties proper to every state, that cannot be
dispensed with; and these Duties are different, according to the diversity of
Professions, and that also makes a difference in the Conscience.

XX.
All Men ought to have the same tenderness of Conscience in the general Duties
of Christians; but it may be greater or lesser on particular occasions.

XXI.
You ought not to have a tenderness of Conscience for one Commandment of God,
more than for another; you must have an equal regard for all; such as take this
Advice in some particulars, and violate a Commandment of God in another, are
inexcusable.

XXII.
Some Men fast Fridays and Saturdays, but will not be reconciled to their
Enemies; others give largely to the Poor, but will not forsake a beloved Sin;
others make scruple of all things but such as they have a Passion for.

XXIII.
The tenderness of Conscience in all those Persons, ought to be thought false
and imaginary. What do I say? You ought to hold it for certain, that they have
no Conscience at all; or if they have any, it is ready to rise against them
before the Tribunal of the Supreme Judge of all Men.

CHAP. XI.
Upon the same Subject.
I.
MY Dear Children, Conscience and Honor ought to govern all your actions;
Interest ought not to be looked upon further than Equity and Right will permit.

II.
Do not throw your self at the Feet of Princes, or the Grandees of the World;
that is, give not your selves up so to them, as to be ready to do all things at
their Pleasure. You ought to render all that is due to your Conscience and
Honor before you give them up to any body else; and you should betray your
self if you did not keep that Order that Reason prescribes, and that your own
Interest continually sets before your Eyes.

III.
Princes often desire Men devoted to their Will; Men that have not that
tenderness of Conscience; in a word, Men that will stick at nothing to serve
them. They desire this, I must confess, but if every one would do their Duty,
they might seek a long time before they would find such as they desire; and
this seeking in vain would make them more just and reasonable.

IV.
Let not Ambition lead you blindfold; you are born free, do not make your self
a Slave to another's Will; there are many Slaves laden with Chains, that would
not buy their Liberty at such a price.

V.
The Kings of Egypt used to make their Judges promise that they would do
nothing against their Conscience for any pretext of Ambition, Interest, or
recommendation they could have. You are Kings of your own Wills and Actions;
they can have no Power but what you give them, which you ought to allow them
with unreproachable Equity and Right. Do nothing against that Principle of
Nature that teaches you to give to every one what belongs to him, and never
regard any thing that would inspire you with other Thoughts.

VI.
The Laws of War cannot Authorize any ill actions; and what we owe to our
Prince and Country, cannot justify them; all things are not permitted to
Subjects in favor of their Sovereign. A Soldier, for being a Soldier, ought
not to forget that he is a Christian, on pretense that he is under the Pay of
him that commands him; he ought to do nothing against his Religion; the noise
of Arms ought not to hinder the hearing the Voice of his Conscience and Honor,
which will teach him what he ought to do in all occasions.

VII.
Have a great regard for Princes, and all your Superiors; but let your
Conscience always go first, and give it the preference in all things.

VIII.
After you have satisfied your Conscience and your Honor, do all you can for
your Kindred and Friends, and you can never do too much.

IX.
Under pretense of Friendship, never do an ill Action; the Laws of Friendship
ought not, cannot carry you so far.

X.
There are two things that ought to be extremely precious, whatsoever
Profession you are of, your Honor and your Conscience: Your Honor ought to be
dear to you, because it is a personal good, without which, according to the
Opinion of all Men, all the rest are nothing. Your Conscience yet ought to be
more dear to you, for when that has nothing to reproach you with, Peace within
will be your Consolation, without which you will lead a languishing and
miserable Life.

XI.
You ought to abhor any thing that is against your Honor and Conscience, and
nothing can oblige you more to detest an Action, than when it robs you of
either the one or the other.

XII.
As long as one enjoys perfect Health, one easily pardons ill Customs; the
pretense is easy and favorable, there needs nothing to excuse it, but Humane
frailty, and the daily and pressing temptations to Sin; you need no other
Excuses. These are the ordinary practices of the Men of this World; do not
follow such bad Examples, but make good use of the bad management of others.

XIII.
A Man that loves the World and its Pleasures, oftentimes, from the impunity of
his Crimes past, draws the pernicious assurance of the same for the time to
come; and after having a long time stifled the remorse of Conscience, procures
such a peace of Conscience, as he calls it, that would affright any honest Man;
and ought to make you tremble, lest you should fall into the same lethargy of
the Mind.

XIV.
Be you persuaded that this disorder resembles the Root of a Thorn, which you
may take in your Hand, and press it, and it will do you no harm; and may be it
may seem to you to be more smooth than the Roots of other Plants; but as it
grows up it arms it self with Prickles, that will prick you in such sort, that
sometimes your hurts may prove Mortal: The same effect may proceed from this
disorder, which at first seems to do no harm, but afterward cuts to the quick,
and sometimes the Wounds become so great, that it is difficult to Cure them.

XV.
What matters it if you be not happy upon Earth, provided you be so in Heaven?
What matters it if whilst you live you die to the World, to Honors, to
Pleasures, and to your self, provided that the purity of your Conscience cause
your Name to be writ in the Book of Life?

CHAP. XII.
Advice upon all that has the Air of Courage, Choler, and promptness to quarrel.
I.
MY dear Children, Gentleness and Civility is so much the Character of Men of
Quality, that they seem to have fallen below their Birth and Rank which they
hold amongst us, when they abandon themselves to the passion of Choler.

II.
Men will suffer, and endeavor to excuse in you your play, your Expense and
your Ambition; but they will never pardon your impatience, your Choler, and
Quarrelling; there is something in them so unbecoming, that they will pardon no
Person in this particular.

III.
If you punish those that do not deserve it, or punish according to the motions
of a brutish Choler, men have reason to regard you as one that violates the
Laws, under the protection of which Innocence and Youth ought to live in peace
and quietness.

IV.
Which, in your Opinion, is the more culpable, A young Man to whom Age has not
given the discretion to live exactly as he ought; or his Father, or Governor,
or Master, who for that Reason uses him ill; because he has not yet obtained
all the Reason and Experience that a Man of riper Years has? Whether of them is
more to blame, a young Man that wants Discretion at Fifteen, or a Father and
Governor that has it not at Forty?

V.
Correction, I must confess, is the Wine, of Wisdom; but you ought to give it
your Children moderately; the excess of it would take away the relish of it,
would disgust and make them drunk.

VI.
All Correction given in anger, takes away the Virtue, and destroys the effects
of it; hold it for certain, that Correction is a meat that must be seasoned, to
make it wholesome and good, otherwise it cannot be digested.

VII.
If you give Correction with Rigor, it is as if you put precious Liquor in a
poisoned Vessel. Correction the most just, and the best grounded, loses its
effect in your Mouth, if you do it in terms full of animosity, and with a
Countenance and Eyes full of Rage and Choler.

VIII.
A Master that always grumbles and rails against his Domestics, does not well
become his place; he carries the Power the Laws have given too far. If justice
should be done upon such Masters, who neither have Indulgence nor Mercy for
their Domestics, they would be put into the number of Slaves.

IX.
It is so seldom seen that a Man of Quality and Probity puts himself in Choler;
that it will make Men believe, that you have neither the one nor the other, if
you fall into that Passion. You ought never to go out of your Character; and
nothing, in the judgment of all Men, will make you leave your Character with
more disdain, than senseless Quarrels that the transports of Choler will bring
you into.

X.
Sudden and rash Quarrels are Childish or Brutal; such as are not easily
excused in common Soldiers and Pages; they will never be pardoned in you, how
young soever you be.

XI.
Your Servant commits a Fault in your presence, by neglect, not thinking on it;
he does ill, I do not pretend to excuse him, but should that make you commit a
greater? On the contrary, you ought to repair, by your prudence, what this
careless Servant has done amiss by his folly. Learn therefore to be a
Philosopher, and keep your self unmovable on such occasions, and show by this
evenness of temper, that such accidents cannot produce any change in your Mind.

XII.
Though you may have Birth, Wit, and Riches, you will never be esteemed, if you
do not add to these good Qualities, that of an even temper, and a moderation in
all your Words and Actions.

XIII.
Do not contradict such as are prompt to quarrel; and do not take pleasure in
provoking them, and they will have the same regard for you; let this Stream
have its Course which you see runs at your Feet, and do not make it a Torrent
by stopping it.

XIV.
You may be sure that Pride is the Father of all Vices, and Choler is his
Daughter; and it may be added, that this Daughter oftentimes gives Arms to her
Father, which makes him Cruel, and Revengeful; so that it may be truly said,
that the Proud and Ambitious oftentimes, transported by Choler, leave fatal
Marks of their Passion.

XV.
A Man Choleric and quarrelsom, is a declared Enemy to Civil Society; or, what
is more, he is a Seditious Person, who prophanes all Holy Laws; he knows
neither Father nor Mother, nor Wife nor Children; and indeed how should he know
them, since he knows not himself.

XVI.
Choler is the only unruly Passion that pretends to justify it self, how
shameful and criminal soever this Passion may be; they that are subject to it,
pretend to have reason to be transported on some certain occasions; and
Experience teaches us, that of all those that are transported by Choler, there
is scarce any one that does not think it just to what extremity soever they are
carried: From whence comes that, but that it blinds the Soul by the Darkness
which it spreads?

XVII.
Choler is nothing else but a motion sudden and turbulent, that takes from us
the free exercise of our Actions; and that is the Reason why we are not only
angry at our Servants, but at all those with whom we Converse; and more at
every one that would hinder us from doing what we will. When a Pen writes not
according to our Fancy, we break it; a Gamester throws his Dice and Cards out
of the Window; a Workman is angry at his Tools, and throws them away.

XVIII.
It is strange to see, that a Man who is observed usually to have Prudence and
Discretion in his Affairs, should, upon a sudden, change his Nature and Humor;
and that a motion of Anger should disorder in him all that Reason had placed in
so good order and quiet.

XIX.
Do not suffer your self so rashly to be transported; lay a foundation of
Prudence against all the Accidents of Life that may disturb you; look upon your
self continually; as if you were in a frontier Garrison environed with Enemies,
and ready to be besieged, and think of all things necessary for your defense.
If you do thus, Anger can never surprise you, and its Arms will be too Weak
against a place so well fortified, and provided with Necessaries.

XX.
At the first motions of Anger; let your Voice be low, and your Countenance
smiling; by that means you will disarm your Enemy before he appears and attacks
you.

XXI.
If it happen that you be transported with Choler, it is to be wished that you
had a Looking-glass before your Eyes, you would find your self so deformed and
different from what you were, that the sight of this Change would make you more
moderate upon such occasions, and you would have such an Idea of this Passion,
as would absolutely Cure you.

XXII.
The Decency and Respect that we owe to one another, should be the Boundaries
that none can go beyond, without doing himself wrong, and making an ungrateful
Impression of his Humor; as long as you observe this decency and respect,
Anger will have no Power over you, and you will be esteemed and loved for the
eavenness and moderation of your Words and Actions.

CHAP. XIII.
Advice concerning the Judgment you ought to make of the Words and Actions of
others.
I.
MY Dear Children, if you will gain the Esteem and Love of all Men, see what
every Man does, and hear what every Man says, without contradicting any one.
Let your Eyes and Ears go no further than you please, and hear obligingly all
that is spoken to you, and judge of others by your self.

II.
What is blameable in some things, impute it to the Youth of the doer; and what
cannot absolutely be excused, impute it to want of Consideration, and to a
surprise that merits Pardon. Never make any more faulty than they really are,
and persuade others as much as you can, that many things are done by imprudence
and want of consideration, and ought not further to be thought upon.

III.
Do not make a malicious Construction of the Words and Actions of others, nor
turn them to the hurt or prejudice of any one; do justice to all you have to do
with, and as you would have others do to you; remember every Man has his
Failings, which you ought to excuse and suffer, if you will live quietly and
peaceably with all the World.

IV.
Always take part with, and defend the Unfortunate; a false appearance
Deceives, and Reports full of Injustice or Calumny, expose them to the Censure
of a hundred malicious Spirits, that think to establish their own Reputation
upon the Ruin of other Men's. And of others that have no other way of magnifying
themselves, but by disparaging and villifying their Kindred and Neighbors; and
of others who at the expense and loss of their best Friends, would make
themselves Critics, or Devotes, by having something to say against every one.

V.
You know that every one has his own Humor, and his own Wit; and you have no
right to pretend to that which is not referred to your Judgment, and much less
to give Law to others, that they should live as you desire.

VI.
Be always circumspect in speaking of those that make too great or too little
Expense in their way of living; let not either the one or the other Extreme
trouble you.

VII.
Praise whatever you think praise worthy, but be wary in passing Sentence upon
what you think condemnable; do not make your self a Judge of the actions of
others; but if you be pressed and obliged to speak your Opinion, let it be in
their favor, and to their advantage.

VIII.
Study your own Conduct and not that of others; examine your self without Favor
or Partiality, and never pardon your self. Use all Severity to your self, and
Indulgence to others. If you find something to say against every one, you will
justly be taken for an Illnatur'd, Unjust, and Unreasonable Man.

IX.
That you may not speak ill of any, you ought not to think ill of any; for from
the one to the other the way is easy and short; it is almost impossible to
forbear speaking of what you believe and think.

X.
You may and ought to pardon a thousand little Faults in Men of Quality, when
they are Young and Unexperienced; to condemn them in every thing, is to be a
Critique without Reason, and to expect an accomplished Wisdom in a Person of
Eighteen or Twenty Years of age.

XI.
When a young Man or Youth has good Inclinations or Desires of doing well, you
ought, in favor to his Age, to pardon some Levities or other small Faults; in
doing this you shall encourage him to do well, and in doing otherwise, the
contrary.

XII.
Set not your self lightly to condemn Women for their Carriage, when they are
neither Gamesters nor Wanton; all things else do not deserve to be taken notice
of. Time will teach them better to consider, than all that you can say to their
disadvantage.

XIII.
You can never, with Honor, highly condemn that in Women, that you can so
easily excuse in Men. Have a care they do not Reproach you; that it is secret
Envy or Pride in your self, that makes you speak after this manner of them.
Take care that they do not impute what you say, to an inexcusable, weak, or a
shameful Jealousy in your self, which is injurious to all Men that have either
Wit, Honor, or Honesty.

XIV.
Women generally are more reserved and discreet than Men; and it cannot be
denied, but that ordinarily they are more tender and Charitable than we;
wherefore then do you fall so severely upon some of their Faults, when you have
so large a Field, and so fair an occasion to praise their Virtue. Believe me,
when you are in the Humor to censure ill Manners, spare the devout Sex, and
consider your own, you will find enough there to move your Gall, and exercise
your Wit.

CHAP. XIV.
Advice concerning what thoughts we should have of Greatness and Riches; of our
Losses, and the Misfortunes of our Lives.
I.
MY Dear Children, you will never be unhappy, if you do not think you are so;
for Happiness generally depends more upon the Opinion we have of things, than
upon the things themselves.

II.
It happens very often, that one is thought unhappy in the Opinion of Men, when
in effect he is not so; if you be no otherwise unhappy than so, you will have
no cause to complain; and in my Opinion, you will be more a subject of Envy
than Pity.

III.
All our Losses and Disgraces will be looked upon with another Eye; if we know
their Nature, their Causes, and their End; and if we look upon our selves as
Men condemned to Humiliations and Afflictions, and not as Men aspiring to
nothing but Riches, Honors, and Pleasures. Look upon your self, in good
earnest, after this manner, and afterward see if you have any Reason to
complain.

IV.
If you will consider things Morally, you must agree, that all things that
happen; is by the ordinary course of Life, and our Birth makes us subject to
them; and by consquence, you must submit your self, and accustom your self to
them; and if you see some Men exempt from these Misfortunes, stay a little and
expect, and you need not expect long, and you will see that they have their
share of them as others, and perhaps a greater share than most others.

V.
Your Grief will augment and gather new force, if you be so sensible of it; and
on the contrary, you may assure your self, that if you have the Constancy to
suffer it patiently, it will diminish.

VI.
If two Persons suffer the same Evil, it will always be said, that he that
torments himself, and complains most, suffers most; but he that suffers more
than comes from the Evil it self, does so from the manner and mind with which
he suffers it.

VII.
To speak well of Pain and its nature, you ought to be persuaded, that if it be
long, it is but little; and if it be violent, it does not last long, and it
will put an end to the Grief that it causes; upon this Principle it will not be
hard to direct your Discourse.

VIII.
Affliction will never have any Power over you, but what you give it your self.

IX.
There is no Pain, how sensible soever it be, that does not lose half its
force, by the Courage you have to suffer it; when you resist it, it will fly
from you; if you yield, it will triumph; in a word, you disarm it when you do
not submit to its Power.

X.
If you do not accustom your self to suffer, the smallest Pain will seem great;
it is enough that it is a Pain that obliges you to suffer with trouble, and
oftentimes even with impatience.

XI.
There are some that seem more content in their Sufferings than others in their
Pleasures; every one is well or ill, according as he finds himself. The Martyrs
had more joy in the midst of their Torments, than the Tyrants that condemned
them could taste in their good Cheer, their high Fortune and great Riches.

XII.
Sin excepted, there is nothing ill in its own nature; it is but the use that
is made of it that makes it so: a straight Oar is crooked in the Water; it is
not enough to see things, but the means to see them well, that makes them pass
for what they are* it is not that which Men believe of you, will make you
happy, but that which you your self believe.

XIII.
There is more strength required to bear the Chain that binds us, than to break
it. There is more force of Mind to suffer the Miseries of Life, than to kill
himself to be delivered from them: There is more Courage in following the
Example of Regulus, than that of Cato.

XIV.
All the Losses and Disgraces imaginable, are not great enough to justify you
in the weakness of wishing your own death; in these cases you must think of
nothing but to compose your Mind and Courage to suffer patiently.

XV.
If you can be sufficient for your self, and out of your own proper Stock find
wherewith to entertain your Happiness, or to fly the Evils that threaten you,
all possessed and full of what you desire, you your self will be the Object of
your Attention, your Thoughts, and your Love, like those Egyptian Husbandmen,
who never looked toward Heaven for Rain, because the overflowing of the Nile
was all their Hopes, and all their Riches. All your Wishes ought to aim at
nothing, but that you may peaceably enjoy all your Advantages, and to have
possession of your self; but the goodness of God gives you leave, not to be
content with your self; he permits that Afflictions and Sickness should make
you know, that there is an Eternal Good, of which you ought to think, and not
to reckon upon those Goods that may be taken from you every Hour, and the
enjoyment of which must end with your life.

XVI.
Whatsoever happens to you, you ought not to think your self unhappy; if your
Wives be as they ought, and your Children well inclined; believe me, when you
have Reason to be pleased with your Domestics, all the rest ought to seem to
you indifferent.

XVII.
If you have no good Fortune, support your Disgraces like a good Christian,
with a Constancy such as may make the Philosophers ashamed. It is not the first
time that Religion inspired with such Thoughts, and Grace has triumphed over
the World and Nature.

XVIII.
God dispences his Gifts as he pleases; one has Health; another has Wit;
another has Birth; which is the most happy? certainly he which makes best use
of what he has, and is content with what he is; and by consequence, it may be
said, that your Happiness is in your own Hands, and depends upon your self;
make a serious reflection upon it, and you will find it so.

XIX.
A Mind composed and well persuaded of the Christian Truths, judges of things
as he ought, and not according to the Opinion of the World; and the esteem they
set upon their Riches, Honor, and Pleasure, is all the Happiness of a Man of
this World; do not make them yours, but search for a Happiness that is not
subject to the Misfortunes, Losses, and Afflictions which happen every Day of
our Lives in this World.

XX.
In all things that concern your self, do not use the Balance of the World, but
your own; that of the World will never be just to you, because it neither knows
the bottom of your Heart, nor the disposition of your Mind; it judges upon
false and deceitful Appearances; some pass in the World for the most Happy Men,
who think themselves the most unhappy.

XXI.
Your Birth, your Wit, and your Riches cannot make you content, because there
is a tranquillity of Mind, and a true Happiness that is not to be found in these
outward Advantages; and without this peace of Mind, and this true Happiness,
you will still be Poor in the midst of Riches, and not content in the middle of
Pleasures.

XXII.
It is sufficiently spoken in the World, that this Life is full of Afflictions
and Evils; and for one rich Man that is content, there are a Hundred that are
not so; but none would be of the greater number; every one desires to be this
one Man, distinguished and chosen of a Hundred; why should you flatter your
self with this distinction.

XXIII.
We all confess, and acknowledge, that Nature has made us subject to a Thousand
Miseries, we know that the Subordination that God has established amongst us,
that the dishonesty of some, the imprudence of others, and our own Passions,
expose us to a thousand Losses and Disgraces; but we draw our selves out of the
Crowd, and our self-love is the Cause that we cannot see our selves amongst the
Unhappy, without murmering and Complaining; why do we do our selves this
Favor? Do we see any thing that gives us Reason to do it?

XXIV.
Do not look upon Losses and Disgraces as real Evils, but as occasions to make
us have a dependence upon the Providence of God, and to do it with respect and
submission.

XXV.
If it be from the Providence of God, and from his power, that you find your
self induced to praise him; that the Plains and the Woods, the Valleys and the
Mountains, the Flies and the Elephants, are the Proofs of his infinite Power,
you ought not to have less inducements to praise him, from the different states
of the Poor and Rich, the Sick and the Sound, Shepherds and Kings, are the
astonishing proofs of his adorable Providence.

XXVI.
Set all these Truths always in your sight; the more you consider them, the
less Esteem and Love will you have for Worldly Riches and Pleasures.

XXVII.
Let the Law that commands you to live contented in the State that God has
placed you in, be always well-pleasing to you; have no less submission to his
Order, in what relates to Riches, than in what relates to the advantages of
your Birth and Wit.

XXVIII.
You never yet thought that you had Reason to complain, that you had not lived
in Ages past; and you have no more reason to complain of the Riches that
another Man possesses, because God is the disposer of Riches as well as Times;
he has made your Birth in such an Age as it has pleased him; he has likewise
given you such Riches as has pleased him; in all that you have, you have
nothing to do but to lift up your Eyes to Heaven, and to bless him that has
given you what you have, and made you what you are.

CHAP. XV.
Advice upon true and false Devotion.
I.
MY Dear Children, know that false Devotion consists in this, that you desire
to be thought a Good, and Pious Man; and true Devotion, that you be really so.

II.
If you do nothing but in the Sight of God, and nothing but for his sake, you
will certainly be of the Number of truly Devout; but there are few that have
Motives so pure; that Interest and Reputation have not some share in what they
do.

III.
Then when you are about to do some good Action, and have forsaken the World,
perhaps you will not have forsaken your self; have a care that a little
self-love and Vanity, be not in your Way when you do it.

IV.
I say further, have a care that when you have forgotten the World in your
Memory, you do not retain it in your Heart; and when you think you have
absolutely forsaken it, have a care that the World do not more live in you,
than you in the World.

V.
When you do a good deed with applause, it may lose the half of its merit,
because it is almost impossible, that Nature will not also find its Account;
and that doing this good Deed, you be not puffed up with the Reputation it brings
you.

VI.
It is not sufficient, that (to be a good Man) you do no ill, but you must do
good. To do no ill, because perhaps you are not in a condition to effect it, or
your Humor and Inclinations does not lead you to it; this is no great matter;
there is neither Merit nor Virtue in it.

VII.
There needs but one bad Inclination to make a Man Vicious, but a great many
good inclinations are necessary to make a Man Virtuous; for that Reason there
are few that are Virtuous, but the number is great of those that are not so.

VIII.
It will be easy for you to live without Trouble or Sickness; if you do not
love Gluttony and Drunkenness; but if you love Money, it will be difficult for
you not to be covetous, as it is for them that are brought up, and accustomed
to Pleasures, to renounce them for ever.

IX.
The Merit of an Action is greater by the Circumstances and Motives that caused
it; that is the Reason that he that gives a little, sometimes gives more than
he that gives a great deal more.

X.
Of two Persons that discourse together of Virtue, he that speaks most does not
always speak the best; nor yet he that speaks the best, is not always the most
Virtuous Man; but of the three, he that most desires to be so, and that is most
industrious to become so. A Man cannot love and esteem Virtue, except he be a
Possessor of it; that is the Reason he loves it, and that he is always afraid
to lose it.

XI.
A Woman loves Beauty, but not for the love she bears to Beauty, but because
she loves her self; that is the Reason she does not love it in others, and that
she is jealous of those that are like her self; it is not the same with you. If
you love Virtue in others, it is a Proof that you love your self less than you
love Virtue; and that it pleases you in all Persons where you find it.

XII.
Do good without regard what others will say; and never consider what
Reflections others will make. Do good because you love it; and love it because
it is amiable, and because you ought to love it.

XIII.
When a good Man will do a good Deed, and hide it from the sight of Men, he has
God for a Witness of the action; he sees nothing but God; all about him is
nothing but Air, that neither makes him that acts change posture or action; and
one may say of that Man, that the World is with him, but he is not with the
World.

XIV.
A good Man, when in the Church he is seen by all; he shuts not his Eyes, nor
looks more up to Heaven, nor is he long upon his Knees; he contents himself
with a modest outward appearance; that is enough for them that see him; but in
the bottom of his Heart he gives himself up to the sweet motions of Grace; he
hearkens to God, and adores his Greatness, his Power and goodness; all that
comes not to the Knowledge of them that see him, and that is it which he
desires.

XV.
A good Man is always good; if he change his manner of living, it is but to
accommodate himself to the place where he is, and to the Employment he finds
himself engaged in. He has always the same Thoughts, the same End, and the same
Design; he only changes the Way to go where he desires to go, and seeks out new
means to serve God, and procure his glory.

XVI.
A good Man that does good, and instructs others, is like a Mother that eats
Bread and Meat, that with it she may feed her Child; but he that is good only
in appearance, and though he talks often of Virtue, yet one may say that this
Hypocrite may be compared to the Raven, that every day brought Bread and Flesh
to the Prophet Elias to feed him, with which she did not feed her self.

XVII.
If you propose, in some certain actions, an Honest and Christian end, and do
not so in others, you will be like the false Coiners, who to make a false piece
pass, cover it over with Gold or Silver, and give it the stamp of the Prince.

XVIII.
If you be indeed a good Man, you will always agree with your self, what you
will do one day, you will do always, all your actions will have the same end;
you will not hide your self, or show your self more in one action than in
another; you will always have the same Zeal, the same Prudence, and the same
Modesty.

XIX.
If you be good only in appearance, you will not always act upon the same
Principle; you will oftentimes take from your actions and employments the merit
that they might have had, because you will never entirely be what you ought to
be. I would say, you will part and divide your self; every thing within you
will be at variance and contradiction; your outside will always gives the Lie
to what your have in your Heart, and you will be nothing like to what you
appear to be.

XX.
To be a good Man in your Ecclesiastic station, you must act otherwise than
you do in your Secular Employments, or in a Married state; these different
stations require a different manner of acting; such a Man would be a good Man,
if he was but a Lay Man, who does not enough to be so, having entered into the
Profession of a Clergyman. Such a Lay Man does more than he ought to do.
Neither the one nor the other are in the Ways where God has placed them, or if
they be, the one walks in it two slowly, and the other too swiftly; the one
stands still and turns back, the other, by going too fast, goes too far and
loses himself.

XXI.
The unhappiness that befalls those that would live with Honor and Probity,
comes from this, that they do not take care to govern their Life and Actions
according to their Profession. You see Men retired and entered into Religious
Orders, and you take your Model from them; that is it which God does not
require of you, if you be a Magistrate, or serve your Prince in his Armies.

XXII.
The practice of Devotion in others generally pleases us, yet we do not
exercise our selves in the practice of it in the station we are in; this is the
Reason that there are but few good Men, because there are few that do what they
ought to do, and nothing but what they ought to do.

XXIII.
Do not trouble your self with the Mortifications and Austerities of others,
but always remember what you are; do not measure your own strength by that of
others; whether you be a Man of the Robe, or of the Sword, do not pretend, by a
false Zeal, to live as a Benediction; this fickle and fantastic Conduct will
make you live neither like a Benediction, nor like a Man of the Robe nor of the
Sword.

XXIV.
The secret of Devotion is never to utter it, and not to make your self known,
by the excess and extremity of making an outward show.

XV.
An easy and equal way of Life, is always a Mark of great Piety. Never do any
thing extraordinary without Advice; but it is not necessary to take Advice to
do extraordinary well in those things which you are accustomed to do, and what
you see others do.

CHAP. XVI.
Upon the same Subject.
I.
MY Dear Children, do not think to get Honor by your Devotion, nor exercise it
to be seen, or to serve your Interests or Designs.

II.
There is a great difference betwixt a Good Man and a Devote or Zealot; the one
loves Virtue, and labors continually to acquire it; the other desires only to
appear so; that which is done without making a show, does not please him, he is
content to be taken for a devout one.

III.
If you be truly Religious, you will speak little of it, but do much; if you be
not in effect what you would seem to be, you will talk much, but do little
according to what you say.

IV.
If you are truly touched with Piety, you will mortify your self as much as
you can; you will be gentle and modest, and you will deny your self; but if you
are Pious only in appearance, you will love only your self, and seek your own
Ease upon all occasions; you will be querulous and impatient, and you will do
any thing to satisfy your Ambition or your Curiosity.

V.
If you be one of those that feign themselves Devouts, you will desire to be
Honored, and considered as such by all; that is your desirable Character. You
will be an irreconcilable Enemy to all that do not give you the Honor that
you think is due to you; you will be so wedded to your own Opinions, that you
will always maintain them with Obstinacy, and never acknowledge any ones Reason
but your own.

VI.
A good Man is always equal and just to all the World; but a Hypocrite is
sometimes pleased sometimes angry. He is offended at all and pleased with none;
the one is good to his Servants, and takes great care of them in their
Sickness, and rewards their Services; the other is Passionate and Choleric,
and can suffer nothing, and upon the least fault takes occasion to turn his
Servants away.

VII.
A truly upright Man is not hard to please in his Eating and Drinking; there is
nothing good enough, nor well enough dressed for the Hypocrite. The one, with
care to be secret, gives Alms, and does his good Works. The other does it in
the sight of the World, and boasting of them; the one thinks of pleasing
nothing but God, and the other nothing but Men.

VIII.
A Man when he cannot make himself considerable in the World, oftentimes thinks
to do it by turning Devout and Religious, and that is easily done. He needs but
reform his outside, to put on a severe and sour look, to censure all Men, and
to keep Company with those that are Religious, or those that seem so; so he
that was known to love the World, and was remarkable for his Vanity and
profuseness, and perhaps for his Debauchery; upon a sudden turns his Tongue,
and speaks in the Tone of a Devout.

IX.
Perhaps you may object to me, and say, what then is there no Repentance for
those that have been carried away, and seduced by the Pleasures of the World?
God forbid that I should have such a Thought; there is assuredly a Way left to
return, but it is not so easy; a Man will not so easily find God whom he has
sought so little.

X.
Your greatest troubles are caused by your ill Habits, and your ungoverned
Passions; to find ease of these Troubles, you ought not to seek it in your
Country-Houses of Pleasure, nor in great Offices and Employments, or in the
Confidence you may have in your Friends; these Remedies will always be too
feeble for so great Evils. If you enter into your self, and there search for
that which you cannot find any where else; perhaps you will find there a
Seditious Revolt and a Domestic War. You will see all in trouble and in Arms;
and you will acknowledge, that you have no greater Enemies than your self.

XI.
What therefore must you do in this deplorable juncture? you must have recourse
to God, he must be your only Refuge; but to have him favorable to you, you
must have recourse unto him with great earnestness, with great Love and Faith.

XII.
To have recourse to God on this manner, is not to devote your self to God by
Habit and Profession, and make Religion a Refuge in your Losses and Disgraces,
nor to be devout for your Worldly Interest, or your Vanity.

XIII.
Many things are permitted to the Devout, or Votaries, which are refused to
those that are not considered as such; they are always in the practice of good
Works always in the company of good and pious Persons; they hear nothing talked
of but Love and Charity, and upon these things they form an Idea of their own
Piety and Merit; and this Devote that looks upon himself as no more subject to
humane Frailties, falls oftentimes into a Pride like that of the fallen Angels.

XIV.
The first thing that this false Devote does, is to seek out a Director that is
not too severe, and complies a little with his Infirmities; this Devote looks
upon himself as a public Person, for whose safety all the World ought to be
concerned, and who ought to be looked upon with more respect than others; he is
so conceited with the Service he renders to the Poor and to the Church, that he
persuades his Director to the same, who in this Vow governs him on all
occasions, so that this Votary and Religious Person lives at his Ease, and
suffers nothing repugnant to his Nature.

XV.
So it is of a Votary, as of a good Wit, both have their just value; to be a
Man of Probity, and of good Understanding, he must be well furnished both with
the one and the other.

XVI.
If you be truly Religious and Devout, you should seem to the World not to be
so; Humility is the Seal and essential Proof of true Piety. Devotion in
Hipocrites, is like the Dust that the Wind carries away every Hour; and in the
truly Pious, it is like a Tree that has taken deep Root, that the Winds and
storms cannot remove.

XVII.
When I speak of the Devotes of one sort, and desire you should not be of the
number, do not mistake me, and think I speak against true Devotion, but against
the pretended one of Hypocrites; my intention is not to decry true Piety, it
cannot be too much or too often praised, and no Tongue is sufficient to show
its value; my design is only to make you understand a false Devotion; that is,
a Worldly and Feigned one, and that you be not deceived by it.

XVIII.
Nothing does so much prejudice to true Piety, as the false Zeal of those that
make a Trade of it; their Vanity, Avarice, and Deceit, is the cause that the
same Faults are unjustly charged upon the truly Humble, Upright, and Charitable.

XIX.
The difference of the true and false Devotion, is the same with that of a
Natural and a Painted Beauty; the one without care or Artifice, always appears
what it is; the other is nothing but fair Red and White laid on, which when
omitted for haste, or forgetfulness, cannot have the esteem that it had
obtained before by their means.

XX.
If you have true Piety, it will always be taken for such, without your care to
make it appear so; and on the contrary, if your Devotion be feigned, you must
always be upon your guard and watchful, to make your self pass for what you
really are not.

XXI.
The truly and seemingly Pious, are often seen together, and the likeness of
their outward behavior, makes them strictly keep Company, and may be thought
to be well pleased with one another; the first have a good Opinion of those
which they believe like themselves, and the last would have their Friends and
Kindred believe this good Opinion the first had on them. Charity is the Motive
that unites the one, and Vanity or Interest the Motive that unites the other.

XXII.
A false Devote is oftentimes a Covetous or Ambitious Man in disguise, that
gives himself this good Name to hide his Avarice or Ambition. You must have
Judgment and Discretion, not to mistake the one for the other.

XXIII.
A false Devote seems always what he is not, and almost never what he is; and
to deceive the World, he takes the Counsel Jeroboam gave to his Wife, to
surprise the Prophet Abias, he changes his outside, but his Heart is the same;
and as Rebecca gave to Jacob the Garments of Esau to deceive Isaac, so he takes
the Garments of Jacob to gain the esteem of all that see him.

XXIV.
Be upright always, but never endeavor to seem more upright than you are.
Hypocrisy is a Vice hated both by God and Man; and I must think that it is
better to be a Libertine, than a Hypocrite, because one repents sooner than the
other; and it is more easy for a Sinner to know himself in a disorderly and
ungodly Life, and to return; than in a false and pretended Piety; of all Vices,
Pride is that which God hates the most.

CHAP. XVII.
Advice against Covetousness, and all that relates to it.
I.
MY Dear Children, there is a great difference betwixt a Frugal and a Covetous
Man; the one is a good manager, and knows how to use the Riches God has given
him, and not dissipate them; the other condemns him for his Prudent Conduct,
and knows not how to make use of the Riches God has given him; the one follows
the Natural and Divine Light, that teaches him to use all things with Prudence;
the other shuts his Eyes to those Lights, and not trusting to Divine
Providence, and upon a necessity which he feigns, and which will never come to
pass, will not use what he has, lest he should want; not believing that God
will not forsake those that trust in him.

II.
Experience makes us know, that great Riches does not make a contented Mind,
and that the more a Man has, the more he would have; what Troubles and Torments
will you cause in your self, if all your Desires are placed in heaping up
Riches? What perplexities, fears, and discontents will you always have, if you
bend all your Thoughts upon adding Bag to Bag, and to fill your Coffers.

III.
The Covetous Man thinks himself happy, because he possesses that which the
World so much desires; but never dreams that he heaps up a Treasure of Anger
for the day of Vengeance, and that the Money that he keeps so close, will rise
up against him in the Day of Judgment. Because, according to the Opinions of
the Holy Fathers, the Covetous are in some sort Murderers of those they do not
relieve; and that they take away the Lives of the Poor, by not giving them what
is necessary to preserve it. What do I say! It is certain, sometimes they are
self-murtherers, when they refuse themselves the necessaries of Life, as they
often do.

IV.
When God forbids Lusts, he does not mean the Lusts of the Flesh only, but also
the immoderate Desire of Riches, a Desire that you can never enough fight
against; for nothing is more ordinary than to form Desires of this Nature, and
to make them without scruple of Conscience.

V.
Be not you of the number of those that are more covetous than the Jews, that
think that the heaping up of Riches is permitted them, and that they may
lawfully, on all occasions, search the means of becoming Rich.

VI.
I wish that Experience may not convince you, that Avarice is a fertile Sin
that brings forth many others. I desire that Experience may not make you know
that Covetousness is the Fountain of all sorts of Vices; in truth it cannot be
denied but that all Robberies and Thefts, both secret and public, all Murders
and Cruelties, are but the different streams that flow from this Fountain.

VII.
You cannot too much observe that Avarice confounds and destroys all things; it
is by that, that all the Principles of Religion are despised, that the
foundation of Justice is destroyed; it is by that, that Judges do not discern
the Truth, and that the Advocates disguise it; it is by that, that Widows and
Orphans are oppressed; and lastly, it is by that, that we see so many Poor
shamefully brought to the last extremity.

VIII.
If it were not for Covetousness, you should not see so much Faith-breaking
amongst Merchants; so much deceit in Trade; so much cheating at Play; so many
false Bankrupts in Commerce; so much Injustice at the Bar, and so much Symony
in the Church.

IX.
It is Covetousness that makes the Rich to ruin the Poor, and to seize their
Goods; if it were not for Covetousness, every one would pay his Debts, and it
would be a pleasure to assist the Poor and Sick.

X.
You will disgrace your self by Covetousness; your Servants will not suffer it,
but will quit you every day; you will grieve every one that you have to do
with, you will have no Friends; and to speak the truth in a word, you will be
good for nothing, but to be shut up in your Closet with your Counters, to count
how much you have spared and scraped up together.

XI.
If you be Covetous, you will be always discontent, always murmuring, and
always old before your time.

XII.
If you be Covetous, you will be unsupportable to your Wives and Children, to
your Servants, and oftentimes to your selves. You will torment your selves,
because your Birth or Employments oblige you to make a greater Expense than you
desire.

XIII.
If you be Covetous when you are to make any extraordinary Expense, you will be
a Week in resolving upon it, and then will have need of a Dozen to comfort you
after you have done it.

XIV.
Look upon Covetousness as a Vice Hateful to all Persons of Birth and Wit; look
upon Covetousness as a Domestic Evil, that troubles the Peace of all the
Family, and does not give a moment of quiet to those that are subject to it.

XV.
Take pleasure in the managament of Money, but not in the heaping it up; it is
a Pleasure to make an Expense proportionable to what a Man has, but it is not
one to sit down, and every Day to count what a Man has.

XVI.
To what purpose is it that your Coffers are full of Gold and Silver, if you
make no use of it? And if the more you have, the more you desire to have; if
you be Rich no otherwise but in this manner, one may well say, that you possess
that which you have not, and that you have what you possess not; and that by
Consequence, it is your Coffers that are Rich, and not you, and that the Gold
you have does not make you more Happy, than if it was yet in the Bowels of the
Earth.

XVII.
If you be Rich on this fashion, your Desires will lead you still to hoard up,
and not to touch what you have gathered, and so you will labor Day and Night
for your Coffers, and not for your self, and you will enrich them at your own
expense.

XVIII.
And when you are Rich in this manner, your Cares, your Troubles and
Discontents will eat you to the Heart, and make you Old to that degree, that
all Men will judge you to be Twenty or Thirty Years older than you really are.

XIX.
If you water a sandy Ground, it will not appear less dry; if you lay more Wood
upon the Fire, it will not extinguish it, but make it burn more fiercely; it is
the same of Covetousness, the more one heaps up, the more he desires it: and
the insatiable desire of having, will not diminish, neither because you augment
your Treasure every Day, nor because you possess it.

XX.
When you have Money in your Coffers, and do not make use of it, you are
neither Master nor Possessor of it, but only the Keeper. You will not have the
Pleasure that the Enjoyment of your Riches would give you; you will only have
the trouble and pains of gathering of them, and the fear of losing them.

XXI.
If you be Covetous, you will value nothing but Gain, Honor and Glory will
have no share in your Designs; you will never consult them in whatsoever you
undertake; and you will think you will steal from your self whatsoever you give
to others; and whatsoever you allow to your self more than necessaries.

CHAP. XVIII.
Advice upon Vanity and true Glory.
I.
MY Dear Children, I know a Man of Quality, who passes for an Insolent and
Proud Man with those that do not know him; and I assure you that never Man was
less so than he; his fine Liveries, his splendid Equipage, and number of
Servants, and his high looks do him wrong; when a Man is acquainted with him,
he finds him upon all occasions very civil, familiar, and obliging, and one
half Hours Conversation gives the lie to all these appearances, and destroys
all the prejudices a Man has entertained of him. I speak not of this Man, but
to approve in you such Qualities, that you are not proud but of your Birth,
good Behavior and Merit; and that these Advantages should always be maintained
by your Civility and Complaisance with all the World; and that this should make
you esteemed and beloved of all; therefore the Advice I have to give you upon
this point, is, that you always preserve, as you do, such an outward Deportment
as they ought to have that are well Born, and that it always be accompanied
with a civility that appears natural in you, and which all the World have
reason to approve.

II.
A Man should not be thought vain, because he appears so; he should not be
considered as such, but when his Words and Actions make him known that he is
really so.

III.
There is so strict a connection betwixt Civility and Humility, that they are
almost inseparable; it is for that Reason that St. Bernard assures us that they
are two Sisters; the one hides her self as much as she can, and retiring into
the bottom of the Heart, never desires to appear, or to be taken notice of; the
other to the contrary, makes her self known at all times, and gives
indifferently to all the World Proofs of what she is; the same may be said of
Pride and Vanity; they are very seldom one without the other, though one of
them hides it self upon all occasions, the other shows her self every moment.

IV.
No Man desires to be thought vain; it is a Fault that a Man takes care to hide
from himself, but he is not ashamed to be taken for a proud Man, or for a Man
that would be distinguished from others; and one who thinks he deserves to be
taken notice of for what he is, a Man of Worth and Value.

V.
It is easy to judge whether a Man be Vain or no, when a Man does not pay him
all the Respect that he thinks his due; his Pride taking offense, makes his
Vanity appear; the one comes to help the other, to give a perfect Idea of him,
which one desires to know.

VI.
If we were not almost all of us unjustly persuaded of our own merit, we should
always discover in others some Virtue that we our selves want; and we should
always find Reasons to submit to them; but we are such partial lovers of all
that is in us, or of all that comes from us, that we believe (when any one
praises another) he steals our own Praises, and gives them to him. I shall
think you happy if you do not find this fault in your self, or that it be not
really in you.

VII.
It is a mistake to imagine, that we cannot do an action that is taken notice
of, except we be moved to it by Vanity; every one may make himself known
according to the Employment he is in, without the Thoughts of being praised and
applauded for it. The joy of performing his Duty well, is a sufficient reward
for one who seeks to acquit himself with Honor, and never desires to carry the
Fame of it further.

VIII.
It is of good actions in respect of Vanity, as of patience in respect to Peace
of Mind; when a Man is accustomed to suffer without complaining, and when a Man
enjoys himself in his Sorrows and Afflictions, and the quiet of his Mind is not
disturbed, it is the same of performing good actions without Vanity, and making
a Habit of it; Uprightness and Honesty are naturalliz'd in us, and are turned
into our Substance, and become the Rule of all we do.

IX.
If you have sucked in greatness with your Milk, and that the Air that you
breath in, be an Air full of Respect that is due to you from your high Birth;
think oftentimes that you are Men, and that Men are subject to a Thousand
Frailties like others; do not make your self drunk with what flatters the Flesh
and the Senses, and do not applaud your self for your great Riches, Birth, and
seeming Happiness; enter into your self from time to time, and there learn
Christian Lessons; learn to humble your selves before God, when all Men cry you
up before the World.

X.
You may be Rich and considerable by your Birth, or by your Places, without
being vain; as you may be brought low and poor without being humble.

XI.
Vanity is of all Countries, and no Country is strange to her; she has been and
will be in all Ages, and all sorts of Governments; and she will be found to the
end of the World in all Professions; it is but the manner of being Rich or Poor
will make you Humble or Vain.

XII.
Humility and Modesty are not always confined to Cloisters or Solitudes, they
are found sometimes in the Palaces of Princes, and in the middle of Courts; and
there they draw to them the greatest esteem, where they find the greatest
opposition; where all fight against them, they triumph over all.

XIII.
Praise ought to be considered as the Shadow of a good action, it follows it
and does not go before it; so that he that does a good action that he may be
praised for it, reverses the order of things, and puts that before which should
come behind.

XIV.
Man is so propense to Vanity, that he often seeks Honor from the Vanity of
another, and sometimes makes himself the Author of a Song or Madrigal, which he
never made; and they that are deceived, not knowing the Author, are not in the
humor to make enquiry, and to convince him of being false in a trifle of this
nature.

XV.
The glory that Men of the World search with such earnestness, is for the most
part so ill established, and of so little duration, that it cannot better be
compared to any thing than to what appears in a Dream, or upon a Theater; a
Dream passes, and a Comedy ends, and there scarce remains any Memory of them.

XVI.
So many Heathen Philosophers have given us Examples of despising glory; that
it is amazing that we can make it the Object of our Vows and Wishes. Those
Philosophers ought to be always before our Eyes, and though dead, ought to
instruct us, and inspire us with Thoughts capable to make us ashamed of those
we have had, and of those which yet we may have.

XVII.
Sometimes we condemn Vainglory, but yet we love it, and pursue it like to
Rivers which fly themselves, and at the same time follow themselves; we are so
filled with Vanity, that we fly our selves, and seek our selves, and do not
find our selves contented either with the one or the other*

XVIII.
We fly Pride under its own Name, but give it more specious and honest Names,
and then run after it; and, in a word, we disguise it so to our selves, that it
no longer frights us, but we love it without scruple; and even so we deceive
our selves with Pleasure, and are sworn Enemies to Pride, if our own Words may
be believed; but we make it all our care, and the delight of our Hearts.

XIX.
Set not too great a value upon the esteem of Men and their Praises, for in
this they are very capricious; the true Reward of a good action is, that you
have done it, the rest depends upon the Mind, and interest of those it relates
to; one will see it by a false Light, another sees it as it is, but perhaps,
through Envy, will not speak of it as he ought.

XX.
Our Religion teaches us, that we should not set our Love upon Worldly Honors,
nor its Praises; it teaches us to fly all the Thoughts of Vanity that it may
inspire us with; it teaches you not to applaud your own Conduct, nor to value
your own merit; it teaches you not to look upon what you have done as any thing
extraordinary, that should distinguish you and set you above others.

XXI.
Religion teaches you not to consider your self with a secret complaisance, and
not to wish that others may have Thoughts to your Advantage, and not to trouble
your self and be transported against those that are noted not to comply with
you in your pretended merit.

XXII.
This sort of Spirit will hinder you from raising your self upon the ruin of
others; this will hinder you from regarding those things that may distinguish
you from others, as the advantages of your Birth and Wit; and this will oblige
you oftentimes to cast an Eye upon your own defaults.

XXIII.
This Spirit teaches you to value the good that you do, and not the praises
that attend it; it teaches you not to see your self by a false Light, and not
to withdraw your self from the true Light, to the end that all your actions may
appear to be no other than what really they are.

XXIV.
So many Persons of Quality, of Wit, and Merit, have renounced the glory of the
World; and by a generous disdain all that could be considered in it. This may
make an impression upon your Hearts; this that I say to you now, is but an
Echo, to repeat to you here that which so many brave actions have said, and
made such a noise when they have been blazoned abroad in the World.

XXV.
The more you despise the Honors and Praises of the World, the more you will
be esteemed; Men will give you that with pleasure, which you refuse by your
Virtue; and then the value they have for you, will come from the Heart, and
will not end in the outward Proofs of a respect that is forced, or in studied
affected, and extravagant praises.

XXVI.
Delight in fearing God, and living according to the Dictates of your
Conscience, and not in your Birth, Employments, or Riches. Value your selves
less upon being persons of Quality, than upon your making your selves appear
such by your Life and Behavior; which you should take care that it be always
civil and obliging: make it your glory, that your Civilities and good Offices
that you render to all, should more make you known who you are, than your
Equipage and number of your Servants.

XXVII.
Know ye that there is more Honor to a Man of Quality, to be familiar with
those that are inferior in Birth, than to carry himself with Pride and disdain
toward his Inferiors.

XXVIII.
Be you always persuaded, that true Honor consists chiefly in despising it,
and doing your Duty civilly and obligingly, without expecting Praise or Reward.
In a word, there is no Man so full of Honor, and makes so good use of it, as
he that despises it the most.

CHAP. XIX.
Advice upon Raillery.
I.
MY Dear Children, it is seldom that Raillery is not offensive, and therefore
by consequence often has ill effects.

II.
Of all Railleries, those that may be made of Princes and Sovereigns, ought
most to be avoided. You cannot be too cautious in this point; there is always
cause to repent of such a Liberty, when you take it, and give not the respect
due to them.

III.
History teaches us, that the Emperor Domitian, who lived in the end of the
first Age, led a Life so idle and effeminate, that when he retired into his
Closet, he employed his time in catching Flies, and killing them with a Bodkin,
as Children do Wasps; this gave occasion to the Answer that one Vibius Crispus
made to one of his Acquaintance, who came to the Palace to make his Court; and
asking whether any one was with the Emperor, he answered, no not so much as a
Fly. The Answer was pleasant and witty, but I must tell you it cost him dear.

IV.
How imprudent soever you may be in this point, have a particular care you do
not rally the faults of your Parents or Friends; if you observe any, forbid
your Eyes the seeing of them, or your Tongue speaking of them.

V.
If you set your self up for a Railer, you will be an Enemy to your own
Reputation and quiet; a Man that sets himself to rally, puts Arms in the Hands
of those that he diverts himself with, and oftentimes receives more Blows than
he gives.

VI.
After you have rallied in a Company, and gone out of it, you are no sooner
departed from it, but they will examine you from Head to Foot; and one that has
not spoke a Word while you was present, will tear you with his Teeth when you
are gone, and in the mean time you may be sure that none will take your part;
none will excuse you, or be sorry for you; to the contrary, the most reserved
by his Silence will seem to condemn your Behavior, and approve of what is
spoken of you.

VII.
It may be said of a Man that hears raillery, that he is a Man of Wit, but the
contrary of him that makes it; the one makes a Business of his Wit, and without
reason; the other is Wiser, and draws himself out of it; the one is blamed by
every one, the other praised by all.

VIII.
He that rallies without being taken notice of, is like a Woman full of Paint
and Patches, far from pleasing, is despised, and every one takes care to avoid
his Company.

IX.
It is true, that oftentimes the tone and manner that one rails with, is the
Reason that they excuse him and are not offended at him; but at the same time
it must be agreed, that sometimes they that are rallied, or those present, have
not the Judgment to understand the manner, but rather consider what was said,
than the manner of saying it.

X.
There is nothing in my Opinion, wherein you can do your self so much Wrong, as
to set up for a Professor of Raillery; if once you give your self this
Reputation, you will lose the confidence of your Friends, and the esteem of all
Persons of Honor. None will value those who make it all their Design, and all
their Aim, to pass for a Wit and Railer, and to divert himself at other Men's
Costs. Nothing appears serious, nothing honest, or allowable in such a Design.

XI.
If you rally with Wit, you will make Enemies with your Wit, but they will be
nevertheless your Enemies; and you will nevertheless make them think, that your
Wit is not capable of any thing better; and make them believe that all the
strength and quickness of your Wit has no further aim, nor cannot go further
than a trifling injurious pleasantry.

XII.
There are some, who to give themselves the Liberty of rallying, and that none
should deny it them, begin with themselves, and first turn themselves into
Ridicule. This is to buy this liberty very dear. I beseech you do not you
purchase it at that Rate.

XIII.
A Man of my Acquaintance, much given to Raillery, both by Inclination and
Custom, begun to play his part as soon as he came into Company, and said a
Hundred pleasant things of his own Nose, and other parts of his Face; and after
that he thought all things would be permitted him, and no person escaped him;
but in truth there was more to be said against the Humor and Wit of the Man,
than against the (...), Eyes, or shape of his Face; he (...) himself obnoxious
to all Men of Sense and Reason, and that understood Conversation.

XIV.
If you give your self the Air and Humor of a Rallier in all Companies; Men
will not believe you capable of any Secret or any Business; they will fear, and
not without Reason, that you will turn all that is serious and of consequence
into jest and pleasantry; they will never ask your Advice upon Marriage, or any
Employment that may present it self; they will persuade themselves that nothing
solid or serious will agree with your Wit.

XV.
In a well established Government, Raillery ought to be banished; it is a Pest
that infects and corrupts thousands that might do the State and Public good
Service. This Pest is so much the more dangerous, and spreads it self more
easily, because it always appears pleasant and agreeable.

XVI.
If these Railers were not applauded, the Race of these Idle and ill-contriv'd
Wits, would soon be exterminated, and Conversation would become more easy and
more honest.

XVII.
By accustoming your self to rally, you will lose the esteem you ought to have
for them with whom you live, and you will fancy a false Idea of your own Merit
and Perfections; the oue is against Civility and Charity, the other against
Justice and Truth.

XVIII.
The more you are above others by your Birth, Riches, or Employment, the more
wary you should be how you displease or anger them; the Rank you are placed in
above others, does not give you right to despise really or affront them; they
dare not offend you, because they fear you; do not offend them, that they may
love you.

XIX.
There are many that applaud themselves when they have exercised a fine piece
of Raillery and Wit; but for certain, you will be better pleased with your
self, than they are, when you abstain from it; and have sacrificed some Words
to the Reputation of others, which will be more to your own Honor, and the
satisfaction of your Conscience.

CHAP. XX.
Of Charity and Alms which ought to be performed to the Poor.
I.
MY Dear Children, Alms is a good Work, that cannot be denied; but you must do
this good work rightly, if you will make it acceptable to God, and profitable
to your self.

II.
You ought not to trust to your Alms you do, as if they should license you to
continue in your disorderly living. You ought not to purchase, if I may so
speak, this impunity by a liberality which does not cost you much, and which
your own Interest induced you to; your Alms ought to be the proof and the
effect of the Conversion of your Heart; and to supply the want of Zeal and
fervor in the mortification of your selves; they ought to be as the Golden Key
that open's the Gate of Heaven.

III.
The sacred Scripture teaches us, that he is Happy that has Pity on the Poor;
it is therefore easy to make your selves Happy for ever, since it is natural
to succor those that are in Misery. And why shall you he Happy? Because you
shall have good Advocates, and powerful Intercessors in Heaven; the Alms that
you give to the Needy shall speak continually for you.

IV.
The Sacred Scripture teaches us farther, that none can believe in God, and
make profession of being a Christian, without loving of Mercy; it appears by
this Expression, that you ought not only to give Alms bountifully, but that you
should take pleasure in doing it, and seek for occasions to do it.

V.
A Father of the Church assures us, that we cannot be pleased with giving Alms,
except we be verily persuaded, that the good we do to others, we do to our
selves; and that we give to our selves what we give to others in their
Necessity; and that we put a little Earth in the Hands of the Poor, by which we
gain Heaven.

VI.
If you have Faith, you will do your self Honor and Pleasure, in succouring
the Word incarnate in the Persons of the Poor, who are his Members.

VII.
What joy and glory ought it to be, to give to him who has given to us all that
we have, and who has made us all that we are.

VIII.
When you refuse the Poor that ask of you, you do great wrong to your selves;
for the Scripture positively says, that to do Charity to the Poor and Sick, is
to lend to the Lord upon great Interest, who will certainly pay again what is
lent him.

IX.
God forbids us to lend to Men upon Usury, but he not only permits us, but
commands us to do it to him; Usury, in regard to Men is Criminal, and punished
with eternal Death; and to the contrary, our Usury, in regard to God, is
innocent and profitable, of which a happy life, that never shall have an end,
is the infallible Reward.

X.
God has no need of your Money, it is he that gives us all we have, but the
Poor have need of it; and when you give Alms to the Poor, God receives them by
their Hands; the Poor cannot render what you give them, and can make no other
acknowledgment than to Pray for you; which when they do, they say at it were, O
Lord God, we have received some Money, we can never pay it again; good God pay
it for us, if you please. He is good Security; you give Credit to a Man, if a
Rich Man be Security for him; with greater Reason you ought to trust God, when
he obliges himself to repay what is advanced upon his Promise and Security.

XI.
The Poor have a right to the temporal Goods of the Rich, as well as the Rich
have a right to the Spiritual Goods of the Poor; they depend reciprocally the
one on the other. The Poor have recourse to the Rich, to succor them in this
Life; the Rich have recourse to the Poor, to obtain in the other World, by
their Prayers, the pardon of their Sins.

XII.
You are therefore obliged by Justice and Interest to give Alms; by Justice,
because Temporal Goods being given by the liberal Hand of God to all Men; the
strong ought to assist the weak, the Sound the Sick, and the Rich the Poor.

XIII.
You are obliged by Interest to give Alms, to the end that you should obtain
from God those Graces that he has placed in the Hands of the Poor, and by this
means you labor to work out your Salvation, which is oftentimes affixed to the
Works of Mercy.

XIV.
He that is ready to have Mercy, is happy, says the Wise Man; behold the Reason
is, that God judges the actions by the Principles from whence they come; the
bottom of the Heart of him that gives is known to him, and that is the Reason
that small Alms given with true Zeal, is more acceptable to him than great
given without Love.

XV.
The joy and cheerfulness with which you give, will augment the Value, and give
them a Merit whereof God alone is the Judge.

XVI.
You may assure your self, you cannot be good Men unless you give Alms, for it
is essential to Virtue; the more Piety you have, the more you give to the Poor;
the more you are known by your Christian Practices, the more you will
distinguish your self by Alms.

XVII.
You give what you have to the Poor, that you may receive what you have not;
this Commerce is equally profitable to both; without the Alms that you give,
you will die in impenitence; without the Alms that are received, the Poor would
die in want; see how God provides for all by his infinite goodness.

XVIII.
It is glorious for Persons of Quality to prefer the care of the Poor, before
that of their Greatness and their Pleasures. The more Piety you have, the more
you will reflect upon what I have said; and the more you make Reflection upon
it, the more will you profit by it.

CHAP. XXI.
Advice upon Sincerity in Words, and the Way to know when we should speak, and
when we should be silent.
I.
MY Dear Children, so much as a Man by his corrupted Nature loves disguise and
lying; so much when he acts by Grace and Honor does he love Truth and
Sincerity; as Purity ought to reign in us in every thing, so Truth ought to be
Mistress not only of our Hearts and Minds, but also of all that appears in us,
or comes from us; that is, our Words ought always to agree with our Thoughts
and Actions, and there should be nothing within us, that gives it self the Lie.

II.
Never speak against the Truth; but you ought not always to speak it; you ought
on some oceasions, to keep it secret, as a thing you are obliged not to reveal
in such Cases; you may conceal the Truth, and not speak it, but in no case
disguise and lie.

III.
Sincerity harh always been esteemed by all the World; it has always been
regarded as the part and Character of an Honest Man.

IV.
Pythagoras used to say, that the Gods had given two considerable Graces to
Man, in giving him the power to be sincere, and to do good Offices to his
Friends.

V.
If we should be all heard to speak, there is not one of us but would say we
are sincere, and desire others should be so with us, in the mean time, there
are few of us that are so in effect; and those that are pass for imprudent, and
such as do not know how to live.

VI.
Of all that concerns sincerity, the Name only is beloved; to be sincere, to
speak according to the World, is to say all that we can think, and more; when
we praise any thing; but upon a thing that may be condemned, we speak with
prudence and circumspection.

VII.
A Man cannot too much praise a Man whom he likes, and in this point one cannot
be too sincere; but when you blame him never so little, and pass the bounds of
sincerity, you grieve him, you offend him.

VIII.
If you follow the Practices of the Age, he that has not Wit enough to appear
sincere in flattering you dextetously, will have no great Credit with you nor
esteem; you would neither have Men sincere(...) Truth, nor Flatterers in
appearance. You would have Men sincere according to the fashion, and as they
are ordinarily, in the practice of the Age; that is, Men that are prudent and
cautious in telling you of your Faults, but witty and dexterous in speaking
your Praises, which you think you deserve; a Man of this temper, and sincere in
this manner, shall pass with you for a brave Man, who knows perfectly well how
to live, and acquize Friends every day.

IX.
There is little sincerity to be learnt at Court, it is the place of the World
where they best disguise what they think; every one has his Designs, and if you
trust them, you will be almost always deceived.

X.
Sincerity is always laudable, but it ought always to be accompanied with
prudence and circumspection. You ought always to speak sincerely, but you ought
not always to speak. If you will always keep and not lose your Friends, nor the
favor of great Men, nor have difference with your Kindred and Acquaintance;
learn to be silent.

XI.
A prudent and discreet silence will be always more to your advantage, than the
most witty and the best contrived sincerity; a Man often repents that he has
spoken, but never that he has holden his Tongue.

XII.
What prudence and circumspection soever you use in speaking, it is still
speaking, and great Lords and Men of the World will have the Power of
explaining your Words as they please, and they seldom change their Mind in what
they believe you have said to displease them.

XIII.
Sincerity is sometimes as faulty as a ^y; that is, when you use it
unreasonably; when you speak with sincerity upon things that you ought to be
silent in, you will offend them of whom you speak, and you will give them cause
to accuse you of imprudence, incivility, and want of Charity.

XIV.
Do not think it an Honor to be taken notice of, for one that talks most in
the Company, but to the contrary, take pleasure in not speaking but when you
ought, and what you ought. Speak to make Conversation, but do not pretend to
take from others the same liberty, and to have an equal share in that innocent
divertisement.

XV.
Consider a great talker, as a Vessel always full, that can hold no more, which
is proper for nothing but to be emptied; and though he empty himself every
moment, yet he seems still to be full.

XVI.
There are some who have such an Itch of talking always, that one may say they
had need of two Tongues as well as two Ears; and that these sort of Persons
give ear so little to what others say; that one Ear would be sufficient to hear
what is spoken to them; and two Tongues not too much to entertain the Company
in which he talks.

XVII.
As it is said, that one speaks to the Eyes of a Man when he Writes to him, so
it may be said, that a Man speaks to the Mouth of one that has no Ears to hear
others speak, and whose Tongue seems to perform two Functions at once, that of
hearing and speaking.

XVIII.
The Tongue ought to be the Servant of Reason; do not suffer this Servant to
run through the Streets, and stop every Passenger; keep her under, and let her
not be employed otherwise than in the Service of her Mistress; in a word, do
not permit her to appear to no purpose, and against the Interest of her she
belongs to.

XIX.
Regard Speech as the Door of the House where Reason Dwells; do not open this
Door but when occasion requires it; if you usually do otherwise, you will show
that this House is not well governed, and abandoned to be pillaged.

XX.
If you know how to be silent, you will deserve to be praised more than if you
spoke the finest things in the World, and the most pleasing.

XXI.
It will always be in your Power to speak what you have been silent in, but not
to call back what you have spoken, and from thence came the Proverb. That Men
have taught us to speak, but the Gods to be silent.

XXII.
A great talker tells all he knows, and all he knows not; he is neither capable
of Secrecy, nor of Business; it is a Sive that can hold nothing; it is a
Torrent so rapid, that nothing can stop it.

XXIII.
It is very seldom that a great talker has either discretion or good manners;
that is the reason why Nestor in the Tragedy of Sophocles, does not reproach
Ajax for his much talking, because he was a brave Man, so that he excused his
too many Words in favor of his Actions.

XXIV.
A great Talker is like a Drunkard that falls into excess, unbecoming and
unworthy of a Man of Quality; he discredits himself so, that tho he speaks the
most solid Truth, out of his Mouth they will be taken for Lies or Trifles, that
are not worthy of attention.

XXV.
Reason ought to govern the Tongue, and all its motions; so as a good Hand and
a good Ear makes an Instrument of Music melodious and agreeable.

XXVI.
To speak much, is not precisely to make a long Discourse, for that is
profitable and necessary, but it is to lose time, and to speak to no purpose.

XXVII.
You will never talk too much when you talk well, and always speak too much
when you speak ill.

XXVIII.
The Naturalists hold, that the Beasts teach us to be silent, and say, that by
instinct they forbear to cry and make a noise on some occasions, for fear they
should become a Prey to those Beasts that they are afraid of.

XXIX.
Bias the Wise Grecian, being requested by Amasis King of Egypt, to send him
the Best and the Worst Member of the Beast, that he should first Sacrifice; he
sent him the Heart and the Tongue; the Heart to show him it was the Principle
of all good actions, and the Tongue as the Fountain of all bad ones.

XXX.
You may be assured, a readiness and custom of talking continually, is the
beginning of Folly, because the levity of the Tongue comes from the levity of
the Brain and Heart; and for that Reason, you ought to be as reserved and
moderate in your words as in your actions.

XXXI.
If you talk much, you will be like to Frontier Towns, that are not fortified;
that are always exposed to the insult of the Enemy; that is the saying of a
Wise Man, which you can never too much think upon.

CHAP. XXII.
Upon Evil Speaking or Slandering.
I.
MY Dear Children, I cannot too much make you abhor Evil Speaking; in my
Opinion, it is the most infamous of all Vices; it is so much the moor to be
feared, that whosoever is subject to it, oftentimes gives a mortal blow to a
Man, that never knows the Hand that killed him. And that I may give you a true
Idea of those that speak ill of others; I assure you, they are Traitors,
Cowards, and Murderers.

II.
I call all those Evil Speakers that speak ill of others, whether that be true
what they say or not; the Reason is, that both do equal harm, and are equally
received as true. In effect the custom is, that Men do not suspend their
Judgment on these occasions, but persuade themselves that common Report is
warrant enough for the Truth of the Matter, to make them believe it, and do not
think themselves obliged to examine it.

III.
We shall never recover the Reputation that we have lost by Evil Speaking, as
we recover our Health we have lost by our excess, or by some other accident
that has happened to us; one depends upon our Constitution, our Temper, or our
way of living; the other does not depend upon our selves; we are in the Hands
of the Public, that never spares or favors any one; and when they have
received a prejudice to any one they never quit the impressions that are given
them.

IV.
One thing of the World that you ought to study most is, that you take care to
make the good actions of others to be esteemed, more than to publish their bad
ones. You should be very unjust with exactness and severity to aggravate what
others have done ill by weakness or surprise, and bury in Oblivion, and never
speak of the good they have done with great zeal and earnestness.

V.
Resolve firmly never to hear any one ill spoken of, but declare that your Ears
shall always be open to hear all that can be spoken good of others, and always
shut your Ears for any thing that shall be spoken to their disadvantage; this
will procure you great quiet of Mind, and hinder you from hearing a thousand
things that will disturb it.

VI.
We are almost all so unhappy by Nature, that we are more touched with Ill than
with Good; if we hear of a dozen good actions, they leave less Impressions upon
us, than one bad one that is told us; we might choose one of those dozen good
actions that pleases us most, to publish it; but this is what we never think
of; but we can never have Language enough to publish one bad action to all the
World. Let us do our selves justice upon this way of proceeding; on one side it
notes a great Corruption in our Hearts and Minds, and on the other side it
denotes the little Respect and Charity we have one for another.

VII.
Tell a Man of the World of an extraordinary action that deserves to be taken
notice of; he has much ado to believe it, and requires Proofs and Witnesses;
and is persuaded that it would be a weakness in him to believe such a Report so
easily; but let a malicious Man forge a shameful and detestable action; he
believes that at the first moment it is told him; ask him the reason of this
difference, and he will answer you, that the Good and Charitable Report a
thousand good actions one of another, that they never once thought upon; will
it not be equity likewise to say, that many wicked actions are attributed to
those that never had the Design or Will to commit them; he is cautious and
circumspect in believing what is said of the one, and finds no difficulty to
believe the other, in one of these he must be convinced, because it is a good
action; in the other he is at first moment persuaded, because it is a bad one.

VIII.
Oftentimes a Man speaks ill of another, because if he had been in his place,
he would have done that which he accuses him of; his own weakness gives him an
Idea of another; and the Reproach of his own Conscience supports his ill
speaking of another; and that is all the foundation he has for it. He is
persuaded, that he must have yielded to the Temptation; and there needs no more
to make him report that another could not resist it. Thus you see how most
things pass in the World, after what manner Men decree and decide the actions
of others, and upon what foot we make our selves Arbitrators and Judges of them.

IX.
It is more cowardice in my Opinion to speak ill of one to others, than to
affront him; the reason is, that he that speaks ill of another assaults him
when he is absent; there is none to resist him. And this manner of acting,
cannot be but by a Man of no Courage nor Honor, who hazards nothing, but does
all with security. He that speaks affrontingly to ones Face, he whispers not
Secrets in the Ear of another; he trusts it not to a Stranger upon the Religion
of an Oath; he attacks his Enemy in his Face; he conceals nor disguises any
thing; and without Fear of his Anger, he fights him with equal force; so that I
can easily conclude, that he that speaks injuriously to ones Face, is the more
transported, the other the more dangerous; but the action of the one is more
excusable than the other.

X.
The Evil Speakers and Slanderers may be fi^ly compared to Vultures and Ravens,
who never seek for Flowers and Fruits, but only for Carrion, upon which they
fall upon to feed. The Slanderers do the same thing; they never look out for
good Actions; they are curious for none but bad ones, and there they rest to
censure and aggravate them.

XI.
They may be likewise compared to the Sea, and this Comparison seems more equal
and just than the other. As the Sea buries in its bottom, Gold and Silver and
Precious Stones, and all that is precious in the Ship that it swallows, and
throws up upon the Shore nothing but some stinking Carcasses, and some
worthless Relics of a miserable Shipwreck; so these Slanderers hide the good
qualities of those they would destroy, and never speak of that which would be
praised; they continually expose their defaults without ever making mention of
their Virtues; they suppress all their good actions, and publish nothing but
what has escaped them by surprise, weakness, or imprudence.

XII.
It is not enough, that you are not the Author of Slanders, but you must not be
one of the Accomplices. I say it is not enough that you did not invent them; but
you must have a care that you do not report them, and spread them abroad.

XIII.
I do not know whether he that enters a Town first to pillage it, does more
wrong, or they that follow and set all on Fire. It is the same of the
Slanderers. They that report and spread them abroad, does at least as much
injury to those that are ill spoken of, as they that forged and invented them.

XIV.
Your Conscience and Honor will always suggest to your Thoughts conformable to
what I have spoken to you, and do but a little consult them, and you will have
a horror for this Vice, and will avoid the Company of those that are subject
to it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Advice about Expenses, and the good management of them.
I.
MY Dear Children make no greater Expenses than you are well able to bear, nor
more than you ought; govern your Expenses according to your Estate, your
Employments, and the rank you hold in the World; do not desire to appear above
what you are, and do not impose upon the Public, by desiring to pass for what
you are not.

II.
If you make all your Expenses in Clothes, in Horses, in Furniture, and on your
Table; this is not a good way to make your self considered; he that chooses
rather to have good Books than a Bed of Velvet, or rich Hangings; a
considerable Office than a great Equipage, is the more judicious; the one sets
his Heart upon Trifles; the other has an Understanding more solid, and judges
of things accordingly.

III.
The Expenses that are Profitable and Honorable, and have happy Effects, are
preferable before those that please but for the moment they are made in, and
leave no other Fruit behind them but Repentance for the making of them.

IV.
You ought to sow by handfuls, and not turn the Sack; this Old Proverb
expresses well what I would say, since it makes us understand, that we ought to
sow our ground, no^ to scatter it; we ought to rule our Expense and not to make
it excessive.

V.
To make too great Expenses or too little, are two vicious extremities that you
ought to have care to avoid; it is true, one is more easily to be done than the
other; but likewise it must be confessed, that one Fault is better than the
other; a Man cannot lessen his Expenses when all is spent, but he may increase
his Expenses when he has wherewithal to do it.

VI.
There is no Expense that we ought less to grieve at, than that which is made
out of gratitude, every thing speaks in favor of this expense. The Interest of
him that makes it, and the Interest of him for whom it is made are equal in
this occasion; the one deserves it, and the other thinks he is obliged to do
it, so that both authorize it, and both justify it.

VII.
I know a great many that make great Expenses, but I know few that make it as
they should do it, and when they should do it.

VIII.
Men do not grudge the Expense that makes a great Show, and for which he is
honored, but this is chargeable, and it is with Reason said, that it is rather
snatched than comes out of the Purse. A Man grudges not ten Pistols spent to
make him appear great, who grieves at one for his particular use; be not you of
this Humor and Character.

IX.
A Man out of good Husbandry oftentimes denies himself many things that he
freely gives to another; this is to pay dear for the respect that others give
him; this seems as if the Riches that is given us, was not given us for own
selves, but for those that have business with us.

X.
Be not Covetous nor prodigal in your Expenses; govern them according to your
Condition and your Estate; it would be imprudence and Vanity to spend higher
than you are able; and want of the heart to live, not to make an Expense
agreeable to your Birth and station, that it has pleased God to place you in;
observe a just middle between these two extremes, and by that means you will
merit the esteem of all, and be taken for what you are.

XI.
When you make an Expense regular and agreeable to your Condition, Men will
have reason to say you are Wise, and know how to live well; but when you make
it too great, and that it be taken notice of, you cannot help it if Men of good
Sense Censure and Condemn you.

XII.
If you spend higher than you ought, you will give Weapons to your Enemies to
fight with you; that is, you will give them Reason to deny that you have right
to make such Expenses; nay, they will go further, and will enquire into your
Family and Ancestors; and will, without Favor, Examine if you be of that
Quality and Descent, that can entitle you to make such an Expense.

XIII.
Do justice to others as well as to your self; do not exalt your self by your
Expense, above what you are; and endeavor to make your advancement due to your
Merit and Virtue.

XIV.
If you find your self to abound in Riches, make a Law to your self to do
nothing to make a Show and a Noise, and your moderation in this case will be
more for your Reputation, than your extravagant spending would be; by this
means you will gain Friends, and by the other make Enemies envious and jealous.

CHAP. XXIV.
Advice upon the thoughts of Death.
I.
MY Dear Children, you will pass your life without Trouble, if you be not
afraid to lose it; Death treading on our Heels continually, and being almost
always by our side, we need not wonder, if they whose Consciences accuse them
do fear it; and if they have not one moment of quiet, all other Objects pass
away, but this stays with them and never quits them.

II.
Do not seek for a Reason why so many die without making their Wills, nor why
they do not make them but at the last extremity? It is because they cannot make
it without speaking of Death, which they fly and fear above all things.

III.
There is no Person amongst us, to whom the Life of Jared and Methusalem is not
always present; every one flatters himself with the length of the Course they
are to run; and considers himself always as if he had but just begun it, and
never as if he was going to end it.

IV.
Experience may well teach us, that more then half of the World dies before
Threescore, and yet all run Counter to this Experience, and look upon it as in
Relation to others, and place themselves in the number of those that must have
a pleasant and a happy Old Age.

V.
One dies in his Bed, as in the Field of Battle; of a Fever, as with the Shot
of a Musket, and no Man is sure that he shall live longer than another.

VI.
To the end that Death may not take from the Goods that you possess, and all
the Pleasures you enjoy, deprive your self by little and little of both the one
and the other; and Death will have little more to do when it can do no harm; it
will not come so soon for the most part, nor when it cannot affright when it
comes.

VII.
Death does not look hideous and terrible, but when it is looked upon as a
Monster, an Enemy to Nature; if you will often approach to it in your Thoughts,
and make it familiar to you, you will afterward look upon it as a Friend that
comes to assist you, and to carry you from the miserable Condition you are in.

VIII.
Death is the Mistress of our Days, but not of our Minds and Hearts; she can
deprive us of Life, but not against our Will, if we expect it without Fear or
Trouble.

IX.
Wherefore should you fear Death, since you cannot grieve for Life after you
have lost it, because you are threatened with a Hundred sorts of Deaths, must
you fear them all; is it not better quietly to expect one?

X.
If by fearing Death you could be assured to avoid it; this Fear would be
reasonable even in the greatest Men; but being it cannot produce this effect,
it serves for nothing but to make you die a thousand times, though you can but
die once.

XI.
No Man is grieved that he did not live a hundred Years since; and why should
any one grieve that he should not live in Five Hundred Years to come; you have
no more right to the future than you have to the past; you are betwixt them
both, hold your self in Peace, and be content.

XII.
You will go out of the World as you came into it, not knowing the Day; make
good use of this ignorance, this moment so terrible to some is hid from you,
perhaps for no other reason, but that you should think every Day the last of
your Life.

XIII.
What matters it if you die Ten or Twelve Years before it was expected; amongst
an innunumerable number of Men, can one know that there are two or three fewer,
or that Paris is not so well peopled, or the State not so well served.

XIV.
Life and Death are equally natural; you began to live without Desire or
Passion; and you ought to die so. The World is a Theater on which every one
plays his part; it is for the beauty of the Universe and his own Advantage,
that every one acts his own in his time.

XV.
You ought to know how to die, whilst others learn to live; there is only God
that is Eternal; your continual changes from nothing to life, from health to
sickness, and from Life to Death, ought to give you a high Idea of the grandeur
of the infinitely perfect Being.

XVI.
It would surprise you if one of your Servants should refuse to obey your Order
in any thing but what pleases him; it is equally wonderful, that God that has
created us to live and to die, and that we should obey him in the one, and
refuse it in the other.

XVII.
It is to cease to be a Man, to make himself an Enemy to Death. Since you are
born to die, you are subject to Death as well as to Life, and I can assure you
are alive and dead at the same time. You are alive, because you are not yet
dead; you are dead, because you were not alive in Ages past, and you shall nor
be alive in those to come.

XVIII.
If you make ill use of your Life, it is unprofitable to you, and when you lose
it you lose nothing, wherefore are you then afraid to lose it; have not you
more reason to hope it than to fear it?

XIX.
You have been Heir to your Ancestors, is it not reasonable that your Children
should be your Successors? your Life is limited to Fifteen or Twenty Lustres,
why should you desire to go beyond it? Have your Ancestors done you the wrong
to take your places, wherefore would you fill the Places of your Descendants?

XX.
It is strange to fear an imperceptible moment to the last breath we live; and
so soon as we are expired, it cannot be truly said that we die, since we are no
more. We do not find this Death in one that is yet alive, nor do we more find
it in him who is nor more, because he is past Death, and it has no more power
of him.

XXI.
A Dwarf is a Man as much as a Giant; and he that lives but a short time is as
much a Man as Adam and Seth, who lived many Ages; the great and the little in
the Life of Man, is but as one point in regard of Eternity; and the World seems
no more empty by his Death, than the Sea appears dry by a drop of Water taken
from it.

XXII.
It would be terrible and frightful to us, if Man could not die, since he would
find his Life a Fountain of inexhaustible Miseries.

XXIII.
Thales the wise Grecian assures us, that it is the same thing to live and to
die; and one day being asked why he did not die; he answered, because if I
should die, it would be asked why I did not live?

XXIV.
I am not of that Philosophers Opinion; I do acknowledge that Life is a Good
that God has given us to enjoy, and that Death is a punishment of sin,
therefore I do not look upon them as things indifferent; yet the difference
that we find between them, ought not to give us too great a tie to the one, nor
too great a fear for the other. We are all Criminals, but we ought not go
cowardly to our Punishment; we ought to be sorry that we have given cause for
our Condemnation, but we ought to suffer with Submission, Courage, and
Constancy.

XXV.
The first of our Days teaches us to live, but the last does not teach us to
die; learn this Lesson long before you make use of it, and the sooner you do it
the better.

XXVI.
In all Contracts of Marriage, there are Articles that concern the Death of
both Husband and Wife; and as soon as we make a strict alliance with Reason, we
ought to make Articles of Death between her and our selves; this will make our
Alliance more firm, more Spiritual and more Christian.

CHAP. XXV.
Upon the same Subject.
I.
MY Dear Children, you ought to regard this Life as a passage to another, which
never will have an end; this being so, you ought not to set your Affections
upon any thing here below, seem it never so great and Charming. You ought early
to begin to die to Honor, to Pleasure, and to your self.

II.
You ought to consider that your Salvation is the greatest business you have to
do, and you cannot think too much of it, nor too soon.

III.
If you have nothing to reproach your self with, you will be quiet and easy in
your sickness. One is not afraid of Death but when he has lived ill.

IV.
Let it not trouble you when you think of Death, but to the contrary, look upon
it with Pleasure, as an end of all your Miseries, and as the beginning of a
happy Life.

V.
When you see so many Persons of Quality, think no more of Death than if they
were never to die; that ought to engage you to enter into your self, and to
reason justly upon this Practice; their insensibility ought to touch you, and
you ought to be persuaded, that the less they think of Death, the more they
ought to think of it; and the less they fear it, the more they have reason to
fear it.

VI.
Make use of the Blindness and Folly of others. Pleasures pass away, Greatness
vanishes, and believe it, it is late, if not too late, to renounce the
amusements of the World, when you can no more enjoy them.

VII.
Make Reflection upon the difference that there is betwixt a Worldly Man; that
is, with all the Pomp of this World; I mean one that has loved them to the end
of his Life; and a good and pious Man, who has always labored to bury himself,
living in an humble, obscure, and retired life; the one dies overwhelmed under
the weight of his Honors, Pleasures, and Greatness; the other dies under the
Weight of his Mortifications, his Fasting and Humiliations. They both die, but
what difference in their Death, in the Thoughts and Consequence of one and the
other; the World has fought against them both, but they have ended the Battle
in a different manner; the one is Conquered, and has submitted to the Laws of
the Conqueror, and the other has triumphed over him; so that it might be said,
that the Death of one is glorious, and may be envyed by those who look upon it
with the Eyes of Faith; and the Death of the other ought to make those that
live such a Life, to tremble.

VIII.
But without considering so morally, why should not you think often of Death,
being that Experience teaches, that you must die? every step you make, leads
toward your Grave; is it possible that you can do this without Reflection? and
that you can travel so long in the Way, and not sometimes think of the end that
this way leads you to?

IX.
You live but to die, and always to think of Life, and of all that may make it
pass away pleasantly, and never think of the time that must put an end to it,
is a thing very extraordinary for a Man of Sense.

X.
Our Sicknesses, our Wrinkles, our Gray Hairs, our Years past that cannot come
again; and how little we can rely upon those that are to come; are all of them
eloquent Tongues that teach us that we must die.

XI.
The different States of your Life are a looking-glass continually before your
Eyes, showing your approaching Death, which already has laid his Hands upon
you. You have been Infants, young, and Men grown up; all that is in order of
Nature; but when you are Old, what can you think or hope to become? Death
without doubt will follow Old Age, which will be the end of your Life, as Old
Age has been the end of your precedent Ages.

XII.
You will ask me what are the means to think of Death, when one loves life so
much? To that I answer, there is one way which is easy; that is, not to love
Life so much.

XIII.
Why would not you think of Death, since it will end your Necessities, your
Weaknesses, and your Miseries; it will finish a Voyage, at the end of which you
will find a happy Eternity.

XIV.
If God, infinitely just, has Condemned Man to Death, as a punishment due to
his Sin; the same God, infinitely good, has given Death to the same Man, as a
Sovereign Remedy to all his Evils, and an infallible means to make him for ever
Happy.

XV.
The nature of Man was created as a Vessel that ought to be filled with nothing
but good and precious Liquors; but the Devil, jealous of his Happiness, having
put the Poison of Sin in this Vessel which corrupted it. God was willing to
repair that which the Devil had spoiled; and not being willing the Poison
should so possess our Nature, that it should always remain infected; he breaks
this Vessel in pieces by Death, that the Poison might run out, and that
re-uniting these divided pieces at the general Resurrection, this Nature might
be mended, purified, and become as wholly different from it self.

XVI.
When you shall have quit the Care you had for the Grandeur and Riches of this
World, and turned your Heart toward God; you will easily surmount the rest,
and not look upon Life but with indifferency; your Treasure will be in Heaven;
you will never lose the sight of it, and you will easily resolve to be soon
with it, to enjoy it to all Eternity.

XVII.
You have no need of Faith, or Rhetoric to persuade you, that all must die;
the Decree of God which for so many Ages has been indifferently executed upon
all Men, is an evident demonstration of it; and if you find any so extravagant
as to doubt it; you need but to lead them from Tomb to Tomb, and the
innumerable number of Bones that they may see there, will convince them of the
Truth of it.

XVIII.
Death has her Lessons and Responses, and they are within us; let us ask her as
long as we please, the greatest and most sensible of all her Lessons, the most
precise and infallible of all her Answers will be, that we must die.

XIX.
Since that all that we have within us, teaches us, and speaks continually to
us, that we must die; will it be strange to make this necessity of Death the
Object of all your Thoughts and your Reflections?

XX.
Since that all that are about you, cannot tell you the Day or Hour of your
Death, will it be strange if you make this uncertainty the Object of your
Meditations; and that by a Spiritual watchfulness make a serious consideration
of that which one Day must certainly arrive, and of what will become of you.

XXI.
That you must die, is an undoubted Truth; you ought therefore to make all your
Endeavors, and employ all your Cares to die well. It is the most natural
consequence that you can draw from this Truth; but to employ all your cares
without thinking of Death; and what good will it do you to think of it, except
you think of it in such a manner, as the Thoughts of it will be to your Profit
and Advantage?

XXII.
Your Soul that will survive your Body, does not that merit your care and
pains? that you should make it happy for ever? does it not deserve more your
care and labor, than the mass of Flesh which it animates? What have you not
done for this Mass? What cares have you not taken to preserve it? in this point
I leave you to your own considerations.

CHAP. XXVI.
Advice upon the thoughts of Death.
I.
MY Dear Children, the great and infallible means to die well, is to live well,
and the great secret and means to live well, is to think often of Death.

II.
A good Death is nothing but the consequence of a good Life; live well that you
may die well, and think often of dying, that you may live well; so that a good
Life and a good Death reciprocally depend one upon another, and they serve the
one the other, as the means to come to a good end; they give a Hand one to the
other, to lead a Man where he ought to be.

III.
All the most great and charming things in the World may be considered two
ways, in relation to their Beginning and their End; the beginning of Greatness,
Honors, and Riches, is God; but as soon as we consider them as coming from
God, what difference do we find betwixt them and God from whom they come? when
we consider this, they must needs appear despicable. These are like little
Stars, that with their small Lights dazzle us, but disappear, and fall by their
own weakness into the profound darkness of Night. As soon as God, the Sun of
glory, infinitely bright, appears before our Eyes in full splendor; such is
the frailty and misery of all in this World, be it never so great, never so
rich, when we consider it in respect to its beginning, God.

IV.
Thy Misery and greatness appears yet greater in respect of its end, since all
Greatness and Riches end with our Lives, and are buried with us in our Graves.

V.
All the World runs headlong to Death, great and small, Rich and Poor, Kings
and Shepherds; and the swift Revolutions of Age draws after them Millions of
Men. Our Fathers are dead, we shall likewise die; our Posterity shall pass away
like us, and like them that have gone before us.

VI.
Our Years roll insensibly one after another, and roll without standing still
one moment till our Death. It is thither that every step we make leads us; it is
there we all go, like several Rivers which throw themselves into the Sea; the
Day and Hour of your Death will never come to your Knowledge. Make your
advantage of this Advice that is given you from the Mouth of Truth, and
continually be watchful.

VII.
Never put off the consideration of Dying to the Hour of your Death; that
moment is not proper to die well; you ought to make it when you are in Health,
and your Mind undisturbed.

VIII.
If you would be watchful and think of Death, you should seriously examine the
Life you lead, to see if it agree with that which you would lead, when you are
at the point of Death; that is to die to the World, and to all that you love in
it, before you die indeed.

IX.
If you be watchful and think of Death whilst you are living, you will dye by a
hearty and true forsaking the World and its Pleasures; you will love a retired
life; you will be assiduous in Prayer; you will mortify your self as much as
you can; you will give liberally to the Poor; you will exercise your self in
good Works; and you will fill your Mind with nothing but what may increase your
Faith, your Hope, and your Charity; it is in the practice of these things
without doubt, that the care and right thinking of Death consists.

X.
Children are afraid of their Fathers when they disguise themselves, because
they do not use to see them in that manner; take away the Disguise you give to
Death, and it will not fright your any more. Death is represented continually
attended with a company of Physicians, with the Tears of a Wife and some
Children crying; it is imagined to enter into a Chamber where the Sun is shut
out, and lighted by Torches; she is believed to walk sadly, and to inspire
Fears and sad Thoughts into all that look upon her: Take but away from her what
does not belong to her, and what is given to her without Reason, and you will
easily be more familiarly acquainted with her, and dispose your self to receive
her as a Friend which is welcome to you.

XI.
He that fears not Death, leads a life long, pleasant, and happy; his life is
like a Torch well lighted, that is not put out suddenly, but by little and
little, 'till all be consumed; his life is like the Fruits that are not plucked
off the Trees 'till Nature has made them ripe and good, and fall of themselves
in Autumn, when they are come to Maturity.

XII.
If you use your self often to think of Death, you will die without Pain, as
you have lived without Trouble. You will look upon Death with Eyes enlightened
with Faith and Grace; you will see her approach without Fear; you will look
upon her as the indispensible Law of Nature; and you will submit to her without
repugnance: Nothing that usually frights on the like occasion will trouble you;
you will end your Days with so great quiet of Mind, as if you had quitted
nothing that was dear to you upon Earth, nor any thing that Reason and Truth
had made appear amiable. Your Death will be so calm, that the greatest Men may
desire that theirs may be like it; and to speak more justly, your Death will
not seem a Death, but a ready passage to a more long and happy Life.

XIII.
It ought not to be said of a Man, that he fears Death, when you would only say
that he thinks of Death often, and that he sees it coming fast on. In effect,
one does look upon things that he fears not as unhappiness, or dangers that he
ought to avoid or fly.

XIV.
The fear of Death oftentimes takes from us the pleasure of living; and the
love of Life oftentimes hinders us from Dying without Pain, and so by false
Ideas that we make to our selves, both of the one and the other, we make our
Lives unpleasant, and our Death unquiet. Make good use of this Advice, and
regard both the one and the other, with a sound and quick Eye, and full of
Faith.

XV.
I shall conclude this Article with the Opinion of a Father of the Church, that
says, that it is not Death that is terrible, but the Opinion that a Man has of
it: And he adds, that to die is not to be feared, but to live in continual fear
of Death is that which makes it terrible; this Fear is not caused but by the
Corruption of our Life, and is never found in a good and Christian Life. We see
by Experience, that good Men live in great Peace and tranquillity of Mind, and
so likewise die in the same.

CHAP. XXVII.
Advice upon Friends, and the concerns of Friendship.
I.
MY Dear Children, there are so many good Qualities required in a Man that one
would make his Friend, that it makes me wonder, when I hear that some Men have
a great many of them. If the number of them be great, from thence may be
concluded assuredly, that they are false Friends; or that they only bear the
Name of Friends, but are not so indeed.

II.
Think your self happy if you have one true Friend; it is a Treasure that you
ought to keep with care; you ought to esteem it Riches enough to have found
him, and possess him, and never to think of finding another.

III.
The greatest part of Friends continue so not long. You have found them at
Play, at your Recreations, at a Ball, in Walking, or at Visits made to the same
person. Leave Gaming, go no more to a Ball, to a Comedy, or to the Walks, and
be not so assiduous in your Visits, and then adieu Friends; you will lose them
with the same facility you have gained them.

IV.
When a Friend Treats us as we desire he should, he does his Duty, but when he
uses us not according to what we expect, then we are displeased; but I do not
know whether we are more sensible of the one than of the other. I do not know
whether three Kindnesses that he has done us, obliges us so much, as the hiding
one Secret from us discontents us; three Services already done us are soon
forgotten by the refusing us a trifle.

VII.
To keep a Secret committed to us by a Friend is no great matter to boast of;
the obligation to it is so strict and natural, that there needs but a little
Reason and Justice to oblige us never to dispense with it; but it is a most
infamous action to reveal it; the confidence he puts in us is the most
essential mark of a sincere and true Friendship; and likewise it is a most
unpardonable Treachery, to abuse that confidence, and by revealing it betray
him that has trusted us.

VIII.
It happens often, that a Friend who has given us a Hundred Proofs of his
Friendship, and who has been for Ten or a Dozen Years a faithful keeper of our
most important Secrets, quarrels with us for a thing of no consequence; for a
jealousy, for a point of Honor; in a word, for a Word that has escaped us;
and this discreet Man who never spoke a Secret, upon a sudden becomes like the
Servant in Terrence, who like a Vessel pierced; can hold nothing. This Person
becomes an Echo which makes himself heard of all; after this, think how much
you may trust a Friend, and publish to the World, what a Consolation it is to
an honest Man, to have a faithful Friend.

IX.
Friends ought to keep the same Silence, and to have the same discretion which
Confessors have; the difference is, that the one acts always naturally as Men;
the other not purely as Men, but as fortified by the Grace of the Sacrament of
their Order which they have received; this is it that makes the first that they
do not forget what they should keep secret, but that by imprudence or Revenge
they sometimes discover them; whereas the latter whether they forget a Secret,
or do not forget it, the Grace by the Sacrament of Order, makes them act as if
they had forgot it, or as if they had never known it.

X.
If you resolve and think it a great Pleasure to have a Friend, be sure that
you have but one. As you have but one Confessor to commit the secrets of your
Conscience to; you also ought to have no more than one Friend, to whom you
commit the secrets of your Business and Temporal concerns. If you change your
Confessor, you will find that the diversity of your Confessors and Directors
will beget an inequality in the Conduct of your Life; so it cannot be
otherwise, but that the change of your Friend will notably prejudice your
Business, and your concerns.

XI.
Of a Friend that you have, you will make an Enemy if you break with him,
without his giving any just occasion; so likewise you are deceived in your
choice; but it is better to suffer a little from your own imprudence, than to
expose your self to the indiscretion and revenge of one who thinks himself
despised and injured. Put on a good Countenance, and contain your self as much
as you can, and do not in one moment, in the face of the World, give the Lie to
all that you have said and done in Ten Years.

XII.
In a matter of Friendship, do not move faster than he you intend to make your
Friend; he pleases you, he is of your Humor, and he seems to have all the
qualities necessary of a good and prudent Friend, but perhaps he has not the
same respect for you; perhaps he has not the same Opinion of you that you have
of him. Do not you still go forward, let him come part of the way to meet you;
do not presently throw your self in his Bosom, you must know him before you
esteem him; and if you do not esteem him you cannot love him.

XIII.
It is better you should be accused of indifferency when you have no Friends at
all, than of inconstancy and ingratitude for quitting them. In case you be
reproached with indifferency, that will procure you quiet of Mind, which will
not disturb you; but inconstancy and ingratitude, which you will be charged
with, in case you be given to change, will make you lose your Reputation, and
that once lost, you will have no joy in your life.

XIV.
We are all weak and subject to imperfections, and if you have not the
indulgence to pardon your Friends, and they the same to pardon you, your
Friendship will last no longer than it can serve both your Interests, and both
find your account; and when you break with your Friends, your Tongue only will
make known what you had concealed a long time in your Heart.

XV.
A Man that tells you he is your Friend, his Word ought not to be taken, nor
ought he to take yours when you tell him the same; both the one and the other
ought to give Proofs of what they say; nothing can give greater assurance that
two Men are Friends, than when experience makes them mutually acknowledge it.

XVI.
Before you resolve to make a Friend of him for whom you have an esteem; think
of it a long time, lest you should be mistaken. I should not blame you, if you
should think of it all the days of your life.

XVII.
We are all so cunning in disguising our selves, and our care and industry
finds out such means to appear what we are not, so that an Acquaintance of some
Weeks or Months cannot easily give a just and true Idea of what a Man is; we
suffer our selves to be prevented, an obliging word, any small favor done with
a good grace, oftentimes carries us too far, and most commonly we repent not
'till it be too late.

XVIII.
Nature leads us into Society and Company, but it is Reason that leads us to
Friendship; the esteem that we have for a Man of Merit, makes us seek and
desire his Acquaintance; and if he do the same to us, the reciprocal
Consideration begets a Conversation between us, which at first, was but an
outward Profession of mutual kindness, which afterward becomes cordial and
full of Affection, and that which is called Friendship.

XIX.
Friendship and Love do differ much in this, that Love is passionate and
inconstant, carrying things to extremity for some moments, and at other times
loses all its Force and Zeal; but Friendship is always regular, constant, and
equal.

XX.
As soon as we possess what Love desires, our Love grows less, and abates of
its force and ardour; and on the contrary, the Enjoyments of what we love by
Friendship, makes it augment, and gives it a new value and new force.

XXI.
That which is ordinarily called Friendship, ought rather to be called
Acquaintance, which is contracted by the like Employments, or the like
Diversions. Such Friends as these, to speak truly of them, are such as see one
another often, without ever having more sincerity for one another, more
confidence, or more openness of Heart.

XXII.
With your Friends go always with Bridle in hand, that is to say, use great
Prudence and Caution with those whom the World, or they themselves would make
your Friends; these manner of Friendships are never so well linkt together, but
that they may be easily broken; therefore it is good that you take such
measures with them, as if you foresaw that there would infallibly be a rupture.

XXIII.
You will find Men enough, who will call themselves your Friends; it will be a
pleasure to some, and to others an Honor; but will you find any that will be
truly your Friends? and in effect, can you find them espousing your Interest as
their own? and will they not upon some accounts be upon the reserve with you?
you may have done them some Service upon some occasions, and they may have done
you some upon others; these are no great Proofs of Friendship; the Laws of
civil Society, does it not oblige us to do some good Offices of this nature to
all sorts of Persons? And where is there an Honest Man that does not take
pleasure to do them, when Occasion presents it self? especially when it costs
him little.

XXIV.
In Friendships that are thought the most strict, and the most solid; every one
uses to consider himself first, and in obliging his Friend, he always sees his
own Interest, be it Profit, Pleasure, or Honor; he almost always finds himself
in the way to gain some of them to himself, when he goes to do Service to
others; all that he does so for his Friends, he does for himself; and he does
but lend them that which he flatters himself they will return to him with
Usury. Take just measures upon this, and be not surpised.

XXV.
If you ask me, in what consists the pleasure of a true Friendship? I will
answer, that it consists in seeeing and entertaining one another often, in
giving reciprocal marks of Esteem and Affection, and in agreeing in their
Opinions and Sentiments. I will tell you that I think, that of all these
Demonstrations of Friendship which the Heart expresses by the Tongue, by the
Eyes, and by a Thousand other pleasing Signs; there is formed, as it were, a
Furnace, in the which the Souls that love thus, melt themselves together, and
become but one Soul.

XXVI.
Far from this is the friendship of the World, by which a Man is ashamed not to
be debaucht with a Friend that is so, and not to be quarrelsome and passionate
with those that take pride in being so; far from this Friendship that I
commend, is that which carries us to commit a Crime, that we may be complaisant
to our Friends, and not anger them, by our too much discretion and modesty; far
from this is the Friendship of Libertines that is established in the ruin of
Virtue, and on a shameful and Criminal Debauchery.

XXVII.
For my own part, I do not believe there can be any true Friendship, but
between those that are united by Charity; they have the same Aims, the
same-Ends, the same Motives, that is it which makes St. Augustine say, That
happy are they that love their Friend in God, and their Enemies for the love of
God.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Leigh, at the Peacock over against
Fetter-Lane in Fleet street.
WESLEY's (Sam.) Life of Christ, in Verse, with Cuts. Folio.

RESOLVES, Divine, Moral, Political, with several New Additions, both in Prose
and Verse, not extant in former Impressions: In this Eleventh Edition
References are made to the Poetical Citations, heretofore much wanted. By Owen
Felltham, Esquire. Fol.

Cambridge Dictionary, Last Edit. 4to.

Salmons (Wm.) Family Dictionary, in an Alphabetical Method, containing
Directions for Cookery, etc. 8vo.

Dr. Horneck's Four Tracts; ( viz.) a Discourse against Revenge, etc. 8vo.

Milburn's Christians Patterns, 8vo.

-- His Translation of the Psalms. 12s.

Contemplations Moral and Divine, in two Parts, by Sir Matthew Hale Knight,
late Chief Justice of the King's Bench, 8vo. Price 5 s.

Style 's Practical Regi^^er, begun in the Reign of King Carles I. consisting
of Rules, Orders, and Principal Observations concerning the Practice of the
Common Law in the Courts of Westminster; particularly the King's Bench; as well
in Matters Criminal as Civil, carefully continued down to this time. The Third
Edition, 8vo. Price 6 s.

Newly Published.
An Essay upon Sublime, Translated from the Greek of Dionysius Longinus
Cassius, the Rhetorician, compared with the French of the Sieur Despreaux
Boileau. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Church of England-Man's Private Devotions, being a Collection of Prayers
out of the Common Prayer Book, for Morning, Noon, and Night, and other special
occasions. By the Author of the Weeks Preparation to the Sacrament. Price bound
6 d. stitched 3 d.

The Holy Days, or the Holy Feasts and Fasts, as they are observed in the
Church of England (throughout the year) explained, and the Reasons why they are
yearly Celebrated* with Cutts before each Day.

The Spiritual Combat, or the Christian Pilgrim, in his Spiritual Conflict and
Conquest. By John de Castaniza. Translated from the French, with some
Additions, Revised and recommended by the Reverend Richard Lucas, D. D. Rector
of St. Catherine, Coleman-street.


