A RELIGIOUS CONTEST. OR, A brief account of a disputation holden at Blyton in
the County of Lincoln. Between Mr. William Fort Minister of the Perochial
Congregation at Blyton on the one part, And Thomas Grantham, Servant to the
Baptized Churches on the other part. Whereunto is added Brief Animadversions
upon Dr. Stilling-fleet his Digressions about Infant Baptism: IN His Book
Entitled, A rational account of the Protestant Religion, etc. In both which
are showed That the generality of the Nations now professing Christianity, are
as yet unbaptised into Christ.

1. Because Their Sprinkling and Crossing the Forehead is not the right way of
baptising.

2. Because Infants ought not to be Baptized.

Acts 2. 38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved. LONDON,
Printed in the Year, 1674.

The Epistle Dedicatory,
To Mr. William Fort and the rest of the Brethren and Assistants at the
Dispute holden by his appointment at Blyton the 18 day of September, 1673.
Reverend Sirs
I Do seriously account it a part of my infelicity to see the distractions and
divisions among us touching the Worship of Almighty God, and his holy Child
Jesus, whom I trust we do all love and fear, and therefore it is the greater
pity that we who differ not about the Godhead, should at all differ about the
things which pertain to his blessed Service. May it therefore please God to
move upon all our hearts to consider (laying aside all carnal interest) where
the causes on either side are given. And since, perhaps we are more quick
sighted about each others mistakes then our own, give me leave without offense,
to show briefly what I conceive is really amiss on your part, and I shall as
willingly consider what may fairly be objected concerning us against that
confideration.

First then, when I look upon your reformation from Papal errors, I cannot but
heartily congratulate the piety and zeal of your Martyrs, etc. Specially in
their being instrumental to bring that sacred institute of the Lords Table from
under manifold corruptions wherewith it had been encumbered in the darkness of
Popery: But yet withal I must needs condole their shortness in not looking
with like diligence to the Pristine Institution of sacred Baptism, by which
oversight we which survive them, are the more exposed to our present
distractions, and I think I may say in this, as David in another case, because
they did it not at the first therefore the Lord made a breach upon us.

Secondly, when I consider the articles of the Church of England, I think it
very strange that we who agree so firmly in them all save three or four, and
differ but in some points touching them neither, should not consider of some
expedient to remove what obstructs our entire agreement.

May it therefore please your Bishops, with their Brethren, to admit of a
friendly conference with our Bishops and Pastors, to try if by any means away
may be found to bring us to brotherly concord, for whatsoever has happened in
the heat of disputation, or fallen from the Pens of passionate Writers on
eitherside, yet be pleased to know, we are no haters of the pious Protestant,
but sincere lovers of them and the truths by them maintained, as indeed we
ought to be of all who love Christ, though differing from us in many things.
And though it is true we hold a separation from you in our Congregations, yet
we do this of necessity, because none among your Leaders will treat with us
about the removal of those things which do offend.

I confess, to reform what is amiss on your part touching sacred Baptism is a
difficult undertaking, yet not more difficult then it was to reform what was
amiss in the other Sacrament, whether we consider their errors, who for some
hundreds of years, gave it to Infants, or theirs who by their
transubstantiation changed the very nature of the Sacrament*

But if no endeavouts of this kind must be admitted, then am I out of hopes
ever to see Christian concord among us, for those coercive ways (which some
incline to) will but aggravate the breach (which is too great already) and
render your cause the more suspicious, and consequently more confirm us in our
persuasion against your way. Now the Lord himself direct us all to the way of
truth and peace in all things;

So prays; yours to love and serve you in Christ as far as permitted. T. G.

THE Epistle to the Reader, Showing the occasion of this Disputation.
Courteous Reader.
DIsputation is not more hurtful when needless, then profitable when necessity
calls for it. And hereupon our Lord Christ himself was frequent in disputes
about his Doctrine. This way went the Apostles to try the matter in Question
about Circumcision, Acts 15. And Paul defended Christianity by disputing daily
in the School of one Tyrannus Acts 19.

The occasion of the dispute at Blyton* September 18. 1673. was on this wise. A
small remnant of baptized Christians meeting in that Town, it pleased Mr. Fort
Minister of the Perochial Congregation there, to come to their Meetings, and to
hinder their proceedings, so that they could not edify one another, as their
manner was. And this he did many times, and told them he was resolved they
should not meet in that Town. And when the Baptists endeavored to maintain
their principles, he slighted them, saying they were foolish Men not fit to
discourse of religion because they understood not the rules of Logic, etc. But
he bad them find him a Man that had Brains, and understood the Languages, and
knew Logic and he would dispute with him. They told him they had few that
understood these things. But he not ceasing to disturb them they consented to
his motion, and a day was appointed, and because the Baptists had not a
convenient place, Mr. Fort provided a large room, and sent for them to come
thither, where himself with two other Ministers and diverse of the Neighborhood
were met togeth^r.

For the account of the dispute it self, take this information that much of it
is here reported according to what Memory could serve in upon recogitation, but
yet be assured of this that for substance it is not altered by this account,
the arguments varying very little, or not at all from the very terms wherein
they were expressed in the Dispute, and Mr. Fort's answers, rendered rather more
advantageous, then in their first delivery.

If it seem strange that a Person of such Learning and Gravity, should answer
and argue with no more advantage to his cause, the Reader may take notice that
God has said, He will confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to naught the
understanding of the Prudent And when he does this, then where is the Scribe,
where is the Disputer of this World.

Now whereas in this Dispute I have used the method which the Learned do more
affect, then other ways of Disputing, I desire the Reader to take notice, that
I do not in any thing that I have said pretend at all to the Parts of a
Scholar, being a Person of no education that way, howbeit, having obtained
mercy of the Lord, to know somewhat of his blessed Will, according to his word,
I am therefore willing to appear in the defense of his Truth when called
thereunto.

Finally, my hearts desire and prayer to God, is, that though our present
differences in Religion, be matter of infelicity, yet since we all agree, that
Christianity is the only true Religion in the world, that we therefore may
^ndeavour to maintain the great engag^ment of Charity, and M^deration, and then
we may expect that the God of Truth and Peace, will pity us under our
mistakes, and also lead us into the enjoyment of that gracious promise, Jer.
32. 39. Even to give us one Heart, and one Way. So be it.

Tho. Grantham.

A Religious Contest, OR, An account of the Dispute held at Blyton the eighteen
of September, 1673.
The People being come together, Mr. Fort applying himself to Thomas Grantham
began after this manner. SIR, I suppose that you are come hither to defend some
unlawful Meetings in this place which I have labored to suppress, now that
which I have to charge them with is this: That their Meetings are unlawful. 2.
That their way of Anabaptism is sinful, And 3. I will prove that our way of
baptizing Infants is lawful.


Tho. Grantham. Sir, I came not hither to defend any Man's sayings or doings,
but to vindicate the truth of the Gospel (as much as in me is) so far as I am
concerned, and for Anabaptism I am against it as much as you, nor do I think it
needful to dispute about the baptizing of Infants till some body be found to
baptize them, for I think that there is no Man in England that baptiseth any
Infants.


Mr. Fort. Why this is a strange thing! can any thing be more plain, then that
which is de facto, and here the three Priests fell a laughing.


T. Grantham. Gentlemen, you have no cause to laugh as yet, for I say (and
shall show in due place) that neither you nor any in the world that I can hear
of does baptize any Infants.


Mr. Fort. I tell you friend we do baptize them and will you deny a thing that
is de facto, and here they fell a laughing again.


T. Grantham. Gentlemen, this does not become the gravity of your Persons, did
you come hither to make sport? But because you make this so strange, give me
leave to put you in mind of the Apostles saying, 1 Cor. 11. This is not to eat
the Lords Supper, and yet the Corinthians did celebrate the Lords Supper as
they supposed in the Bread and Wine which they set apart, but going from the
Institution of Christ, the Apostle denies it to be the Lords Supper. I
therefore say you do not baptize at all, because you have lost the Institution
of Christ.


Mr. Fort. Well, well, but first let me hear what you have to say for these
unlawful Meetings which I have endeavored to suppress.


T. Grantham. I am not so much a stranger to the Meetings you speak of, but I
think they may be defended, but yet I suppose it the best way to try our
principles, for if they be good, our Meetings to promote good principles need
not offend you, and truly till this day, I did not understand that our Meetings
should be the subject of our Dispute.


Mr. Fort. I perceive those that have informed you have done you some injury,
for I did say, that your Meetings were unlawful and therefore I opposed them,
and seeing you have not premidated this, I will not surprise you, but will
consent to dispute their principles.


T. Grantham. Sir I thank you for that, and I desire that the Questions may be
fairly stated to contain the points in difference about the Doctrine of Baptism.


Mr. Fort. Well, I agree to that, and pray do you state the Questions if you
please.


T. Grantham. The Questions then may be these, (viz.)

Qu. 1.

Whether your way of baptising, be the right way of baptising?

Qu. 2.

Whether Infants ought to be baptized?


Mr. Fort. Well, let these be the Questions, I say our way of baptisi^g i^
right, and that Infants ought to be baptized, and do you prove the contrary if
you can.


T. Grantham. Although you ought to prove what you affirm, yet I will accept
your offer, and shall show, that your pretended way of baptising is not the
right way of baptising, and that Infants ought not to be baptized, and first I
argue thus.

Arg. 1.

Holy Scripture does show what is the right way of baptising, holy Scripture
does not show sprinkling or crossing is the right way of baptising, ergo your
way of baptising is not the right way of baptising,


Mr. Fort We do not say that sprinkling or crossing is baptising, neither did I
ever sprinkle any in all my life,


T. G. Then you contradict your brethren, whose constant practice is known to
be sprinkling and crossing the Forehead, yea you contradict your own Common
Prayer Book, for there your direction is to sprinkle and cross the Infant.


Mr. Fort. I confess our old Common Prayer Book did use the word sprinkle, but
we have now altered it, and it is only baptize in the new Common Prayer Book.


T. Grantham, I confess reformation is no error, it seems then by your own
grant your first Book was faulty, and for your practice it is still the same,
and I pray, as you are a Scholar tell us plainly, does the word baptize
signify to sprinkle?


M. Fort. No, I do not say it does the word that signifies sprinkling is (...)


T. G. In that you say well, and now pray answer to my Argument, for it proves
sprinkling is not the way of baptising.


Mr. Fort. I have told you we do not say that sprinkling is baptising, neither
do we make the Cross any part of Baptism.


Tho. Grantham. You do certainly make the Cross an appurtenance in your
Baptism, for you will excommunicate such as refuse to use it in Baptism, and
for sprinkling I appeal to this Assembly, who can witness it is the common
practice of your Ministry to sprinkle the Forehead, and it is remarkable that
you cannot stand by your practice now it is opposed. I desire you to answer the
Argument.


Mr. Fort. I have answered it for I do not sprinkle, but I always pour water
upon those whom I baptize, and for my own part I was dipped, and so according
to your own Judgment rightly baptized.


T. Grantham. If you were dipped then you had more done to you then your
Brethren in that case, and so you are divided in your practice nor is your
pouring water on the Forehead baptising and therefore answer the Argument.


Mr. Fort. Here Mr. Fort and the other Ministers spoke together disowning
sprinkling, and saying they did not make the Cross necessary in Baptism, for
(say they) in private Baptism it is not used.


T. Grantham. You know that the Papists allow of Midwife to pour water out of a
Glass upon the Infant, which they account a valid Baptism yet at other times
they make their ceremonies necessary, and so do you the Cross, performing in
the name of the Father, Son and holy Spirit.


Mr. Fort. That is not so, we do not perform it in the name of the Father, Son,
and holy Spirit, therefore you wrong us.


T. Grantham. This is strange, for either you do it in the name of the Lord, or
in your own name, if you do it in your own name pray tell us so, but you answer
not the Argument, therefore I proceed.

Arg. 2.

That which renders the practice of Christ and his Apostles supers^^ous, ^r
ridiculous, is not the right way of Baptising.

But your pretended way of Baptising renders the practice of Christ and his
Disciples superfluous, or ridiculous,

Ergo. Your way of Baptising is not the right way of Baptising.


Mr. Fort. The minor is denied our way of Baptising does not render the
practice of Christ or his Disciples superfluous or ridiculous.


T. Grantham. The minor I evince by this demonstration, he that considers how
Christ and his Disciples were baptized, and did baptize in Rivers or Places of
much water and you on the other side take a little water on your finger ends,
or in your hand only, must needs conclude that either they did too much, or you
do too little; Now thus it is written, Mat. 3 Jesus when he was baptized came
up straight way out of the Water, Mark 1. They were all baptized in the River
of Jordan, confessing their sins. John baptized in Enon because there was much
water there. Phillip and the Eunuch went both down into the water. Now if your
putting a few drops of water on the Forehead only, be sufficient then the
other must needs be superfluous, yea ridiculous.


Mr. Fort. This does not prove the minor, for we do not deny dipping, and I
pray what do you mean when you say our way renders Christ's to be ridiculous.


T. Grantham. I mean a thing to be laughed at, and put the case you had
occasion to wash your hands only, would it not be ridiculous to see you go into
the River to do it? even does thus your pretended way of baptising, render the
way of Christ ridiculous and reflects dishonor on him and his followers, as if
they were not so wise as you, to know the best way to be baptized, but we are
resolved to follow Christ though we differ from you.


Mr. Fort. Yes, the word ridiculous does signify so much, but yet I deny that
our practice does reflect upon Christ's, for though in these hot Countries they
did dip in Rivers, yet it was not necessary in these colder Countries to do so,
for Christ has not commanded that.


T. Grantham. Then you confess it was the practice of the first christians to
dip in Rivers, and I ask you whether they did this by a command or not?


Mr. Fort. Yes, I grant they did it by a command.


T. Grantham. Then you have granted sufficient to overthrow your practice, and
to confirm ours, unless you can also show a command for sprinkling.


Mr. Fort. I have told you I do not sprinkle.


T. Grantham. The contrary is the known practice of your Ministry, and yours is
little differing, I proceed to another Argument.

Arg. 3.

That which brings unavoidable confusion into the Church is not the right way
of baptising:

But your way of baptising does bring unavoidable confusion into the Church.

Ergo, your way of baptising is not the right way of baptising


Mr. Fort. Our practice in baptising as we do, does not bring confusion into
the Church.


T. Grantham. I show the contrary thus, your way of baptising admits of as many
several ways, as there are parts in a man's body; for whether the Forehead, the
Breast, Back, Hand or Foot, or some other part ought to be only sprinkled, or
whether any of these may not serve, you can show no reason, so that you thus
bring confusion into the Church:


Mr Fort. The Head being the most honorable part of man's body, we therefore
choose the head and think that the best.


T. Grantham This is only your imagination, and if I think otherwise, and so
choose the breast, you cannot show this to be a greater error then your own,
but I proceed.

Arg. 4.

That which renders all Men uncertain whether they do the will of God or not,
is not the right way of baptising,

But your way of baptising does render all Men uncertain whether they do the
will of God or not,

Ergo, your way of baptising is not the right way of baptising.


Mr. Fort I deny that our way renders men uncertain, whether they do the will
of God or not.


T. G. God has not assigned any one part of the body to be baptized, and not
another, therefore no man that follows your way can tell whether he do the will
of God or not, in following your way:

Arg. 5.

That way which does not signify that which ought to be represented in baptism
is not the right way of baptising.

But your pretended way does not signify that which ought to be represented in
baptism.

Ergo. Your way of Baptising is not the right way of Baptising.


Mr Fort. Our way of baptising does signify the cleansing of the conscience
from Sin which is the thing that ought to be signified in baptism:


T. G. No action of man's devising may be said to signify the cleansing our
conscience^ from Sin, but my argument refers to the whole signification of
baptism, and particularly the burial of Christ and others with him, Romans 6 we
are buried with him in baptism, and the Scripture cannot be broken, therefore
baptism must so be performed as to signify these things:

Arg. 6.

That which agrees not with the native signification of the word (...) is not
the right way of Baptising.

But your way agrees not with the native signification of the word (...):

Ergo, your way is not the right way of baptising.


Mr. Fort The minor is denied, our practice agrees with the signification of
the word (...):


T. G. I desire you to show the place which mentions such a washing as you
practice, where the word (...) is taken to express the sacred act of baptism:


Mr. Fort. It is said the Pharisees did wash their cups and beds; here the word
Baptizo is used, yet they did not dip them.


T. Grantham. I called for a Text where the word (...) is used to express the
sacred Act of baptism, and that signifies your manner of washing, and instead
of this, you bring me a place which speaks of the Pha. rises washing cups and
beds, and yet even this place is against you, for they that wash defiled cups
and beds do more then sprinkle them, or pour a little water upon them, as you
do on the Infants Forehead; and here give me leave to urge some Authorities
for the sigsiification of the word (...) to be a dipping of the thing
denominated baptized, and first I urge the Greek Grammar, where the radix is
(...) and rendered, mergo, immergo, to dip or plunge.


Mr. Fort. I will not regard the Greek Grammar.


T. Grantham. This is strange! will you take upon you to correct the Greek
Grammar.


Mr. Fort. Yes that I will, I will not believe the Greek Grammar.


T. Grantham. I suppose you would correct our Bibles too if you could, but till
this be done give us leave to believe the Grammar which we have for I do not
expect a better from you; my next Authority is that of Channer, who says (...)
estingo quod fit immergendo portinctionem, and inundationem.


Mr. Fort. I have not seen that Author.


T. Grantham. Then I give you another: An brose says, ergofratres tingi debens
(...) font quo Christus. Therefore brethren we must be dipped in the same
Fountain with Christ, that we may be one with Christ, and to this agree the
decrees of some Counsels.


Mr. Fort. Pray Assign those counsels that decreed such a thing if you can.


T. Grantham. The forth Toleton counsel (which is ratified in the Decretalls)
says proter vitandum schismatis scandulum, and ^. Wherefore to avoid the
scandal of schism* let us in baptism dip but (...) and says the counsel of
worms* In aquas demersio in infernum est, and rursus ab aquis emersio
resurrectio est.


Mr. Fort. Well I have told you I was dipped yet I had but my head only dipped,
and for my part I do not use sprinkling at all.


T. Grantham. Sir, I have showed how therein you contradict your Brethren and
the Church of England, and it is observable that you cannot stand by your way of
baptising, and hereby you give this Assembly just cause to suspect their
baptism, but I proceed.

Arg. 7.

That practice which was innovated long after the institution of baptism is not
the right way of baptising.

But your way was innovated long after the institution of baptism.

Ergo, your way is not the right way of baptising.


Mr. Fort. I deny that our way was innovated long after the institution of
baptism.


T. Grantham. I can prove it was innovated long after the institution of
baptism by your own Doctors. For example, Hugo Grotius who confesses so much in
his judgment on sundry points controverted,

Also the Learned Marquess of Worcester in his conference with His Late Majesty
confesses that their Church (to wit the Papists) changed baptism from dipping
over head and ears to a little sprinkling upon the Forehead, and Wallridus
strabo de rebus ecclesiae, that the first Christians were baptized simply in
floods and fountains, yea I can prove by our own chronicles that there were
about ten thousand baptized in one day in the River Swale in Yorkshire, from
all which it appears your way of sprinkling is an innovation.


Mr. W Mr. Wright one of the Ministers that sat by was very angry and stood up,
saying; you speak all, it is not fit you should speak so much.


T. Grantham To whom T. G. replied Sir you ought not to be angry; I do not
interrupt Mr. Fort, and he has time to speak what he has to say: therefore
blame not me since I hear as well as speak.


Mr. Fort. Pray Mr Wright be not angry; I promised it should be a peaceable
dispute.


T. Grantham. Because I would give place that Mr. Fort ^ight have time to prove
his practice, I would now proceed to the second Question, (viz)

Qu. 2. Whether Infants ought to be baptized, I am to prove they ought not,
which I thus do,

Arg. 1.

Holy Scripture does show who are to be baptized, Holy Scripture does not show
that Infants ought to be baptized.

Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.


Mr. Fort. Holy Scripture does show that Infants ought to be baptized.


Thomas Grantham. If Holy Scripture does show that Infants ought to be
baptized, then some body can show where it may be found, but no body can show
us where such a Scripture may be found.

Ergo Holy Scripture does not show that Infants ought to be baptized.


Mr. Fort. I can show where it may be found, and I will prove that Infants
ought to be baptized, from Mat. 28 19.


T. Grantham Sir, you mistake your place, for you are not now to prove, but to
answer me, nor does the text you mention speak of Infant baptism at all.


Mr. Fort. The word is (...) make Disciples in all Nations baptising them, but
Infants are part of the Nations that are to be baptized.


T. Grantham. You do violate the Law of disputing, for being my respondent you
ought not to argue. Now for the Text it is read thus (...) etc.

Now for the explication of the Verb (...), I refer you to John the 4 1. (...)
here Disciples are made such by actual teaching: Ergo, Infants cannot be made
Disciples according to Mat. 28. 19.


Mr. Fort. I deny, that it is necessary to understand an actual teaching by the
w^rd (...)


T. G. The very reading of the Text gives it against you, for it says go teach
all Nations, ^twas an act to be done by the Apostles.


Mr. Fort. I tell you Infants of believers are disciples and need no act to
make them so.


T. G. That cannot be, they must be made disciples either by God or Man before
they can be disciples, however they cannot be disciples according to Mat. 28.
Because that is interpreted by your self to make disciples, (viz) by the
Apostles.


Mr. Fort. But there is no necessity to understand an actual teaching of all
that are to be made disciples.


T. Grantham. It can have no other signification, as I shall show by your own
Critics, who tell us that the (...) est disco, to learn or get knowledge and
in the Hebrew (...) is (...) and (...) comes of (...) didict and is rendered
dicens ab alio, which agrees with the Syriack (...) and the Arab. (...) this
fully accords with Mark 16. 16. go preach the Gospel to every creature and
hence I argue. If those that are to be baptized according to Mat. 28. 19. must
first be made by actual teaching or learning from another, then no infant ought
to be baptized according to this Text but the first is true: Ergo, so is the
latter.


Mr. Fort. I will prove that infants ought to be baptized as being disciples
from Acts 15. Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the necks of the disciples?
this is spoken of infants, and therefore they are disciples.


T. G. Sir, I marvel you should no better observe the Law of disputing which I
must hold you to, and the rather because you were pleas^d to glory so much over
your poor Neighbors because of your skill in Logic, and now I will show your
mistake of this Text by the prosecution of my next Argument which is this.

Arg 2

None ought to be baptized but such as are Christ's Disciples, according to the
gospel use of that expression.

Infants are not Christ's Disciples according to the gospel use of that
^^pression. Ergo infants ought not to be baptized.


Mr. Fort. I deny the minor, Infants are Christ's Disciples according to the
Gospel use of that expression.


T. Grantham. None are Christ's Disciples according to the gospel use of that
expression, but such as take up their cross daily and follow Christ, but
Infants do not so. Ergo, to this agree the words of Christ, Luke 12.


Mr. Fort. This place speaks of persons of years, and not of Infants.


T. Grantham. I grant it, and so does every Text that speaks of Christ's
Disciples according to the gospel use of that expression.


Mr. Fort. Not so, for I will show a place where Infants are called Disciples,
Acts 15. Here such as were to be circumcised after the manner of Moses are
called Disciples and you know Infants were circumcised after the maaner of
Moses.


T. Grantham. That Infants were circumcised after the manner of Moses is true,
and that the false Apostles would have put the yoke upon all the Disciples is
true, but that every one upon whom they would have put that yoke were Disciples
is not true; I will expound this text by another, Acts 4. 32. here we are
informed that the multitude of them that believed had all things common* yet it
does not follow that all that had part in these common things were believers,
for Infants had part in common things, and yet were no believers, for it is said
the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one Soul.


Mr. Fort. That text does not expound the other.


T. Grantham. Let them be diligently compared, and you will find that a man may
as well prove Infants believers from the one, as you can prove them Disciples
from the other, but I proceed.

Arg. 3.

None ought to be baptized but those whose duty it is to be born again of water
and of the spirit.

It is not the duty of Infants to be born again of water and the spirit. Ergo,
Infants ought not to be baptized.


Mr. Fort. I except against the term duty in your Argument.


T. Grantham. Why so?


Mr. Fort. There are four terms in your Argument;


T. Grantham. This is but an evasion, and no answer, you cannot show four terms
in it.


Mr. Fort. I say Infants ought to be born again of water and of the spirit.


T. Grantham. Here you grant that they ought to be born again of water, and of
the spirit, and yet deny it to be their duty, this is no good distinction to
make the new birth no part of man's duty, but I will prove that whosoever is
born again must therein perform duty, i Joh. 5. whatsoever is born of God
overcomes the world, and this is the victory even our faith: certainly to
believe and overcome the world is something of duty.


Mr. Fort, This place speaks not of Infants, but of persons which are Adult,


T. Grantham I grant it, but withal I say this Text speaks of whatsoever is
born of God, and says Christ, every one that is born of the spirit is like the
wind that blows so as the sound thereof is heard now can you imagine your
Infants are born again of the spirit, seeing they give not any demonstration of
it?


Mr. Fort. You still insist upon places which speak of adult persons.


T. Grantham. I have told you that all the Scriptures which speak of the new
birth of water and of the spirit, speaks of adult persons, or if any speak of
Infants pray show us where they are.

Arg* 4.

No sinners ought to be baptized, but those of whom faith and repentance is
first required,

Faith and rep^ntance are not required of Infants.

E^go, Infants are not such sinners as ought to be baptized.


Mr. Fort. This Argument is like the rest, you still insist upon those things
wh^^h are the duty of adult persons.


T. Grantham Your conscience tells you that I insist upon those things which
are the duty of all that are to be baptized; yea your vulgar Catechism teaches
us that faith and repentance are required of all that are to be baptized, but
seeing you answer not, but evade only, I shall proceed.

Arg. 5.

All that ought to be buried with Christ in Baptism, ought first to be dead
with him from the rudiments of the world. Infants ought not to be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world. Ergo, Infants ought not to be Baptized.


Mr. Fort. I deny the consequence.


T. Grantham. No Sir, you cannot deny the consequence in a Categoricall
syllogism, so that you must either distinguish, or deny one of the propositions.


Mr. Fort. Well then, I deny your major.


T. G. I need but only show the absurdity of this your denial, for you say in
effect that so^e are to be buried before they be dead, now that all Christians
in Rome and Coloss were dead with Christ, before they were buried with him in
baptism, is evident, Romans 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, Colos. 2. 10, 11, 12. and is as true
of all other Churches, by which it is plain that no Infants were then, nor
ought now to be baptized.

Arg. 6.

Such only ought to be baptized as Christ and his Apostles did baptize, or
appointed to be baptized, but neither Christ nor his Apostles baptized any
Infants, n^r appointed them to be baptized, Ergo.


M. Fort. Christ did appoint Infants to be baptized, and said suffer little
Children to come unto me and forbid them not, Mat. 18.


T. Grantham, All that can fairly be inferred of this passage is this, that if
any desire the Prayers of the Ministers of Christ for their Children etc. they
may lawfully pray for such blessings as they have need of; but if any presume
to baptize them, they do more to them then Christ did, or any other by his
appointment.


Mr. Fort. The Jailer and all his were baptized, and how can you think there
were no Infants in his house.


T. Grantham. The very reading of this Text does show, that there were no
Infants baptized, for first the word was Preached to him and to all that were
in his house, secondly he rejoiced believing in God with all his house: I
desire no better evidence against your Infant baptism then the place you bring
for it.

Arg. 7.

All that are to be Baptized ought therein to worship God in spirit and truth,
as also in other general duties of the n^w Testament.

But Infants ought not to worship God in spirit and in truth in Baptism, nor
any other general duty of the new Testainent. Ergo, Infants ought not to be
Baptized.


Mr. Fort. What do you mean by the general duties of the new Testa ent?


T, G. I mean Prayer, hearing the Word, and Communion at the Lords Table
according to Acts. 2. 41. 42.


Mr. Fort This is spoken of grown Persons, and not of Infants.


T. Grantham. This is spoken of all that were baptized in the first Church,
whose pattern we ought to sollow rather then the innovations of Men.


Mr. Fort. Your way is an innovation not much above two hundred years old.


Tho. Grantham. Not so, for our way of baptising began in the days of John the
Baptist, and for our opposing Infant baptism it is very ancient, for as soon as
we hear it mentioned we find it opposed by Tertullian who lived in the third
Century:


Mr. Fort. Tertullian is conceived to oppose only the Baptising of the children
of unbelievers:


T. G. That is a great mistake, his words are indefinite, for he says, veniant
ergo dum adolescunt, veniant dum discunt, dum quo veniant decentur, fiant
Christiam cum Christum nosse potuerint.


Mr. W Mr. Wright who was one of the other Priests, stood up and said, let the
business be put to that issue, for you only have Tertullian for the Ancients,
and he was a Mantanists.


T. Grantham. If he must be lightly looked at because he was in some error, as
that of Montanus, then you must lay aside most of the ancient Fathers who also
had their errors, but you are mistaken Tertullian was not the only person
among the Ancients that opposed Infant baptism, for Greg. Nazianzene did
likewise dissuade from it.


Mr. Wright. We have Irenaeus before Tertullian who speaks for Infant baptism
for he says Infantes pueris senis.


T. Grantham, You act his words amiss, for it is not senis but seniores.


Mr. Wright. It is senis, it is senis.


T. Grantham, You mistake it is s^niores, and beside Irenaeus speaks not of
baptism, only he uses the words, renascunter in d^um.


Mr. Fort The Ancients understood by them words to be baptized.


T. G. It is inconvenient so to interpret Ir^^eus in this place; for then it
would follow that unless Infants be baptized they cannot be saved, which is
absurd, but I desire you to answer to the Argument

Mr. Fort seemed not disposed to give any surther answer: then T. Grantham said
I have propounded and prosecuted 7 Arguments against your pretended way of
baptising* and 7 against your Infant subject, of what weight they are, and how
you have answered them, we are no proper Judges* but must leave that to the
Auditors; now because I would not take up the whole time, I desire you to be
Opponent, and I will answer you: I conclude with the words of Aug^stine, Nec
ego te, nec tu me, sed ambo audiamus Christi in Scrip^^res.


Mr. Fort Opponent. I am now to prove our way of baptising to be the right way
of baptising, and that Infants ought to be baptized.

Arg. 1.

If our way of baptising does signify that which ought to be signified in
baptism then it is the right way of baptising.

But our way of baptising does signify that which ought to be signified in
baptism. Ergo, it is the right way of baprising.


T. Grantham. If you mean that your way of baptising does signify all that
ought to be signified in baptism, then I deny the minor, and we have before
showed how short it comes of the true and full signification of baptism.


Mr. Fort. Our way of baptising signifies the washing away of sins, and it
agrees with the signification of the word (...) which is to wash, therefore it
is sufficient.


T. Grantham. The contrary to this has been showed and I now deny that every
kind of washing agrees with the signification of the word (...) when used to
express the sacred act of baptising, and I desire you to show one text where
that word is taken for a washing the Forehead only when the sacred act of
baptising is expressed by it*


Mr Fort. The Jailer was baptized at midnight; and do you think he had a River
in his house?


T. Grantham You are much mistaken the Jailer went out to be baptized:


Mr. Fort. You cannot make that appear.


T. Grantham. Yes the reading of the text is plain to that purpose, for it is
said he was baptized, he, and all his straightway, and then it follows, and
when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them.


Mr. Fort. That may be meant of carrying them out of one room into another


T. Grantham. This is contrary to common sense; you cannot speak your
conscience in this.


Mr. Fort. I have showed our way of baptizing is sufficient, I will now prove
that Infants ought to be baptized.

Arg, 2*

If Infants are within the Covenant of grace then they ought to be sealed with
the seal of the Covenant, and by consequence to be baptized.

But Infants are within the Covenant of grace and ough to be sealed, etc, Ergo,
they ought to be baptized.


T. Grantham. Before I answer your argument give me leave to ask you a
Question* How many Seals belong to the Covenant of grace, and what be they?


Mr. Fort. There are two Seals of the Covenant, to wit, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper:


T, G. Then I deny your minor proposition from your own practice, for you deny
Infants one of these Seals, to wit, the Lords Supper, though you confess them
to be within the Covenant, and we by as good reason deny the other Seal to
belong to Infants:


Mr. Fort. Yes, we have better reason for the one then you have for the other,
for it is said; let a man examine himself, and so let him eat.


T. Grantham. 1. It is also said, Repent and be baptized every one of you, Acts
2. ^8. if thou believe with all thine heart thou may. 2. I might answer
your instance out of your own mouth, by saying this is meant of persons of
years, and not of infants, which as it is true so it shows the weakness of your
answers to many of my Arguments.


Mr. Fort. I say infants being in the Covenant they ought to be sealed with the
Seal* and I pray tell me plainly whether you hold them in the Coven^n^ or no?


T. G. I say being in the covenant you mean the grace of Eternal Life by the
death of Christ, then I say all infants are so in the covenant of say but if by
covenant you mean the duties of the covenant, then I (...) infants are not so
under the covenant.


Mr Fort. You cannot prove that all infants dying in infancy shall be saved.


T. G. (...) if it were my business, I could and would prove it, but I am (...)
you*


Mr. Fort. (...) to prove it if you can.


T. Grantham. Then I prove it by the testimony of the Apostle, who says as in
Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, and again as by the offense
of once the Judgment came on all men to condemnation, so by the obedience of
one the free gift abounded toward all men to justification of life.


Mr. Fort. These places do not prove that all Infants dying in infancy shall be
saved; for he speaks here only of the resurrection of the Dead.


T. G. These places do show that what death and condemnation came on infants by
Adam is made void by the death of Christ, and I desire you to answer me this
Question, whether you believe that any infants dying in infancy shall be damned;


Mr. Fort. yes I do be^ieve some infants dying in infancy shall be damned,
(here the people gave a general sigh as disliking so harsh a saying.)


T. G. Then you are no friend to infants; shall the Lord tell us, the Son shall
not bear the iniquity of the father, and shall we no^ believe him.


Mr. Fort. The Lord does say he will visit the iniquities of the father upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation.


T. G. yea Sir, but it is of them that hate him, but yet I grant in respect of
temporal punishments the children do often bear the iniquities of their
fathers, yea, all infants do bear the sin of their father Adam to this day, but
our discourse is of eternal condemnation, in which respect I say infants shall
not bear the iniquity of their father, seeing Christ says of infants
indefinitely, of such are the kingdom of God.


Mr. Fort Well I have showed that infants being in the Covenant ought therefore
to be baptized, and it is said 1 Cor. 7. that infants are holy and so they are
in Covenant with their believing parents.


T. G: I have answered your argument by distinguishing betwixt the duty of the
covenant, and the mercy of eternal life, in the first I say infants are not in
the covenant, but in the other I say they are for they shall be saved by Christ.

And for the holiness the 1 Cor. 7. it is expounded by Erasmus, and others of
your own Doctors to be only a legi^timate holiness, and indeed being derived
from the unbelievers being sanctified, it cannot fairly be understood of any
other kind of cleanness then that which is Matrimonial.


Mr. Wright Mr. W. interposed saying Diodate does expound that place of a
covenant holiness.


T. G. I grant he does so, yet Augustine far more ancient then he says, that
whatsoever that Ho^iness is it is certain it is not of power to make Christians
or remit sins.


Mr. E. I marvel you ^ould deny infants the seal seeing you grant them to be in
the covenant.


T. G. I do not deny them the seal any more then your self, who deny them the
Lords Supper, which was allowed them in old time for 600 years together.


Mr. F. What Author says so? I do not think you can show that in any good
author.


T. G. I can show it from your own Doctors in a learned treatise called a
Scholastical discourse about symbolising with Antichrist in Ceremonies.


Mr. Fort. Infants being in the Covenant are in the Church, and therefore
cannot be denied baptism,


T. Grantham. I answer by the former distinction if by being in the Covenant
and in the Church you mean the whole number of the saved: I grant infants to be
in the Covenant and in the Church; but if you mean those only who are in the
actual profession of gospel Ordinances, as baptism and the like, I say no
Scripture shows them to be so in the Covenant.

Mr. Fort repeating what he said before, rose up to go away, then Tho. Grantham
said.

Gentlemen, though we differ in opinion, yet I desire we may endeavor to
maintain the great duty of Charity toward each other, till God shall rectify
our judgments in these things.


Mr. W, Mr. Wright replied, saying it was not meet to place all our Religion in
these things, but to walk in love one toward another, or to this effect, and
thus in a f^iendlie manner the meeting was dissolved and every man went away
in peace.

The next day the baptized Christians met together to preach the Word: Mr. Fort
and Mr. Wright came to the meeting and i^ a very civil manner assaied to
discourse with them about the Authority by which they Preach, supposing that
they had no ordinary calling to the ministry, but when it was showed them that
no man was allowed to minister in the baptized Churches in the capacity of a
Pastor or other Officer, without due election and ordination by fasting and
prayer, with the laying on of hands by the Presbiterie, Bishops, or overseers
of the Church; they then only opposed that liberty of Prophecy, which we
allow, saying that gifted men in the church, as mere gifted christians might
not pray, or expound the Word in public assemblies, we on the contrary
alledgd that gifted christians as such might lawfully speak in the church to
exhortation, etc. in a modest and humble manner for the improvement of gi^ts
and the profit of the church. Quoting to this purpose 1 Pe. 4, 10, 11* 1 Cor.
14. 31. Acts 18. 25 26.

We spent about half an hour in friendly discourse about the meaning of those
Scriptures, but not agreeing in our expositions, Mr. Fort took his leave, and
we proceeded in our work.


FINIS.
Brief ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Dr. STILLINGFLEET'S Digressions about the Baptising
of Infants, In his Book entitled A Rational account of the grounds of the
Protestant Religion. etc. Wherein The insufficiency of his grounds for Infant
Baptism is discovered.

By Thomas Grantham.

Job. 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean one. Isa. 29. 16.
Surely your turning things upside down shall be esteemed as the petters Clay.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

To the Reader.
IT is not any conceit of my fitness to contend with Learned Men in the
controversies depending about sacred Baptism, which moves me to this present
undertaking, but the experience I have of the mistake of some persons, who take
the things brought by Dr. Stilling-fleet in favor of Infant Baptism, to be of
greater weight then what has been done by other Men in that question, as also
I might by this Paper move some abler hand to reckon morefully and Methodically
with his new devices, if upon consideration they find themselves concerned to
do it.

But chiefly my aim is, to move, if it may be, the learned Author, to consider
how much he injures the Cause he manages against the Papists, with so much
Judgment and Learning, whilst he endeavors to support his Traditional Infant
Sprinkling (for Baptism it is not) which being allowed, other innovations of
Popery, or other Sects will certainly be supported together with it, as having
the same grounds, and in some respect fairer pretenses to obtrude upon the
Church of God, from all which errors let her be delivered, by the protection
of the Almighty, to whose grace I commit thee.

Thine to serve thee in Christ. Tho. Grantham.

Brief Animadversions upon Dr. Stillingfleet's Digressions about the Baptising
of Infants.
SOlomon the wise, has told us, there are many devices in Man's heart. The
truth whereof is verified in the multitude of devices old and new which Men
have found out to darken the Counsel of God, teaching the sacred institution
of the Baptism of Repentance for the remision of sins. Nevertheless the
Counsel of God that shall stand, and therefore neither shall the devices of
Dr. Stillingfleet prevail, nor be found ^o much as a rational account of the
grounds of Infant Baptism, albeit diverse Persons are persuaded that he has
outdone others, that have undertaken to defend that innovation.

1. First, Therefore we shall consider the two Texts, John 3. 5. Act. 2. 38,
39. which he says, according to the interpretation of the Fathers and the
ancient Church and the Papists themselves do evidently assert Infant Baptism*
It were answer sufficient to tell him, that what ever was the interpretation of
the Fathers, etc. yet, according to the interpretation of the Protestants, the
grounds of whose Religion he presents to give an account off, these Texts, does
not hold forth such a necessity of Infant Baptism, as by some of the Ancients
was imagined, seeing the Protestants do not say, as the Papists and some before
them, no Baptism no salvation; but they more truly teach, that this place is to
be understood (even as some of the Fathers also expounded it) of such as refuse
or contemn Baptism, and yet saying withal to your confutation, that it is not
necessary by water, John, 3. 5. To understand the external rite of Baptism. See
Fulk. Ans. to the Rhemists Annot. John 3. so Dr. Willit Synops. Papis.

However, it is evident to them that will not shut their eyes that in John 3.
5. Christ is showing the way of Life, and the duties of regeneration to such as
came to him for instruction, and spea^^ nothing there, of the case of Infants,
who (as one well observes) cannot overcome the World, by reason of their
natural incapacity to know either good or evil, and therefore are not obliged
to the duties of the new birth, to wit, repentance, faith and Baptism, for
whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that
overcomes the world even our faith. And hence it is evident that John 3. 5.
cannot be understood of Infants, who are wholly incapable of the duties of
regeneration.

And as eviden^ it is, that Acts ^ 38. 39. intends not Infants seeing the
persons there to be baptized, even every one of them, are required first to
repent; a duty of which Infants are wholly incapable; and the promise there
mentioned is clearly meant of the gi^ts of the Holy Ghost or the Spirit of
promise in a special manner, according to the Prophecy of Jo^l, the extent of
which promise is only to the called of the Lord, v^rse 39* and this
interpretation also is avouched by learned Protestants, See Diodate on the
Text, and Erasmus on the same; Dr Jer. Tailor in his book of confirmation does
fully expound this place, of the promise of the Spirit both to the Parents, and
to the Children, as they are the called of the Lord, and not to infants in that
capacity. Lib. Proph^cy. So then the pretended evidence of Infant Baptism from
this place is taken away, because this tr^th is hence very evident, that
calling by the word of the Gospel regeneration ^y Faith and repentance are the
true antecedents to the Baptism of every sinner.

2. Secondly, Dr St^lling-fleet states the Q^estion between the Baptists and
the Paed^-Baptists after this manner.

Whither our blessed Savio^r has by a positive precept so determined the
subject of baptism, viz. Adult persons professing the faith, that the
a^teration of the subject, in baptising Infants be not a deviation from, and a
p^rversion off the institution of Christ in a substantial part of it? (...)
short, whether our Savior has so determined the subject of bapt^sm as to
exclude infants. This done he tells us that taking in only the help of
Scripture and reason, it were no difficult matter to ^rove directly that
infants are so far from being excluded Baptism by the institution of Christ,
that there are as many grounds as are necessary to a matter of that nature, to
prove that the baptising (...) is ^uita^le to the institution of christ, and
agreeable to the (...) of the Church under the Gospel. So then, Scripture and
reason ^nly must now deside the controversy, Let us hear therefore (...)
St^ll^ng fleet brings from thence, and th^s he speaks.

If there were any ground to exclude them it must be either the incapacity of
the subject or some express precept and institution of our Savior, but neither
of them can be supposed to do it.

But I answer, for both these cau^es Infants are not to be bapti^ed, and since
their incapacity depends upon the nature of the institution these two reasons
are resolved into one; Now the institution of baptism, whether we consider it
as delivered by God to his Servant John, and by him to us; or as it is
established by precept from Christ, for a perpetual Ministry in his Church to
the end of the world* we shall find it delivered by both in such sort, as it is
exclusive of infants; for, in the first place it is deli^ered as the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins; Mark 1. 4. and every sinner who is said
to be baptized by him, is said to be baptized confessing their sins, verse 5.
which we know is not to be expected of Infants.

The precept of our Savior for the perpetuity of Baptism so expressly requires
the making every subject a Disciple in order thereunto, and that by actual
teaching, or preaching the Gospel to them, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16 15* according
to Christ's own example, who so made Disciples before they were baptized, that
no Infant with any show of Scripture or reason can possibly be brought within
the reach of baptism according to it is institution; In a word Dr.
St^ll^ng-fl^et seems, in so many words, to grant in his first state of the
Question that to bring Infants to Baptism, is an alteration of the subject, and
therefore not agreeable to the institution of Christ, in which to admit of
alterations is very dangerous.

But says Dr. S. The rule and measure as to the capacity of divine
Institutions must be fetched from the end of them, for this was the ground of
the Circumcision of Proselites under the Law.

Answer, That the ground of the circumcision of Proselites was fetched from the
end of the institution, is not true. And indeed had it been left to that, Men's
various conceits about the ends of such institutions might have made as ill
work, as we see yours do now* wherefore the wisdom of God to prevent those
dangers, gave express order in that case as appears, Gen 17. 13. compared with
Exodus 12. 44. 48. And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep
the Passover, let all his Males be circumcised, and verse 49, One Law shall be
to him that is home born, and unto the strager that sojourneth among you.

Thus we see the Law is as express for the circumcising Proselites and their
males, as for Israel themselves Diodate also expounds the first place by the
second (The servant that is born) meaning (says he) the Proselite who of his
own free will shall add himself to the Church by the profession of Gods true
worship.

But now, if we admit Dr. S. his rule, that the measure as to the capacity of
Divine Institutions, must be fetched from the ends thereof, yet will he be so
far from gaining, that he will quite lose his cause. For, if by the ends of
Baptism he means the things signified in Baptism (as that he does, for he said
they who are capable of the thing signified ought not to be denied the sign)
then we shall certainly gain one thing out of two and either of them will serve
our turn to show his mistake, viz. either Infants are not capable of Baptism,
because not capable of all things signified thereby, or else that the
Protestants do violate their own rule in denying Infants some other holy signs,
as general as Baptism, when yet they are capable of some of the things
signified thereby, and this shall evidently appear ^y running the parralell
between us, as to the grounds upon which you deny Infants the privilege of the
Lords Table, and we deny them Baptism. And first.

1 The things signified by the Lords Table (as the ends of that Institution) is
Christ Crucified for us, and to come again to receive us to himself, of these
mercies Infants are capable, because they shall be saved by the death and
coming of the Lord Jesus, thus they have the thing signified* yet you deny
them the sign because they understand not the thing represented by the sign.
Answerable to this we say, by Baptism is signified the death and resurection of
Christ and our salvation thereby, of this mercy signified in Baptism Infants
are capable but yet the sign is not given to them because they understand not
the thing signified thereby.

2. The ends, or things signified by the Lords Table, on our part are, the
profession of our faith, the manifestation of our union with the Church, etc.
of these ends Infants are not capable, therefore then do not admit them to the
Lords Ta^le.

Answerable to this we say, the things signified in baptism on our ^^rt, are
the profession of o^r faith, and manifestation of our union (...) the Saints,
etc. of these ends ^nfants are not capable, therefore (...) them not to baptism.

3. Our coming to the Lords Table holds forth abstainence from the Levened
bread of malice and wickedness, and our feeding upon the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth; of these ends (as they are duties) Infants are not
capable, therefore you admit them not to the Lords Table.

Answerable to this we say, baptism holds forth our death to sin, and the
newness of life from our baptism to the end, of these ends of baptism Infants
are not capable, and therefore we admit them not to baptism, for the rule and
measure as to the capacity of divine Institutions is to be fetched from the
ends of them.

The same might be said concerning the imposition of hands with prayer for the
Spirit of Promise, seeing it was practiced by the Apostles upon the newly
baptized indifferently yet you admit no Infants to this Divine Institution,
though you suppose them to be baptized, although according to Protestant
Doctrine they are capable of the promise Act. 2. 38, 39. And the benediction
signified, and obtained thereby by which your inconsistancy with your own rule
is further manifested and hence I infer (according to your own words) by a
parity of reason built on equal grounds, you ought not to baptize Infants
because the rule and measure, as to Divine Institutions, or the capacity of the
subjects ther^of are to be fetched from the ends thereof.

Not from some ends only (and those too only which we please) as Dr. S does
unadvisedly teach, for so there would be no Man, or but very few, but might be
brought to Baptism, or other ordinances, seeing they are capable of several
things signified therein, as the death of Christ for the sins of the world and
his Resurection, by which all shall rise again; and whether they believe it or
no, yet he is the Lord that bought them, and a mediator between God and them,
that his long-suffering might lead them to repentance

Wherefore your instance of our Saviors being baptized without repentance
avails you nothing, unless you were a le to prove a special case to be a
general rule for the practice of ordinances, which yet you cannot but know is
pernicious many ways, nor can you rationally believe that because Christ who
was no sinner was baptized without repentance, that therefore you must baptize
sinners without repentance also; if otherwise, then why may not Persons be
admitted to the Lords Table without self examination, seeing Christ did partake
of it without self examination, having no need to do so? certainly though
Christ did this it shall never be demonstrated that the Members of his Church
may do it without self examination, and yet thus went the matter in old time
for hundreds of years together, so true is the maxim admit one absurdity and
more will follow.

But to make an end of this, its evident: Christ in being baptized did his duty
to God, and had he not been baptized he had not fulfilled all righteousness;
Let it now be showed that it^s the duty of infants to be baptized, or that they
or any body else commits sin in refusing infant baptism, and then we shall
stand upon no further capacity on their part nor oppose this instance as to the
end for which it is brought but till this be done we justly reject such
Argumentation.

Neither is it true, that what we say of the incapacity of infants etc.
reflects upon the wisdom of God in appointing circumcision for infants, for
Gods command made them fit subjects for it, together with the nature of the
covenant which he made with Abraham, and his, according to the flesh, which
covenant he also ordained to be in their Flesh by circumcision, Genesis 17. 13.
Now therefore when it shall appear, that the covenant of the Gospel, (I mean
it, as established by Christ in his Church) is made with any Man and his seed
according to the Flesh, and that God has required the Gospel covenant should
be in their Flesh by baptism, and so every infant born of them, or servant
bought with Money to be baptized we shall then grant that to insist on the
incapacity of infants would reflect upon the wisdom of God, but since this
neither is, nor can be done, all these pretended reflections falls really upon
Dr. S. for denying infants the Lords Supper, because of their incapacity, who
yet were admitted to the Passover, of which they were as incapable as of the
Lords Table.

What the Dr. says further of the ends of baptism to represent and exhibit the
nature of the grace of the Gospel and to confirm the truth of the covenant on
Gods part: We have considered before, and to what you here add, saying, It
instates the partakers of it in the privileges of the Church of God, I answer,

That though the Dr. speaks right according to the right administration of
baptism, yet according to his way of infant baptism it is not so, seeing we all
know, infants (while such) though sprinkled have no more privilege in your
Church then those who are not sprinkled, for the privileges next following
baptism, is to be taught to observe all things whatsoever Christ commanded, and
to continue in fellowship with the Church in breaking of Bread and prayer, Acts
2 42. Ma. 28. 20. Now to tell us that infants are instated in these things, and
yet whilst infants have nothing at all to do with them is too gross a vanity.
For,

If you say they are instated in these privileges upon future contingences,
viz. Repentance, Faith and newness of Life according to the Gospel, I answer
when this comes to pass they are no infants, nor as infants partake of these
privileges, but as those that are now the Sons of God by faith, and thus truly
all infants are instated in Church privileges as soon as born, seeing by the
death of Christ they have a right upon the conditions of the Gospel when
capable to perform them, thus you mislead the world with a specious pretense of
instating their infants in Church privileges, when it is only an empty sound of
words.

But the Jews Infants as they were instated in the privileges of their Church,
by circumision, so they entered upon the enjoyment of their privileges in
infancy, appearing by Gods commandment three times a year in the Temple with
the offerings accustomed and to partake of the Passover, with the congregation
or family where it was eaten.

The Dr. says, nothing can seem wanting of the ends of Baptism (in respect of
Infants) but that which seems most cerimonial which is the personal
restipulation, which yet may reasonably be supplied by Sponsors, etc.

That there is much wanting beside this restipulation in your infant baptism is
showed before, and it is unadvisedly said that the restipulation of the person
baptized is the most ceremonial thing in baptism, seeing it is the moral and
substantial part being indeed our covenanting with God and in truth the
external washing is far more ceremonial as appears 1 Pet. 3. 21. And for your
saying that the personal restipulation in baptism may be reasonably supplied by
Godf^thers, is very much below the reason of any Christian to affirm; But is it
so? that Sponsors may supply the personal restipulation, which is the greater,
then let them also supply the lesser, to wit sprinkling with water, which they
can better perform, then the covenant they make for the infant, and then the
whole business will appear to have the same reasonableness in every part* viz,
wholly unreasonable.

Thus much touching the capacity of infants* etc. Next the Dr tells us, That in
the Institution of Baptism there is neither direct nor consequential
prohibition of Infants to be baptized, and that there is nothing of that nature
pretended before the (...) commission, Mat. 28. 19. But here is a mistake, and
its strange he never observed that it has often been demonstrated that, as
when Circumcision first appeared in the world, it clearly took in the Infants
of those to whom it was first given, so, accordingly it was propagated; But
when Baptism first appeared in the world, it as clearly left out the Infants of
those to whom it was first ministered, and accordingly was propagated by the
holy Apostles* insomuch that of the many thousands, and famous Churches, that
were baptized, all the world is not able to show so much as one Infant to have
been baptized in any one of them, nor one word of precept for so doing, and if
this be not so much as a consequential prohibition of Infant baptism, I shall
never believe that the Dr. or any else can show me so much as a consequential
prohibition, of Infants receiving the Lords Supper, the imposition of hands etc.

And though the Dr. consider never so much what apprehensions the Apostles had
concerning the Church state of such as were in external Covenant with God, yet
he cannot rationally imagine that they should measure the state of the Gospel
Churches by the reason of the Covenant which God made with the Jews and their
Seed according to the flesh. Seeing it is expressly said from henceforth, to wit
from the vanishing of the old Covenant, know we no Man after the flesh -- But
now if any Man be in Christ he is a new Creature. And now Men are not to be
accounted of the Church because they are Abraham*s Seed, but they are accounted
Abraham*s Seed by being in the Church of Christ, Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's
then are you Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to promise.

Neither is it true that Christ commanded his Apostles to gather whole Nations
into Churbes, as the Dr. affirms, neither did the Apostles gather any one whole
Nation, or City into a Church S^ate that we read of, therefore Churches
consisting of whole Nations, Men, Women and Infants, are not Apostollical But
this the Apostles did they taught many Nations, 1. v. their sound went through
many Nations, not that they taught all manner of Persons in the Nations, for
they taught no Infants, and the persons by them gathered into the Church, were
only such as received their Doctrine, as appears by those Families where their
Gospel was received, the Husband sometimes opposite to the Wife, and
otherwhiles the Wife to the Husband Servants and Masters likewise differing in
the same Family about christianity, 1. Cor. 7. If then the Apostles did not
gather whole Families into a church state unless they did wholly believe, Act.
16. how-should any Man imagine, they gathered whole Nations? the greatest part
whereof by all experience are wicked persons yea in those very Nations, which
Men pretend to have made into churches of Christ of which would God England
were not so full an evidence as it is this day.

The Dr. grants that the order of words Mat. 28, 19. (Teach all Nations
baptising them) was necessary for those who were then to be proselited to
Christianity. And we say they are as necessary for the generations following,
who have as much need of true Faith and Repentance* or the first principles of
Christianity in order to their being Christians, as them that went before, and
it is a pernicious alteration of the order of Christ's commission, to outrun
it^s direction so, as to make persons to be Christians, before they do or can
know the least title of Christianity.

The case which the Dr. puts, about going to Disciple the Indians Baptising
them, is not at all rational, but upon the pre-supposition, that the person so
doing, to have seen or known them, that gives him his authority to Baptize
infants, and then indeed it is rational to suppose such a Person would not
understand that the words, Disciple the Indians Baptising them, would exclude
infants. But yet I must also say, that his ground to believe so could not arise
from the words themselves but from the practice presupposed. Wherefore the
Apostles having direction to teach all Nations Baptising them, without the
least knowledge of any Infants Baptized by any Baptists which were before them,
or from whom they received their authority, here is no place for the Drs.
suppositions at all.

As little cause has he to think that had any one said to Abraham he that
believes and is circumcised shall be saved, it ought so to have been
interpreted, as that infants ought to be circumcized. For if this had been all
the rule given for circumcision, it must of necessity have been limited to such
as believe only, and unless the Dr. know how from good ground to satisfy his
conscience, that Infants are believers of that which is taught or Preached
according to Mark 16. (which place he aludes unto) he must so limit the
diversion for baptising. But if indeed he take Infants to be such believers,
then he is answered by Dr. Hammond in his Let. of Resol. p. 297. who says, as
for the Question whether Infants have faith? I profess my self to be none of
those who are concerned in it. I freely confess to believe, Faith to be so
necessarily founded in understanding, that they that have not understandisg
cannot have faith, whethe actual or habitual.

The conclusion therefore is, since in the case you put, the word (believe)
cannot concern infants, and that they must be deemed capable of Salvation,
though they believe not, it is every way safe to think them unconcern^d in the
other duty, that passage Mark 16. 16. or any other like unto it notwithstanding.

Finally the Dr. proposes five considerations about the suitableness of In^ant
baptism to the administration of things under the Gospel, and first he says.

1. That if it had been Christ's intention to exclude Infants, there had been
far greater reason for an express prohibition then for an express command, if
his intention were to admit them, because this was suitable to the general
grounds of Gods dispensation among them before.

Answer, Here is little said but what has been answered before, and may be
answered by saying, had it been Christ's intention that infants should not be
admitted to the Lords Table there had been more need of an express prohibition,
etc. then of an express command, etc. because suitable to Gods dispensations
among them before. Thus Argumentum ad hominem.

But I answer further, it is dangerous arguing to our present right to
Sacraments, from Gods dispensations among the Jews, seeing the state of the
Church, and the di^pensation is so much altered as that the former was but
carnal, in respect of the Spirituality of the other.

2. The Dr. says, it is very hard to conceive that the Apostles thought
Infants excluded by Christ, when after Christ's ascension they looked upon
themselves bound to observe the Jewish Customs, even when they had baptized
many thousands,

Answer, It is ill said that the Apostles were bound to observe any such Jewish
Customs because of any suitableness between them and things under the Gospel
(which is the mark you ought to hit or you say nothing) but the reason why they
did observe such Customs for a time, was the weakness of the Jews, and we find
the Apostles did as speedily put a period to such Customs as they could Acts
15. 24. to 32. Acts 1645. which clearly shows Jewish Customs was not suitable
to things under the Gospel, and here circumcision one of the chief of Jewish
rites, is clearly abolished among the rest, so that a man would think infant
baptism should never have been built upon it.

3. The Dr says If admission of infants to Baptism were a mere relic of
judaism, it seems strange that none of the judaizing Christians should be
charged with it; who yet are charged with the observation of other judaical
r^tes..

Answer, I find no man saying that Infant baptism was a relic of judaism,
save Dr. Hammond, and some from him, and he indeed would make believers baptism
also a jewish relic whiles he teaches that the jews baptising Proselites, and
their Children was the Original, and the baptism ^f the Christian Church but
the Copy, by which device he has opened a gap to our late N^tionists to
deprive the Church of sacred baptism altogether, and has done more to weaken
the cause of infant baptism then any other of its favorites, in laying its
foundation in jewish ceremonies, for which they had no clear command from God.
But great is this truth of believers baptism, and will stand notwithstanding
the injury done by Dr. Hammond, for it was no jewish rite, the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins was from Heaven, Mat. 21. 25. and the
Pharisees who ^ere ^ealous enough for jewish rites, rejcted holy baptism, which
Christ asfi^ms to be the counsel of God Lu. 7. 30. and testifies out of the
consciences of his enemies, that he that t^aches otherwise denies John to be a
Prophet. This then is the thing that truly seems strange, that no mention is
made of infant baptism, if indeed it was at all received in the Christian
Church either as a jewish rite or otherwise, but not str^^^e at all that none
is charged with it, seeing none can be named that held it.

4. Since theie wish Christians were so much offended says the Dr. at the
neglect of circumcision, Acts 21. Can we in reason think they should quietly
bear their children being wholly thrown out of the church, as they would have
been, if neither admitted by circumcision nor baptism.

Answer, Since the false Apostles was so earnest to have the christians
circumcise their children, it is strange that none of the true Apostles could or
would quiet them by saying instead of infant circumcision you have infant
baptism if indeed there had been any such thing practiced, For, this way went
the Apostle Paul to still them, when they would have brought the believers
themselves under circumsion, Col. two. Telling the chriffians they were
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the* Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
baptism, wherein ye also are ^isen with him through the Faith, etc. And why
might not the jews as qui^tly take the non-admission of infants to baptism, as
they so took the non-admission of them to the Lords Supper seeing they were
formerly admitted to the Passover, nor i^ it necessary to say, that though
they were not admitted to either of these, that therefore they are wholly
thrown out of the Church; For,

If by church be meant the whole number of the saved, then are infants of the
churchs for Christ has told us the kingdom of God belongs to infants, and thus
were infants of the church before circumcision was for some thousands of years:
But if by church be meant those only who are concerned in the actual
profession of the gospel, in this respect I grant infants are not of the
church, God having no where required this of infants in his gospel. Infants
are now as well as before the Flood, within the covenant of the gospel in
respect of the grace of eternal Life, but are not under the duties of the
Covenant, to wit, Repentance, Faith baptism perseverance, etc.

Nor can my calling the whole number of the saved the church, and thus making
infants a part thereof offend a Protestant who is acquainted with Protestant
doctrines, seeing Mr. Rogers Cath. Doctrine p. 73. upon Art. 19. of the Church
of England, does affirm, there is an invisible Church, and takes all within the
compass of ^his Church who are elect, tryumphing or that shall triumph in
Heaven Dr. Field takes into his definition of the Church all the Elect, of Men
or Angels, caled, or not yet called. l. 1. c. 8. So that according to these
defi^itions of the church, infants are not thrown out of the Church though not
of the number of the called, and consequently not that cause for the jews to
complain, nor any other which the Dr. does imagine; unless they be not
acquainted with the extent of the covenant of Gods grace in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Five, The doctor lastly tells us, That had it been contrary to Christ's
institution (to baptize infants) we should not have had such evidence of it is
early Practice in the Church, and here I acknowledge the use of Apostolical
Tradition to manifest this to us.

Answer, This is altogether unlike a Protestant: What are the Sacraments so
darkly laid down in the Scripture that we know not when and to whom they
belong without Tradition? but when shall we see this Tradition Apostolical,
I think doctor Ta^lor expressly denies there is any Tradit apostolical. lib.
proph^si. p. 117. 120.

But the doctor cannot but know there be errou^s ^vhich crept into the Church
even in the apostles days, which also continued in some of them,
notvvithstanding all endeavors to purge them, such were circumcision and
keeping the Law. Or if we list to reckon with records of antiquity, it is
easi^ o show some things held by Papists and opposed by the doctor are better
proved by tradi^ion then infant baptism, for example the Lent Fast and prayer
for the dead, this is not denied by Mr. Perkins demonst. prob. What then shall
be gained to the protestant Religion by such Traditional arguments.

It is a notable saying of Irenae^s (according to Dr. Fulk) Wsen the Heretics
are reproved out of the Scriptures they ^all to accusing the Scriptures as if
all is not well in them -- and that the Truth cannot be found out of them that
know not the Tradition. And says Tertul, (according to Dr. Fulk) Take away
those things from the Heretics, which they hold with Ethnicks, that they may
stay their Questions upon Scripture only.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 3. l. 5. r. is right, p. 4. l. 25. r. of a Midwife p. 5. l. 34. for these
r. those p. 7. l. 27. for others r. overs.


