A DIALOGUE Between the BAPTIST AND THE PRESBYTERIAN.

WHEREIN The Presbyterians are punished by their own Pens, for their Cruel and
Soul-devouring Doctrines, making God the Ordainer of all the Sins of Men and
Devils: And reprobating the greatest part of Mankind, without any help of
Salvation.

Whereunto is annexed, A Treatise of ELECTION, Entitled, The Order of Causes:
Formerly published by an Eminent Servant of Christ, and now republished with
some Explication concerning FREE WILL.

By THOMAS GRANTHAM, Messenger of the Baptized Churches in Lincolnshire.

Psalm. 64. 7, 8, 9. But God shall shoot at them with an Arrow, suddenly shall
they be wounded. So shall they make their own Tongue to fall upon themselves:
all that see them, shall flee away. And all Men shall fear, and shall declare
the Work of God; for they shall wisely consider of his doing.

London, Printed in the Year, 1691.

An Epistolary Preface, to the Citizens of the Ancient City of Norwich.
Honored Sirs;
GOD's Providence having ordered my Refidence in this City* and my Business
being to Preach the Gospel, I have endeavored to perform my Office amongst
you; for which I have met with many unkind and undue Reflections, and more
especially from that sort of Professors who have espoused the Principles and
Doctrine of Mr. John Calvin, concerning his imaginary Decree of absolute and
irrespective Reprobation.

Two Confessions of Faith I find much received in this City, containing these
words; God did from all Eternity, freely and unchangeably ordain ALL THINGS
whatsoever come to pass. -- And that his Almighty Power extends it self even
to the first Fall, and all other Sins of Angels and Men, and that not by a bare
permission. And that By the Decree of God, some Angels and Men were
foreordained to Everlasting Death. -- And that these Angels and Men, thus
predestined and foreordained, are particularly and unchangeably designed;
and their Number so certain and definite, that it cannot be either increased or
diminished. See the Conf. of Faith by the Assemb. of Divines. In which
Confession, they also teach, That God did not decree any of those things,
because he foresaw they would come to pass: But they make the Decree of God the
FIRST Cause of all things whatsoever comes to pass, Chap. 5. Sect. 2. So that
according to this Doctrine, all the Sins, both of Devils and Men, from the
beginning to the end of the World, was by force of God's Decree, THE FIRST
CAUSE, unavoidably necessary; and hereupon also the unavoidable Damnation of
just such a Number, both of Angels and Men, as God would have to be ^ed, and no
more.

And hereupon it will follow, that God's Decree was (...) that Cain killed his
Brother Abel; that Ruben polluted his Fathe(...) David committed Adultery with
Bathsheba, and murdered (...) and of all the Villainies in the World. The
odiousness of w(...) will better appear, if we put this Case: A owes B 100 l.
he pays it, for so it was decreed; but then comes C in the Night, and robs B of
his 100 l. and also cuts his Throat. And this comes to pass also by force of
God's Decree unavoidably; because (say they) God did from all Eternity
unchangeably decree all things whatsoever comes to pass. That I do them no
wrong by thus speaking, hear the words of Calvin himself, Inst. L. 1. c. 17.
Thieves and Murderers are the Instruments of Divine Providence, which the Lord
himself uses to execute his Judgments, which he has determined in himself,
and that he works through them.

When I had seriously considered, that many were ensnared in these dreadful and
blasphemous Doctrines, to the exasperating their Spirits, against the Truth of
the Gospel, and against such as do sincerely preach it as the Means of
Salvation to all Men, scandalizing them by the Name of Free-willers, etc. I did
find my self concerned, to testify against this unmerciful Doctrine, and this
unrighteous Accusation about Free Will Concerning which Point of Free Will, you
shall have an Account in the last Treatise, where it will appear, they that
accuse others, do hold as much as the Persons they accuse (if not more)
concerning Free Will.
; And to preach the Everlasting Gospel, that God is not willing that any should
perish, but that All should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. And being well
assured of the sincerity of my Doctrine and purpose, I did as Occasion offered
assert the Truth, both by Word and Writing.

And hearing that Dr. John Collings was the greatest Assertor of the
Reprobatarian Principles; I found an opportunity to write to him, upon the
occasion of a Passage in his Book, Entitled, A Discourse of Divine Love, page
259. which I now publish, with his Answer, and my Reply, to prevent and correct
false Reports, which have gone abroad amongst some concerning these Papers. The
Doctor's Proposition is this:

God cannot seriously act, and be finally opposed. A dangerous Position it is;
as if the final Impenitency of Sinners, were the issue of some want of
seriousness in God; that is, though he calls them to Repentance, yet he does
not inwardly intend that they shall repent: and to this purpose he quotes
several Scriptures; all which will be evident by the Papers following. My first
to him proceeds thus.

Some Observations upon a Passage of Dr. Collings, in his Discourse of Divine
Love, page 259. Viz. God cannot seriously act, and be finally opposed.
1. HEre the final Impenitency of Sinners is charged upon God, for that he is
not serious in leading them to Repentance; directly contrary to the Word of
God, Romans 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

2. It reflecteth upon God's gracious Expostulation, and acting in a way of
Mercy with Cain, (who opposed God finally) as if God was not serious with him.

3. It reflecteth upon God's striving by his Spirit with the old World; as if
God did not strive seriously, nor act seriously by the preaching of Noah,
wherein God waited long, and yet they opposed finally.

4. It reflecteth upon God's Counsel to the Pharisees, (quoted by the Doctor)
as if he was not serious in that Counsel, which he by his Servant John the
Baptist gave them, to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance; for they resisted
finally, as the Doctor himself intimates.

5. It renders God not serious in sending his Prophets to turn Israel from
their Iniquities, Jer. 7. 13. (which is quoted by the Doctor) for they did
oppose finally, and were cast out, and the Prophet was forbidden to pray for
them, Jer. 7. 15, 16.

6. It impeacheth God as not serious, in calling Israel to Repentance, Psalm.
81. (quoted by the Doctor) for they opposed finally, and God gave them up to
their own Hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels, Ver. 12.

7. The Doctor reflects dishonor upon Christ, as not serious in his actings
toward Jerusalem, when he would have gathered them, (the words are quoted by
the Doctor) when yet he wept over them, for their final Opposition. For the
things which did once belong to their Peace, were now hid from their Eyes.

Finally, The Doctor is humbly entreated, that he do not oppose God finally, by
such Reflections as these, nor by finally rejecting the Counsel of God against
himself, as the Pharisees did, for he has been long under the Power of that
Sin.

Norwich, Sept. 12. 1690. Tho. Grantham.


Here follows the Doctor's Answer, dated Sept. 12. 1690.

I Received a Letter this Night, by an unknown Hand, from an unknown Person,
who calls himself Thomas Grantham: Whosoever that Thomas Grantham be, I
perceive he is one, that either knows God so little, as that he believes him
not Omnipotent, or of so little sense, as to affirm Omnipotency may be
resisted, when it seriously wills to effect an End; which it cannot do,
without a willing to put forth its utmost Power to effect it.

He seems mightily scandalized at a Saying in a Book of Mine, on 1 Cant. p.
259. God cannot seriously Act, and yet be finally resisted. That is, he cannot
act seriously, for any End or Effect, and be finally opposed as to that
intended Effect. This Proposition I thought had been secured, as well by that
of the Apostle, Who has resisted his Will at any time? As from the Nature of
God, who is Almighty, and therefore cannot be finally opposed in what he
resolves, [that is, wills to effect:] but that God may be finally opposed in
what he advises or commands, none that ever I heard of yet denied.

Well, but if this Gentleman may not have his Notion, the final Impenitence of
Sinners must lie at God's Door, contrary R. 2. 2, 3, etc. First, Let the Author
prove, That God willed their Repentance by an inward Act of his Will; for if he
did not, his Act in calling them to Repentance, might have another End, as to
which he was not, nor could not be opposed.

The same must be proved, as to his Instances of the old World, the Pharisees,
the Jews, etc. Let him prove, that God within himself, willed the Eternal
Salvation of these Persons, and to do what in him lay toward it, and
accordingly acted; or affirm that any reasonable Creature, can seriously act
for an End, and yet not inwardly will it, or put forth his Power in order to it.

For his Admonition and Charge in the close, I shall only say with the Apostle,
It is a small thing to be judged of Men, especially Men who understand the
Nature of God no better. But I have too much Business further to regard such
Impertinencies.

J. Collings.


To this Letter I sent this Reply.

Reverend Sir,
1. IN much faithfulness to God and you, I sent you my Observations upon your
Position, i. e. God cannot seriously act, and be finally opposed; for I think
you are the first Man that ever spoke so of the God of Truth. But you persist
in it, and labor to defend it, by accusing me of Ignorance about God's
Omnipotency; And are you sure you know him therein unto Perfection? You cannot
fairly collect from my Paper, that God can be resisted in the thing wherein he
will act Omnipotently, for then he should cease to be God. But does God never
act Seriously when he does not act Omnipotently? This, Sir seems to be your
Notion, but it is far from Truth.

2. Nor do these words [who has resisted his Will at any time] prove your
Proposition; for I find them not in the Bible. Indeed, St. Paul shows that some
bold Spirits would be ready to interrogate the most High much after that rude
manner, but I hope Dr. Collings will not do so. For he cannot but know, He has
often resisted God when he seriously advised him to the contrary, as well as my
self and others have done, for which we ought to be greatly humbled. Let him
not then think to defend himself by adding to the Text, lest he be reproved.

3. You seem to hold that God cannot affect an End, [I suppose you mean, he
cannot convert a Sinner] without a willing to put forth the utmost of his Power
to effect it. But you cannot give an Instance, where he ever did exert or put
forth the utmost of his Power in any thing that ever he did. We must take heed
we limit not the Power of the Almighty, lest whilst we accuse others, we our
selves prove our selves the most ignorant of his Omnipotency.

4. You should not alter the Terms of your Proposition. But let us consider
what you now say; God cannot seriously act (you say) for any End or Effect, and
be finally opposed as to that intended Effect. And yet you grant, God may be
finally opposed in what he advises or commands: but seeing you explain God's
resolving by his willing a thing, here seems to be a plain Contradiction,
unless you can be so hardy as to say, when God Advises or commands Men to
forsake Evil, and learn to do well, his Will is not that they should do so; and
when he commands all Men every where to repent and obey his Voice, he inwardly
never intends they shall do the one or the other, for he wills not that; and if
he wills not that, then he wills the contrary, that he may punish them for not
doing that which he would not have them to do; or else he wills nothing at all,
and so his Advice and Commands signify nothing. But indeed your meaning is, God
commands and advises Men well, but wills they shall not obey that; so he may
damn them for not obeying, as appears in the close of your 2d Paragraph. And
you also put me to prove, that God did will Sinners to Repentance, Romans 2. by
an inward Will. And what is this, but to tell the World, that God does not mean
as he speaks? Sir, Was it not the Riches of his Goodness, and his
Long-suffering that should have led them to Repentance? O no! you will imagine
God had no such End, but another, as to which God was not, nor could not be
opposed, and that was not their Salvation; why then it must be their Damnation.
But I had rather believe the Apostle than you; he shows that God's end was to
lead them to Repentance, and that is the way to Salvation.

5. But I must prove also, that God willed within himself, the Salvation of the
old World, the Pharisees, etc. whom he called to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance; and that he willed the eternal Salvation of the Jews, Psalm. 81. and
those over whom Christ wept for their disobedience with an inward Will.

1. Then for the old World, The Lord was so serious, and so inwardly concerned,
that he strove with them by his Spirit; and it grieved him at his Heart that
they were so disobedient: and he gave them a Preacher of Righteousness, and an
hundred Years space to repent in. And I think this shows that he inwardly
willed their Repentance; yea, and I am sure that had they repented, he would
not have destroyed them, for he has taught us so to judge of his Threatenings
against sinful Nations, Jer. 18. 7, 8. Jona 3. 10.

2. Is it possible that you should call in question God's Seriousness with the
Jews, Psalm. 81? Are not these his words? O that my People had hearkened unto me,
and Israel had walked in my Ways! verse. 13. See also verse. 8. 9, 10. and judge
your self. Surely if you, or any Man else, should speak thus to his Friends, or
Enemies either, it would be great uncharitableness to think you were not
serious, and had an inward will for their happiness, unless we knew you to be a
Dissembler, [which temper cannot be found in God].

3. That Christ was [inwardly] serious in his endeavors to gather Jerusalem,
appears by his Words, and by his Tears, which are such as may even break an
Heart of Stone. And sure I am, God's Mind in sending Christ to them was to turn
EVERY ONE OF THEM AWAY FROM THEIR INIQUITIES, Act 3. ult.

4. Now for the Pharisees, they were part of the Jews to whom Christ was sent,
and in many things they were the best Sect of the Jewish People; and God did,
by his Servant John, seriously call them to Repentance; yea, his Counsel was of
God, Luke 7. 29, 30. Who never said to the House of Israel, Seek ye me in vain.
And yet if he were not now serious, but spoke one thing, and thought another,
yea, determined and resolved another, you will then make him say to them, Seek
ye me in vain. But far be it from the Almighty, that his Word should be Yea and
Nay. Sir, It is because God is true, that his Ministers may boldly assure poor
Sinners that he wills not their Death, but that they turn and live; yea, he
has sworn, He has no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked. And hence I
conclude, [against your dangerous Position] that God is altogether serious,
even as Seriousness it self.

Tho. Grantham.


To this Letter the Doctor gave no Reply. But a Friend of his sent me a small
Paper of Verses, as I suppose, to pick some Quarrel with me about Free Will:
And thus they speak.

IF Faith be not, what can we then foresee?
Or, how can we avoid it if it be?
If by Free Will in our own Acts we move,
How are we bounded by Decrees above?
So whether we drive, or whether we be driven;
If Ill, it is ours; if Good, the Act of Heaven.
To this captious piece of Poetry, I made this short return.

OUR own Free Will! It Is nonsense, since it is true,
Our own we are not; Then our Will is due
To him that made us; and when we were lost,
Restored our Loss at his own proper Cost.
Free-Will's more talked of, than well understood;
That Will's not truly free, that is not good.
God is no Author of the Will that is Evil;
The Will that leads to Sin is of the Devil.
Decrees from Heaven restrain, not farther Sin;
Much less does cause Sin. For it did begin
From Satan; This God's Word does plainly show,
Who charge't on Heaven's Decrees, their Charge will rue.
Norwich, whence came this Leaven into thee,
To fix thy Sin first upon God's Decree?
T. G.

After this another nameless Poet assaults me; but his Lines being so exceeding
ridiculous, it would but profane the Muses to commit them to Posterity: And
because their chief Clamor was against my preaching, that Christ died for all
Men; and for that cause calling me a false Teacher, I resolved to try whether
plain Scripture, without my Commentary, would pass for current amongst our
Reprobatarians, wherefore I wrote as follows.

To the Nameless and Nonsensical Poet.
SIR,
YOur great Quarrel is, because I teach this Doctrine, That Christ died for
all, and not only for some.

Now thus says the Lord, We see Jesus made a little lower than the Angels, for
the suffering of Death, -- that he by the Grace of God should taste Death Heb.
2. 9.
for every Man.

He is a Propitiation for our Sins: and not for ours only, but 1 John 2. 2.
also for the Sins of the whole World.

He gave himself a Ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2. 6.


And if one died for all, then were all dead: And that he died 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
for all --.

The Bread that I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the Joh. 6. 51.
Life of the World.

God is the Savior of all Men, specially of them that believe. 1 Timothy 4. 10.


This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior; who will have All
Men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
the Truth.

Not willing that any should perish, but that All should come to 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Repentance.

And he commands All Men every where to repent. Act. 17. 30.


As by the Offense of One, judgment came on all Men; even so Romans 5. 18.
by the Righteousness of One, the free Gift came upon All Men to justification
of Life.

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15.
22.


They that have done Good, to the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done
Evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation. Joh. 5. 29.


Denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves 2 Pet. 2. 1.
swift Destruction.

For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World; John 3. 17, 18.
but that the World through him might be saved. He that believes on him, is
not condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has
not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.

God will judge the Secrets of Men according to the Gospel. Romans 2. 16


Which has been preached to every Creature under Heaven. Col. 1. 23.


He has showed thee, O Man, what is good. Mich. 6. 8.


The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion, flow to anger, Ps. 103. 8.
and of great Mercy.

The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Ps. 145. 9.
Works.



By these Authorities I teach, that Christ died for All.

Now, Sir, show me (if you can) where the Scripture tells us, that Christ died
BUT for some only, and not for all. For hitherto I have not met with any such
Testimony in the Word of God.

And seeing you think Christ died but for some only, show me sufficient
Testimony from the Scripture, that he died for your self: And name one (if you
can) now living in this great City, for whom Christ died not. And when you have
done these things well, you may expect some further Account of your Paper.

Your abused Friend, Tho. Grantham.


Finally; To give you some Account of the Dialogue and Treatise ensuing. For
the first; Being a great distance from my Study, I could not have the help of
my own Books. The Collection therefore which I here give you, I have taken from
several Writers, but chiefly from Mr. Tho. Pierce, (a Person of great Learning
and Judgment); 1. From his Correct Copy of Notes. 2. His Divine Philanthropie
defended. 3. His Divine Purity defended. 4. The Self-Revenger exemplified, in
Mr. B. And, 5. Self-Condemnation exemplified in Mr. W. and others. Where the
studious Reader may not only find those Quotations more fully set down, and
perhaps more exactly quoted, but also very well maintained, (against his
learned Adversaries who have labored to excuse them, and to palliate the
Disease which they discover); and therefore I have the more willingly made this
present use of them, I hope without his Offense.

For the Treatise, you will therein find the Case of Election clearly handled,
and so familiarly demonstrated according to Scripture Light, that the meanest
Capacity may arrive at competent Satisfaction, and be delivered from the dismal
Snares wherewith the World has been encumbered by Men's presumptuous pretending
to know a secret Will in God, contrary to his revealed Will in his Word: Which
is a vile Absurdity, and calls in question the Veracity of the Almighty, with
whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

Your Servant for Jesus sake, Tho. Grantham.
Norwich, 12th Month, (vulg. Feb.) 1690.
A Brief Dialogue, wherein the Presbyterians are punished by their own Pens.
Baptist. WEll met, Sir; I have somewhat to say unto you.


Presbyterian. Pray say on, I would know what is the matter.


Bapt. I was reading an Author the other day, and he declares, That the
Doctrine of the Presbyterians is blasphemous against God, and cruel to Mankind,
making God the Author of all Sin, and the destroyer of Mankind, in the greatest
part, without any Mercy, or help for their Salvation.


Pr. This is an heavy Charge indeed, but it is not true in this, we do not make
God the Author of Sin. We do say indeed, by our Confession of Faith made by the
Assembly of Divines, and approved by the General Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, That God did from all Eternity, freely and unchangeably ordain
whatsoever comes to pass, Chap. 3.


Bapt. But when you say that God did freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever
comes to pass, do you mean that God ordained all the Sins of Angels and Men,
that they should come to pass, of necessity or unavoidably?


Pr. Yes, that is our very meaning; for we tell you in the same Book, Chap. 5.
That the Almighty Power of God, extends it self to the first Fall, and all
other Sins of Angels and Men, and that not by a bare Permission, etc.


Bapt. What do you mean, by the Almighty Power of God extending it self to the
first Fall, and all other Sins of Angels and Men?


Pr. We mean, and say in express words, That by a necessity of divine
Providence the Fall of Adam did necessarily happen, that God made Adam and Eve
to this very purpose, that he might suffer them to be tempted, and led into
Sin, and that by force of his Counsel or Decree, it could not otherwise be, but
that they must sin. Piscat. Disp. Pref. p. 6.


Bapt. This seems very strange that God should lay Adam under a necessity of
Sinning.


Pr. It could not otherwise happen than God had ordained; and in respect of
God's Decree, there is no contingency (or condition) in the World. And
therefore Adam's change from Good to Evil, was absolutely necessary to the
execution of God's Decree. Piscat. Disp. praedest.


Bapt. But do you not ground this Decree upon God's Foreknowledge, rather than
upon his Will?


Pr. God foresees nothing but what he has decreed, and his Decree does precede
(or go before) his Knowledge. Adam necessarily fell in respect of God, and it
behoved him to Sin, not by the idle permission of God separate from his Will
and Decree. Piscat. Disp. praedest.


Bapt. Can any satisfactory Reason be given for this Doctrine?


Pr. Man does fall, God's Providence so ordaining it. And the first Man fell,
because the Lord thought it expedient: why he thought it expedient we cannot
tell. Calvin. Inst. l 3. c. 23. sect. 8.


Bapt. By this Doctrine you make God the Author of Sin, though you would deny
it.


Pr. God does holily drive, or thrust Men on to Sin or Wickedness, that he may
punish Sins with Sins. God is the Author of Sin one way, and the Devil another;
yet we say, God is the Author, not of these Actions alone, in and with which
Sin is, but of the very Pravity, Ataxy, Anome, Irregularity and Sinfulness it
self which is in them; yea, that God has more hand in Men's Sinfulness, than
they themselves. Comfort. for Believ. p. 36, 37.


Bapt. How it is possible that the Holy God should have any will to, or hand
in, the Sins of Devils and Men?


Pr. Adultery or Murder is the Work of God the Author, says Zuingl. de. Prove.
c. 6. God may seem not to be the cause of human Actions only, but of the very
Defects and Privations which cleave unto them, Pet. Mart. in 1 Samuel c. 2. God
procures Adultery, Cursings, Lyings, Piscat. Resp. ad Apol. Britii. p. 143. All
wicked Men do all that they do by force of God's Will, idem Resp. ad Tauff. p.
65. God efficaciously acts, or effects, and by his efficacy performs all
things without any the least exception. Beza cont. Castle. Aphoris. 1, 6, 7.


Bapt. These are very unsavory Speeches. I ever thought, and do yet believe
that the Devil and wicked Men are the Authors of all Sin; and that God only
suffers Sin, that is, he does not by violence always hinder them, though he
does often restrain them, and graciously prohibits all Sin under pain of his
displeasure.


Pr. The Devil and Wicked Men are so restrained on every side with the Hand of
God, as with a Bridle, that they cannot conceive, nor contrive, nor execute any
Mischief, nor so much as endeavor its execution, any further than God himself
does not permit only, but command; nor are they only held in Fetters, but
compelled also as with a Bridle to perform Obedience to such Commands. Calvin.
Inst. l. 1. c. 17. God exciteth Men to the act of Adultery, that he stirs
them up to unjust Acts, as a Man puts Spurs to a dull Jade. Mr. Barlee cont.
Mr. T. P.


Bapt. Certainly the Original of Sin is Satan's Malice, and the Lusts of the
Flesh, and cannot be bottomed on God's Decree, for he tempts not any Man; nor
on his Commands, for they prohibit all Sin.


Pr. God's Decree, by which any is destined to Condemnation, is not an Act of
Justice, nor does his Decree presuppose Sin -- When God makes an Angel or a Man
a Transgressor, he himself does not transgress because he does not break a Law.
The same Sin, viz. Adultery or Murder, inasmuch as it is the Work of God, the
Author, Mover, and Compeller, it is not a Crime; but in as much as it is of Man,
it is Wickedness. Dr. Twiss, in Sermon. de Prove. See Mr. Pierce, Correct Cop. p.
10.


Bapt. This is highly gross, that you should charge God with making the Devils
and Men Transgressors; whereas God made Man upright, but he has sought out
many Inventions.


Pr. God does stir up the Devil to lie, and is in some manner the cause of Sin,
and thrusts on the Wills of the Wicked to grievous Sins. Pet. Vermil. in Ep.
ad Romans p. 403, 406. and 38. Yea, God does incite, seduce, draw, command,
harden, and inject Deceptions, and effects those things which are grievous
Sins. Piscat. ad Amic. Dupl. Vorstii, p. 176.


Bapt. By this Doctrine you make Man an insignificant Cipher, and God the
principal Actor in all Wickedness. But seeing the Elect do sin as well as
others, Who is the Cause of their Sins?


Pr. Though Reprobates are predestined to Damnation, and to the Causes of
Damnation, and created to that end that they may live wickedly, and be Vessels
full of the Dregs of Sin; yet it follows not that God's absolute Decree is the
Cause of all the Villainies and Lewdnesses in the World, because, besides the
Sins of the Reprobates, there are also other Villainies committed, namely by the
Elect. Piscat. cont. Tauff. p. 47.


Bapt. But you do not answer the Question, Whether did God decree that the
Elect should sin?


Pr. Nothing is done without God's Will, no not without his Operation; for God
works all things in all Men, therefore he wills and effects that ungodly
Men do live in their Concupiscences. Trigland. Apol. p. 172.


Bapt. But why do not you answer the Question directly, Whether God decreed all
the Villainies committed by the Elect?


Pr. God does incite, seduce, draw and harden, and inject Deceptions; and does
or effects those things which are heinous and grievous Sins. Mart. in Judge.
3. 9. P. 49.


(...) so of perishing by this Ordination of God; and so compelled, that they
cannot choose but sin and perish. Zanch. de Not. Dei, l. 5. c. 2. Man does that
which is not lawful for him to do, by the just impulse of God. Calv. Inst. l.
1. c. 18.


Bapt. If things be thus as you teach, Why does God call upon Men to abstain
from every appearance of Evil, and to do Good?


Pr. God directs his Voice to some Men, but that they may be so much the
deafer; he gives Light to some Men, but that they may be so much the blinder;
he offers them Instruction, but that they may be the more ignorant; and he
uses a Remedy, but to the end they may not be healed. Calv. lib. 3. c. 24.


Bapt. Why, does God speak one thing, and mean another quite contrary
thereunto? How then is he serious?


Pr. God cannot seriously act, and be finally opposed, Dr. Collings, ut supra.
God can will that Man shall not fall by his Will, which is called voluntas
signi, (his revealed Will); and in the mean time ordain, that the same Man
shall infallibly and efficaciously fall by his Will, which is called voluntas
beneplaciti, (viz. his acceptable Will): The former Will of God is improperly
called his Will, for it only signifies what Man ought to do by right; but the
latter Will is properly called a Will, because by that he decreed what should
inevitably come to pass. See Mr. Pierce Correct Copy, p. 9.


Bapt. By your Doctrine I perceive you hold, that the number of the Saved, and
the number of the Damned, were unalterably determined, before there was so much
as one Man created.


Pr. Yes, we say, by the Decree of God for the manifestation of his Glory, some
Men and Angels are predestined unto Everlasting Life, and others
foreordained to Everlasting Destruction; and those Angels and Men thus
predestined, and foreordained, are particularly and unchangeably designed;
and their Number so certain and definite, that it cannot be either increased or
diminished. Assemb. Catechis. c. 3. sect. 3, 4.


Bapt. Why then is the Gospel preached to Men thus determined to Damnation?


Pr. It must necessarily follow that Christ is preached to them to aggravate
their Damnation. Dantil. cont. Anonimum.


Bapt. You make the Case of the greatest part of Men grown deplorable, without
Remedy. Pray, What do you think of the Case of dying Infants?


Pr. Elect Infants dying in Infancy, are regenerated and saved by Christ
through the Spirit. Assemb. Catechis. c. 10. sect. 3. And of the rest Mr.
Calvin says, That so many Nations of Men, together with their Infants, were
involved without Remedy, in Eternal Punishment, by the Fall of Adam, for no
imaginable Reason, but that so it seemed good in the sight of God. Inst. l. 3.
c. 23. sect. 7.


Bapt. That God does cleanse dying Infants, and fits them for Heaven, I readily
grant. But what do you mean by regenerating Infants?


Pr. They must be regenerate, and have Faith some way, else they must perish.
They who are regenerated, have Faith and Repentance. But all Infants saved, are
regenerated. Therefore all Infants saved have Faith and Repentance. They must
be born of Water, and the Spirit, according to John 3. 6. else there is no
Heaven for them. Mr. Firmin.


Bapt. What manner of Faith and Repentance is this you talk of?


Pr. It is Seminal Faith, and Seminal Repentence. Mr. Firmin.


Bapt. But you know not what kind of Faith this is, nor can you tell what
Infants have it; and so you cannot tell that one Infant dying, is saved, by
this Seminal Faith and Repentance; or, are you so charitable to think that all
Infants have this Faith Seminal, and this Seminal Repentance?


Pr. I aver, (how cruel soever I may be judged) that no Unbeliever can,
according to any Divine Revelation, have any assured hope of their own, or
their Childrens Salvation who die in their Infancy. Mr. Whiston, Right Method,
p. 46.


Bapt. Lo how you would fill Hell with multitudes of poor dying Infants; but
how then has God said, that he has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked, if
it be as Mr. Calvin and you teach, that both they and their Infants are damned
without Remedy?


Pr. God wills not the death of a Sinner, so far forth as he wills his
Repentance, which experience teaches, that he does so will as not to touch his
Heart that he may repent. Calv. in Ezekiel. 18. The Sin of Incredulity does depend
upon God's Praedestination, as the Effect upon the Cause. Piscat. ad Dupl.
Vorst. p. 10, 11. God does effect in them an Incredulity, in as much as he
blinds them whilst the Gospel is preached. p. 25, 27. All things which shall
be, shall be by the inevitable Counsels and Decrees of God. Mart. Borrhaus in
Deuteronomy. 47. p. 924.


Bapt. You should have said, that Men do harden their Hearts, and resist the
Holy Ghost; but I am sorry that so many Learned Writers should represent God at
such a dreadful rate, not only to make Angels and Men to damn them, but also to
make them Sinners that he may damn them. What is this but to make God the
greatest Sinner? which is blasphemous.


Pr. I have told you already, That when God makes an Angel or a Man, a
Transgressor, he himself does not transgress, because he does not break a Law.
The very same Sin, viz. Adultery or Murder, inasmuch as it is the Work of God,
the Author, Mover, and Compeller, it is not a Crime; but in as much as it is of
Man, it is Wickedness.


Bapt. Certainly these things hitherto asserted by you are dreadfully
Blasphemous, and more like the Doctrine of the Turks, than of true Christians,
and ought to be exploded with the same detestation which was wont to be made
(as my Author shows) in these words.

I do Anathematize the Blasphemy (...).
of Mahomed, saying, That God deceives whom he will, and whom he will he
leads to what is good; for if God would, Men would not war one with another;
but he does what he will, and is himself the cause of all Good, and of all
Evil; all things are governed by Fate and Destiny. Nicetus Saracenita.


Pr. Our Doctrine is more ancient than Mahomet; St. Augustine did maintain it;
It is certain that Judas could not but betray Christ, seeing God's Decrees are
immutable. And whether a Man bless or curse, he always does it necessarily in
respect of God's Providence; and in so doing, he does always according to the
Will of God. Piscat. de Praedest. These. 12. 1.


Bapt. Antiquity, for the first four Centuries, is against your Doctrine
Augustine, tho sometime tinctured with it, yet upon better Advice exclaims
against it. And as to the Instance of Judas, Antiquity is against you. For thus
says Chrysostom;

Judas, my Beloved, was at first a (...).
Child of the Kingdom, when he heard it said to him with the Disciples, Ye
shall sit on twelve Thrones; but at last he became a Child of Hell. Chrysostom.
Orat. 52. as quoted by Mr. J. Goodwin.


Pr. I perceive you hold, that a Child of God may possibly fall away and
perish. This is a dangerous Error.


Bapt. That some may depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, is
clear in the Word of God, and of this fall I doubt the Presbyterians, many of
them, are a terrible Instance, as well as others. Nor need any Man say more
concerning falling away than they do in their Confess. of Faith, made by the
Assembly of Divines; for as they deny not but that there are temporary
Believers, and truly such are all that fall away. So they plainly tell us,

That the purest Churches under Heaven are subject to Mixtur^ and Error; and
some have so degenerated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagogues of
Satan. Chap. 25. Sec. 5.

Surely the purest Churches under Heaven are true Believers; and if these
purest Churches may become the Synagogues of Satan, it is too much to prove the
Point.

For my part, though I doubt not but there is a state attainable, even in this
Life, from which by the Grace of God Christians shall not fall; yet I hold it a
vanity for any Man to affirm of himself, or of any other Person in particular,
that it is impossible for him to fall. I hold it better by far, for the best,
as well as others, to take heed lest they fall. And here the Decree concerning
Reprobation may be useful; for God never made it to cause Men to be Reprobates,
but to hinder them from being such; like as all good Laws made against Treason
and Felony, were not made to make Men Traitors or Felons, but to prevent them
that they might not be Traitors nor Felons.

Let us not then turn the Goodness of our God into Perverseness, nor his Grace
into Wantonness, by thinking he will damn any Man, without first showing Mercy;
or save us of necessity; for is God unrighteous, who takes vengeance: how then
shall he judge the World?


Pr. But why do you suggest your fears that the Presbyterians are a terrible
instance of falling away, as well as others?


Bapt. Because they have received a Doctrine, the Tenor of which is such, that
no Man which receives it, can have any true or well-grounded Faith: for if God
did extend the Death of Christ to scarce one Man of an hundred, how is it
possible for any Man to know assuredly that Christ died for him in particular?
He may have an opinion Christ died for him; but he cannot be sure of it, seeing
the certain knowledge who Christ died for, must not be built upon any good which
we conceive to be wrought in us, but upon the clear testimony of the Word of
God. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Rom 10. Hence all
are bound to believe under pain of Damnation, Mark 16. 16.


Pr. We deny, by the Pen of Mr. Whitfield, p. 75. that all Men are commanded to
believe, but only the least part of the World: and Mr. Brinsley tells us, There
should no Gospel be preached, but for the Elects sake. And Mr. Calvin says,
That so many Nations of Men, together with their Infants, were involved WITHOUT
REMEDY in eternal Punishment, by the fall of Adam [and he fell, because God
thought it expedient] for no imaginable Reason, but that so it seemed good in
the sight of God. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. And hence we conclude, that those
Nations which have not the light of the Gospel, Christ died not for them; for
if God gave his Son to die for them, which is the greater, he would not deny
them the Gospel which is the lesser. B. K. Sermon. and Letter.


Bapt. That God is known throughout the whole World to be Propitious, Gracious
and Merciful, cannot be denied; and where God is known to be gracious,
pardoning Sin upon Repentance, he is known in Christ, though the Name of Christ
be not known; and indeed few knew him by that Name of Jesus Christ, till he was
born of the Virgin. And that God has taken care that his Name, Gracious and
Merciful, should be known throughout the World, is evident, not only by the
Holy Scriptures, but by the Writings of the Heathen; yea, the Turks themselves,
though they are for Destiny, yet begin almost every Chapter of their Alcoran
with these words; In the Name of God Gracious and Merciful.

And Prosper (Augustin's Disciple) De vocatione Gentium, shows, Tha^ God did
never leave himself without Witness in any part of the World, Act. 4. 17. which
he compares with Psalm. 76. 8, 9. and 138. 4, 5, 6. Isa.* 60. to make it good.
And Mr. Pierce shows excellently how the Gospel is spread throughout the World.
As, 1. All Protestant Countries. 2. All the Countries of Papists. 3. All the
Greek Churches. 4. All the Muscovites. 5. All the Asiaticks under the Patriarch
of Jerusalem. 6. The Christians called Melchites, under the Patriarch of
Antioch. 7. The Armenians under an hundred Bishops. 8. The Christians called
Jacobites, mingled with the Mahometans, through a great part of Asia, under the
Patriarch of Carmite. 9. The Christians under the Patriarch of Mezul, about
Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia and Media, (accounted more than all the Papists.)
10. The Christians called Georgians in Iberia. 11. The Christians called
Circassians. 12. The Christians called Mengrellians. 13. The Christians of
Natolia, under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 14. The Kingdoms of Cazan
African, etc. under the Patriarch of Mosco. 15. The Christians called
Maronites, 16. The Christian Indians of St. Thome. 17. The Christians under the
Patriarch of Alexandria, from the Graditan Straits to the River Nile. 18. The
Abassine Christians in Ethiopia. 19. The Christians in Congo and Angola. 20.
All the Christian Americans (which are not few) through New Spain, Castella,
Nova-Peru, and Brasile. 21. All the English, Dutch, and French Plantations, in
Mexicana, and the Islands on either side.


Thus it appears that the Name of Christ is known in all the World, Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America; though, God knows, the Gospel in the purity of it,
is too little known in all these Nations. But this may show that Christ died
for many more than the Presbyterians, and that the whole World has an Object of
Faith, and not the lesser part only.


Pr. But Mr. Barlee confesses, p. 87. That in the general Proposal of the
Gospel, Mark 16. 15. cannot possibly lurk any mental Reservation, or
Insincerity. Yet Mr. Whitfield says, p. 61. That Christ cannot be said
seriously to desire the Salvation of those, from whom he will not remove those
things which he knows will hinder their Salvation.


Bapt. You are excellent at Self-contradiction; and you that represent Christ
not to be serious, because he will not save Men whether they will or no, can
never be serious in your calling upon Men to repent and believe; for whilst you
inwardly believe God has decreed they shall not believe, your Sermons are mere
Dissimulation, or mere Absurdities. Which made Bishop Usher cry out, That this
is the extreme Absurdity into which the Arminians did drive the Calvinists.
For, says he, What would not a Man fly unto, rather than yield that Christ
died in no wise for the Reprobates; and that none but the Elect had any kind of
Title to him; and yet many thousands should be bound in Conscience to believe
that he died for them, and tied to accept him for their Redeemer and Savior --
whereby they should have believed that, which in it self is most untrue, and
laid hold on that in which they had no kind of Interest?

This Reverend Man says further; That the Satisfaction of Christ was once done
for all, the Application is still in doing. The Satisfaction of Christ only
makes the Sins of Mankind fit for Pardon. All the Sins of Mankind are become
Venial, in respect of the Price paid to the Father -- But all do not obtain
actual Remission, because most Offenders do not take out or plead their Pardon
as they ought to do. -- We may safely conclude, that the Lamb of God offering
himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, intended, by giving
sufficient Satisfaction to God's Justice, to make the Nature of Man which he
assumed a fit Object for Mercy, and to prepare a Medicine for the Sins of the
whole World, which should be denied to none that intended to take the benefit
of it. -- In respect of his Mercy, he may be counted a kind of universal Cause
of restoring our Nature, as Adam was of the depraving of it.

I will conclude this Dialogue with the 31 Article of the Church of England,
which the Presbyterians, and other Calvinists, have lately subscribed: And
shall appeal to their Consciences how they can reasonably believe the Articles
made by the Assembly of Divines, which I have excepted against; or be
displeased with me, merely because I teach, That Christ died for all Men.

The Article is this; Christ is a perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and
Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual.

Let them stick to this, and then magnify God's special Grace, and abase Man as
much as they please.


Pr. But before we part, let me mind you of the Case of Esau, concerning whom
Huldericus Zuinglius says, contra Catabap. p. 172. That we cannot say of Esau,
being rejected by God, I would to God he had died an Infant. For he could not
die, whom the Divine Providence created to this very End, that he might live,
and that he might live wickedly.


Bapt. Those whom Zuinglius called Catabaptists, were the faithful Assertors of
the Doctrine of Baptisms against the Church of Rome, as we whom you falsely call
Anabaptists are against both the Church of Rome and the Presbyterians, who have
changed God's Ordinance, and set up your own Inventions instead of it.

But to the Case of Esau, how blasphemously do you speak in saying, That the
Divine Providence created him that he might live wickedly? Although his Case is
doubtful, (as well as Solomon's, who sinned with as high a hand as Esau did)
yet it is rashness to conclude that either were damned. The Learned observe,
that some of your own Writers believe the contrary. Luther in Genesis 33. and
Mollerus in Malach. 1. did not doubt of Esau 's Eternal Bliss. Nor durst
Oecolampadius to account him a Reprobate, because he knew these words, Romans 9.
were only spoken by a Figure. See Mr. Pierce (...), p. 197. And it is observed
by Mr. Sam. Loveday, in his Personal Reprobate Reprobated, p. 65. That it has
been the general Opinion of the Ancient Fathers, that Esau in Person is saved;
and he particularizeth of the Ancients, Jerome, Augustine, and Anselm.

The Reasons why they think Esau was not damned, are three.

1. He was fully reconciled to his Brother Jacob, notwithstanding the occasion
of Offense given by Jacob: this appears Genesis 33.

2. He joined with Jacob in the burial of their Father Isaac, Genesis 35. 29.

3. They say he died in the True Religion, and that many of his Posterity were
Godly: It is said to be the general Opinion of the Learned, that that holy Man
Job was of Esau's Posterity; and was that Jobab, of whom we read Genesis 36. 33.
ex Loveday, idem.

But he that will diligently read Genesis 25. 23. will find that there is not a
word of hating Esau before he was born, but only it is foreshewed, that the
Nation which should proceed from Jacob, should be greater than the Nation which
should proceed from Esau: and how could this be any prejudice to the Salvation
of Esau? And whereas Paul adds, in Romans 9. as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated. To this we say, first, There was no Scripture
written at all when Jacob and Esau was born, nor for many hundred Years after.
Secondly, When it was written, it is evidently written of the Posterities of
Jacob and Esau; and the only cause why the Posterity of Esau were hated, was
their Pride and Wickedness, particularly against the Israelites, or Seed of
Jacob; this will appear by reading the places where these things are written.
First the Prophet Obadiah is very plain.

Ver. 6. How are the things of Esau searched out? how are his hid things sought
up? -- For thy violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and
thou shall be cut off for ever. In the day thou stoodest on the other side, in
the day that the Strangers carried away captive his Forces -- even thou wast as
one of them. -- Thou should not have entered into the Gate of any People in
the day of their Calamity -- Neither should thou have stood in the cross
way, to cut off those of his that did escape. And, Ver. 3. The pride of thine
Heart has deceived thee. And for this Cause the Lord hated the Posterity of
Esau; Ver. 8. Shall I not -- even destroy the wise Men out of Edom, and the
Understanding out of the Mount of Esau? Yes, he would surely punish them for
their Iniquity.

And to the same purpose are the words of the Prophet Malachi, chapter 1. 2, 3, 4.
I loved Jacob, and hated Esau, and laid his Mountains and his Heritage waste,
for the Dragons in the Wilderness. Whereas Edom (that is, the Posterity of
Esau) says, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate
Places: thus says the Lord of Hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down.
And thus did the Lord hate Esau, that is, the Posterity of Esau, who lift up
themselves in Pride against God, and Cruelty against the Israelites.

The truth is, God is no respecter of Persons; and therefore God will hate in
this kind, (that is, punish) as well Judah the Seed of Jacob, as Edom the Seed
of Esau; yea, both these Nations, as well as other Nations, when they lift up
themselves with Pride against him. Read and consider, Jer. 9. 25, 26. Behold,
the days come, says the Lord, that I will punish all them which are
circumcised with the Uncircumcised; Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
Children of Amon and Moab, and all that are in the utmost Corners, that dwell
in the Wilderness: For all these Nations are uncircumcised, and all the House
of Israel are uncircumcised in the Heart. Lo, here is the Cause why God hates
Men, even their hardness of Heart, and Rebellion against him, and nothing else.


POSTSCRIPT.
WHat I have here presented to consideration, is but an Essay; for I doubt not
but that the contrary-minded will quarrel these my Labors. Know therefore,
that as Occasion shall be offered, you may expect (if God permit) a more ample
Account of the things briefly noted in the preceding Dialogue.

It has pleased God to stir up some of Learning and Judgment, to serve the
Truth in these Enquiries; of whose Learned Labors I hope to give a more full
Account, and especially concerning the Doctrine of the Christian Writers from
the Apostles Days, to the Time of Augustine, which was more than 400 Years:
During which Time this dreadful Doctrine, opposed in these Treatises, was a
Stranger to the Church of Christ. The Testimonies being many and large, it may
be convenient to take a further time for the producing of them, as well in the
Languages wherein they were first written, as in our English Tongue. And the
same may also be necessary in respect of those Modern Writers, which have so
greatly eclipsed the Grace of God to Mankind. All which may be done by an
industrious Hand, though but meanly Learned, because these things are made
ready to our Hands, and may therefore be made the more serviceable to the
Truth, when dispersed in small Volumes, for these large Tractates come but into
few Hands.

And were I never so capable to collect and translate those Authors Opinions
respectively, yet I would rather make use of the Collections and Translations
already made, by those whose Abilities that way are unquestionable; and what
they have done of this kind, approved and defended; as may also be showed in
time convenient.

I confess I never had experience of the Effects of this Spirit, which makes
Men think that God in Christ loves but a very few of his Offspring, (I mean
Mankind, Acts 17. 28.) and that he hates the far greatest part of them from all
Eternity: I say, I never had so much experience of this Spirit, in its bitter
Effects, as since I came to reside in Norwich. It has filled even the highest
sort of Professors with such indignation against me, merely for preaching God's
Love to all Men, [for let them talk what they please, this is the thing] that
if they Calvin burnt Servetus, (a learned and pious Baptist) for differing in
Opinion in Matters of Religion. Servetus is justified since his Death, and
Calvin condemned for a false Accuser and Fratricide, by Grotius and other
Learned Men.
could, I should not have had a Place whereon to lay my Head in Norwich. And I
have been prayed against (as I am informed) as a Limb of Antichrist; and God
has been desired to confound me with Antichrist, etc. such a Fury does this
Doctrine of irrespective Reprobation beget in the Hearts of its Admirers. A
Fraternitate Calviniana libera nos Domine.

Now the Lord knows, (to whom I appeal) that I have born these things with
Patience, (and yet vigorously preached the Truth, according to my ability) and
I have, and do heartily pray for Mercy for these my Persecutors, and hope by
such Endeavors to prevail; praying them timely to consider the dismal Effects
of their Doctrine, [that Christ died but for a few:] How many have hereby
despaired of Mercy, and laid violent Hands upon themselves! and too many (God
knows) about this City. And here the most humble Christian is in the greatest
danger.

And on the other Hand, how does the careless and confident sort go on in their
evil Courses; concluding from those peccant Articles (above recited) that not
one more can be damned, nor one less can be saved, than was decreed, (and that
unchangeably) to be saved or damned from the beginning, yea, from before the
World was, yea, from all Eternity: And therefore it is all one whether they be
Religious or Irreligious.

This is the Doctrine (says a Learned Man) which is calculated for the Kingdom
of Satan, than which no Doctrine can more befriend his devouring Designs
against the Souls of Men; for, says he, A Man may (now) be unjust, unmerciful,
partial, and full of dissimulation; hating most Men without a cause, and yet be
most like God. And indeed how should Men that have thoroughly imbibed these
Principles, be better than they take their God to be? O then beware of a false
Apprehension of God; for when Men have set up such an Image of God in their
Judgment, they will adore it, and thereby depart from God, and do Mischief at a
venture.

As concerning God's Election and Reprobation, I shall briefly here assert my
Judgment.

1. That God did from the beginning choose (in Christ) to Salvation, all that
part of the fallen Race of Adam, that die in their Innocence, or accept of his
Mercy and Grace according to the Means he gives them; and this Decree proceeds
from his own Goodness, and is not built upon any Goodness in the Creature.

2. God did reprobate in his Decree and Determination, from the beginning, all
that should, in the successive Ages of the World, reject or despise his Mercy
and Goodness, which should have led them to Repentance; even every Soul of Man
that does Evil, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles, Romans 2. 8, 9.

3. That no Man that is an unregenerate Sinner, is actually Elected, till he
turns from Sin, and accepts of God's Mercy by Faith, Rev. 17. 14. And that none
are actually reprobated till they depart from God, or reject his Mercy and
Goodness, which he graciously holds forth to them, Romans 1. 28. And this is so
clear, that even those who are our Adversaries, are forced to allow it. For
thus they speak, Assemb. Conf. of Faith, c. 11. God did from all Eternity
decree to justify the Elect -- Nevertheless they are not justified, until the
Holy Spirit does in due time actually apply Christ unto them. And to make this
Matter evident to every considerate Reader, I shall offer this Argument.

All that are actually Elected, have an Inheritance in the Kingdom of God, and
of Christ, and none can lay any thing to their Charge, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Romans 8. 33.

But no unbelieving, Drunkard, Whoremonger, Murderer, or Idolater, has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 5. and these
Impieties may be laid to their Charge.

Ergo, No unbelieving Drunkard, Whoremonger, Murderer, or Idolater, is actually
Elected. And yet we know that some which have been such, were actually Elected,
when they were purged from their Filthiness, and by Grace renewed.

As for personal, irrespective, and unavoidable Reprobation, it is a Plant
which bears most dismal Fruit: An Instance we have of it in Calvin, who
confesses that he procured the burning to Death of Michael Servetus, who was a
learned and worthy Man, though perhaps in some things mistaken. See Hug. Grot.
in Points of Controv. Of which inhumane Act I will make this just Reflection to
prevent the like.

O Calvin, why did thou (like Cain) thy pious Brother slay,
Because he could not walk with thee, in thy self-chosen Way?
He did, in Sacred Baptism ('it is plain See Calv. Inst. cont. Servet.
) the Truth assert:
And thou, by choosing Infancy (as plain) did it pervert:
To which thou needst would it dispense, without one word of Truth,
To stand by thee in thy defense. Whilst it with open Mouth
Did stand by him whilst he did plead, Repentance and true Faith,
(In Sinners all) prerequisites, are for that Holy Bath.
Why did thou slander him, and then his Books to Ashes burn,
Lest by his Innocence, thy Wrath should to thy shame return?
But some did 'scape thy furious Flames, and he by them does speak
More Truth than thou his Enemy. But yet suppose him weak,
(Tho Wise and Learned all must grant) must he therefore be slain?
And Charitable too he was, (thou do confess): How vain
Then must thou be him to oppress? Let all thy Brood take heed,
They Reprobate no Man (as thou) by such an horrid Deed.

T. G.

FINIS.

