THE HERO, OF LORENZO, OR The way to EMINENCY and PERFECTION.

A piece of serious SPANISH wit Originally in that language written, and in
English.

By Sir John Skeffington Knight. and Barronet.

London, Printed for John Martin and James Allestrye at the Bell in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1652.

Let this be told the Reader,
THat Sir John Skeffington (one of his late Majesty's servants, and a stranger
to no language of Christendom) did about 40 years now past, bring this Hero out
of Spain into England.

There they two kept company together 'till about 12 months now past: and then,
in a retyrement of that learned knights (by reason of a sequestration for his
masters cause) a friend coming to visit him, they fell accidentally into a
discourse of the wit and galantry of the Spanish Nation.

That discourse occasioned an example or two, to be brought out of this Hero:
and, those examples (with Sir John's choice language and illustration) were so
relisht by his friend (a stranger to the Spanish tongue) that he became restles
'till he got a promise from Sir. John to translate the whole, which he did in a
few weeks; and so long as that employment lasted it proved an excellent
diversion from his many sad thoughts; But he has now changed that Condition,
to be possessed of that place into which sadness is not capable of entrance.

And his absence from this world has occasioned me (who was one of those few
that he gave leave to know him, for he was a retired man) to tell the Reader
that I heard him say, he had not made the English so short, or few words, as
the original; because in that, the Author had expressed himself so
enigmatically, that though he indevour'd to translate it plainly; yet, he
thought it was not made comprehensible enough for common Readers, therefore he
declared to me, that he intended to make it so by a coment on the margent;
which he had begun, but (be it spoke with sorrow) he and those thoughts are now
buried in the silent Grave, and my self, with those very many that loved him,
left to lament that loss.

His epistle to the Reader.
BEcause I desire to see thee singular, I have undertaken in a dwarf-book, to
set out a Giant, and in short periods, immortal actions. But to set out a man
accomplished, and such an one as being by nature no king, is yet more by his
qualities, will be a miracle in perfection.

Seneca would have him endued with prudence, Aesop with subtlety, Homer would
have him a warrior, Aristotle a Philosopher and the Count Duke de Lerma.
would have him be a Courtier.

According to this Character, having Coppied some Perfections out of the works
of these great Masters: I intend to present thee with a rough draught of an
Heroes. To which purpose I have forged this manual mirror made up of other
men's Christalls and my own Errors. Sometimes it will flatter thee, and then
give thee Counsel: Ano^^er time thou shall find in it either what thou art, or
what thou should be.

Here thou shall find neither Politics, nor Oeconomicks, but reason of State
concerning thine own particular. A Mariners Card to sail by, till thou arrive
at Excellency. An art to become famous with a few rules of discretion.

I write but short, because thy understanding is large, and short for the
poverty of mine own thoughts. I will stay thee no longer that thou may pass
on.

THE HERO.
EXCELLENCY I.
That the Heroes practice Incomprehensibilities.

LET this be the first dexterity in the Art of those that understand best: to
take a right measure of the place by their artifice; it is a Masterpiece to
make ones self known, but not to be comprehended, to feed expectation, but not
u^ deceive it altogether: let the much still promise more, and the best action
leave an appetite, and hopes behind it of greater.

If an able man would maintain his respect, he must suffer none to sound his
bottom: The flood is formidable till we have found a foard; And a man is had in
honor till the limits of his capacity be known, because profoundnes unknown,
and presumed on, has always maintained a credit by suspicion.

It was a hansome propriety of speech to say (that which discovers cowards)
(Victory being alternative in a moment) If he that comprehends, commands, then
he that keeps concealed, never renders himself.

A well-advised man must so carry himself that his address go always equal
with the curiosity of him that attempts to understand him: but such a
curiosity, for the most part, uses to overdoe it self, when it gives the first
onset.

He that is dextrous in As in leaping or pitch ing the Bar.
any exercise of strength, uses not to give over at the first assay, but goes
engaging himself from one attempt to another; every second advancing and
mending the former.

This advantage belongs to none but an infinite Entity to vye much upon the
stock; reserving a rest of infinity: Observe strictly this first Rule of
greatness, and if thou can not be infinite, strive to seem so, for it is no
common subtilty.

In this sense no man will be nice to applaud the Paradox of Mitylene, the half
is more than the whole, because one half set to show, and the other in reserve
is more than the whole in Declaration.

That great King that was the first of the new world, and the last of Aragon,
was America.
his crafts-master in this, as in all other habilities, in which none of his
heroic successors could ever carry their glory so high as he.

This Catholic Monark Ferdinand^
kept his contemporary princes more in breath, by the splendor of those rare
qualities which appeared every day in his spirit, than by the addition of all
the new Crowns that adorned his Temples.

This Center of the rays of Prudence; this great restorer of the Monarchy of
the Goths, never appeared more glorious than when he dazeled the eyes of his
Heroic. Consort, and of his Isabella.
subtle Courtiers: when they set spies upon his deportments, to sound the
vigor of his spirit, and measure his Valor, which he perceiving, sometimes
let fall a discovery of himself, and then of a sudden shut up himself again,
another time abandoning himself to their curiosity, presently after drew a
curtain before their eyes: managing his spirit with so much conduct, that at
last he turned their curiosity into admiration.

O thou that art one of Fame's Candidates! thou that aspirest to greatness, be
vigilant to become excellent; let the world know thee, but let none come aboard
thee: By this subtlety, that which is but moderate will appear much; the much
will be thought infinite; and infinite, more.

EXCELLENCY II.
Cifrar la voluntad.

To cover the Will.

THis Art would be of little esteem if while we command a confinement to our
capacities, we should not charge our Affections to dissemble their follies.

This piece of subtilty has gotten so much credit that Tiberius, and Lewis The
11th (...) France.
have built the whole frame of their Politics upon it.

If each excess in secret, be so in reputation, then the concealing our
affectitions would get a sovereignty over our selves: The weakness of our Wills
are the Syncopes of Reputation, which if once they declare themselves, the
other strait perishes.

The first force serves only to suppress them, the second to disguise them: The
first has more of valor, and the last of cuning.

He that renders himself to the weakness of his will, descends from a man to a
brute: but he that bridles his will, keeps at least a Reputation in appearance.

To penetrate the whole Designs of others, is a mark of eminent capacity; but
to be able to conceal a man's own, is an incomparable superiority: To discover
passion to another is all one to open him a wicket to enter the fortress of our
capacity: And hence it is that politic spies raise all their battery, and for
the most part make all their assaults in Triumph: The Affections being once
discovered, the entries and out-gates of the will are all understood, beside a
perpetual power over us at all times.

The inhumanity of the Gentiles has ranked diverse in the number of the Gods,
for less than a moiety of Alexander's heroic actions: denying that predicament
to the Laureat Macedonian of being added to the Deities; Not assigning him a
little place in Heaven, that had occupied so much of the World: But why should
they have been so sparing, when they had so much to have been liberal of?

Alexander obscured the luster of his Actions, by his ungoverned fury, giving
himself the lie after so many Triumphs, in rendering himself to the weakness of
his Passions: It avayled him little, to conquer a World, when he lost the
patrimony of a Prince, which was his Reputation.

Excessive choler, and extreme covetousnes, are the Scylla and Charibdi^, the
two Rocks of Reputation and Excellency.

Let an able man then take good heed to suppress his Passions, or at least to
dissemble them, with so much dexterity, that no countermine find a way to
uncipher his will.

This quality shows men how to be wise, though they were not, and passes yet
further to hide defects, deluding the vigilance of those that lie sentinel to
surprise the careless, dazlingthe eyes of those Lynxes that are always busy
in discovering the imperfections of others.

That Chatholick Amazonian Isabella, wife of Ferdinand
(after whom Spain had no reason to envy either Zenobia, Semiramis, Tomiris, or
Penthesilea) might have bin the Oracle of these subtilties: when she was to be
brought to bed she shut her self up in the most retired room, the most
withdrawn chamber of the Palace, where her inbred Majesty, jealous of an
inseparable gravity, sealed up her sighs in her Royal bosom, without
suffering so much as the least dolorous accent to pas from her, and covered
with a veyl of darkness those undecent gestures which the violence of pain might
have extorted: But she that in her wisdom made it so nice upon excusable
pretenses, how much more scrupulous was she like to have been in occasions of
Honor?

The Cardinal Madruccio did not account that man a fool, that acted a Folly:
but him that having acted one, knew not how to smother it.

This perfection is only accessible by him that can keep silence, it is an
inclination that is qualified and perfects it self by Art: It is an attribute of
a divinity* (...) Nature, yet at (...) (...)ance.

EXCELLENCY III.
La meior prenda de un Hero.

The chief quality of an Hero.

GReat parts are requisite to make up a great entirenes, and great qualities
are necessary to raise the Frame of an Hero.

Passionate men give it in the first place to the understanding to be the
original of all greatness: And as they do not admit of a great man without
excesses of understanding; So neither do they acknowledge a man to be of
eminent understanding, except he be great.

The most eminent of visible things is a man, in respect of his understanding,
and consequently his victories are the greatest.

This principal part is composed of two others: a stock of judgment, and an
elevation of spirit, which being met together in one subject, form a Prodigy.

Philosophy has prodigally assigned faculties to the memory, and as much ^o
the intellectual parts: Yet give the politic leave with better reason, to
admit a division betwixt judgment and wit, betwixt the Synderisis and
(...)cutenes of spirit.

Only this distinction of (...)telligences, exceedes a (...)crupulous truth:
condemning so much multiplication of spirits, to make a confusion betwixt the
understanding and the will.

The Judgment is the Throne of Prudence, and Wit the sphere of Acutenes: But
to judge whether the eminency of one, or the mediocrity of the other, should
have the precedence, will be a pleading to be held before the Tribunal of
Sense, and of every ones inclination: I shall be of that woman's mind, who
praying for her son said, Hrjo bios te de entendimiento del bueno.

Courage, and prompnes, and subtilty of wit, are like the Sun of the world in
abridgment; they are like the sparks, if they be not the very beams of
Divinity: Every Hero has had a share in the excesses of spirit.

The words of Alexander gave a luster to his Actions: Caesar was as prompt in
his thoughts, as he was in their Execution.

But when I endeavor to set a true value upon the true Heroes, I find it
doubtful which was more eminent in St. Augustine, the Majesty of his style, or
the quicknes of his conceit: and in that famous Laurel which was given by
Huesca to make a Crown for the Roman Empire, Constancy, and Subtilty, were at
strife which should have precedence.

The Promptitudes of the Wit are as happy, as those of the Will are
unfortunate: they serve as wings to fly up to greatness, wherewith many have
raised themselves from a Center of dust and baseness, to the height of splendour.

The Grand Signior using sometimes for a diversion, to appear rather upon a
Balcone in a garden, before ordinary people, than in a place of public
expectation (the true prisons of Majesty, and irons of greatness) began one day
to read a letter, which the wind, either in sport, or to let him see there was
a so^eraignty above his, blew (...)ut of his hands and carry^d it among some
scattered (...)eaves. The Pages that at^ended, being emulous to ^lease so great
a Prince, (...)an down the stairs to ^each it up; But one among ^he rest, a
Ganimede of in^ention that had practiced (...)o support himself in the (...)yr,
threw himself down from the Balcone, to re^over the paper, and sud(...)ainly
again remounting with it, presented it to the Grand Signior while the rest were
but running down to fetch it: And this to speak properly was a right remounting
or raising himself to greatness: For the Prince, sufficienly charmed and
flattered by so rare an action, preferred the Page to the highest degree of his
merit; and so it becomes verified, that subtilty of spirit, if it be not in its
own right possesed of a Kingdom, deserves to be a compagnion to those that are.

This is that which displayes our best abilityes: it cries up reputation, and
raises the subject to as great a height as the foundation was laid deep.

The ordinary speeches of a King are refined and crowned subtilties: The great
treasures of Monarchs have often perished and come to nothing, but their
sententious and wise speeches, are kept in the Cabinet and Jewell-house of Fame.

Some Champions have gotten more by a wise parley, than by all the swords of
their armed squadrons: victory being for the most part an achievement that
waits upon a refined spirit.

It was the touchstone, the trumpet of greatest honor to that King of wise men
and wisest of Kings, in that difference which was pleaded before him by the two
harlots concerning their children: So we see that subtilty contributes as much
to the reputation of Justice.

He that is their Sun of Justice, and sometimes asistant at the tribunal of the
Barbarians: The vivacity of that great Turk enters in competition with that of
Solomon: A Jew pretended to cut an ounce of the flesh of a Christian upon a
penalty of Usury; he urged it to the Prince, with as much obstinacy as
perfidiousness toward God. The great Judge commanded a pair of scales to be
brought, threatening the Jew with death if he cut either more or less: And this
was to give a sharp decision to a malicious process, and to the world a miracle
of subtilty.

Quicknes is an Oracle in the greatest doubts: A Sphynx in Aenigmaes, a golden
thread in a Labyrinth, and corresponds most with the nature of a Lion, who
reserves his greatest force till he be in the greatast danger.

But there are a sort of lost wits, that are as prodigal of their spirits as
of their fortunes: To high designs they are like bastard Falcons; but for base
and mean undertakings they are Eagles: If cruel men must be satiate with
blood; they must be with poison, in whom their subtilty abates by a contrariety
of levity, burying them in an Abyssus of scorn by making the world weary of
their foolery.

Hitherto we have had the favors of Nature, hereafter we expect the
perfections of Art: The first is that which begets spirit, the second feeds and
seasons it self with the salt of other men's wits; and many times by an
anticipated care and study upon diverse Observations.

The words and actions of other men, are to a fertile capacity, like Seeds,
from whence springs a sharpnes of wit, wherewith the spirit being enricht,
multiplies it self into a harvest of promptitudes, with abundance of subtilty.

I take not in hand to advocate the cause of judgment, since she is able to say
enough for her self.

EXCELLENCY IV.
Coracon de Rey.

Heart of a King.

A Great head belongs to Philosophers, a great tongue to Orators, a great
breast for Champions, Arms for Soldiers, Feet for runners, Shoulders for them
that carry burdens, but a great Heart only for Kings: It is one of Plato's
Divinities, and a text, in favor of which many make the heart to contest with
the understanding for a pre-eminence.

What avayles it that the Understanding go before, if the Heart stay behind?
Invention easily conceives that which costs the heart full dear to execute with
Honor.

Great effects proceed from great causes, and wonders of action from a Prodigy
of heart: The issues of a Giants heart are Giants: It presumes allwaies upon
Enterprises worthy of its own greatness, aspiring always to the most eminent
Employments.

(...) was the heart of Alexander, it was an arch(...), since in one corner of
it, the (...) contain(...), leaving (...) for ^ix (...) (...).

Caesar's heart was likewise ^ut Caesar (...).
va^^, which could find no difference betwixt all and nothing.

The heart is Fortunes stomach, which with equal heat digests the two extremes:
A great belly is not cloyed with a great morsel; it is not put out of its way
by affectation, nor made sour by ingratitude: That which would starve a Giant
for hunger, will prove a surfeit for a Dwarf.

That miracle of valor, the then Dauphine of France, and after Charles the
seventh, when they told him of that sentence which was extorted from the
Parliament of Paris, by the two Kings, one of France, his father, the other of
England and his Adversary, whereby he was declared incapable of succeeding to
the crown of Lillies: He said undauntedly, that he appealed; his friends
wondering at his speech, asked him whither, he answered again, to the greatness
of my Heart, and the point of my Sword: And his words were followed with
answerable effects.

The Diamant that contests with Eternity, sparcles not more among devouring
Carbuncles, than a Majestic heart in the midst of the violences of danger.

The Achilles of our time, Charles Emanuel D. of Savoy, made his way with only
4 of his own thorough the midst of four hundred of the Enemies Curiassiers, and
satisfied the admiration of the world by saying, There was no better company in
the greatest danger, than that of a great Heart.

Excess of Heart supplies the defect of every thing else (that being ever) the
first that arrives at difficulties and makes the Conquest.

They presented on a time to the King of Arabia a Damask Cimitar, A rarity to
please a warrier. The Grandees that were about him fell to commend it, not for
ceremony but with reason. Some for the workmanship, others for the temper:
Only some of them thought it was a little with the shortest. The K. presently
sends for the Prince his son, the famous Jacob Almancor, to have his opinion.
He came and considerd it, and said, that it was worth a Kingdom. (A prizing
worthy of a Prince) The King urgd him to know whether he could find no fault
with it. He replied that there was nothing in it that was not excellent: why
but Prince, said the king, these Cavaliers have censured it to be too short.
Then Almanzor laying hand upon his own for Cimitar said, that there was no
weapon too short a valiant man, because by moving but one stepp forward his
sword would be long enough: and what it wanted of iron and steel, would be
supplyd in the generositie of his heart.

Magnanimity in injuries serves fitly to crown this subject with laurel. It is
the large crest and Character of great Hearts: and Adrian showed us an
excellent way to triumph over enemies, when he said to the most cruel of his,
(...) thou escaped me?

There is nothing can hold compare with that saying of Lewis of France, Let not
the king of France revenge the injuries done to the Duke of Orleans: These are
the miracles of the Courage of an Hero.

EXCELLENCY V.
Gusto relevante.

A palate to relish no ordinary things.

EVery great capacity is ever hard to be pleased: The Gusto must as well be
improved as the wit. Both raised and improved are like Twinns begotten by
capacity and coheirs of excellency: Never sublime wit yet bred a flat or abject
Gusto. There are perfections like the sun, others like light. The Eagle makes
love to the sun. The poor frozen fly destroys her self in the flames of a
Candle. The height of a Capacity is best taken by the elevation of a Gusto.

It is something to have it good, but more to have it elevated. By communication
Gustoes are linkt together, and it is a rare thing when two are met that are
superlative.

Many esteem it the greatest felicity to have what they desire, accounting all
others unfortunate, but it returns to be six all, at seven up: and so we see
the one half of the world Laughing at the other, more or less foolishly as it
happens.

A Critical Gusto, and a palate hard to please, have something in them of noble
and qualified; the most acomplisht objects live in aw of them, and the securest
perfections are afraid of them.

Estimation is most precious, and only wise men can merchand it to profit. All
Covetousnes in money of applause is generous, and contrary, the prodigalities
of estimation deserve to be punished with scorn.

Admiration is Commonly the superscription of ignorance: It is not bred so much
out of the perfection of objects, as the imperfection of our conceptions. The
perfections of the first magnitude are singular, but in valuing of things there
ought to be a great reservation.

He that had the Royal Gusto was the wisest of the Philips of Spain: he was
accustomed to miraculous objects, and was never pleased with any thing but what
was rare in its kind.

A Merchant of Portugal presented him one day with a star of the earth (I mean
an oriental diamant) an epitome of riches, an astonishment for splendor:
Every one expected that Philip should admire it; but he beheld it rather with a
careless disdain: Not that he delighted in discurtesie, but in a kind of
gravity, like one that having had his Gusto inured to Miracles both of Art and
Nature, could not be so vulgarly affected as others. What may this diamant be
worth to a noble fancy? (quoth the King) Sir, replied the Merchant, the seventy
thousand Ducats which I abridged into this rare production of the Sun, need
not be an offense to any body; I, but replied the King, what did thou think
when thou payedst so dear for it? I thought Sir, said the Merchant, there had
bin a second Philip This was Philip the second of Spain in allusion to that
great Philip of Macedon.
in the world. This answer so unexpected, pricked him to the quick more near
than the price; whereupon he commanded the Diamant to be paid for, and the
Jentilesse of the Portugall's answer to be rewarded; showing thereby the
superiority of his Gusto both in the price and in the recompense.

Some are of an opinion that he that exceeds not in the commendation of a
thing, dispraiseth it; But I would say, that all excesses of praise are from a
defect of capacity; And that he that praises any thing beyond reason, either
mocks himself, or those that hear him.

The Greek Agesilaus condemned that man for an ill master of his trade, that
would fit the shoe of the Giant Enceladus, to the foot of a Pigmy, and in the
matter of praises it is the best skill to take a first measure.

Europe was filled with the praise and prowess of that great Duke D'Alva, and
yet though they filled the world with his praises, they took not a right
measure of his Gusto, which left him unsatisfied; Some of his friends desiring
to know a reason, He told them that for forty years wherein he had bin a
Conqueror, and having had for his Camp all Europe, and for blason all the
Empresses of his time, yet it seemed nothing to him, because he had never seen
one of those prodigious armies of the Turk before him, the defeat whereof had
been a triumph of dexterity more than of force; And such an excessive power
subdued, would have enhaunst the experience and merit of a General: so many
things must go to the entire satisfaction of the elevated Gusto of an Hero.

Let not this quality make a perfect Man of a Momus, for that were an
unsufferable disorder, but only to be a faithful Censor of things to their
value: Some there are that make their judgment a slave to their wills,
perverting the offices of the sun and of darkness: Let every thing carry
reputation for it self, and not by the subornation of a Gusto.

Only a great knowledge favored with a great experience arrives at a right
understanding of the value of perfections. And where a discreet man cannot give
his vote with clearness, let him not precipitate, but retain himself for fear
he make a discovery rather of what himself wants, than of what others have too
much.

EXCELLENCY VI.
Eminency en lo mejor.

Eminency in that which is best.

TO contain all perfection is granted to nothing but to the primum Ens, which
because it receives from no other, is therefore it self without limitations.

Some perfections are from heaven, and others are got by industry; One nor both
are not able of themselves to raise a subject to eminency: So much as heaven
has denied o^ natural parts, let diligence supply in those of acquisition.
The first are the daughters of favor, the other of a laudable industry and are
usually not the less Noble.

A little is enough for an individual, but a great deal must be for an
universal: and these are so rare that we scarce grant them any other reality
than what they Steal from our conceptions.

No one man is equivalent to many. It is an excellency in one particular
subject to be the abridgement of an entire Categorie, and to possess it in
himself, every Art deserves not estimation, nor all employments gain not credit:
we condemn not a general Nation of all things in one man: but it were a sin
against reputation for a man to practice every thing.

To be eminent in an humble and lo^^ profession, is to be great in a little,
and something in nothing; to contain ones self in a mediocrity, gets an
universal approbation, but he that passes on to an Eminency, puts his credit
upon hazard.

The 2 Philips, the oue^ of Spain, the other of Macedon, were of different
humors. He that was first in all things, and second in name, thought it strange
for a Prince to sing or fiddle in his Cabinet. The Macedonian allowed it in his
son Alexander to enter the list, and run a measured course, in an Olympic
game. The one was a punctuality in a prudent man, the other a carelesnes that
belonged to greatness, but Alexander resenting it in point of Honor, replied,
That he would have kings to be his Antagonists.

That which contains most of delectable, has ordinarily a less share of
Heroicknes.

A great man must not confine himself to one or two perfections, but push on
his ambition to infinity, aspiring to a plausible universality; the perfection
of knowledges corresponding with the excellency of arts.

A slight knowledge is not enough to make a man appear consummate, it is rather
a note of vain loquacity than of profound science. To attain to an excellency
in all things is not the least of impossibilities, not so much by the weakness
of our ambition, as of our diligence, and even of life it self: Exercise is a
means to obtain a consummation of that we profess. But our time fails us in
our best employments, and we are soon distasted with the length of a tedious
practice.

Many mediocrities are not enough to compose a greatness. One only Eminency has
more than needs to secure a superiority above all others.

There was never Here known to be without Eminency in some thing, it being the
Caracter of greatness, and by how much the employment is qualified, his applause
is more glorious. Emine^cy in an advantageous subject it is a beam of
souveraignty and pretends to a kind of veneration.

And if to rule a Globe of wind with Eminency be a triumph of admiration, what
shall it be reputed to manage a sword, a pen, a rod, a baston, a scepter, a
Crown?

That Castilian Mars from whose valor it became a common saying (Castello for
Captains) as Aragon for kings, Don Diego Perez de Vargas, more charged with
bays than days, forsook the Court to end them in Xerez a frontier town: He
withdrew himself but not his fame, which extended it self day lie over the
Theater of the universe. Alfonso the new king, but old in knowing how to value
Eminency, especially in arms, put himself into a disguise, acompani'd with
only four Cavaliers to gosee Vargas. (O how Eminency is an adamant of wills
and a Charm of affections) The King being come to his house at Xerez, found him
not there, but gone abroad, because Vargas to deceive his generous inclination
used to wall^ into the fields. But the King that thought it not much to come
from the Court to Xerez, made it no scruple to go after him to his farm; And
spied him a far off in his vineyard with a Hook in his hand, cuting off the
Heads of vines, perhaps with more difficulty than at other times he had used
to do the heads of his enemies. Alfonso commanded the Cavaliers to stay behind
and conceal themselves, while he alighted from his horse, and with a Majestic
galantry fell of gathering up the twiggs, which Vargas had lopt, and carelessly
left behind him. But Vargas, apprehending some little noise which the king
made, chanced to look back, and by a loyal inspiration taking notice that it
was the king, threw himself at his feet, and asked him, Sir, what do you do
here, proceed Vargas quoth Alfonso, for (A tal podador tal sarmentador) to such
a vinedresser such a gatherer up of twiggs.

Oh the triumph of an Eminency! whereat set a brave man strayn to arrive, with
this assurance, that whatsoever it shall cost him in travel and pains, shall be
repai'd again in money of Honor and reputation.

It was not therefore unproper, that the Gentiles consecrated an Ox to
Hercules, to let us understand by a mystery, that laudable travel is the seed
of actions which promise a Harvest of fame, applause, and immortality.

EXCELLENCY VII.
Excellencia del primero.

Excellency of primacie.

THere are some that had been the Phoenix in their employments, if others had
not stepped before them: It is a great advantage to get before others, and if it
be in a way of eminency the merit grows double. He that winns by the hand,
may win upon equal terms.

Those that come after are counted but Imitators of them that went before, and
whatsoever they do they can hardly clear themselves from a presumption of
imitation.

The first raise themselves to fame by a right of eldership, while the second
like younger brothers must be content with meager portions.

The curiosity of the Gentiles gave not only honor but veneration to the
inventors of arts. They changed honor into worship. An ordinary Error, but a
true expression of the merits of primacy. But the galantry is not in benig the
first in time, but the first in Eminency.

Plurality is a discredit to it self, in things which are of high esteem, and
on the contrary, rarity enhaunses the price of indifferent perfections.

This is then no common dexterity to find out a new way to become famous, to
discover an unknown trace to celebrity.

The ways to fame are multiplyd, but they are not all chalkt out, and the
newest being hard to find, have often been an obstacle to greatness.

Solomon, did wisely in choosing the title of pacificall, letting his father
enjoy that of a warrior: He changed the path and, arrived with so much lesser
difficulty at the predicament of Heroes.

Tiberius strayn'd himself to wear that title by Policy, which Augustus had
got by Magnanimity.

And our great Philip, from the throne of his prudence governd the world, with
an admiration to all ages. And if Charles V. his invincible father were a
prodigy of courage, He was so of prudence.

The radiant Suns of the of the Church have by this policy ascended up to the
Zenith of celebrity: Some by an eminent holiness; Others by rareness of
learning; Some by their magnificence in buildings; and some other by knowing
how to maintain his dignity by the strength of his wit.

By this diversity of designs the wisest have got themselves places and been
Matriculated in greatness.

Wit knows how to degage it self from ordinary tracks without a desection of
Art, and how to find in an old profession a new passage to Eminency. Horace
gave place to Virgil in an Heroic strain, Martial to Horace in the Lyrick,
Terence addicted himself to the Comic, and Persius to writing of Satyrs, each
aspiring to a glory of being first in his kind. A generous fancy never became a
slave to easy imitation.

A gallant painter observing that Titian Rafael and some others had won
themselves an Honor of primacy, and that every day their fames got advantage of
their deaths, used an invincible invention, and fell to work in a grosser way:
Some demanded of him why he did not paint after the manner of Titian and
others: He satisfied gallantly with this answer, that he had rather be the
first in that gross way, than second in a way of more delicacie.

Let this example extend it self unto all kind of employments, and every rare
man understand this kind of address, that in a noveltie of Eminency, it
suffiseth to find out some extravagant way to greatness.

EXCELLENCY VIII.
Que el Hero prefiera los empenos plausibles.

That a Hero made choice of the most plausible employments.

TWo cities gave birth to two Hero's; Hercules was born at Thebes, and Cato at
Rome: Hercules was applauded by all natious, and Cato was the distate of Rome.
All cuntries admired the one, and the Romans shund and hated the other.

The advantage which Cato had of Hercules, admits no controversy because he
exceeded him in prudence: But Hercules went as far beyond him in fame.

Catoes work was more arduous and Honorable, for he engaged himself to subdue
Monsters of passions, as Hercules did of nature, yet the Thebans attempts had
more of famousnes.

The difference was in this, that the enterprises of Hercules were more
plausible, and those of Cato, more odious.

The plausibilitie the of imployme^t carried the fame of Alcides as far as the
Confines of the habitable Hercules
world, and had gone further, if it had been more spacious: the severitie of
Cato shut up his renown within the walls of Rome.

And yet there are some, and not of the least judgment, that prefer a
difficult employment before a plausible, and with such, the approbation of a
few select persons is more accepted, than applause from the vulgar: plausible
employments are called the miracles of the ignorant.

Those that comprehend the excellency of an high employment are but few: yet
they are persons of Eminency, and so their reputation comes but from a few.
The facility of that which is plausible is discerned by all, and grows common,
and so applause is ordinarily more universal.

The approbation of a few Honored people, is better than the acclamations of
the numerous vulgar.

Beside it is a piece of dexterity to be always encountered with plausible
employments, and a point of good discretion to suborn common attention, by the
splendour of brave undertakings the Eminency thereof appears to all, and the
reputation is settled by every man's vote.

Plurality of opinions is always to be preferred: In such kind of employments
Excellency is ever palpable; and although the other (which being of a higher
strain) partakes more of supernatural and Metaphysicall, and with a plausible
evidence please themselves, yet I leave the difference to every man's opinion; I
call that a plausible employment which is executed in the view and to the
satisfaction of all, provided that reputation be at the bottom, and excluding
those employments which are as empty of Honor, as full of Ostentation. A stage
player lives rich in applause: but dies poor in reputation.

To be eminent, in a gentleman, is an undertaking that is set upon the theater,
and must consequently be attended with a large applause.

What princes are those that make up the Catalogues of fame but warriors? To
them is properly due the renown of greatness. They fill the world with applause,
the chronicles with fame: because the exploits of war have something more of
splendour in them than those of peace.

Among judges we assign the strictest to immortality, because justice without
Cruelty, was ever of more acceptance with the vulgar, than remissness of mercy.

In matter of wit, plausibilitie has always triumph. The sweetness of a
polished discourse has had a power to charm the soul, and flatter the ears,
while the dryness of a Metaphysical conception puts us upon the rack.

EXCELLENCY IX.
Del qui late Rey.

King of his own talent.

I Am in some doubt whether to call it wisdom or a happy encounter in a
Heroes that having an elevated perfection in himself, has also obtained this
attribute, of being the King of his own capacity.

In some the Heart reigns, in others the Head: and it would be thought a high
piece of foolery for a man of brains to study valor, or for the other to make
war with his pen. Let the Peacock please himself with ^he glorious wheel of his
^rain, Let the Eagle be esteemed for the height of ^er flying. If the Ostrich
should aspire to tower into the Air, her downfall were inevitable: let her
please her self in the beauty of her plumes.

There is no man that in something might not have attained to be eminent: yet
we see how few are accounted rare as well for their paucitie as their
excellency, like the Phoenix whereof the world is in doubt whether there be
such a bird. No man thinks himself incapable of the greatest employment you can
offer him, but time (though late) will disabuse him in that flattery o^ his own
passion.

That man deserves some excuse that is eminent i^ mediocrities, though h^ be
but mean in eminenci(...) yet he that might have been chief in sublimities, and
contents himself with (...) mediocritie in the low(...) things, is never to be
excused.

Although he were a poet, yet he dealt ingenuously with us, (...) nihil in
(...), etc. Thou shall undertake nothing (...) an opposition of thy Genius, but
there is nothing so hard as to undeceive a man in the confidence of his own
capacity.

Oh that there were as well looking-glasses for the understanding, as there are
for the face. The understanding should be a glass to it self; but it is so
easly falsifi'd, Every judge of himself finds presently some text of evasion,
or some color to suborn his passion.

The variety of inclinations is infinite. It is one of natures delightful
prodigies: In faces; in voices, in constitutions. So many fancies; So many
employments: The most vile and infamous ones want not their passions, and what
the powerful providence of the most politic Prince, cannot effect; becomes
easy to an inclination.

If a Monarck in his own kingdom were to dispose of all Mechanic offices; Be
thou a plowman, Be thou a Mariner, He would presently arrive at an obstruction.
The best employment might be conferred upon such an one that would not like it.
And at this day men are blinded in their own elections of things that are but
common and ordinary, so much power has inclination; and if force and power be
but joined with it, nothing will be able to make a resistance. But ordinarily
these two faculties of power and inclination meet not in the same subject.

Wherefore a wiseman must cherish his own fancy, by drawing it without
violences to take a just measure of it is own power, that having found the
height of his talent, he may proceed to employment with felicity.

That prodigious Marquis Del Valle, Don Fernando Cortes, had never attained, to
be the Alexander of Spain, nor a Caesar in America, if he had not sorted his
abilities to his employment. His learning was able to place him but in a mean
rank: but by Arms he raised himself to the top of Eminency: paralleling
himself both to Alexander and Caesar, with whom he divided the conquest of the
world into three parts.

EXCELLENCY X.
Que el Hero hu de tener tanteada su fortuna al empenarse.

The Hero must found his fortune to the bottom before he engage himself.

FOrtune, which is as much renowned as she is little understood, is nothing
else (to speak with reason and like a Catholic) but that great mother of
events, and granchild of supreme providence, which has always assisted at
causes, sometimes with willingness, and at other times by permission.

This is that so sovereign, so inscrutable, so inexorable a Queen, smiling upon
some, and severe to others, sometime like a Mother, then a stepmother, not so
much out of passion as an arcanesse of inaccessible judgments.

It is a rule among the greatest politics, to have a narrow observance upon
fortune and her favorites. He that has found her Successus (...)rgere suos,
(...)nstare favori Numius: Et so(...)itus in (...)aeceps mit(...)ere Caesar
Fortunam. (...)ucan.
like a Mother, let him make use of her favor, and throw himself freely into
great actions, for where she is in love with a man she gives her self leave
to be flattered with his confidence.

Caesar had taken the true pulse of his fortune, when he was fain to encourage
his faint-hearted waterman in a storm, by saying, Be not afraid, for so thou
wrong'st the fortunes of Caesar: He found no Anchor so sure as (...), nor did
he apprehend any contrariety of winds while he had in poop the sweet gale of
the breath of his fortune.

What danger is it if the Air be troubled, while the Heavens are clear? If the
Sea roar, while the stars smile?

Such a boldness in another had been judged rashness, but in Caesar it was a
dextrousness, that had so truly considered the favor of his fortune. Others
have lost brave oportunities to celebrate themselves by not comprehending their
fortune: Even as low as the blind gamester, there is scarce a man that consults
not his fortune before he set up his rest.

It is a great talent to be fortunate, and in the opinion of most, the
fortunate man must wear the garland: Some make more account of an ounce of
fortune than of quintalls of valor, or a Magazine of wisdom. Others, of a
more Melancholic temper, say it is more honorable to be unfortunate; and that
fortune is the inheritance of fools, and the reward of those that have no other
merit.

The wise father redeemes the defect of beauty in his daughter with gold, and
good success for the most part gilds over the deformities of the spirit.

Galen desired that his Physician, Vegerius that his Captain, and Aristotle
that his Monark might be fortunate. True it is that valor and fortune (the 2
godfathers of every Hero) are also the axletrees of greatness.

But he that has had often experience of fortune for a stepdame; let him
strick sail at great employments, and not overween of her affection: for where
she disaffects generally, her Arms are leaden.

Excuse me for stealing once more a saying from the poet of sentences, for I am
obliged to restore it again, by way of counsel. Tu nihil invita; etc. Thou
shall neither say nor do any thing where thou have fortune in opposition.

The Benjamin of our felicity, is at this day by the evidence of his splendour
that Heroic, unconquered, most ^erene Cardinal Infant of Spain Don Fernando, A
name that passes for blason, the nominal Crown of so many Heroes as have worn
it.

The whole world being in some suspense, looked after his fortunes, being
assured of his courage. And that great princess declared him for her gaiant,
upon the first occasion; I say upon that occasion, which was as immortal for
him and his, as it was mortal to his enemies, the battle of Norlinguen, beside
other progressions of Stratagemes in France and Flanders, and the remainder of
his honor from Jerusalem.

It is a considerable part of the Politics to be able to discern betwixt
fortunate men and such as are unsuccessfull, that when they are met together in
competition, they may be resolved whether it be better stand to the shock, or
yield.

Solomon showed himself a wise man in diverting the felicity of our Catholic
Mars, the fifth of Charleses, by using all means possible that his valor might
be confined within his own sphere of Europe, He feared that alone more than all
the Regiments of the west together: Let this be a subject of contemplation for
others whom it may concern.

Charles himself struck sail, in a time when it See St^^daes first book of
Decades neatly Eng lisht.
served his turn (not for his reputation) for in that he had resigned his part,
but for his crown.

The first Francis of France did not so: He was in love with the ignorance of
his fortune, and desired not to understand that of Caesar his adversary: but as
a delinquent in prudence he was unfortunate to be At the battle of Pavy
taken prisoner.

Good and ill success, adhere alike to those that are of a side: let a wise man
take heed, which side he takes and at this game of triumph or (as we call it)
trump, let him so take and discard his cards that he may be sure or win.

EXCELLENCY XI.
Que el Hero sepa dexarse ganado con la fortuan.

To give over before he be a loser.

ALL things that are subject to mutability have as well an increase as a
declination: Others allow them a state like a solstice, wherein there is yet no
stability.

It is a business of great forefight to be able to stop the revolution of a
restles wheel. It is the subtlety of a cunning gamester, to give over while he
wins: where prosperity it self is but a game, nothing is so certain as ill
luck.

It is better sit down with Honor, than attend the Changes of an unconstant
fortune, which is accustomed to show two contrary faces in a moment.

So much as it has of woman: so much it wants of constancy, according to an
opinion of some choice spirits. When the Emperor young adversary Hen 2 the son
of France; Fortuna est juvenum. Strada.
Charles was in some distress before Metz, and ready to make his retraict, the
Marquis of Mariguau told him for his comfort, that she had not only the
inconstancy of a woman, but the levity of a girl.

But I say they are not Charles was now grownold and had a
the lightnesses of a woman, but the alternative varieties of a just prudence.

Let a wiseman show himself in this: Let him betake himself to the Sanctuary of
an honorable retraict; because a fair retraict is as glorious as a gallant
combat.

But there are some that are so hydropsick, always burning in a thirst of
Honor, that they have no Prince Rupert.
power to command themselves, if fortune once begin to flatter them in their
passions.

Let that great Charles, be a great example of this Perfection, that eldest son
of fortune and of Heroes: This emperor crowned all his actions with a prudent
conclusion. He triumphed over the world by his fortune, and at last he
triumphed over fortune, by moderating himself in his ambition, which was like
the sealing up of all his former prowesses.

But contrary some have put the best part of their reputation (which they had
gotten) to arbitrament, by the unruliness of their desires. Great beginnings in
felicity have had many times monstrous terminations, which if they had made use
of this advise in time might have secured their Honors.

A ring thrown into the sea, and found in a fishes belly, might give Policra^es
some assurance that he and his fortune were inseparable: Notwithstanding a
little while after The Mountain Micale was the tragical theater of a divorce,
betwixt him and her.

Belisario became blind, that others might receive sight. And the Moon of He
intends some one of that family De le Lunae.
Spain fell into an Eclipse, that it might give light to many.

There is no art can teach to take the pulse of fortune aright, it beats so
uncertain: yet nevertheles^ some presages of declination serve sometimes for
(...) diversion from dangers.

Sudain prosperities and inundatious of success one upon another have bee^
always to be suspected (...) because when fortune i^ most prodigal of her
favors, for the most part she intends no long continuance.

Felicity that is grown old draws near an end, and extreme ill forttune is not
far from a reverse.

The Moor Abul, brother and Heir to the King of Granada, and taken pri^oner in
Salobrenia, to ^eguile his misery used sometime to play at Checks, (a true
represen^ation of the game of for^une) He was no sooner set down but in comes a
Cor(...)yer to tell him he must prepare himself to die. In(...)xorable death
comes always post. The Moor de(...)ir'd him for a respite of 2 hours. The
Commissary ^hought it too long: but yet granted him leave to play but his game.
He played and won both his life and the kingdom: for before the game was ended,
another Post arrived with news of the Kings death, whereby the City of Granada
presented him with their crow^

There have been as many that have risen from the scaffold to the Crown as have
descended from the Crown to the scaffo(...) the good morsells of fo^tune had
never so good relish as when they w(...) Sour sweet
seasoned with an Agr(...) dulce of danger.

Fortune is not unli(...) pirates that wait for ve^sels at sea till they (...)
fraught. The count(...) plot must be to anticipa(...) and take some port be
times.

EXCELLENCY XII.
Gracia de les gentes.

The love of the people.

IT is but a small conquest to gain the u^derstanding, if the will be not won,
and it is a great matter to make a joint conquest of admiration with affection.
Many maintain their credits by plausible actions, but they get not benevolence.

He must be born under a favorable constellation, that obtains so universal a
grace, but the best part proceeds from our own diligence; Others hold a
contrary discourse when applause does not correspond to an equality of merits.
That which in one man's nature draws affection like the adamant, another has
it by a conspiracy or secretnes of practice? I shall always yield the
superiority to that faculty that is artificial.

An Eminency of perfections serves not to get the peoples affection, (although
it be enough) Affections are easily gotten where the understanding is suborned,
because affection follows good opinion.

The Duke of Guise, that was as famous in misfortune as he was rich in the
endowments of nature, did very happily practice the way of gaining common
favor. He grew in greatness by the favor of one King, and grew greater Charles
9th Henry 3.
by the emulation of an other, I mean the third of the French Henry's; A name
fatal to Princes in every Monarchy: For in so great a subject the name
deciphers Oracles.

The King one day asked some Lords that were about him, what it was that Guise
did to make himself so powerful to bewitch the people: An ingenuous Courtier,
and the chief of those that were present, answered him, Sir by dealing
courtesies with both hands: Those whom the influences of his courtesies, reach
not in a direct line, they have it by reflection, and where his power extends
not into action, there he charms with good words; If they invite him to a
wedding, he fails not to be there; If to be a godfather, he never refuses; If
to an enterrment, he honors it with his presence; He is Human, courteous,
liberal, endears all the world to him, and speaks il of none; In conclusion,
He is the king in their affections, as your Majesty is in effect.

A happy grace, if it had been in relation to his Prince, and without which it
was of no essence: whatsoever the opinion of Bajazet were: yet we find that
applause given to the minister cannot but enjealouse the Sovereign. And to say
truth, the Grace of God, and of the king, and of the people, are 3 graces of
more beauty than those other 3 that were feigned by antiquity. They hold hand
in hand, and are so straightly enterlaced that if any of them fayl; let it be
able to show a good cause.

The most powerful Charm to make ones self beloved, is to love, the vulgar are
as violently carried away in their affections as they are furious in their
persecutions. The first thing that gets their love after a good opinion is
courtesy and generousnes, by Delicias humani generis.
means whereof The Emperor Titus was called the delight of mankind.

The favorable word of a superior is as good as an obliging action from an
equal, and a courtesy from a Prince, exceeds a rich present from the hands of a
Citizen.

By forgeting Majesty but a while the Magnanimous Don Annoso, lighting King of
Naples.
from his horse to relieve a country fellow that was in some danger, conquered
the fortified walls of Ga(...), which the battry of his Guns could not have
done in many days. He made his first entry at their hearts, and presently
after, entered in triumph into their city.

Some overcurious Critics could find nothing Fernando Gonsales.
so eminent among the merits of the great Captain that Giant of Heroes as the
love of the people.

And I am of the same opinion, that in a pluraliof perfections, where each
deserves a plausible renown, this was the happiest.

There is also the favor of Historians to be had in ambition as much as
Immortality; because their pens are the wings of renown: They set not out so
much the favors of Nature, as of the Soul: That Phaenix Corvino, the glory of
Hungary, was used to say, and practice it much better, That the greatness of
an Hero consisted in two things, by inuring his hand to Glorious Actions, and
to the Pen, because Characters of Gold bind up Eternity.

EXCELLENCY XIII.
Del Despeio.

We have no word to express Despeio, the French call it Entregent, the Chapter
gives a definition, and I must use the word Entregent.

THE Entregent is the Soul of every rare quality, the life of all perfection,
the vigor of action, the grace of words, the charm of well-born spirits,
sweetly flattering the understanding, and sets all expression upon the tenter
hooks.

It is an enhaunsment of excellency, It is the beauty of formality; Other parts
adorn nature, but this improves those ador^ing parts, insomuch as it is the
perfection of perfection, by a transcendent beauty, and by an universal grace.

It consists in a certain ayriness, in an unspeakable cheerfulness, as well in
words as actions, and passes even into discourse. It receivs the best advantage
from nature, although it borrow something from observation. It was never
subject to directions nor to the precept of a superior although it were always
governed by art; when it steals away the fancy, it is called an allurement;
when it is not easily discerned, it is called an ayriness. If it be put on by
courage it is animosity: If out of galantry or Gentiless, it is a sweetness of
carriage, If it be done with facility it is address. All these names have been
given it out of a desire and difficulty of expressing it.

They do it wrong that confound it with facility, for it leaves that far behind
it, and goes as far before bravery: and although all Entregent presuppose
freedom, yet it add's to perfection. If actions have any thing of splendour,
the obligation is to Entregent, for that sets them to the light.

Without this the best execution is dead, and the greatest perfection
unpleasing. Neither yet retains it so much of the nature of accident, that
sometimes it stands not for the principal. It serves not only for ornament,
but for a prop to the most important affairs.

Wherefore if it be the soul of beauty, It is the spirit of prudence; If it be
the breath of gentilesse, it is the life of valor.

The Entregent gives as much Luster to a Commander in war, as his courage, and
in the person of a King it parallells prudence.

The freedom of Entregent is of no less use in the day of a battle, than
dextrousness and valor. It makes a general first master of himself, and then
of all that are under him.

The brave assurance of that Conqueror of kings, that contender in honor with
Alcides, Don Fernando d'Avalos, is never enough magnified: let same resound his
praises He took France prisoner at Pavy battle.
upon the Theater of Pavy.

The Entregent discovers animosity as much in him that sits on horsback, as in
him that fits under a cloth of state. It add's acuteness to pleading, and
graces the Orator in his chair. Most Heroical was the disengagement of that
French Theseus, Henry the fourth, who by the golden thread of his Entregent
found a way to free himself out of that intricate labyrinth.

The Entregent has no less influence upon the politic. And therefore upon
the credit of that spiritual Monark of the world, I come to ask this question,
Whether there be not another world to govern?

EXCELLENCY XIV.
Del natural imperio.

THis primacy is interested in another quality so subtle and separate from
Common apprehensions, that it were in some hazard to be flung up for a
transcendent, if curiosity had not cautioned for it.

We see a certain in-born and natural souveraignty in some men, which seems
to spakle in them, and upon others by a secret influence, a power of
domination, which wins it self an obedience without help of exterior precepts
or any art of persuasion.

Caesar being taken prisoner at sea by certain pirates that were Ilanders,
presently became the master of them. He being conquered, commanded, and they
Conquerors, obeyed; By ceremony he was a Captive, and in reality of
soveraigntie became their Lord.

One man like him does more execution with one stern look, than others with all
their industry. Their reasons have an occult vigor, which prevails more by
sympathy, than by any thing that is visible.

The proudest mind submits to their domination, without knowing why or how, and
the freest judgment renders it self without constraint.

Such persons among men have as great an advantage as Lions among creatures,
because they have a share in the princiapll quality which is domination.

All creatures acknowledge the Lion by instinct of nature, and do him homage
by way of prevention before they have examined his valor.

So to those Heroes, other men give them respect by way of advance, without
staying to take an inventory of their habilities.

This is an Excellency deserving a Crown, and being matched with a great
understanding and height of courage, it can be said to want nothing why it
should not form a Primum Mobile in politics.

This sovereign quality was in the person of Don Hernand Alvarez, (Duke d'Alva)
as in a throne: A lord more by privileges of nature than of courtesy: He was
great, and born to be greater, for in his ordinary discourse He knew not how to
disguise a natural imperiousness.

It holds great difference from a measured and borrowed gravity, from an
affected tone of voice, which is a very fifth essence of odiousness, and though
being natural, it might be born with, yet it comes very near to tedious
importunity.

The distruct which it has of it self rayses contradictions upon every design.
And if once it come but to lose confidence, it falls off to be the skorn of the
world. It was th'advise of the great Cato, (and suitable to his severity) that
a man should not only respect but be in fear of himself.

He that loses himself to himself, His fear gives license to others, and by his
own permission he makes himself to be easily abused.

EXCELLENCY XV.
De la sympathia sublime.

IT is a perfection in one Heroes to hold sympaphye with another. If a plant
sympathize with the sun, it grows among others to a Giantlik^ height, and the
flower of it is the Crown of the garden.

Sympathy is one of those prodigious things which nature has sealed up: but
the effects of it are matter of astonishment, and subject of admiration.

It consists in a parentage and kindred of hearts, as all Antipathy is in a
divorce of wills: Some give it the original from a correspondence of tempers,
others from a supernall alliance in the stars.

The first aspires as high as doing of miracles, the other produces
monstruosities. They are but the wonders of sympathy those which common
ignorance calls charms, and vulgar spirits will have them to be enchantments.

The most accomplished perfection suffers scorn from antipathie, and the most
deformed fowlnes is thought a perfection with sympathy.

Even betwixt father and son it pretends a jurisdiction, and exeqcutes every
day something of power, trampling upon laws, and defeating the privileges of
nature and policy. The antipathy of a father takes away a kingdom, and a
sympathy gives one.

There is nothing which the merits of a sympathy cannot obtain, it perswads
without eloquence, it compasses whatsoever it desires, by presenting the
symptoms of natural Harmony.

An eminent sympathy is the Character, it is the starr that inclines to
Heroicity: although some be of the nature of adamant that maintains antipathy
with the diamant, and holds sympathy with Iron: It is a monstruosity in nature
to be in love with dross, and to hate things of splendour.

Lewis the 11th was a Monster among kings. He had an antipathie to greatness,
more by nature than art. He was so wedded to his own principles that he lost
himself in the dreggs of the Category of Policy.

Active sympathy, if it have any thing of sublimity, raises the subject: but
the passive more, if it be Heroical.

It is more precious than the great stone in the ring of Giges; and in power it
is stronger than the chains of the Thebane. Hercul.


It is easy to have an inclination in observance of great men, but it is not so
easy to be like them in a Correlation. The Heart sighs and speaks alowd many
times when it is not answered with an Echo of correspondency. In the School of
Love this is the A. B. C. where the first lesson is of sympathy; let it then be
a dexterity of discretion to know and comprehend perfectly the passive
sympathy; make use of this natural Charm, and let Art supply the defects of
Nature; it is an obstinacy as undiscreet as unprofitable, to pretend to do any
thing without this favor of Nature, or to seek to conquer Wills without the
munition of sympathy.

But if it be in a King, it may be called a Queen of all perfections: It
exceeds the terms of a Prodigy; It is a Basis that has served to raise a
Statue of immortality, upon the foundations of a good Fortune.

This so vast a perfection lies sometimes in a Lethargy, if it be not relieved
by the sweet breath of Favor. The Adamant draws not iron beyond the limits of
his attraction: Nor can a sympathy work beyond the sphere of his activity. The
principal condition is to be within distance; but take heed of in terposition.

You that aspire to the qualities of Heroes, rowse up your attentions, for with
him that attaines to this perfection, the morning Sun arises in a glorious
light.

EXCELLENCY XVI.
Renovacon de Grandeza.

THe first employments are a trial of worth, and a setting forth of credit and
capacity to the view of the world. Miracles by accident which fall out in
progression, are not sufficient to enhanse ordinary beginings; and what a man
strives to do afterward, scarce makes amends for what he should have done
before.

A gallant beginning has this in advantage, that beside what it gets of
applause from the World, it engages still to higher attempts.

Suspicion in matter of reputation, at the beginning is of the nature of
Predestinaon, which if once it enter into contempt, it never gets out again.

Let the Heroes raise himself like the Sun in his East, affecting great
enterprises; but the greatest at the beginning.

A common employment can never get an extraordinary credit; no more than a
Pygmie can pass for a Giant.

Advantageous beginings are affianc'd to good opinion, and those of an Heroes,
must take their mark a hundred Furlongs beyond the projects of the vulgar.

That Sun of Captains, and General of Heroes, that Heroic Count Fuentes, was
born to be applauded.

In one days march of the Sun, which appears like a Giant in his Orient, he
begun and finished his Masterpiece.

His first attempt might have been a Barricado to the ambition of the God of
War: He never made his Novitiat in Fame, but past the first day to immortality.

He besieged Cambray, against the opinion of all the other Commanders, his
comprehension being as extravagant as his courage. He was sooner known for a
Hero than for a soldier.

To disingage with Honor from a great expectation, is no ordinary business. He
that is but a looker on conceives highly, because it costs him less to imagine
great actions, than another to put them in execution: an exploit unlookt for,
shows more than a Prodigy that was prevented by expectation

The Cedar grows more in his first morning, than Hisop in an age: because the
first fruits being vigorous, the second threaten a gigantick growth.

A maxim in the Antecedent draws a mighty consequence, the power of Fortune
declares it self: the greatness of a capacity, universal applause, and common
grace attend it.

But vigorous beginnings are not enough, where it fails in the progress: Nero
began his Reign with the applause of a Phoenix, but ended it with the horror
of a Basilisk.

If disproportionable extremes come to be joined together, there can be no
production but monstruosity.

It is a hard matter to keep credit always growing, and as hard as it was to
give it a beginning; Reputation grows old, and applause is perishable as all
other things, because the Laws of time know no exception.

The Philosophers say, that the Sun, the greatest of Lights, has lost much of
that splendor and heat which it had at the Creation.

But it is of an Eagles nature as well as of a Phoenix to grow young in Fame,
to renew greatness, and to bring applause to a second birth.

The Sun every day changes his Horizons, and removes his fires to new
Theaters: to this end, that a privation in the one, and a newness in the other,
may perpetuate admiration and desire.

When the Caesar's returned from illustrating the rest of the world with their
victories, they came always back to their Orient of Rome, where they were
received like newborn Monarchs.

The King of Metalls passing from one world to an other, has also past from an
extremity of contempt to another of from America where it grows to Europ.
estimation.

The greatest perfection loses of his worth by being every day in sight: the
object cloyes desire, and distasts Appetite.

EXCELLENCY XVII.
Toda prienda son affectation.

Every perfection without affectation.

EVery perfection, every excellency, must serve to adorn the Heroes, but he must
affect none, for affectation is the Conterpoids of greatness.

Affectation is a tacit praising of ones self, and for a man to commend himself
is the surest way to be exposed to scorn. Perfection must be in a man's self,
but praise in others: and it is a deserved punishment, that he that so foolishly
remembers himself, should be as discreetly forgotten by others.

There is nothing so free from servitude as estimation, it is subject to no
artifice, much less to violence. It yields it self sooner to a dumb eloquence
of deserts, than to a vanity of ostentation.

A little esteem of ones self hinders a great deal of applause from others.

All wise men judge every affected quality rather to be violent than natural,
rather apparent than real, and so it abates much of estimation.

All Narcissuses are fools, but those that are so in their minds are
incurable, because their disease lies in the remedy.

So then, if to affect perfections be a folly of Royal of reald de (...) is
the hig^est coin of Silver in Spain.
eight, what degree shall be left for them that affect imperfections? By
avoiding affectation, some fall into the very center of it, while they affect
not to affect.

Tiberius loved dissimulation, but he knew not how to dissemble his
dissimulation. The perfection of an art consists in the well disguising of it:
and the greatest artifice must be covered with a greater than it self.

He that partaking of many perfections, seems to have none in estimation, is
of a double greatness, for by a generous disdain he awakens the common
attention, and seeming to be blind in his own virtues, He makes others open
Argus's eyes upon him.

This may be called a miracle of dexterities, for if others rise to greatness by
other ways, this guides him to a throne of fame by a contrary way, seting him
under a Canopy of immortality.

EXCELLENCY XVIII.
Emulacion de idaeas

THe greatest part of Heroes left no sons behind them, and though they did, yet
they proved not Heroes: but yet they wanted not imitators. Heaven rather
exposed them for examples of valor, than for propagators of nature.

Eminent men are the living texts of reputation, from whom an able man may take
lessons of greatness by repeating their actions, and interpreting their
exployts.

They must still set before them such as are the first in every predicament,
not so much for Imitation as Emulation, not to follow but to get before them.

Achilles was the Heroic wakener of Alexander, who sleeping in his sepulcher,
awakened him by the Emulation of his fame; The generous Macedonian opened his
eyes, as much to weep, as to behold him, and wept not to see Achilles in his
to^mb, but to see himself so far behind him in renown.

Alexander engaged Caesar in the very same kind, and look what Achilles was to
Alexander, Alexander was the same to Caesar. It pricked him to the quick in the
generositie of his heart, and thrust him on so far, that he put fame into the
balance, and greatness into comparison: because if Alexander made the Orient
to be the large theater of his prowesses, Caesar made the Occident to be so of
his.

The Magnanimous Don Alonso of Aragon and Naples, used to say, that a
courageous Horse, was not more moov'd by the sound of the trumpet, than he felt
himself enflamed by the trump of Caesar's fame.

And it is worth observation to see how these Heroes go inheriting each others
greatness, by their emulation, and by their greatness, their fame.

In every employment there are some that occupy the first class, and others
the lowest: Some are the miracles of excellency, and others the Antipodes of
miracles, let a wise man graduate them as they deserve, and make himself
perfect in the categorie of Heroes, and in the catalogue of fame.

Plutark in his parallels made a table of the Heroes of former ages, and Paulus
Jovius in his elogies, a list of the modern.

Now it is desired perhaps to have an absolute Chrysis, but what wit shall
presume to make one?

It is easy to assign them a place in time, but it is hard to set a right
value upon them. It might have been an universal Idaea: if it had not past to
be a miracle, leaving all imitation in idleness, and only taking up admiration.

That Monarck of Heroes, the first of the worlds inanimated wonders and 4th of
Spanish Philips, to whom as to the sun of the House of Austria, they owe their
four sphere, Let him be a general looking glass that represents not only
magnitudes but maximities. Let him be called the common object of emulation for
Heroes, being the center of all his own prowesses, and let applause equivocate
it self into blasons, with Eminent, ph(...)ies: of sense. He that for his
felicity See how this excessive comendation agrees with the 5 excellence. He
calls him fortunate for losing Portugal and Catalgo nia.
may be called the fortunate, for his courage the valiant, for his wisdom the
discreet, for his zeal the most catholic, for his ayrinesse the most
entregented, and in all things the universal.

EXCELLENCY XIX.
Paradoxa Critica.

ALthough our Hero may be secure from the Ostracism of Athens, yet he will be
in some danger of the Criticismes of Spain. The extravagancie of those may make
him an exile at home; but he can be banished but to the precincts of Fame, and
to the confines of immortality.

This Paradox condems him to be peccant for not sinning: It is a critical
primacy of a venial falling into Prudence and Valor, only to entertain Envy,
and to feed Malignity.

These Critics conclude it impossible for any man to escape their censure,
although he had resplendent perfections; because they are so like the hungry
Harpies, which when they fail of finding a prey that is base enough for them,
fall upon some better.

There are intentions compounded of so subtle and Metaphysicall poison, that
they can transform the best qualities, and make the best perfections abortive,
giving a sinister inpretation to the most justified pretenses.

So it must pass for a sleight of Policy to consent to some venial sins, that
Envy may have something to gnaw on, and the poison of Emulation may be diverted.

Let it pass for a politic treacle, for a counterpoyson of Prudence; since
being bred out of an infirmity, it is attended with Health: It secures the
heart by exposing it self to detraction, and drawing the venom to it self.

Beside we see sometimes a little defect in Nature, adds a perfection in other
parts: a Naeve, or Mole upon the Face raises the Or blac patch
luster of a beauty.

There are defects without defect: Alcibiades affected some in Valor, Ovid
allowed some in the highest Wits, and called them cauterizing for healths sake.

But this perfection seems an idle one, and is rather a curiosity of a man
conceited of himself, than any point of discretion.

But who can be that Sun without an Ecclips, that Diamant without a cloud or a
flaw, that Rose without a prick?

There needs no artifice where Nature is sufficient, and all affectation is
superfluous where neglect is becoming.

EXCELLENCY the last.
ALL Light descends from him that is the Father of Lights, and if from the
Father, then to his Sons: Virtue is the daughter of auxiliant light and has
an inheritance of splendour.

Sin is a monster, whereof blindness has made abortion, and therefore it is the
heir of darkness.

Every Hero partakes as much of Felicity and Greatness, as he does of Virtue;
because from the hour of birth, to that of death, they run parallel lines. In
Saul they were both ecclipst, and in David they appeard like the dawning of the
day.

Constantine was the first among the Caesar's that was called the Great, and he
was also the first Christian Emperor: He was that Oracle that declared the
first aliance betwixt Christian virtues and greatness.

Charles the first Emperor of the house of France, obtained the same renown by
being called Charlemain, and aspired to be a Saint.

Lewis that most glorious King of France, was the flower of Saints and of Kings
by the name of Saint Louys.

In Spain Ferdinand, commonly called the Holy, in Castile was one of the great
men of the world.

The Conqueror of Aragon consecrated as many Temples to the Empress of Heaven,
as he won Castles.

The two Catholic Kings Ferdinand and Isabell, were the non plus ultra, I mean
the Columns of the Faith.

The Good, the Great, the Pious, the Zealous of Philips of Spain, without Phil.
3.
losing one hand-breadth of Earth, won Heaven by else, and subdued more
Monsters by his virtues, than Alcides with his club.

Among Captains Godfrey of Bullion, George Castriot, the great Captain Gonzalo
Fernandez the first Knight of Sanctacruz, and that terror of Turks Don Juan of
Austria, have been mirors of virtue, and Temples of Christian piety.

Among the Heroes of the Church, the two first to whom greatness gave a
furname, Gregory and Leo, have had their greatest luster from their Sanctity.

Saint Augustine (that Sun of spirits) reduces all the greatness of the Gentills
and of Infidells to a foundation of Moral virtues.

The greatness of Alexander was never confined till his virtues began to
decline, and Hercules gave not over conquering Monsters of strength, until he
yielded himself to the weakness of incontinency.

The justice of. Fortune grew to be as cruel to the two Neroes, as they had
showed themselves tyrannous to their Vassalls.

Sardanapalus, Caligula, and Rodrigo, were the Monsters of lasciviousness, and
baseness of courage, and after became examples of horrible punishment.

In Monarchies the same Divine Justice is observable; That Nation which
deserved to be called the Flower of Kingdoms, France.
maintained greatness while Piety and Religion florisht: as soon as Heresy
sprung up, she withered as fast.

The Phoenix of Provinces found a Tomb in the ^^^in.
ashes of Rodrigo, and was born again in the Piety of Pelagius, or in the zeal
of Ferdinand.

The great house of Austria made her self the wonder of Families, by founding
her greatness in that which is the Cipher and Epitome of Gods Miracles, and set
her Imperial blood in the Rubick, by a religious devotion to that blood of our
Lord which is in the holy Sacrament of the Altar.

Now you judicious spirits that pretend to Heroicity, observe this most
important quality, make this your most constant piece of Policy.

No greatness can lay a foundation in sin (which is nothing) but in God who is
all in all.

If mortal Excellency be to be desired, eternal Excellency is to be
ambitionated.

To be a Heroes of the World is very little (or rather nothing) but to be an
Heroes of Heaven is something; To whose great Monark be praise and Honor and
Glory.

FINIS.

