Conformity ACCORDING TO CANON JUSTIFIED; AND THE New Way of Moderation
REPROVED: A SERMON Preached at EXON, in the Cathedral of St. Peter, at the
Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, Anthony by Divine permission
Lord Bishop of EXON.

BY WILLIAM GOVLD.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, and are to be sold by Abisha Brocas, Bookseller in Exon. MDCLXXIV.

To the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Anthony by Divine permission Lord Bishop
of Exon.
Right Reverend Father in GOD, and my ever-Honoured Lord,
IT were an unpardonable affront to your Lordship, to publish to the World,
that you have laid a command upon me to be thus public; for I must declare
that I had not the same injunction to Print this Sermon, that I had to Preach
it; but it was partly done to gratify the importunity of the Regular Sons,
partly to stop the mouths of the malicious enemies of the Church of England:
The one zealously pretended it might be someway useful to recover, and promote
that indisputable Obedience which is due to our Ecclesiastical Constitutions;
the other cried it down with noise, and clamor, and calumnies; which (with men
of their Character and Complexion) drowns all the force of reason and
demonstrations (not to mention the moderate Conformist who had two impregnable
arguments against the following Discourse, the pre-eminence of Diotrephes, and
the interest of Demetrius.) But, my Lord, however this Sermon be entertained, I
am happy in the opportunity, of thus openly professing my self*

your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, William Gould.
Kenne Devon. Sept. 28. 1674.
Conformity according to Justified, etc.
1 COR. 14.40. Let all things be done Decently and in Order.


THAT men pretending a tender Conscience should have Estrich-stomachs, and
digest Iron rather than Obedience, esteem a Surplice more criminal than Schism,
and Sedition less culpable than Ceremonies; plead for compassion from the
weakness of their Brains, when they have a stubbornness in their Necks, which
will not bow to any Regular Constitutions: This is at once so ridiculous and
mischievous an Impiety, as puts all Hyperboles to a nonplus. Who (but a
Refractory Nonconformist) One who adheres to his own Conclusion in defiance to
all Premises, could ever declare (by his public practice) That the Whore and
the Beast are more nearly allied to the Order and Decorum of my Text, than
Sacriledg to the late through godly Reformation, or Witchcraft to Disobedience?
But these are not the only persecutors of this best of Reformed Churches: We
have a sort of men, who are neither for Liturgy nor Directory, Canon nor
Covenant; part Churchmen, and part Schismatical; having one Leg for a Tub, and
another for a Pulpit, one Hand subscribing to separate Worship, and the other
to the Church of England; such who conform to the Benefice (not to the Canons)
and (Pope-like) cancel all their solemn Obligations to the Laws, and give
themselves a pardon, and dispensation, for their barbarous Irregularity against
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions: Ex animo (in their Subscription) signifies
Lukewarmness, and Neutrality; an unfeigned Assent and Consent is a deep
Hypocrisy; Decently, is a compliance with a faction, and (...) according to
moderation, and (too frequently) according to contribution. --

Now we have not the Title of precious Soul-searching Ministers, unless we sell
Divine Worship to accommodate our Interests, and add a precious breach of all
our promises and engagements, to the utmost height of all Sacriledg and
Profaneness: He is your only Man of Moderate Principles, whose Conscience is a
Composition of Five precious Ingredients; the Pride of Diotrephes, the Interest
of Demas, the Treachery of Judas, the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, and the
Disobedience of Devils: Such with whom to pray by the Purse is to pray by the
Spirit, who expose to sale their Duty and the Laws, at the despicable pension
of a few Ignorant Zealots, who call themselves Saints before they are
Christians, and are Heirs of Heaven without the Civility of Heathens, or the
Morals of Infidels; These are your blessed Episcopal Covenanters, Canonical
Comprehenders, Clergy Merchants, and Regular Renegadoes, whose very Character
is Nonsense and Contradictions: It is from their Indevotion, Irreverence and
wilful Omissions (as if some offensive vapors did ascend from our excellent
Devotions) that the people seldom enter some of our Oratories, till the Air be
first purged, and cleansed, and made clear and free to breath in by the
Ravishing Meeter of Sternhold and Hopkins. These are your powerful men of God,
described by Tertullian of old, Tert. depi. script. cont. Haeret.
Qui simplicitatem volunt esse prostrationem disciplinae, cujus apud alios
curam lenocinium vocant -- The Church has a Custom to prescribe the Laws of
Order, relating to Divine Worship, and these have a Custom that they be not
observed. Their Religion consists in the overthrow of Church Discipline and
Government, and their Moderation is a wilful Omission of the Rites and Offices
of the Church of England: It is with these men (as with Servilius in Rome)
Medium se gerendo nec plebis vetuit odium, nec apud patres gratiam iniit. Thus
these please neither the Church nor the Schismatic; -- not the Last (because
not wholly Irregular) nor do they act according to the Canonical Precepts of
their Mother, because all things are not done decently and in order. Calvin
(who with some is of more Authority than all the Fathers) calls the Text the
Canon of Canons, giving life and efficacy to all our Ecclesiastical
Constitutions. -- Regula est ad quam omnia quae ad externam Ecclesiae Politiam
spectant exigere convenit. The Learned Dr. Hammond observes, That upon these
Two all Uniformity is built, rendering the first -- according to Custom, (Custom
being the Rule of Decency) and the other words according to Appointment (viz.)
of the Governors of the Church of God: The Learned Bp. Davenant (on Col. 2.5.)
(where we have the same word for order as in the Text) tells us, It is a
Military Term, implying the Church is a well Marshaled Camp, wherein the
strictest Discipline is observed and exercised; It is an Army with Banners
(Cant. 6.9.) and so where this requisite Order of Offices, Distinctions, Ranks,
and Files, and Postures are not observed (it is in an Army of Soldiers) non
Ecclesiastica Disciplina sed politia Cyclopica est, says the Reverend Prelate,
upon that Text. The Church then is not all Head, nor all Body; no Roman
Monarchy, nor Disciplinarian party; no Familistical Community, nor
Anabaptistical Anarchy; but a well-compacted Army of Volunteers, who have
listed themselves by their Baptismal Covenant to live and dye Christ's faithful
Soldiers, and under the Banner of the Cross, to follow the Captain of their
Salvation, the Eternal Jesus. The Lord-Marshals under this victorious General,
are the Sovereign Christian Princes; and in the next degree of Eminence, the
Reverend Fathers, and Pastors of the Church, who are especially to provide that
the God of the Armies of Israel, be solemnly worshipped in the beauty of
holiness; and that the Rules of Order be observed by all the Inferior Officers
of the Church in their several stations -- Hic Ergo quae conducant leges tantum
abest ut damnemus, ut his ablatis, dissolvi suis nervis Ecclesias totasque
deformari, ac dissipari contendamus: So Calvin, in the Tenth Chapter of the
Fourth Book of Institutions. Order and Decency are the hedges fencing the
substance of Religion from all the Indignities of Sacriledg and Profaneness;
as the glorious Laud spoke quaintly and piously, who became formidable to the
Roman Interest, by pursuing the External Decorum of my Text in the English
Church.

The general Conclusion (according to most Expositors upon this Text) is
briefly this.

There is a Power in Ecclesiastical Governors, to make Laws, and Canons, and
to decree Rites of Order and Decorum, for the External Solemnization of Divine
Service, to which all under their Authority, Priests, and People are obliged to
yield a regular and a conscientious Obedience. Which I shall briefly and very
plainly demonstrate by Scripture, Reason and Experience, Fathers, Councils,
Reformed Churches, and the Confession of Adversaries, and so make Application
to our selves.

As to the first, I humbly offer Six unquestionable Scripture-Principles, which
this Reverend Audience is able to defend against the most Learned and Judicious
Nonconformists.

First, The Apostles intended Unity (as in the known Chapter of Unity the
Fourth to the Ephesians) and to preserve Unity, they recommend Order and
Uniformity to the Church of Christ, as appears sufficiently from Romans 15.6.
compared with Colossians 2.5. and this Canon of the Text.

Secondly, The Apostles (at the first Preaching of the Gospel) did not
establish that Order, which the State of the Church did afterward require. The
rest will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor. 11.29. Upon which words the
Assembly of Divines are as politiquely reserved and silent, as in the case of
Sacriledg in their Annotations, ad (...) and (...) pertinet (so Grotius) ad
ordinem pertinet Ecclesiasticum (so Pareus) Certum est Paulum non nisi de
externo decoro loqui (says Calvin) quod ut in Ecclesiae liberate positum est,
ita pro temporum, locorum, hominum condition, constitui debet -- The Second
Scripture-principle.

Thirdly. The Apostles expected such a Setlement to be made by those to whom
they entrusted the Government of the Church: For this cause left I thee in
Creet, to set in order the things that are wanting, or (as the Original) left
undone, Titus 1.5. Upon which Walo Messalinus, or Salmasius (he who called the
blessed Dr. Hammond, Nebulo, for defending of Bishops) he himself does
acknowledge, That Titus had an Episcopal Power, at least in the Judgment of all
the Greek Fathers; particularly quoting St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilact
and others: (To set in Order the things that are wanting,) quae ego ob
brevitatem temporis and impedimenta a Custodibus ordinare non potui: (So Calvin
and Grotius.) Hence two things are very naturally and genuinely deducible. --

First, That St. Paul (as to External Order, for he omitted no Essentials) had
left some things undone in the Church in his own Judgment fit to be afterward
(at Creet) established: Secondly, He committed the accomplishment of these
Externals, relating to the Discipline and Decency of the Church to the (at
least) Episcopal, some say Archiepiscopal, Titus, as having under him many
Bishops; which is the Third Scripture-principle.

Fourthly, The Apostles gave certain Canons to direct Church Governors in in
such Ecclesiastical Establishments, to prescribe such things, which (according
to the conditions of times and places) should seem most expedient to Order,
Honesty, Edification, and Peace; according to 1 Cor. 10.31, 32. 1 Cor. 14.26. 1
Cor. 11.27, 29. and the precept of the Text. Hence Calvin soundly teaches (his
too credulous Proselytes in deeper Mysteries) that such Ecclesiastical Laws,
and Canons, are not to be esteemed as humane Traditions, quia fundatae sunt in
generali lege, Omnia decenter, etc. Whence in his Institutions lib. 4. Cap. 10.
He determines concerning kneeling at public Prayers in obedience to such
Church-constitutions, to be a Divine as well as Human Institution; Divine, as
founded in the general Precept, Let all things be done decently and in order:
And Human, as framed by Governors according to that general Injunction of the
Apostl's: Hence Beza (in Confessione fidei; cap. 5.) all such Laws as to their
end and foundation, sunt Divinae and Coelestes: Which is the fourth Principle
of the holy Oracles.

Fifthly, The Apostles gave only general Rules, and so supposed a Power in the
Governors to frame thence particular Rites, consonant with their general
Canons. Thence Calvin, non potest haberi quod Paulus hic exigit nisi additis
observationibus, tanquam vinculis quibus ordo servetur. But more plainly
Pareus, facit Ecclesiae potestatem de ordine and decoro Ecclesiastico liberis
disponendi and ferendi leges: The only question is, Where this Power was
placed? (for at this time Kings were not nursing Fathers to the Church;) for
this cause left I thee to set in order, as before expressed, it was lodged in the
Bishops, and Governors of the Church by the blessed Apostles -- which is the
fifth Principle consonant with the holy Oracles.

Lastly (the Five former Principles supposed) That we ought to obey such
orderly Canons is included under obedite praepositis, Heb. 13.17. There are two
words in that Text, (...), Obey and submit your selves; The one relating to
active and the other to passive Obedience. If Church Governors do give out
Precepts and Directions for the Policy of the Church, or the Decorum, or Order
of Divine Service, here obedite praepositis takes place according to the former
Principles, and there is a passive Subjection due (called Submission by the
Casuists) where we cannot pay the other active Obedience, but in doubtful
Cases, praesumptio est pro Autoritate imponentis, say Divines. And so much
briefly for Scripture-Evidence.

2. The Light of Nature and right Reason does apologize for this Power in our
Ecclesiastical Superiors: This Topique (to the great advantage of the cause)
Dr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum, Book the first, the third, fourth, fifth,
and sixth Chapters) has taken out of my hands: He there proves, that the Light
of

1. Nature dictates that there be a Society for the worship of God.

2. That this Church-society be governed in a decent and orderly manner.

3. That there be a Distinction of Persons, and a Superiority of Powers.

4. That the Governors be reverenced according to their Employments and
Offices, and Obedience paid to their solemn Constitutions.

5. Lastly, That every offender do give an account of his actions to such
Governors, and submit to their Censures: So far Nature goes, as that learned
Man fully demonstrates which is sufficient as to the Second Particular,
referring thither (because I cannot add, and will not diminish) all that are
curious of satisfaction in the Case before us.

Thirdly, When we exchanged a Charles for an Oliver, a Bishop for a Lay-elder,
the Oaths of Allegiance and Canonical Obedience for Covenants and Engagements,
and a Liturgy for a Directory, you know the Consequence, by a sad and
dear-bought experience; no sooner were Order and Decency removed from the holy
Oratories, no sooner were Priests and People indulged to their own fancies and
conceptions in Preaching, Hearing, Administration and Reception of the
Sacraments and Public Prayers, but immediately we had Pulpit against Pulpit,
Altar against Altar, Preaching and Prayer, placed as Antipodes, Ordinance
justling out Ordinance, (that to speak with Erasmus) ingeniosa res fuit esse
Christianos. Such who never sat at the feet of Gamaliel, stepped up into the
Chair of St. Paul, the People were taught from the mouth of a Cannon, and the
Church swept with the Besom of Destruction: The Weaver became inspired, and had
new Lights and glorious Discoveries, the Mechanical Demetrius, a precious
dispencer of the Words and Sacraments; and Alexander the Coppersmith could
challeng the Reverend Assemblies at Gifts and Experiences. The Soldier
undertook to cut the Text, and could as powerfully Preach Swords, and Pray
Grenades, and as devoutly curse Meroz, as any of our Soul-searching Ministers,
who first pulled down King and Bishops by the form of Godliness, and the Virtue
of Hocus pocus: (That there might be no want of Laborers) The Common-Reaper
thrust his Sickle into the Lords Harvest, and Common Shepherds qualified
themselves for the oversight of the Flock of Christ, and the Cloak and Apron
Preached down Gowns and Universities; and he whose occupation it was to mend
the old Shoes of the Prophets, had the possession of Desk and Pulpits, Venting
Treason, Nonsense and Blasphemy by the Hourglass; we had a New England Medley
instead of Decorum and Reverence, and an Amsterdam hotch-potch (as many
Religions as Babel had Languages:) instead of Uniformity, and the Beauty of
Holiness, we began to number Articles of Religion almost by the Million (as St.
Austin said of the Donatists) The Charisma of boldness acted the part of the
Gift given by Imposition of hands; and he that could neither Write nor Read (by
virtue of Lungs and Impudence) was taught to pray Extempore in the Congregation
of the Saints: A Phrenzy became desirable for its Lucid intervals, and it was
thought a glorious attainment above others to be besides our selves; our
Churches were Garrisons to keep out the Sacrifice of Obedience, and its
Notaries, while by profane boldness, pious Nonsense and tumultuary Effusions,
men daily offered unto God the Sacrifice of Fools: We had Stones given us
instead of Bread, and amidst perpetual holding forth, suffered a Famine of the
Word, and by all men (not distracted) Divines and Preachers, Scholars and such
as carried on the Work, were very carefully distinguished, some
Oxford-Schismatick petitioned the pretended Parliament, to send down Ministers
to teach the Colledg-Graduates (how to Preach down Learning and Sciences, I
suppose) under the pretense that they stood in need of more powerful
Instructers: The progeny of Sects grew too Numerous for any other way of
Arithmetic than the Stars of Heaven, or Sands by the Seashore for multitude;
the Questions of our Creed almost as Numerous as the Letters of it; such who
boasted Communion with Christ in the purest Ordinances of Worship, banished his
Prayer from the Pulpit, and imputed Blasphemy and Atheism to the glorious Form
of the Savior of the World: The Ark of God was a kind of Noah's Ark with us,
where the unclean Beasts were herded up together without order or distinction,
and the Church (our Mother) once the joy of the whole Earth, equally
overwhelmed with grief and confusion. We found her in the Wood (as the Psalmist
speaks of the Ark of Divine service) stripped of all her due Attendants and
Solemnities, and the Cathedrals turned to Stables: Where the Sacriledg had some
ingenuity, To give so lively an instance of the vast difference between Laud,
the Glorious, and the new Reformers of this best of Reformed Churches. Tell me
now, ye prudential Clergymen (whose Moderation is a constant omission of the
holy Rites and Offices of the Church) does not the whole Kingdoms experience
proclaim a Zeal for our Canons to be a Zeal according to knowledge? Is it not
the Policy and temporal Interest of a Priest (as well as his indispencible Duty)
to obey our orderly Constitutions? Thou (High and Mighty Master of the
Politics) When was thy Mother the Eye and Glory of all the Christian Churches?
Was it not when the Ark was settled with a Decent Splendor amongst us? When the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy enjoyed its full Authority and Encouragements? When
the venerable Courts of Justice dazzled the eyes and brake the hearts of the
most insolent offenders? And all the parts of Divine Service performed with
that Decorum as is enjoined by the Canon of the Text (with a solemn Reverence).
Since these things are so by experience, lay then aside, (my moderate Brother)
this Lukewarm kind of Temper; set a higher estimate on the Churches Peace and
Honor, and contribute to her recovery (to some degrees at least) of the
ancient Luster, By doing all things decently and in order.

Fourthly, The Ancient Fathers and Councils join with Scripture, Reason, and
Experience, as to this Power (by me pleaded for from the Text) in our
Eclesiastical Superiors. Thus St. Austin to Casulanus, -- in things
undetermined in the Word, Mos populi, Dei, and instituta majorum, pro lege Dei
tenenda sunt: Hence St. Bernard (Epist. 7.) of things absolutely good or
absolutely evil, the Case is Evident; the one must be not done when commanded,
the other done though prohibited by Superiors; inter haec sunt media quaedam,
in his fas non est sensum nostrum sententiae praescribere Magistrorum. To both
assents the old Tertullian, in his Book De corona Militis, where speaking of
kneeling, the sign of the Cross, of standing at Prayers between Easter and
Whitsuntide, and many other Rites and Customs of the Primitive Church, Harum
and aliarum ejusmodi disciplinarum, si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam
invenies, etc. Hence thus much is clear from Antiquity, that the Ancient
Christians of the purest Ages of the Church were not in bondage to a Scruple,
nor startled at a Ceremony, nor ever said to their Governors, show us a Text
for such Rites and Orders; They too well understood Christian Liberty and
themselves, to throw away their Time, Interest, Peace, and Safety, for the mere
Fringes of the Garment of the body of Religion with our peevish, and (withal
obstinate) Renegadoes: That conditional Assent and cautionary (though not)
absolute Obedience we do owe to our spiritual Pastors and Governors (albeit we
have not express Commission out of Scripture for the very particulars) cannot
be denied by any Man in his senses; for to dispute in such a Case, instead of
yielding Obedience, is to declare to the World, that when Christ ascended up on
high, his Donation of spiritual Authority was a Donation of Titles without
Realities; whereas he that said, He that resists Kings, resists God, Romans
13. The same Wisdom of God (by whom Princes Reign) said also, He that hears
you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me and him that sent me.
These are the Prerogatives of spiritual Guides, and were never esteemed words
of course or formality in the Primitive Church: And the Epistles of Ignatius
(an Apostolical Bishop, vindicated by Vossius, Dr. Hammond, and Doctor Pearson,
are an admirable Comment in this Case, upon obedite praepositis -- Be ye
subject to the Bishop, as unto the Lord; Reverence your Bishops according unto
the precepts of the Apostles; he that acts of his own head without the Bishop
is polluted in his Conscience; attempt nothing in the Church against Episcopal
Constitutions, are known expressions in the writings of old Ignatius -- But I
intend a more particular vindication (under this Topic of Antiquity) of this
best of Reformed Churches: First, As to her Imposition of a Liturgy; Secondly,
as to the Imposition of orderly Rites, and Thirdly, a Vindication of the
Authority also (as Primitive) by which our Canons are established. -- Briefly
to each of these.

Thus the Fourteenth Canon of the Church of England is truly Primitive -- The
Minister shall use the prescribed Forms and Rites in the Common Prayer Book,
without diminishing in regard of Preaching, or any other respect, or adding any
thing in the matter or form thereof. --

1. The Minister shall use the prescribed Forms and Rites, etc. Thus, in Synodo
Epnuensi, in the Order of the Celebration of Divine Offices, the Metropolitical
Church was the Standard for the whole Province, to keep the better Decorum in
all Sacred Administrations. And in the Fourth Council of Toledo, they declare
it consonant with the ancient Canons of the Church, Vt unus ordo orandi and
Psallendi conservetur, nec diversa sit a nobis Ecclesiastica consuetudo, quia
una fide continemur and Regno; the same Forms, and no other, as the Council of
Africa, Canon. 103. The Third Council of Carthage, Canon 231. The Council of
Laodicea, Canon 181. And above all the Council of Milevis (Canon 12.) for a
sufficient Reason there rendered, Nec aliae preces nisi quae a Synodo
Comprobatae dicerentur in Ecclesia, ne aliquid contra fidem aut bonos mores per
ignorantiam aut minus studium sit Compositum: So that hence our imposing of
Forms upon Priests and People, is clearly justiflable from the Practice of the
Primitive Churches of Christ -- It is Recorded of Proclus the Patriarch of
Constantinople in his Treatise, (...), That St. Basil first, and afterward St.
Chrysostom, contracted the Liturgy of St. James, that upon the account of men's
slothfulness and profaneness, they might not Nauseate for the length, and so
Apostatize from the Apostolical Tradition of Liturgies -- The Liturgy now
ascribed to St. James may be denied on good Reasons, yet that St. James made a
Liturgy, the Council of Trullo long since acknowledged, and is at this day by
the Greek-Church openly owned and professed; and amongst them to question it,
were the ready way to be laughed at as eminently ridiculous. The Magdeburgenses
have collected from some expressions of Origin, on Jeremiah, That it is without
dispute a doubt, that the Christians had Forms of Prayer in the Third Century.
Scal. lib. 6. 573. Edit. Genev. 1629.
Scaliger, de Emendatione temporum, declares that he had himself seen an
ancient Liturgy of Ignatius, who exhorts (by the way) to one Common Prayer, and
to one mind in his Epistle to the Magnesians. And what else means Justin Martyr
by his (...), Apol. 2.
or Tertullian, Tert. de oratione.
by his Oration Legitima and ordinaria; and by that Form of Praying for the
Emperors, ut illis foret vita prolixa, imperium securum, senatus fidelis,
Exercitus fortis, Apol. 30.
domus tuta, populus probus, orbis quietus, which some (not improbably
conjecture) to be grounded on St. Paul's Charge to Timothy, That Prayers be made
for all, then especially Kings, etc. making it Timothy's chief care (as Bishop
of Ephesus) rightly to Frame and Order the Public Prayers of the Church. And
what else does St. Cyprian intimate (de Oratione) publica nobis est and
communis oration -- or the (...), which Constantine observed with the whole
Assembly of Christians Recorded by Eusebius; Eusebius de vita Constanti. in
lib. 4. cap. 17. 19
So that whether we consider the use of a Liturgy, we are justified by the
Fathers; or the Imposition of it on the Clergy, particularly with exclusion of
their own conceptions, the Church of England herein observes the prudence of
the Ancient Councils and Synods (long before Popery was introduced) and so
liable to such trifling exceptions from our Puritan Adversaries.

Again Secondly, not to diminish (in regard of Preaching) the Prayers of the
Church (the Fourteenth Canon Commands us) and that the Pulpit should not
swallow up the Desk, this Auditory is not to be taught, to be the high prudence
and politic zeal of the Ancient Churches of Christ. You know that Justyn
Martyr says, when the Reader had done, then the Preacher exhorts (in his
Apology) you know that in the primitive times (as now) there was a first and a
second Service, the one preceeded, the other followed, the Sermons or Homilies;
and so Preaching and Prayer did not shoulder out one another, but walked hand
in hand as friends, and not as Antipodes in the holy Oratories. The Sermons
anciently came in, post recitationem Evangelii, after the rehearsal of the
Gospel, being usually a Discourse upon it; and hence it is an easy collection,
that Preaching had its due esteem, yet never so magnified as that the Liturgy
should be laid aside to make way for the Sermon. The most eminent Preachers (as
Basil, Chrysostom and others) were Compilers of Liturgies, but could never
endure (as is clear by many passages in their writings) that the people should
throng more to their Discourses, than to the pure Word of God read in the
Church in Divine Service, or to the common Devotions -- That was no Music to
the old zealous Saints (the holy Bishops and Priests) which now affords such a
mighty pleasure to men of moderate principles, the crouding of people to a
Sermon, and leaving the Church empty and wast at the solemn Prayers.

Thirdly, (Not only not to diminish on the account of Preaching;) But also in
no other respect, says the Canon aforesaid, nor to add any thing in the matter
or form thereof (a Constitution truly Primitive;) for in Ancient times, ever
since the ceasing of miraculous Gifts it was never permitted any Presbyters to
add to, or detract from the public prescribed Service, or to make any private
Prayers of their own in the holy Oratories.

There is no footstep of Record or Monument in the Church of God, whereby our
Moderate Clergy can make it probable, that in the solemn and set Assemblies of
Christians constantly observed, a Presbyter was ever allowed to utter any thing
of his own or others composing, premeditated or extemporary, without the
approbation of his Bishop first had in the matter of Prayer (which we now are
discoursing of) -- It is an impudent and untrue Assertion (I wonder it could
ever enter into any Man's mind) that Ministers may of themselves, curtail or add
to the Service prescribed, or modify the Worship of God. But on the contrary
(as Baxter, in his Cure of Church-Divisions, does well note) no Man questioneth
but some Form of Prayer was imposed on the Jewish Ministers of old, and a Form
of Prayer taught the Priests, Joel 2.17. To which I add, since the Word of God
has given us Forms of Worship, of Praise and Prayer in the House of God; If we
will allow the Composers of those Forms to be of Gods own appointment (which
cannot be denied), we have in Scripture too, in concurrence with the Ancient
Church, found out some appointed to make Prayers for other Pastors and
Churches, to offer up unto God -- And we find Titus for this purpose left in
Creet to set in order what was wanting, ad (...) and (...), (So Grotius)
Pertinet -- and Timothy is charged with this Office as Bishop 1 Timothy 2.1. an
Order is there given him touching the substance of Public Prayer to be settled
in the Assemblies of his Jurisdiction, as Master Thorndyke notes and proves in
his Treatise, The Service of God in public Assemblies -- in Timotheo mandata
dat Episcopis, so Grotius -- Again in the Imposition of orderly Rites attending
on the public Worship, it was the style of old, Si quis praesums^rit, si quis
contumaciter fecerit, Anathema sit; which is well Englished in our 34th.
Article, by Laws established, Whosoever shall (through his private Judgment)
openly and wilfully, and purposely break the Rites of Decency and Order
enjoined, shall be censured, etc. Such therefore who are in profession Sons of
the Church of England, (whose Imposition of a Liturgy and decent Rites, is thus
prudentially primitive and moderate) and do wilfully, and studiously violate
the Orders prescribed, by robbing God and the People of any parts of the
public Worship or Rites thereof, upon the account of Preaching, or the free
Prayers of the Pulpit, they do very wickedly. I leave their own Consciences to
condemn them till God himself does; which he will certainly do without a more
honest and zealous adhesion to the Regular Constitutions. It would be
Ridiculously arrogant in me to prove out of Antiquity, that the reading of the
Litany, the observation of the Feasts and Fasts, Catechizing, visiting the
Sick, and giving them their viaticum, the Cross in Baptism, the Rites of
Decorum, and the Decent Habits of the Clergymen, and many other Canons, which
this present Audience sufficiently knows to be truly consonant to the ancient
Canons and primitive usage: But you must give me leave to say, that these are
so far omitted, not out of a prudential, but schismatical, Compliance -- Pudet
haec opprobria nobis, is too mild a reproof; (like that of Eli to his Sons, It
is no good report, ye make the Lords People transgress) Too meek a reprehension
to such Sons of Corah or Diotrephes, who by a barbarous disobedience to the
Laws, endeavor to bring into this Church, tot schismata, quot Sacerdotes.

Consider we again, under this head of the Fathers and Councils, the Authority
confirming the present Canons of this Church, and we shall find That also, by
undeniable evidence, equally primitive with the Constitutions themselves.

We have such Canons as are treated on by Bishops and Priests, but they do not
(with the Westminster-Conventicle of Divines) meet without the Royal Call and
Summons, nor sit and act when the King Commands their dissolution (with the
Glascow-Assembly of spiritual Lay Elders) but we own the Kings Power, a part
ante, to convene the Prelates and the Clergy-Representatives, and a part post,
to oblige their Subjects, by their Confirmation, to a Regular Obedience. A
clear primitive Practice, as soon as ever God gave Kings to be Nursing-fathers
to the Church (as is admirably proved by Causabon, Grotius, Morney Duplessis,
our own Jewel, Field, Whitaker and others, beyond all exceptions: Now where
King and Bishops thus join in Ecclesiastical Laws (according to the constant
Practice of Christ's Church) where Moses and Aaron, the Oaths of Allegiance, and
Canonical Obedience meet together to oblige us, there is not now the least
pretense for a Man in Orders to despise such Rules as are truly Primitive in
themselves; when the Canons are treated on by the Episcopal Order, which has
filled our Calendars with Saints, our Histories with Fathers, and Church with
Martyrs; and when this Order is subject to Kings, and supported by Moses, and
both appointed of God for the Management of the Church under the blessed Jesus,
he is neither a true Priest nor Christian that denies obedience.

And here I do, with all duty and submission, most humbly beseech your Lordship
and all (under you) advanced to any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to Countenance
the truely-regular Clergy in their cheerful submission to the truly ancient
Laws and Canons of this best of Reformed Churches.

When the Schismatic keeps a Faction in pay, and allows Schism a Salary, and
gives a pension to the hollow-hearted Judas of moderate Principles to break and
divide us, it is pity the Zealous Conformist should want a Benefice, whilst
the Enemy thus nourishes Vipers to eat their way through our Mothers Bowels --
(God knows my heart) I abhominate a private design when I thus speak, as much
as a moderation against the Rules of the Church of England. I petition for a
poorer sort of Brethren than my self, for the Priest unbeneficed, who is
Ingenuous and Open-spirited, Generous and Devout, and a Lover of the Church of
England: And would not the primitive Canons of this Church be rather more than
less observed; If such an incarnate Seraphin had always the next Living of
value in the Churches own gift. If Self-interest should ever creep into a
Cathedral, it will first pull down the Honor, and then the Walls. It is not
certainly for the peace or safety of our holy Mother, that any Regular,
Conscientious, Learned Priest should spend his time in a discontented
Contemplation of his misfortunes, whilst a barbarous Nonconformity without,
and Moderation within are sustained with a full and free enjoyment of all
Creature Comforts, in order to the ruining of the best of Churches. This is, I
hope, a pardonable digression, as consonant with the Text, and not repugnant to
Antiquity in the Case before us, as tending to increase and support the very
little flock, God knows, of the truly zealous for our (no less Ancient than
Orderly) Constitutions.

Fifthly, -- To this Power of Ecclesiastical Superiors we have the harmonious
assent also of all Reformed Churches. Thete are two Excellent Books of Mr.
Durell entitled, Ecclesiae Anglicanae adversus schismaticorum criminationes
vindiciae, and The Church of England not condemned by any other Reformed
Churches; both so well known to this Audience, as sufficiently satisfactory in
this Particular to all intelligent and unbiast persons, that they spare me the
Labor of any farther Discourse: And indeed our Mother, the Church of England,
is so far Justified against all imaginable rational Opposers, from the
publiquely-printed harmony of Confessions (in which book are inserted also the
Thirty nine Articles) and by the public open practice of our neighbour-nations
(we not condemning them nor they us) that our enemies have recourse to Clamor
and Noise, and want only an opportunity by Swords and Pistols to encounter our
Reasons and Demonstrations; Club-Law must once again gain that advantage (when
occasion offers) which they despair of by Arguments and Disputations.

They are not for treating like Men, but fighting like Beasts; Men neither to
be broke nor to be softened, all Anvil and Adamant; and Nonconformists in all
other Kingdoms, and over all the Christian World, as well as to the Church of
England, (as is admirably proved by the Learned Author aforesaid). All the
Reformed Churches maintain this Principle, That every National Church has
Power to make Laws for herself in outward things, not expressly commanded or
forbidden in the Word, and that they may vary according to Times, Places and
Persons, and other Circumstances; and not one of them but has acted according
to this Principle in making Laws different from their Neighbor Churches. I
therefore pass to the last Particular (not only Scriptures, Reason, Experience,
Fathers, Councils and Reformed Churches) but our Nonconformists and very
Dissenters, by their Confessions and Practices, own this Power in
Ecclesiastical Superiors, however refractory to our present Constitutions.

And first I cite Calamy, in his Convenant-Sermon; who tells us, That the
Covenant is to be taken standing, the head uncovered, and the right hand bare
must be lift up, which are emphatical Cermonies (says the Man of God,) and
Significant that we call God to witness, etc. Here I note that there are as
many Cermonies in this unlawful Oath as the Church of England, has in her
whole Worship legally authorized, and the Ceremonies are significant too, as
well as ours.

2. I cite the preface to the Directory, where the thorough-Reformers thus
conclude: We are resolved to lay aside the Common prayer book and set up the
Directory instead thereof; where we hold forth what is of Divine Institution in
every Ordinance, and other things (not of Divine Appointment) we do hold forth
according to the Rules of Christian prudence consonant with the general Canons
of the Word of God? But now I demand, By what Law of God or Man have you the
Sole Privilege of thus holding forth? Why may not the Church of England use the
same liberty of her Christian prudence, agreeable to the Rules of the Word? dic
Quintiliane colorem. If this Privilege be granted to a Directory, without Law
set up, why not to a Liturgy, legally established? and if granted, the Church
of England has thus proceeded in the Liturgy prescribed viz. by Christian
prudence, and the Canons of the Word.

3. I cite a (not unlearned-Treatise of the Presbyterian entitled, An Alarm by
way of answer to the last warning-peice, where the Authors tell us, That no Man
endued with right Reason, but will say there is a necessity of a Government; if
of a Government, then of an Uniformity, else it will be confused: therefore
there is a necessity that every man should observe such Orders, Time, Place,
and Gestures, as the Parliament and Assembly (but why not as the King, Bishops
and Clergy?) shall appoint; Very sound and good. (It follows) No man that has
any use of Conscience in any thing, but he will acknowledge that he is bound in
Conscience to obey the Laws of the Land in things indifferent, and deserves
Censure for being turbulent even in matters of Worship: But now the Case is
altered, the Nonconformists being not in Throne of Government, it is false
Doctrine at present in the Church of England.

4. I cite Mr. Baxter, who (writing to his Brethren Brandon and Caryl) cleaves
a hair, Let me be bold to tell my Brethren of the Ministry, That (though I deny
them to have any Authority against the Word) yet so great is their Authority as
Guides and Governors of the Church, in things agreeable to, and but generally
determined in the Word, that the want of the knowledge of this Truth has been
the occasion of all the Schisms and Confusions in England; And till we have
taught even our godly people, what Obedience is due to there spiritual Guides,
the Church of England will never have any good or established Order: I say
again, we are broken for want of the knowledge of this Truth, and till it be
better known we shall never be bound up and healed.

To which if you add the formal Covenant of the Brethren of New England for
admission of Members, even these precious Saints will condemn themselves, or
must justify this best of Reformed Churches. Thus I have by Scripture, Reason,
Experience, Fathers Councils, Reformed Churches, and the Confessions and
Practices of the Nonconformists themselves, plainly proved a Power in
Church-governors to make Canons, and decree Rites for the external Solemnity
and Decorum, and Order of Divine Service; to which all Priests and People are
to yield Obedience under their Government and Jurisdiction -- quod erat
demonstrandum. From the preceding Discourse I do (as a zealous Brother)
reprove my Brethren of moderate Principles, as Commentators, as Casuists and as
pretenders to the Politics; And so with a brief Exhortation to all my reverend
Brethren, shall conclude the Discourse.

1. They are abominable Commentators. They shall always sign the Infant
baptized with the Cross, (that is to say) the Children of Conformists; but the
Canon says not it must be done to the Seed of the righteous: Not marry without
Banes or License at uncanonical Hours or prohibited times, or without the
consent of their Parents or Governors (that is); The Minister shall not do it
gratis, but if soundly paid it is no Disobedience against the Canon of the
Church. He shall not diminish the Prayers of the Church on the account of
Preaching or any other respect (that is to say) unless it be to increase the
Salary, or to lengthen the Sermon, for to make way for the freely conceived,
Directory-way of canting in the Pulpit. He shall read the Letany on Wednesdays
and Fridays every week; Antiphrasis voces tibi per contraria signat.- Canonical
Obedience, in omnibus licitis et honestis, that is, as far as the new Saints
will permit, upon whom they depend for a Maintenance: The confirming their
Doctrins by Scripture according to Exposition of the Fathers, and their Mothers
own Articles; Populo ut placerent quas fecissent fabulas: Whenever they
officiate, to wear the Surplice (that is) if their precious Benefactors do not
account the Garment Popish, and take occasion hence to withdraw the
Creature Comforts: Not give the Sacrament to any men but such as kneel (that
is) if the posture be approved by such as have Communion with the Lord Jesus in
the purest Ordinances. To bid Prayer before Sermon is to pray by the Spirit;
and as breisly as conveniently we may, is more or less, half an hour or a full
glass, according to the Judgment or contribution of the Saints. The Sick shall
be prayed for by the Form at the Visitation prescribed (that is) the
Parish-clark shall keep the Ticket till the Soul-searcher is in the Pulpit: The
same Form to be used in private, unless the Schismatic puts his hand in his
pocket and makes a Present, and then the case is altered, and the Law not
violated. No Man vows Poverty when he swears to obey the Bishop: But the Man of
God can sometimes supererogate; He shall preach one Sermon every Lords day
(that is to say) two at the least; He shall use Catechizing in the afternoon
(that is) if the people (et vox populi, vox Dei) had not much rather have a
Sermon: And the Desk is unhallowed; It is no Sermon neither, unless it come
from the holy Mount: After all, we must have a strain of Sternhold and Hopkins
after Sermons for our godly solace, while precious the Man cons over the Heads
of the foregoing Discourse; a way of singing and canting which has neither Law
of the Land nor Canon of a Synod to justify its use, nor any Approbation (upon
Record, either of Civil or Ecclesiastical Superiors; but the people love to
have it so: By this craft these Men of God have their wealth, and this shall be
observed (not required) above all the Churches ancient and laudable
Constitutions; thus precious Man Divines for Money, and the small Levite for
handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread; and turns Spiritual Pedlar to avoid
the Statutes of Vagrants, and both sells the Church for a Subsistence, and
rebels against the orderly Laws and Constitutions.

Secondly, We will consider him as a Casuist likewise, and then the Commentator
will appear to be less ridiculous. With our Brother-Conformists of moderate
Opinions, to comply with a Faction against the Church and the Laws, for a
benevolence, is to be a Jew with Jews, and a Gentile with Gentiles, and being
crafty to take their Money; then they catch the People with guile (as the
Apostle did in the conversition of Souls (admirable Casuists) who cannot (or
will not) reconcile St. Paul's two Sentences; Becoming all things to all men,
and if I yet please men, I should not be the Servant of Jesus Christ; the best
Salvo they have is a late Act of Parliament (which being duly executed) It did
appear there was no difference between the Purses and the Consciences of
Nonconformists; rather than lose an Office of profit, the Conscience was
satisfied, that he could communicate with the Church, and kneel at the
Eucharist, and was not defiled with the company of Sinners at the holy
Ordinance: So that he that gains the Purse gains the Soul of our precious
Dissenters; (a use of Consolation to our moderate Casuists). But if this does
not help them, they are certainly lost to all intents and purposes. It must not
be, Paul a servant of Jesus Christ (but something else): If such imitate that
zealous Apostle who (by omission of known Ministerial Duties) have forfeited
the Faith of a Priest, and the Feast of a good Conscience, who subscribe with
their hands and something besides (which ex animo signifies in some approved
Dictionaries) and yet Pope Interest is supreme over Kings and Bishops, and can
dispense with all imaginable engagements to Ecclesiastical Superiors and
Constitutions. For Sixty years and upwards our present Canons have been
obligatory upon us, but these Casuists can tell you that a Custom of Five or
Six years (If it let in the Evangelical Graces of profit and ease) can
prescribe against the Custom aforesaid, and every offender against this New
Law, must be called a Hyperbolical Conformist to the Church of England. But I
humbly conceive (with submission to better Judgments) that for a Priest (after
Subscription) neither to obey the Churches Laws, nor to require it of others,
to serve upon his holy Mother all his sordid and degenerous ends, and keep open
her bleeding Wounds for his own advantage, and to turn Renegadoe (as a Soldier
for pay flies to the Tents of Enemies) is a Crime that doubles its malignity
from the Quality of the Actor, and (if possible) we want a number above the
plural, to express so complicated a wickedness.

3. I do as little understand the Politics of these men, as their Casuistical
Divinity, or barbarous Commentaries; what they call a prudential Compliance, is
only the want of Courage and Resolution; their Moderation is an open defiance
to that Heroical integrity which should speak the Priest a Saint and a
Gentleman. It is with these men (as Tacitus said of Fabius Valens Captain to
Velleius) utrumque consilium aspernatus est, and quod inter ancipitia
deterrimum est, nec providit; It is so with these partial Conformists, they
have not Courage enough to embark heartily on one side, nor Providence enough
to escape the hatred of both. It were more politic to take the advice of
Suetonius, Quando non efficias quin alterum habiturus sis inimicum aut socium,
Jacienda tunc est alea alterutri adhaerendum est: Let them be either through
Conformists or Non-conformists, the middle moderate practice is attended on
with an Episcopal Rod executing the Canon against Revolters, and an angry God,
who (as he hates robbery for burnt-offerings) so he abhors the Priest that
curtails the Sacrifice of Obedience: Nay to add more torment to their lives,
there is a Sacrilegious Layman, who believes in his Conscience he may as well
diminish the Titles, as the Priest the Service: Will thou sue him in the Court
of the Bishop, whose Orders thou do despise? Will thou fly to that Law in thy
necessity, to which in point of Duty thou have denied thy homage? When the same
Law puts thy Bread into thy mouth, and the Common Prayer Book into thy hand,
Will thou Read the Litturgy in the way of Moderation, and take the Layman by
the Throat for the uttermost farthing? Have thou Confidence enough to accuse
him of Sacriledg before the Right Reverend Diocesan, when Clodius accusat
maechos, Catilina Cethegum.

These things duly considered, suffer I beseech you my reverend Brethren, The
Word of Exhortation.

1. It is taken for granted, that the reading of Divine Service as (...); If
first beseech you therefore to read this Worship with all imaginable Devotion
and Reverence; let us be a sort of incarnate Seraphins when we officiate by the
Liturgy in the holy Oratories: thus we shall silence the calumny (equally
uncharitable and ridiculous) of the Presbyterian Divines, who (in their grand
debates) briskly tell us, that an able and holy Ministry flows immediately from
Pulpit-conceptions, according to the variety of Subjects and occasions, and
that Men are apt to lose a great deal of affection by the constant use of the
same Forms; let us (with the blessed Jesus) pray earnestly, using the same
Words; be truly zealous at the Prayers of our Church, and demonstrate that
inward fervor by the Text (...), and we shall silence these insipid
vainglorious Canters, who place all their Religion in their rude impremeditated
and tumultuary effusions. The reverend Doctor Fell in his life of Doctor
Hammond observes of that Divine (the late glory of the Church of England) that
his transport at his Prayer threw him sometimes prostrate on the earth, that
his tears would interrupt his Words in the Common Service of the Church; let
these men know that revile Liturgy, by our following this eminent Priest in
holy fervors, that the Votary (not the Prayer) is in fault, when ever zeal is
wanting at the public Devotions.

2. With Submission to better Judgments, the Canons relating to Divine Service
would be more carefully observed amongst us, if in Cities, Corporations and the
most Populous places, the Ten-pound-Man did not read the Service.

I therefore request that the Searcher, Melter and Establisher of Souls, may
read the Prayers of the Church, and that he may not be permitted in the least
to curtail the solemn Worship for his own private conceptions; and then the
People will begin to consider, with themselves, whether God do not require
something else besides Ears and Elbows in the Congregation of the Saints.

3. I do humbly Request that all that Preach Twice every Sunday and forget
Catechizing, that they would once more Read the Forty sive Canon, and Fifty
ninth Constitution: I must and do openly profess that I understand not the
English Tongue, if two Sermons every Lords Day be equally Canonical with this
Duty of Instructing the younger sort in the Churches Catechism, in order to
Confirmation.

4. That I may not be misconstrued as Enemy to Preaching, I do freely consent
from my heart that every Minister with Cure of Souls do herein consult his own
prudence: I shall not contend whether once or twice, but I presume the former
to be more consonant to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions; but let the Clergy
Preach every day of the week provided the old Canon be observed, That every --
Preacher in this Province take a special care that they Teach or Deliver no
other Doctrines than what is consonant with the Word of God, and Collected
thence by the Ancient Fathers and godly Bishops. Unless this ancient good
wholesome Rule be carefully put in practice, the Church will be more edified by
our Silence than our Sermons.

5. What if the Feasts and Fasts and Letany-days of the Church were
Canonically, and Conscientiously observed, amongst us, It would infinitely
promote true Piety, the Churches Peace; and I know no pretense against it, but
Pride and Interest, Applause and Benevolence, which too frequently cancel all
our Vows and Obligations.

6. Let us think the Nation and Church wiser than a particular Priest, and the
Liturgy more weighty than our own Pulpit effusions; and confine our selves to
the Canonical way of bidding Prayers with that brevity that the Canon-prayer
mentions (God is not taken with the Novelty of our expressions) but possibly
the People is the Idol to which we sacrifice, and from whom we expect an answer
to our petitions; and then there is some Reason for a long-winded Cant before
the Pulpit-Discourse, because the rabble do admire what is equally ridiculous
with themselves.

Lastly, The Seventy fifth Canon must never be forgotten, enjoining a Regular
Life and Conversation; and this joined, with a public Spirit that abominates a
compliance against the Rules of Conscience and Honor, is absolutely requisite
to the doing all things decently and in order.

FINIS.

