THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THOMAS TREGOSSE Late Minister of the Gospel, At Milar
and Mabe in Cornwall:

With his Character; and some Letters of his, not long before his Death.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXI.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF THOMAS TREGOS, etc.
SECT. I. Mr. Tregosse's Life, unto the time of his Conversion.
THe Lives of Virtuous and Heroic Spirits have been in all ages esteemed of
great use and efficacy, for the promoting of the like dispositions in those,
who are of more awakened and raised Souls. For Man, of all Creatures being most
under the power of Imitation, he is usually more moved by Examples than
Precepts: Examples are Lessons to the Eye, and Table^ wherein the Theory is
demonstrated in the Practice. Things Intelligible, which are more obscure in
the Idea and notion, are rendered as it were sensible, and so more familiar and
practicable by examples; which give a kind of Body, Life, and Motion, to
general Doctrines and Instructions. As the beams of the Sun gain force by
Reflection, so do Doctrines and Precepts, reflected from the examples of holy
men. Notions and Precepts give us only a general Idea of what we ought to do;
But the Lives of holy men tell us what by grace we may do; and withal, they
offer unto us efficacious Motives for the provoking of us by an holy emulation
to our duty. Thence the poor Pagan advises us, (...). Stob. Sec. 3. de prud.
To set before us the fairest Copy of Virtue, and then to imitate the same.

These, with some other private considerations, have induced me to commend to
the world the ensuing story of Thomas Tregosse, late Minister of the Gospel;
who was born at St. Ives, near the Lands-end in Cornwall. The Family of Tregosse
whereof he was a branch, was not without noble blood lodged in its veins Some
conceive it to be more ancient than the Norman conquest, a relic of the old
Britains, seated in those parts; though the title seem to be of French
notation. Our English History acquaints us, that William the Conqueror created
John Tregosse a Baron; who, though he died without issue, yet Henry Tregosse
sat as a Baron in the Parliament held An. 35. of Edw. the I. And Robert de
Tregosse was one of those Lords that sided with Simon Monfort Earl of
Leicester, against K. Henry the third. As for the ruins of this Family, the
principal cause thereof deserves a particular remarque One Mr. Roscadden going
in Pilgrimage, his Wife had in his absence a child, or more: whereupon, at his
return, John Tregosse advised him to settle his Estate on some Friend, for the
use of his Wife and Children, lest, after his death, the Heir at Common Law,
should turn his Wife and Children out of doors. Mr. Roscadden embracing his
advice, desired him to accept of this trust; which accordingly he did; but
instead of a Deed in trust, he made it absolute to himself, and his Heirs. As
soon as Mr. Roscadden wad dead, the said John Tregosse entered on the Lands, and
turned his Wife and children out of doors; who for some time lay in a Hogstie,
and every morning went forth on the dunghill, there on their knees imprecating
the vengeance of God on Tregosse and his Heirs. After this time the Judgments
of God signally appeared against this Family; Walter his Son, falling from his
horse in a fair way, broke his neck; others of his issue came to an untimely
death; and a curse has remained on the estate ever since. This, Mr. Thomas
Tregosse, (whose Life we now relate,) was so greatly sensible of, as that it
cost him many Prayers for the removing of this curse, as he himself assured me.

Notwithstanding the Judgments of God on this Family; yet the Parents of Mr.
Thomas Tregosse were godly, and reputed among the number of the old Puritans.
This was much seen in the pious education they gave this their Son, whose
tender years they took care to have seasoned with the Principles of Religion
and good Literature. At first his capacity seemed dull, till about the age of
seven years, or after, his diligence gave some notices of a quick apprehension,
and tenacious memory. Indeed, he had from his youth a natural inclination to
the work of the Ministry, and would often, (when but a child,) mount up a stool
or bench, and there, in his manner, preach to his companions.

When he had attained a competent measure of Grammar Learning, he was sent to
Oxford, and placed in Exeter College, under the Tuition of Mr. Francis Howel,
then Fellow of the said College; who perceived in him an awakened Spirit full
of Vivacity and Intention, insomuch that he made good the character which
Aristotle gives of a young man, (...), to act vigorously, in what ever
exercises he was engaged in. He did not, (as too many) abuse the expectations
of his Friends, by squandring away those precious opportunities, and
encouragements vouchsafed him, for the elevating his natural capacity, by the
acquirement of Liberal Arts, and Philosophic Sciences, wherein he made a good
progress. Neither was he without a good interest in the esteem of pious
persons, as it appears by the admittance which Reverend Dr. Conant gave him, as
a Member into his Church. Also whiles he continued in Oxon, he began to feel
some wounds of Conscience. One day hearing Dr. Conant on Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim,
what shall I do to thee? etc. Some passages of that Sermon made so deep
impression on him, as that his conscience was filled with no small terror;
when he went to his bed, he was not without fears he should never see day; when
in his study, that he should never come out alive. So long as these awakening
terrors of Conscience, and sick nights for sin continued, he could not endure
to hear a vain word, or to behold what had but the appearance of sin. But these
lights and heats of Conscience did by degrees die away; Neither did they at
that time determine in a through Conversion, as it will hereafter appear, Sect.
2.

Having spent some time in the University, he returned to S. Ives, the place of
his Nativity; where, having made some trial of his Ministerial gifts, the
Inhabitants invited him to be their Minister. This he at first modestly
refused; but being at last overcome by their importunity, he agreed to spend
some time among them; Whereupon he was Aug. 17. 1657, in that Church, set apart
for the work of the Ministry. He continued there two years a close Student all
the week, and constant Preacher twice every Lords day. Before his departure
from this place, he took to him for Wife Margaret Sparnan, who proved a
gracious, meek, humble, affectionate, and meet help to him. Whilst he continued
in this Town, there were two accidents, which deserve a particular remarque;
The first was this; The Summer after his sitting down among them, much of the
fishing season was expired, and no Pilchards appeared; the sense whereof
greatly afflicted their Spirits; that Town depending much upon the Pilchard
trade. Mr. Tregosse advised them to join in a day of Prayer and Humiliation:
which being performed, the next day appeared a great shole of Fish, whereof a
considerable quantity of them were taken. The other accident which deserves a
particular remarque was this; the next Summer, the Fishermen, taking a great
number of Pilchards on a Saturday, all that night was spent in saving of them;
and the Seamen were very intent in drying their Nets the Lords day. This Mr.
Tregrosse rebuked them for; withal, giving them to understand, that they
provoked the Lord deservedly to withdraw his blessings from them, which
happened accordingly: For from that time, to the end of the Fishing season,
they had not another opportunity of employing their Nets.

He removed hence, October. 1659. to the Vicarage of Milar and Mabe; where he
continued his constant course of study, and preaching; till he was silenced by
the Act of Uniformity, Aug. 24. 1662. Being prohibited the public place of
preaching, he ceased not to preach in his own Family twice every Lords day.
Which being known in the neighborhood, diverse, who had tasted of his Ministry
in public, could not but desire to partake thereof in private. This being
divulged, notice was given thereof to the Lord Lieutenant; who, upon his
refusal to take the Oath appointed for the Militia, committed him to the
custody of the Marshall, where he continued obout three Months space; not
ceasing to preach to his fellow prisoners, besides others who came to hear him:
but at last he was released by order from the Deputy Lieutenants.

SECT. II. Mr. Tregosse's Conversion; and several Accidents that attended the
same.
SEptember 1663. Mr. Tregosse removed his habitation to the Baron of
Kigilliack, in the Parish of Badock, near Penryn; where he kept up his Lords
days meetings, many flocking to him. About the beginning of October 1664. he and
his Wife lying awake in their bed, they felt a great Earthquake, which made
the room to tremble and quake under them, as they aphrehended: and that which
gave them the greater cause of admiration, was, that no one else felt the same.
But this was but a Prognostic and symbolick Image of that dreadful Tremblement
or Earthquake, which not long after Mr. Tregosse felt in his Conscience. For,
on the first of January following, it being the Lord's Day, the Lord led him to
preach on that Text, Luke 12.47. And that Servant which knew his Lords will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes. On which he showed, what a dangerous sin it is to sin
against knowledge. The duties of the day being finished, his old sins were
livelily presented to him; especially one among the rest. Hereupon he betook
himself to his Duties, but drove on very heavily; yet the Lord, by an
omnipotent pull, drew him on. In one one Duty among the rest, he was assaulted
with that Scripture, Heb 12.17. For ye know, how that afterward, when he would
have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: For he found no place for
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. He frequently assayed to
shake off the chains and cords of the Spirit, grieving that he was bound up
from the world; his performance of duties was not without much deadness and
unbelief. But the Lord bound him fast to his work, forcing him to follow on in
a way of seeking. Sometimes he feared God would leave him to run into his
former courses; yea, that he should not persevere to the end of one day. But
the Lord magnifyed his power and grace above and beyond his fears. Sometimes in
reading, the Lord would set home threatening, then comforting Scriptures to keep
him equally balanced between hopes, that he might not sink, and fears that he
might nor presume. He was detained for about 5 weeks space under much bondage,
and afflictive terrors, with little or no discoveries of Gods gracious
disposition; till about the beginning of February, being under a resolution to
reveal some sins which burdened his Conscience, he met with a passage in an
English Divine, touching the greatness and freeness of Christ's love and
purchase; which, the Lord setting home, he was a little quieted and refreshed
by. The next day being the Lord's Day, he had a sweet heart-melting
consideration of his sins, together with a lively contemplation of Christ
pierced; to whom he directed an eye of Faith. And now he, who thought it an
hard matter to shed one tear, drops many; the Spirit of the Lord also bringing
to his heart that promise, I will pardon their iniquity, and remember their sin
no more: and that of Christ to Thomas, Jo. 20.27. Reach hither thy finger, and
behold mine hands, and reach hither thine hand, and thrust it into my side; and
be not faithless, but believing; and this was promoted by reading the history
of Christ's Passion. Yet was he not without some doubtings still; yea, at times,
all these his encouragements signified no more than nothing. After this, he was
carried on in Duties, with more enlargement, and affectionate workings,
especially at times.

And from this time he dated his conversion; For, albeit his conversion, for
some considerable time before, was irreproachable, and his labors in the work
of the Ministry indefatigable; yea, and his Zeal for Non conformity remarkable;
yet he judged the whole of his foregoing life zeal, and labor in the Ministry,
to be no other then a continued series of Formality and hypocrisy. And because
some of his friends who knew his former conversation well, could not but
conceive that he had sincere Grace, before this great turn; A friend of his
discoursing with him on this point, he peremptorily affirmed, That he assuredly
knew, that he had nothing of sincerity before this great work, and withal he
bewailed the Church of England, in that generally men were made Ministers
before they were made Christians; Yea, he was not without great fears, that
many, who in humane estimation, now pass for able and good Ministers, will one
day be found to be, according to Divine estimation, not so much as good or
sincere Christians. These fears, we may presume, he grounded on his own
experience of himself, (besides other common observations,) who had the vogue
of being a faithful Minister, before he was a faithful Christian. And that
which yet adds further weight is this, that though he was before this time a
constant and faithful Preacher, yet he could not say the Lord had given him any
Covenant, as the fruit of his Ministry, though he received many Seals thereof
afterward.

Some short while after these great, which he strongly concluded were the first
sincere turnings of his Soul to God, being brought very low in his Body and
Spirits, he conjectured his death was near: Then was that Scripture cast in,
Psalm. 118. I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. And
being again under a return of strong persuasions and fear that he should die,
looking into his Bible, there was presented to his eye that Text, Psalm. 53.5.
There were they in great fear where no fear was; which dispelled that
persuasion: and not long after, by the use of means, with the blessing of God
thereon, he gained strength in order to his future service. Some short time
after this, on a Saturday, being very weak in body, and under despair of
recovery, he went up to his chamber as well as his feeble legs would carry him,
and fell down on his knees to Prayer: whilst he was on his knees, on a sudden,
as it seemed, agreat measure of strength was given in to him, even to his
astonishment. Whereupon he attempted to arise and walk; which he did two or
three turns about his chamber very strongly. Then calling for his Wise, she
soon perceived his pale cheeks clothed with their wonted color and complexion;
and now he, that not many moments before, thought himself at the brink of the
grave, was enabled to perform the duties of the evening, and next Lord's Day,
with much vigor and strength. Since these signal marks of Divine savor and
assistance, afforded both to his Soul and body; he, with some other Christians
observed a monthly Fast, to afflict themselves before the Lord, for their own,
their Family, and National sins. After these his first turns to God, he found a
more then ordinary assistance in his studies and work, the Lord casting in
abundant matter, and affecting him therewith.

SECT. III. The Account of Mr. Tregosse's Service and Sufferings, with the
Providence of God that appeared for him.
ON April 30. 1665. it being the Lords day, Mr. Tregosse, whilst in Prayer, was
much distracted about his intended Preaching in public; whereunto he seemed to
be drawn by a very strange, though manifest course of Providence, which he
strongly resisted, till he was forced to yield. He had been that week wondering
what the Lord would do with him; He could not study as formerly, but was
induced to read a practical discourse of Self-denial: The Lord furnished his
contemplations with many passages about suffering; And the Creatures duty to
be, and live in the will of his Creator, and at his disposement. In the end of
his reading, casting his eye on his Bible, the first thing he met with, was
that, Matt. 9.36. When he saw the multitude, he had compassion on them, because
they fainted, and were scatter-abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. At the view
of which Text, he inwardly trembled; and the Lord seemed immediately to
intimate, that he should put on like bowels. But hereupon he questioned within
himself, where he should find such an opportunity of public Preaching? Mabe.
(a Daughter-church to Milar, which has Preaching only every other Lord's Day)
was presented to his thoughts. After many Disputes, being loath to yield to the
will of God, he concluded to send thither, to know whether any Minister would
be there the Lord's Day following: answer was returned, that there would be
none. But doubting still, whether he might look on this as a Call, he cast his
eye on his Bible, and fixed on that expression. Luke 11.33. No man, when he
has lighted a Candle, puts it in a secret place, or under a bushel, but on
a candlestick, that they who come in may see the light. This answered all his
objections, allayed all his carnal fears, and confirmed him in his resolution
of Preaching in public the next Lord's Day. When the Sabbath came, he went on,
and found the People willing, and all things suiting with the opportunity:
neither found he any disturbance, but was much assisted in all duties to the
end.

The rumor of this days work was spread abroad, and came to the ears of Mr.
Thomas Robinson, a Justice of the Peace. The next Lord's Day, May 7. being rainy
in the morning, Mr. Tregosse preached in his own house, on Luke 21.19. In your
patience possess ye your Souls: without any expectation of disturbance that
day, by reason of the weather. But after the Sermon was ended, Mr. Robinson
came to the door, and after entrance, took the names of those who were present;
requiring Mr. Tregosse to give surety for the good behavior, or to render
himself to the Constable upon his order, the Monday sevennight ensuing; Mr.
Tregosse refused to do the first, but promised the latter. After Mr. Robinson's
departure, they met again in the afternoon without any disturbance. The next
Lord's Day he preached again at Mabe without interruption. But when the
Exercises were finished, he was served with a Warrant to appear before Mr.
Robinson at Hellestone, on the Tuesday following. At his appearance he
vindicated his preaching with much boldness: But after all, was sent to
Lanceston-Goal, there to remain for three Months; to which he submitted, not
only patiently, but joyfully. In his way to the Goal, he embraced all occasions
for the comforting those christian friends he met with. And whilst he continued
in Prison, his Spirit was very free and enlarged under many gracious influences
and refreshments. His time there was spent in reading the Word, Holy
Meditations, Fasting, Prayer, Holy conference with, and preaching to those who
were his fellow Prisoners, and Visitors. Few came to visit him, but did, or
might gain by conversation with him. The time of his Imprisonment being
expired, July 29. he came out of Prison; and after his return home, took the
first convenient opportunity to keep a day of Thanksgiving, for the many
experiences of Gods goodness toward him, and his, during his confinement.

He had not been at home above four days, before Mr. Robinson gave out, that he
would speedily send him back again to the place from whence he came: in order
whereto, on Friday or Saturday after, he providing (...) ride to Market, there
(as it is reported) to procure another Justice to join with him in a Warrant
for a second Conviction of Mr. Tregosse for a Conventieler, and to prosecute
some others; whilst he was at a Tenement of his, his own Bull (which was never
known to hurt any before,) followed him in a Field, with much fury, and gave
him deadly wounds, whereof he shortly dyed.

Aug. 20. being the Lord's Day, Mr. Tregosse w^^t again and preached at Mabe
Church, without any disturbance; as also that day fortnight, spending the
interval with much activity in his Masters service, elsewhere. He had many
dissuasives from christian friends against public preaching; but all arguments
urged, could not satisfy his Conscience. He was again sent to Lanceston-goal
for public Preaching; whither, Sept. 18. he went with comfortable persuasions,
that God would be with, and care for him and his Family; which was fully made
good. This second Imprisonment conduced much, through the Lords benediction, to
the good of many Souls: For the report of his bonds being spread far, diverse
came to visit him, to whom he imparted Spiritual gifts; and there were some
Onesimus's, whom he begat through the Gospel, in his bonds. During this
imprisonment, he took several opportunities of visiting the Prisoners,
laboring to convince them of their sinful state, etc. Also whilst under this
confinement, he enjoyed many Divine Suavities, and spiritual refreshments in
Duties; with many gracions returns of Prayer; and some prophetic intimations
of future Providence; As, October. 2. he praying for opportunities of service,
etc. After the Duty was ended, he firmly believed he should be released of this
restraint, and be no more imprisoned in that place; which proved true,
notwithstanding several attempts to the contrary. October 7. being much
enlarged in praying for patience, and submission to the will of God; he grew
very confident, that shortly God would farther try him. So October. 23. God
seemed sundry ways to intimate to him, that some great affliction was near, but
that he should be delivered from it; all of which proved true, as it will be
shown. Again, October. 27. being earnest in Prayer for the Nation, he was
strongly induced to believe, that some great judgment was not far off. About
which time, there was often cast into his thought that Scripture, Isa 21.16. Thus
says the Lord unto me, within a year, according to the years of an hireling,
and all the glory of Kedar shall fall. He often mentioned to some of his intimate
friends, the strong Impression this Scripture made on his thoughts; much
wondering what it should mean; but a little before the year expired, the
Conflagration of London happened, which fully interpreted his former Impression.

December. 14. he was delivered out of Prison; and upon his return home, he kept a
day of Thanksgiving, and shortly after he did set apart every Tuesday as a
Fa^^ing or Thanksgiving day; which he kept either in private, or with his
Family, or with others more pub^ickly. Jan. 8th. being the Lords day, he went
to Mabe, where he preached both parts of the day without interruption: which
was attended with this remarkable Providence, that whilst he was there, the
Constable, with an Officer from Pendennis Castle, came to his house, but missed
of him.

Jan. 12. he began a journey toward the East of Cornwall, and from thence into
Devon: The Lords day, and the Wednesday after his house was searched. In this
journey he went forth on the South of Cornwall, and returned on the North;
exercising in all places where he came, and receiving great encouragements, as
to the fruits of his labors. At his return Febr. 4th. going to preach at Mabe,
the Constable served him with a Warrant, to carry him under the Custody of the
Marshall, as a dangerous and seditious person: which indeed he was so far from
being guilty of, that he never so much as meddled in his preaching, or private
Conferences, with the present Discipline or Liturgy of the Church; much less
with matters of State: Nay, he persuaded others to be obedient to the higher
powers: and in his daily exercises he did put up many fervent petitions for the
King. Being under the custody of the Marshall at Bodmin, this imprisonment
brought him to the acquaintance of several persons, who reaped much benefit by
his Ministry. The Marshall was civil to him; yet he met with more difficulties
then in his former confinement; but the Lord honored him with the conversion
of several souls. He continued in this prison till about the midst of September
1667. Being at a certain time earnest in Prayer for enlargement, a Scripture
was presented to his thoughts which made so deep impression on him, as that he
was filled with a great confidence, that if he were delivered, it would be by
order from the Kings Majesty. Not long after, whilst he was under various
afflictions, touching his Family, the Marshall received a special order from
the Kings Majesty for his enlargement.

Feb. 1668. coming to Penryn to preach his Monday-Lecture, he fell sick of a
Fever, which held him all that week. On the Lords day morning, the sense of his
own weakness did somewhat affect him; because the people, who attended on his
Ministry, had none to supply his place: Whereupon, he had that Scripture
impressed on his thoughts, Esa 40.31. They that wait on the Lord shall renew
their strength, etc. This wrought so much upon him, that he resolved to arise:
All about him were very pressing to divert his resolution, knowing how
exceeding weak he was; but they could not prevail: He having got on his
clothes, cast himself on the Lords work. As he went on, strength was gradually
given in, so that he preached thrice that day, choosing that Text before cited.
Isai. 40.31. for his subject; and, to the great admiration of himself and his
auditory, was well at night; neither did he feel any relics of his distemper
afterward.

In the beginning of the year 1669, the number of the Auditors was so much
augmented, as that the rooms they usually met in, would not contain them; which
occasioned the removal of the Meeting into a large Barn; until being summoned
by the Proprietor of that Barn to quit his hired House, he took up his
habitation in the Town of Penryn. Before his remove, a Mittimus came from the
Seffions, grounded upon as information of the Bishop, to send him to the Goal
at Lanceston, for public preaching: The Constables coming to serve the
Warrant, one of them, more furious then his fellow, whilst he reasoned with Mr.
Tregosse, with the Mittimus in his hand, sunk down in the place, for the
present, as it were dead; but being, by the diligent endeavors of those who
were present, brought to himself again, he departed without executing the
Warrant. That which makes this the more remarkable, is, that this Constable was
a strong man, and never fainted in all his life before. And though they come
again some days after, to execute their Warrant, yet had they not power to
carry him to Prison; For which, as it was said, the other Constable was fined
the next Sessions.

At Lammas Assize, 1669. Mr Tregosse having some affairs which called him to
^anceston, he was invited to visit some part of the North-west of Devon;
whence, for preaching at a private house in the Parison of great Torrington, he
was sent to Exeter Goal, with several others of that Town, and Bideford; who
being all Bailed, had for that time no other trouble, then to traverse a Bill
for Riot preferred against them. In his return from Exon, he spent some few
days at Crediton, where he contracted an intimate friendship with a person,
who was providentially cast there at the same time; to whom he unbosomed many
of the choicest accidents of his life, and secrets of his heart: And albeit
they never saw each other afterward, yet this friendship was preserved
inviolable, and improved by Paper-conversation, till death made a disunion, or
rather a present suspension. This trouble which befell Mr. Tregosse in Devon,
was the occasion of much good to many souls in those parts: for it opened a
door to many hundreds in Devon, who resorted to him in his Travels: and so
became partakers of his Ministerial gifts; which were very effectual through
the concurrence of Divine Grace. This made him lay out himself day and night to
the utmost, allowing his body no more then extreme necessity required, that so
he might follow all advantages for the advance of his Masters service. The Bill
preferred against him at Exeter, necessitated him to attend the two following
Assizes; where he was at last freed by Proclamation; but mean while, his return
into those parts was of no small advantage for the propagation of the Gospel.
Some of those persons who discovered their malice against Mr. Tregosse, for
preaching at Torrington, were shortly taken away by unnatural deaths, not
without signal marks of Gods displeasure against them, as it appears by his
following Letter, Sept. 16. 1670.

Not long before his death, he was strangely, he knew not how, taken up in
conversing with the state of departed Saints, martyred for the Testimony of
Jesus; as he himself acquaints you, in his following Letter to his friend,
October. 7th 1670. Which indeed was a prophetic intimation of the nearness of
his Dissolution, and entrance on that life which he was immediately more fully
to partake of. Which brings to my remembrance an old observation which I had
from a great Padre Paul. Histor. Trent.
Master of Wisdom, That it is natural for men near their grave from some
intrinsic cause, unknown to themselves, to be distasted with humane affairs,
etc. What this wise man observed of men in general, I think is most true of
many holy Christians, who a little before their dissolution are frequently
called off, and separated from humane affairs, to a fiducial converse with
coming Glories, and the Life of just men made perfect; which was the frame of
Mr. Tregosse's Spirit, not long before his death; though he himself was not
apprehensive that his change was so near.

SECT. IV. Mr Tregosse's last Trials, and dying Speech to his Friends.
AFter Mr. Tregoss came to reside at Penryn, he hired a House for a Meeting on
the Lords day in the Parish of Mabe, where he exercised without interruption,
from Midsomer 1669, to the 10th of May 1670. After which day, there were two
debauched persons turned Informers, hoping thereby to get fuel for their lusts:
who having obtained a Warrant, required the Officers to attend them every
Lord's Day, and made oath against Mr. Tregosse, and others, for a breach of the
Statute then in force against Conventicles. This sacred away most of his
Hearers, especially those who had any considerable Estates. Though there were
diverse Fines laid on him, which amounted to 220 l. yet the Lord so ordered
things, as nothing he had was seized upon. This Meeting being thus broken, he
resolved to drive the nail that would go, and to preach the oftener unto a
Statute number: herein his labors were so many and great, as if his body were
of Steel, he could not hold out long; He preached five times every Lord's Day,
and in the evening made repetition of some part; He also continued the Tuesday
and Thursday duties, besides other Exercises. He was often advised by his
friends to favor himself, and moderate his pains; but the great zeal he had
for the keeping on, and advancing the work of God, did stop his ears against
all dissusives of this kind. Having at last worn out himself, and exhausted his
Spirits, he fell into a griping of the Bowels, occasioned by a Flatus
hypochondriacus, (as his Physician affirmed) which brought him so weak, as his
friends suspected him to be past recovery, and he himself expressed a longing
desire to be dissolved. But the Lord was pleased to reprieve him a little
longer, and put him once more upon his feet, though he took not the air. As
soon as he perceived a small recruit of strength, he began to fall upon his
work again; this continued but a very short time, till a Fever seized on him,
and in a few days did set and end to all his Labors and troubles. His his
deportment during both his sicknesses, was like his life, very sweet and
heavenly. Upon the 18th. of January, observing the hour of his dissolution at
hand he took his farewell of his friends in a long speech, whereof you have a
part, as follows.

I though I should have had some more turns with my Lord in his Gallery; but he
hoth turned his back, and is gone, and calls me to come after him: Indeed,
though I had some distemper of Body, yet I did not think death was so nigh,
till putting my hand on my brow, I felt the tokens thereof. Think, think not
therefore it is a foolish fantasy that moves me to speak; for I know it to be
right reason. And seeing the Lord has left with me a few mouthfuls of breath,
Let me, who am your faithful Pastor, at the taking my farewell of you, drop a
few words among you, before he calls away this breath of mine, and say, breath
no more through that body, but lay it in the dust.

O my friends! my friends! you know that I have often warned you of an evil
day, and now I must once more tell you, that there is a dead day, a dark day
coming. O! what will this poor people do? O my Friends, did we think, that
after so many Fasting and Humiliation days, after so many Thanksgiving days,
after so many Sacrament days, we should see such a day as this? O, but it may
be you will ask me this question. Do you really believe that you shall dye?
Indeed, friends, there is nothing but Omnipotence can bear me up. And if you
ask me, what I think of my self? Truly, friends, I can say that I have walked
among you by the pure copy of the Holy Scriptures, and Life of Christ; and
through the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, I shall be presented spotless to the
Father. Indeed, when I was young, I had my youthful vanities; but in the year
1664 upon a New Years day, the Lord was pleased to meet with me, and then, even
then, did he set all my sins in order before me: And theose very sins which
were small to me before, were by the Spirit of the Lord in that Rod, made as
bitter as death it self. My slight childhood-sins, my slender youthful sins,
were to me very heinous and abominable. Wherefore, my friends, I charge you to
make a conscience of those sins, yea, of the least of them which I have warned
you of.

Some may think me passionate, and some may think me severe and uncharitable;
but now I repent that I had not dealt more plainly with you. However, in the
truth of the Lord; according to mine ability, I have walked among you; and I
hope you will not think it tedious if I drop a few words upon my grave before I
die. Then the Physician steeping to him, with an intent to desire him to leave
off speaking, lest he should spend his spirits too much, M. Tregosse said, Give
me leave to speak, for I am upon the borders of eternity; and I think you all
look upon me as a dying man, therefore may suffer me to speak as much as I can.
Then he proceeded; I am going to my great God, to my dear Father, to my best
Friend; to him in whom I have believed: His face I hope to see, in his bosom I
hope to lie down this day. Oh! what unspeakable glory is it to see the glory of
mine everlasting God? O, my Friends! I must tell you the truth; though
sometimes there have been upon my fantasy strange black clouds, which made me
to speak somewhat inconsistent, and were suddenly blown off again; yet little
does any one know the reviving in-comes I had then, even then from my God. And
the last Lords day at night, the Lord gave me sweet turns with himself. Oh! it
was a pleasant night with me, I was up with God, and God was down with me. Oh!
it was to me as the going up to Paradise. Oh! how sweet was it to me? And now
my friends, I must tell you, that through many tribulations you must enter into
the Kingdom of God. Some of you have told me your thoughts concerning me, that
I have walked in all good Conscience toward God and M^^. Oh friends,
whatsoever things ye have seen in me that were honest, whatsoever things were
just, whatsoever things were pure, whatsoever things were lovely, whatsoever
things were of good report, pursue those things. Rely not upon the world, for
the world will leave you could and helpless. And now friends, I must go to see
the Lord, and this Body of mine must be laid in the dust and never arise more,
till the Resurrection-day. And must many of you go from this place, and come
naked before the face of God? (though I hope better of some of you.) Oh
friends, if there be any hope, if there be any love, if there be any
consolation in you, think on these things; You know I have. When I came to this
town, some may think my design in coming was to fill an empty bagg, and to get
a livelihood amongst this people; but God is my witness I had not this in my
eye; I sought not yours, but you. And now friends, flesh and blood will say; It
is hard to part with dear friends, to part with a dear Wife, to part with dear
Children. But as the Lord has given them to me, so I now leave them with the
Lord. And I call you to witness, that I leave this dear Wife of mine with the
Lord, and my dear Children with the Lord, to be protected by him, to be
maintained by him, to be kept blameless to the day of his appearance. Though
Men may prove unkind to them; as I suppose they will, yet I know the Lord will
not. I must into Eternity; the Prophets cannot live for ever; neither can they
Prophecy for ever: I have been but a young branch, and you see the Lord is
cutting me down this morning. O blessed Lord God? shall there not be a meeting
in Paradise? shall not thy servant see thee, and love thee, and be embraced by
thee? O Lord give a good evidence to thy servant, that he may know that he
belongs to thee. Lord thou have given him the working of an holy faith; and
of an heart-purifying spirit: And are not these tokens of thy free grace, and
of thine eternal love in Christ Jes^s? And now Lord God, thy servant must away
and be about other work, thy servant must away to holy Angels; and to the
spirits of just men made perfect: He must away to serve his Lord in the upper
Chambers: He must away, Lord, and never look on these earthy things more. And
now, O friends, one thing I tell you, I shall come again with my Lord, in most
excellent Glory; and you then must come before him: But I fear, I fear, that
some of you will be found then to be in a very low, and poor, and miserable
condition. Well, I commend you to the love and grace of God, the Eternal
Father, in Jesus Christ. And I pray you to get your hearts full of love to God;
and of the grace of God; and full of the holy Ghost. And now think on these
things, that I have delivered to you, in the name of the Lord. I must go, and
deliver up my accounts to God: And on that I might deliver them up freely! that
I may be able to say, I have run my race; I have finished my course; I have
fought the good fight; I have kept the faith; and what remains but that I
receive the Crown, that the Lord Jesus, the righteous Judge, has prepared for
me. And now I commit my self to the Lord; and my Wife and Children to the Lord
-- I commit my spirit to thee, O Father of spirits; I commit my soul to thee O
dearest Lord: Keep these that do believe on thee.

These words he spoke with a more audible and plain voice, than he was wont to
do, in his ordinary Preaching: And about an hour and half after he had ended
his speech, he departed this life, Jan. 18. An. 1670.

SECT. V. Mr. Tregosse's Character.
HAving given some story of Mr. Tregosse's Life and Death, it may be, not a
little, Useful, to give some Character of his Person, Spirit, and Conversation.

Mr. Tregosse was of a middle stature, his Hair black; his Face palish, not
perfectly round, His Natural capacity.
nor long. His Spirit was Masculine, Generous, and Great; agreeable to the
condition of his Ancestors. There was a sparkling Vivacity apparent in most of
his intense Actions. His natural humor was not moross but affable: yet was he
not without a tincture of dark melancholy; which yet his grace improved to a
great measure of seriousness. He had also some sparks of choler; which being
spirited by warm affections for God, brake forth into a pure flame of Divine
zeal. His natural Judgment seemed deep, and solid; his will firm and fixed; his
memory tenacious and faithful; his Affections tender and active: And the whole
capacity of his soul fit for great exploits.

But the most Illustrious and bright part of his Character regards his
gracious capacity, and dispositions. His universal Holiness.
His personal holiness was remarkable, even unto great visibility: And, I
think, few, in this age, have, for so short standing, made a larger proficience
in the School, and service of Christ. After Jan. 1664. (from whence he dated
his conversion) he banished from his heart, and life many vanities, he had been
formerly adicted unto. Neither did he gain his godliness, at so cheap a rate as
most professors do: No; his heart was first deeply wounded for sin, and thence
delivered from it: He was, for some while, under many extremities, from a
Spirit of Bondage, and these made way for a Spirit of Adoption. He was soundly
convinced of his spiritual death by sin, and that opened to him a door of life
by Christ. And, the entire change of his heart much appeared in the change of
his life, and last end. Neither had some particular graces only a place in him;
but a combination and complexion of many amiable graces, seemingly opposite,
seemed visible in him. How affable and courteous was he; and yet how severe
against sin? What meekness and humility in his own cause? and yet what courage,
and magnanimity in the cause of God, shone in him? How much holy fear, and
self-jealousie; and yet how much Christian boldness, and confidence was he
possessed with? What an inflexible, and strong bent of heart for God, against
sin, seemed he to have? and yet how flexible and complying with others, for
their good was he?

He did not, as some, take Christ to ease himself of his work; or to secure his
lusts; His Sincerity.
but to kill them and to quicken him to duty. His peace of Conscience was
maintaned, not by peace, but war with Sin; it was not only from, but also in
God. He had, not only form of Christ in his life, and Picture of him in his
fancy; but also the Image of, Union with, and love for Christ in his heart. He
affected not so much to entangle his thoughts in disputes, about the
controversies of Religion; as to get the power of it stamped on his soul. His
faith did not lie level with worldly Interest, but oppositie thereto. He
climbed not, as some, ^o the top of an high profession, without ^^^ing a deep
foundation in self-denial. He borrowed not, as to many, the Mask of Rel^g^on to
conceal a rotten heart; but was uns^tisfied in his heart-inquiries after grace,
till he arrived to such a full measure thereof, as is (...) ^ttainable by any
hypocrite.

H^^ d^yly progress in mortification of sin, seemed very remarkable, His
mortification.
and conspicuous. He knew full well, that one reigning lust would darken and
harden his heart; yea, bring all into captivity; and therefore durst not
gratify any lust, in the least. He was content to give up his lusts to death
for Christ, who gave up his soul to death for him: He thought it not much to
part with a beloved sin, for a beloved Savior. Yea, he seemed to take more
pleasure in subduing his unlawful desires, then others do in the fulfilling of
them And lest his flesh should impose on his more noble part, he innured
himself to many bodily severities; and deprived himself of such natural
refreshments, which others too much indulge themselves in. Yet did he not
content himself with external mortification, but maintained a daily conflict
with the whole body of sin, in corrupt nature, yea, he would often blame himself
much for spiritual sins, as Infidelity; pride, etc. Which others could least
blame him for.

His Crucifixion to the world was not less visible: His Crucifixion to the
world.
He seemed to have acquired a great indifference of Spirit for things
indifferent; to give perishing things but perishing affections. As our blessed
Lord gave his Heaven for him, so he thought it not much to give his earth for
his Lord: He could not part with Christ for any worldly good; and therefore was
willing to part with all for Christ. The believing views he had of future
Glories, darkened the world glories to him; so that he seemed to admire nothing,
but approaching glory, or what related thereto. Poverty in Christ's way was
greater riches to him, then a flourishing state in the ways of sin. He knew how
to abound in his wants, by contentedly wanting what the Lord thought not fit
for him, and thereby crucifying his desires, he made the Cross of Christ easy
to him. His desires were low, and therefore his spirit high above the frowns,
and smiles of this lower world. He seemed better pleased in his mean condition,
then worldlings are in the highest. His mind was too great, to put a great
value on the nothings of this life: He brought his natural desires into a
narrow compass, and thence gained a great enlargement of Spirit.

By his long sufferings he gained a great dexterity and skill in bearing the
Cross: By starving sin, His Art in bearing the Cross.
and crucifying his heart to the world, he took out the stings of his
sufferings. He knew, that the Divine will was more Eligible then his own; and
therefore he endeavored to conform unto it, as well by passive as active
obedience. He knew he could not glorify God more, then by being content, that
Gods Glory should gain by his private losses. He durst not make sin a shelter
against sufferings; or bear false witness against God, by repining under the
Cross. He was not so well pleased with sin, as to prefer it before sufferings:
Or so ill-pleased with sufferings as to fly from them when called thereto. He
innured himself to the yoke of Christ, and so gained the Art of bearing his
Cross. His Conscience continued under a lively sense of sin, and that made him
dead, and in a measure senseless as to suffering. His Will was so far broken,
as that it could cheerfully bend, and submit to the Cross; yea, welcome
crosses, when in Gods way. When God brought him into any affliction or
suffering, he waited there till God brought him out. He knew himself to be
nothing, and that made him bear any thing from God, with contentment: And by
knowing his own vileness, he learnt to justify God in every cross. His spirit
was generous and noble, like that of the Eagle, which is not clamorous when it
wants food. He studied passive obedience as well as active; to be well-pleased
with what God did, as well as to do what was well-pleasing to God. He had a fit
disposition for the Cross, which made that easy to him, which seemed into
llerable to others. As he durst not make men Lords of his faith, so neither of
his happiness, by doting on their smiles, or fearing their frowns; but as
worldly men content themselves with the world, without God; so he endeavored
to content himself with God, without the World. He had his present wants
supplied, by ordinary or extraordinary means, and therefore conceived lit his
duty to trust God for the future: He knew he had more of the creature than he
deserved, and therefore was not: anxious about having more. He was much taken
up about the weighty things of Eternity and therefore little concerned about
these lower things.

He had many generous and noble dispositions, but no one appeared more
illustrious, and visible in him, His zeal for God.
after his conversion, than zeal for his Masters service; and the good of
Souls. Oh! what a rare and excellent Quality is a public Spirit for God? And
how much was this holy man invested herewith? How little did his flamin zeal
care to live, when the honor of his great Lord, seemed to bleed, and die? What
a meek and patient Spirit had he, as to injury done unto himself? and yet how
impatient and zealous was he as to injury done unto his Lord? How modest and
backward was he in his own cause? and yet how magnanimous and forward in the
cause of God? How little was it in the power of the greatest men, to frown him
out of duty, or flatter him into Sin? What a masculine courage had he, with a
fixed resolution not to displease God, to please men? Yea, how much vigor and
strength did his zeal gain by opposition? He seemed indeed naturally to have a
Heroic spirit: But how much did Grace transform this natural quality into a
Divine zeal? How much of divine flame, and how little of wildfire or carnal
wrath was there in his zele?

Notwithstanding his ardent zeal for God, yet was he of a very peaceable and
quiet spirit. His Catholic Charity.
He did not, Salamander-like, delight to live in the fire of contention; but
was of an uniting healing spirit: He was not only a Patient, but also an Agent
in seeking after peace: He judged our Church divisions one of our greatest
plagues; He had a Catholic universal charity, and love for all: and albeit he
hated the vices of wicked men, yet he loved their persons. But he had a
particular affection for all Saints, and that as Saints; making their graces,
not their opinions, the measure of his love. His spirit and principles were so
peaceable, as that he desired to avoid all needless disputes, that might breed
strife: But when he was called to dispute, or confer with those of different
judgments, he evidenced much modesty, and meekness; arguing not for glory, and
victory, but to inquire into truth: Wherein he affirmed nothing, but what he
endeavored to prove out of the Scriptures: And when he could not fully comply
with other men's persuasions, yet he would not impose his own on them, as the
rule of their faith or communion.

And although he could forbear, and bear with all for their good, yet could he
not bear with sin in any; His dexterity in Admonitions and reproofs.
but was a severe Admonitor, and Reprover thereof. Yea, his very presence was a
powerful and persuasive Admonition to such as he reproved; for there was so
much gravity and sweetness mixed in his countenance, that one word from him
would often effect more, then many from some others: Especially, by his holy
conversation, exemplifying what he urged on others from the word of God, he
much convinced such as were defective, and subdued their wills to the will of
God. I my self once heard him, in the presence of several Ministers, sharply
reproving the sin of Ministers, in mispending their time, whiles together, in
frothy, or unprofitable conference: Which reproof he managed with so much
majesty, and yet with so much humility, and submission; confirming all that he
pressed from the word of God, that, I must confess, I could not but conclude,
that there was much of God, in his so seasonable Admonition and Reproof.

Neither did his severity extend to the sins of others only, His vigilance and
heart examens.
but also to his own: He was a curious observer of his own spirit, its ends,
intentions, inclinations, motions, risings, and fallings, as to Sin or Grace.
He always kept a vigilant eye on his heart, and every night made particular
reflections on the passages of the day past, with a strict examen, how it had
been spent; what his conversation had been toward others; and how he had
demeaned himself in his private duties toward God. He examined not only what
he had done, but also from what principles he had done it; and thus by the
knowledge of what he had done, he came the better to know, what he was to do;
by studdying well the book of his own heart, and life he became a good student,
and proficient in the mystery of godliness, and of sin. He was a man of great
observation, and of nothing more than of his own spirit its various
vicissitudes, turnings, and windings, etc. Thus he came to have an intimate and
deep acquaintance with his own heart; and an experimental sense of the holy
spirits working in him; Hence also he came to know, what sins he had to
confess, and humble himself for; what mercies to bless God, or petition for,
what burdens to groan under. At some times he found himself under great
deadnesses and distractions; at other times under sweet inspiration of the holy
Spirit, and enlargements; Sometimes he sighed under sinking despondences, black
unbelief, and hase fears; at other times, he was on the wing of faith, and full
of courage.

He had his stated times for private and family duties: Faith and prayr were
his chief refuse in his troubles. His private duties.
And, indeed, he seemed to drive a great trade with Heaven, by prayer; wherein
he was very powerful and prevalent; He had a very strngling, wrestling spirit
in Prayer; bottomed on a deep sense of his own need, large desires, and lively
workings of faith. What strength he gained by prayer, he lost not by neglects
after prayer, but improved for God. His Spirit seemed unsatisfied in duties,
till he had met with God, or something from God. Sometimes he was dull and
indisposed in the beginning of a duty; but before he came off, he often found
great Assistances; when he found weaknesses, the Lord gave in unexpected
supplies of strength; when he was cast down under any perplexing disturbing
fears, or difficulties from within or without, he had recourse to his Bible,
and thence received frequently such sweet and encouraging promises, set home by
the spirit of God; as afforded abundance of refreshing relief to him.

His Family Exercises and Discipline deserve a particular Remark. He gave no
Toleration to any known sin, His Family Discipline.
or omission of Duty: He was very diligent in preventing, or reproving the
Profanation of the Lords day, even to idle words: Neither was he less careful
for the pious Education, and Instruction of those under his domestic charge.
Every morning and evening, for the most part, he read, and expounded a part of
the Scriptures, sung a Psalm, and prayed with them. Every Friday night he
examined their proficience in the Assemblies lesser Catechism, explaining some
part thereof to them. Every Lords day at night (besides other Duties) he
repeated the substance of what was delivered that day in the Sermons Preached:
And after such Exercises he examined his Servants, and such Children as were
capable, what they remembered; not suffering any to live under his Charge, who
would not give account of their Faith. When he did not read a Chapter, his
course was to examine and instruct his Servants, concerning the Fundamentals of
Religion, which was a great means for the improving their knowledge. Besides
his private Retirements, and Family Duties, he had his set times every day, to
spend with his Wife in private prayer.

Neither was this his religious care for instructing Souls confined only to
his Family, His holy Conserence.
but extended unto others. He was invested with a singular Gist of Personal
Conference, which Talent he employed for the good of Souls; being ready to
take, yea, to seek all convenient opportun ties to treat with them, about their
eternal state. He was much in pressing men to Holiness: He was wont to propose
questions to those he conversed with, and desired the like of them; which the
Lord made very successful He esteemed it no small burden to be cast on any
society, where his time was spent in unprofitable discourse; and when he was
cast on such, his ordinary practice was, to put a stop to such unedifying
conference, by spiritual divertisement, or turning it to some holy discourse.
When he intended to visit any Christian Family, his method was, first to call
his Wife and Mother, that they might join with him in prayer, for a blessing on
his intended undertakement; and being greatly sensible of the advantages that
are acquired by personal Conference, he gave those of his hearers, whom he
judged most judicious, diverse directions for the right management thereof, on
all occasions.

He had a great Tenderness, and regard toward such as were sick: When he
understood of their sickness, His Visitation of the Sick.
he waited not till he was invited, neither did he rudely intrude where he
might not be welcome; but first employed a Friend, to show his willingness; and
then where he might be received, he failed not to visit them, and to adminster
such spiritual advice, as he conceived most proper for the state of their
Souls. And to those who wanted a competent supply of conveniences, he imparted
not only of his spiritual, but also temporal Gifts, according to what God had
blessed him with. He failed not to pray with them before his departure, nor to
spare any labor, or trouble, in the difcharge of this Christian Office.

As for other more extensive parts of his Ministerial Gifts, His Ministerial
Gifts and Labors.
and Labors, they were also very remarkable. His Preaching was solid and
practical; he had a great Pathos, and vehemence in setting home Truths on
Conscience: His Sermons were full of plainnss, and yet clothed with a sacred
Majesty: His words were familiar, and yet very efficacious: He dwelt much on
awakening Truths; such as might pierce and sting the Consciences of secure
sinners; and yet to such as needed Consolation, he was another Barnabas, full
of sweetness. He had much of Divine assistance, as well in the composing, as in
the hearing of Sermons: He often said, that usually his Sermons were given him on
his knees: His practice was, when he had pitched on a Text, to apply himself to
Prayer; and whilst he was on that duty, he often had the Heads of his Discourse
give in unto him. As for his enlargements he was never barren; having a memory
to treasure up all that he read, and an Elocution apt to deliver what he had
treasured up, on all occasions. Those who knew him, much admired how he could
preach so often, and yet so well. He was likewise endued with a large gift of
prayer. which he always expressed in Scriptural language, wherein he seemed to
have much communion with God.

In brief, he was one of Divine Lights and Heats for God. His zeal in promoting
the ways of God, A Summaris of his Character.
was flaming and ardent: He was affable in his Speech, serious and grave in his
Carriage, invincible in his courage, Charitable to such as differed from in
persuasions, so long as he saw their design was to promote Godliness; temperate
in the use of the Creature, Frugal in the husbanding of his time, spending his
spare hours in walking, meditating. Praying, or conversing with Christians
about Soul-affairs. And indeed, he was of so holy a disposition, and heavenly
temper, as that all good Men who knew him, reverenced him. To conclude, his
greatest ambition seemed this, to act and suffer somewhat more then ordinary
for God; that so he might, by a singular exemplary conversation, silence the
reproaches of ungodly men, and give check to the Pride, Formality, Vanity and
Carnality of too many Professors in these wanton days, which he sadly bewailed,
as sad prognostics of great Desolations: Only, he hoped there were some, and
the Lord would raise up more young Converts, who should be furnished with
Spirits, and conversations for the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom. But more of
his Spirit, Fears, and hopes, will appear, in, and by his following Letters.

Penryn October. 5. 1669.
My Dear and Respected Brother.
I May tell you sad stories of my heart; O! how unbelieving, fearful, and faint
found I it, on those short views I took of it: But that God, on whom my
scandalous heart has raised so many false stories heretofore, and then gave my
fears the lie; and yet continue I untoucht, and undisturbed to this hour. I do
cast my self on the disposing hand of God, to live or die in my liberty,
according to his pleasure; When I go forth, not expecting to see my Family
again, and my frequent escapes, fill me with pleasing admirations of love, that
(through Grace) I return triumphing in his goodness. How long this liberty may
be indulged, I know not; but I know he will be a good God when he seizes our
freedom in the Gospel: and it will be the Rod of a Father, and may tend to our
increase and settlement. I have had one very strange raising from the Grave
since I saw you; the circumstances whereof compelled me, and others to own a
very visible finger of God: But a Narrative of this would be too tedious; I
desire you would be importunate with God, that I might eye the approaching
Glory, and the return of that great Shepherd, and might feed in hope, singly
aiming at the Lords blessed Interest, being contented with my own greatest
decreases, might that be increased and enlarged. Gods waterings and blessigs
must give life and fruit to all our poor and defective labourings. O! Beg that
these may be eminently with me; poor England I think is near heavy strokes for
her barrenness, sensuality, and enmity against the power of holiness: the Lord
grant this may not come as a snare on you and me; but that we may be sober and
watchful unto Prayer. The gracious Lord, who dwelt in the bush, be with you, to
teach, strengthen and warn you, that in his hand you may be serviceable and
glorious; In him I am, and ever shall be,

Your unfeigned friend, yet unworthy servant, T. T.

Penryn Jan. 12. 1669.
My Dear Brother,
I Should rejoice to hear how God is dealing with your inward man, and what
measures of success you are crowned with in your labors of the Gospel, and
interest of the Son of God in the world. We may justly guess ^h^t God will do
with us in the Land, by his breathings with his truths. I desire with much
earnestness to know (seeing you have so many advantages beyond us in these poor
corners) how the Spirits of Professors stand qualifyed, so far as a conjecture
may be made, by the visible tenure of their carriages. I generally find a very
secure, earthly, laizy frame has seized those among whom I occasionally fall
abroad: I hope better things with you; and that a more engaging relish, and
taste of God and Glory, is fallen on their hearts; and a more refined pure lip,
seconded by more humble, self-denying converses before the world. O! What a
blessed Omen would this be, that God is on healing terms of Grace with
England; I must confess in the place where I now labor God is traveling forth
with a measure of the greatness of his might: Some most stubborn and obstinate
wretches attend the means, and our meetings grow; the Spirit of Jesus has made
some to fall under him, and our hopes of greater things are increasing; if the
Lord for our unfruitful walkings blast not all. My Dear Brother; I need not
tell you how sweet it is to be tabernacling in Mount Tabor, by close believing.
Meditation, to see your Lord and mine; and on those views to rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory: and by the stme also to mourn over unkindness
with bitterness, as for an only Son. Your received anointings lead me, and keep
you there: Only I must tell you, Sermons much watered in the Closet, and
steeped in fervent Prayer, will ordinarily prove most quickening to the dead,
and consolating to the Saints; and a heart dropped upon by such views, will lay a
more then usual tincture of Heaven upon the mouth which will have a choice
influence in a Teachers treating with Souls. I must commit you to Isreal's
Keeper, in whom you may repute me,

Your unfeigned well-wishing friend, and engaged Brother, T. T.

Jan. 28. 1669.
My dear Brother,
I See you have taken up a more than ordinary care for me; the ground of which
I suppose, is, somewhat of God you conjecture is upon me: In which, I beg the
Lord you may not be mistaken. If I should confess the truth to my bosom
Brother, my Heart is such a confused disordered piece, its Principles and ends
lying so viel'd and hidden from my self, that most frequently I am mine own
stranger; I know not who, or what I am, whether God or self swayes me. Only
this stays me, that were the eye of my heart levelled as directly, and in as
much singleness at the glory of God in Christ, as I would have it be in my
greatest strangeness to him and my self, I think I should be sincere. This
therefore being much my state, I may admire at the touch of Gods Finger on your
heart, to turn it to such a worm. I had no sooner the Letter, but I saw much of
God by it; and in such providence, (through the Redeemer) I desire to hold
some communion with him. I shall hint at a footstep of the blessed walks of God
to me, so far as your Lines may require. Seven or eight years since, I found
amongst the writings of a deceased friend, two Bonds belonging to a poor Ophan;
on the finding of which, I sent word to the Orphan, of them, who came to the
House where I dwelt, and gave order that one of her Debtors should be sued, for
the calling in her Money. Accordingly that Bond was sent to a Lawyer, and the
Debtor sued; But it being out of the way of my employment to attend such a
business, I acquainted the Orphan I should not follow that affair, but leave it
to a Kinsman of hers to manage it; and accordingly regarded it no further; he
promising to show all fidelity for the bringing in from the Debtor, the Money
to the Orphan. In process of time, not having heard of the business, either
from the Orphan or her Kinsman, and therefore concluding all matters were
regularly managed, and in equity between them. As I was alone in my
imprisonment, I had a thought that stuck upon me. I must needs enquire what
issue of the Orphans affair, in her Kinsmans hand had attained; and on an
inquiry, found out that the Orphan was abused, and damnified 14 l. by this
Kinsman, who yet had so saved himself, that no Justice could be gaind against
him. On which I was under many disputes with my self, whether I were not
obliged to take care the Orphan might be satisfied. I did propose the case, but
was informed in the Negative. However, because I entrusted it in his hand, I
could not so clearly discharge my self; and therefore lately borrowed the
money, and paid it to the Orphan; resolving, notwithstanding my present
condition, rather to be the sufferer my self, then that the fatherless Child,
by the others injustice, should be injured; and was determined to eye the Lord
for a way to discharge that money so borrowed. Within a very little time I had
borrowed the 14. l. yours came; and within a little season from another; and
now you write me of more, which makes up the sum. I have been somewhat moved
under the graciousness of God: the Lord make me fruitful in my seasonable
improvement of this dispensation. I should be very glad, might I see you at
Crediton in my passing up to the Assizes: Many things I have to say, which I
must silence, till God open a door for a more satisfactory converse. You are
minded by us here, and I desire to live on your thoughts, when nearest God.

I am yours in unfeignedness, T. T.

May 11. 1670.
My Dear Brother,
YOurs of the 16th. of April, I received not till the 7th. instant. Your long
silence I confess much amazed me: but now in your lines, and the reason by them
given me of the suspense in those paper-enter courses, I rejoice. Since my last
lines to you, according to my engagement by recognizance; I had an opportunity
to spend some time with your friends at Crediton, Chimly, and Southmoulton* and
am sorry where there is an appearance of so encouraging an harvest, so little
stomach, and spirit is found in adjacent Laborers. It has been long my
thought, that God has yet a great controversy with the Nonconforming (though
the best) part of the English Ministry; among whom how few are there who
naturally care for the state of the poor perishing Country; and what their
hands find to do, do it with their might? This with that levity of Spirit,
unholiness of Lip, Reigning Selfishness, Earthly mindedness, Formality,
Lukewarmness in Worship, Security, etc. visible upon the professing body, does
as apparently and dangerously threaten England, as the more branded
D^baucheries. I could heartily wish (had the wise Lord seen it fit) your
station had been fixed in your native Soil, that you might be to the quickening
of Brethren, and professing Saints; and also ready at hand to succor those
poor corners, which seem to cry as the Macedonian in the vision, Come over and
help us. But you know your proper gift, and I presume will carefully study and
answer your calls. I did contract friendship in that journey, with Mr. Stucley,
whom I find of another Spirit, in whose society my Soul was refreshed: And Mr.
Flavel of Dartmouth, I find a well tempered Man; whom else I met with to
rejoice in, of my Brethren I scarce know any. The times are now very black, and
clouds are gathering in every quarter; what the issue of our storms may be, a
little time will much indicate, I wish I could say, Nubecula cito transibit; To
give you my fears, I think this nothing to what must ensue: I have been long
waiting for this; and do considently believe this not the dearest testimony
that must be given to Gospel Truths, and Duties. A national overwhelming
cluster of severe judgments, I am sore afraid, is at the door, sharper then
what formerly, for some scores of years we have felt: though I hope there will
be a larger measure of God to sanctify them, for the reforming of his own, and
converting the Rebels, then ever we yet experienced. This I confess, is some
stay to me, under what I am enforced to believe. I have often begged, if the
Lord sees I am like to prove a dishonor to his Interest, he would first shut
me up in the dust. Dear Brother, Pray for me, that I may do my work according
to my convictions, humbly and with success; and that after my teachings of
others, and small sufferings, I may not be a stranger to the Light, Love, and
Life, by which the Saints are quickened, and so at last a Castaway. The Lord
make you useful, and keep up your courage, and grant you a deliverance from
rude and unreasonable men, which, with desires of the like cequests from you on
my behalf, will be now all,

From your most affectionate and engaged Brother in the Faith. T. T.

Penryn, September 16. 1670.
My Dear Brother,
AT this Assize at Exon I was called to my Trial, but no persecutor appearing
to give evidence against me; my jury acquitted me, and a Verdict of not guilty
was returned. George Smith, the Deputy major of Torrington, when the
Conventicle was surprised (and the grand Enemy in this affair) was at Lent
Assize attending: but the Trial being put off; by this Assize God disabled him
for such a journey, he having received in a drunken voyage, a fall from his
Horse; by which his shoulder bone is dislocated, and he rendered unable to dress
or undress himself; and so like to abide to the day of his death. His Wife also
(that violent Woman) died of a Timpany, a fearful spectacle to all beholders;
she departed hence the night of that Lords day in which I exercised at
Torrington, in my journeying now to my home. I suppose you heard of the bad end
of another Persecutor there, one Denis, Smith, Brother in Law, who so much
rejoiced when our meeting was broken up, affirming, the surprizal of the
Conventicle did him more good, and more rejoiced him then all his losses did
sadden him: his Wife also bitterly belched forth these words concerning me,
hang the Rogue; hang him at the Sign-post, or next Tree, and never send him to
Exon: This poor wretch did hang himself in his own Study, and thereby his
Estate is forfeited to the Town. Many much take notice, how signally Gods hand
has been against them since that Meeting. There are a very precious handful at
Chinely, Southmoulton, and adjacent parts, who gladly receive the word: their
ready submission to the truth in my former journey, engaged my heart to visit
them again, and hope our seeing each other has not been in vain: Your memory
is dear to sundry of them, and your scatterings there. I wish they might again
see you. A fruitful heavenly lip to improve truths imparted, by corresponding
pressing conferences, is much wanting among us: I pray beg it for me, and your
other Brethren, now laboring My complaint will not Crucify my unbelief, pride
and deadness; pray labor for me with God, with whom I leave you, and am,

Your much obliged Brother in the Lord. T. T.

Penryn, October 7. 1670.
My Dear Brother,
I am a Sympathizer with you in dear Mr. R's loss of so choice a mate; but
suppose his so exemplary living on God, will do much to quiet him in the loss
of the best enjoyment not everlasting; and the ground of hope she is safely
housed from the storms we feel and fear, will I believe, and do more sweetly
reconcile him to this ungrateful and flesh-disgusting stroke. As for what God
speaks to you in this providence, I think its plain, viz. That you more
effectually daily dye to what is not God and Spirit; and that you enure your
Soul to more deep and fixed thoughts of your own dissolution. I hear many very
precious ones have been lately, at London (through a malignant distemper in the
Bowels) called ^ome; the Lord more fully warn them who survive, and us; also of
those black and tempting days which probably are near us. My thoughts have been
much of late settled, I know not how, on a conversing with the state of departed
Saints, Martyred for the testimony of Jesus. I have observed in special two
passages in Mr. Foxes Acts, etc. The one of Mr. Rogers the Protomartyr in Marys
Reign; who in his Prison had this passage to the Printer of Mr. Foxes book,
then in bonds with him, Thou (said he) shall live to see the alteration of this
Religion, and the Gospel freely preached again: and therefore have me commended
to my Brethren, as well in Exile as others; and bid them be circumspect in
displacing the Papists, and putting good Ministers into Churches, or else their
end will be worse then ours. The Printer accordingly lived, but what remains
for us who have shamefully slighted his counsel, time will evidence. The other
is from Mr. Holland, who thus bespeaks Bonner after his sentence; This I dare
be bold in God to speak (which by his Spirit I (...) moved to say) that God
will shorten our hand of cruelty; that for a time you shall not molest his
Church; and this shall you in short time well perceive (my Brethren) to be most
true; for after this day in this place, there shall not be any, by him put to
the trial of Fire and Faggot. After which there was not one burned in
Smithfield. I principally consider that expression, That for a time they should
not molest his Church. The Lord prepare me for a suffering day, and if fair
weather succeeds, we shall be more watchful in its improvement. As for our
condition it is full of threats and trouble; Warrants are granted for the
levying of 220 l. on me; yet God has kept them off; but I am expecting daily
to be stripped of all. Our meeting place is taken from us, through their
threatenings on our Landlord: we now meet at my house, and once each Lord's Day
above the number; but very few are free to attend, unless with four. I am also
threatened to be persecuted on the corporation Law; so that I am constantly
expecting an imprisonment: but I shall endeavor to turn into the strong hold,
as a Prisoner of hope. I should very gladly understand more particularly, how
it is with you in this troublesome and sickly time; however, the Lord clear up
your interest, and grant you an open door; if called hence into his presence
with exceeding joy. I shall commit you to God, beseeching him to guide and use
you, and to preserve you blameless to his Kingdom.

I am yours most unfeignedly. T. T.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 4. l. 1. r. others. p. 6. l. 27. dele of them. p. 7. l. 25. r. about. p.
10. l. 24. for conversion r. conversation. p. 11. l. 24 for convenant r.
convert. p. 12. l. 25. for and r. and. p. 26. l. 21. for hoth r. has. p. 30.
l. 3. dele you know I have. p. 36. l. 20. r. related. p. 42. l. 15. after in
add understanding. p. 43. l. 6. for refuse r. refuge. p. 47. l. 28. after him
r. in. p. 52. l. 15. for some r. same.


