The Prisoner against the Prelate: OR, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE Common Goal AND
CATHEDRAL OF LINCOLN.

WHEREIN The true Faith and Church of Christ are briefly discovered and
vindicated, BY Authority of Scripture, Suffrages of Antiquity, Concessions and
Confessions of the Chief Opposers of the same Church and Faith.

Written by a Prisoner of the Baptized Churches in Lincolnshire.

O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the
stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely.

Cant. 2. 4. I sit as a Queen, and shall see no sorrow.

Rev. 18. 7. Prisoner. Prelate.

You look too much upon the Walls, etc. the Mountains, Caves and Prisons are
more sure places to me.

Bernard.

A PROBLEM demonstrated, AND Fixed to the ensuing Dialogue, instead of an
Epistle to the Reader.
The PROBLEM.
No Learned Englishman can modestly pretend to know the meaning of the Hebrew
and Greek Tongues (so far as they only concern the holy Scripture) any whit
more in substance or effect, than such us are Unlearned.

The Demonstration.
IS it not the usual refuge of many in our Age to fly to their (particular)
skill in the Hebrew and Greek Tongues, as a sufficient defense against such as
are not skilled in the literature thereof, when opposed about such things
touching Religion, as for which the English Text affords nothing? Yea, it is
even deemed enough to silence the Unlearned, when assaying to reason about
Religion, to tell them, They are unlearned, know not the Originals, understand
no Greek, etc.

Upon this occasion I have taken this their Plea into consideration, to see
whether it be of such weight as is commonly thought. And verily (to the utmost
of my understanding) it seems to have nothing of strength in it: for (to say
nothing of this vain boast of their knowledge of the Originals of holy
Scripture, when yet they never saw them, nor know where to look for them; I
say, to let this pass) if we consider diligently wherein the effectual and
substantial knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek Text of Scripture lies, we shall
find, that (as touching Englishmen) it lies not in the knowledge of the
Characters or Words of these Tongues (for this a Child of seven years old may
know) but that which is the effectual knowledge of the Hebrew or Greek Tongues
to an Englishman, is His knowing the true English of the Hebrew and Greek
Characters and Words: For example, these a. b. g.
Hebrew and Greek Letters avail an Englishman nothing so long as he can only
sound them in the Hebrew and Greek Dialects thus; Aleph, Beth, Gimel, etc. or,
Alpha, Beta, Gamma, etc. But that which is the effectual knowledge of these
Letters to an Englishman, is to know that they are of the same signification
with the English A. B. G. The like may be said of words; for so long as our
Englishmen can only sound the Hebrew word El, or the Greek word Theo, it
edifieth not the understanding, but when we know these words are the same in
signification with our English word [God] this is that understanding of the
Hebrew and Greek which to us is truly effectual: for whatsoever sounds our lips
pronounce, be they Hebrew, Greek or Latin, our understanding receives these
several sounds in the English tongue.

This being evident, it now remains to be considered whether it be not possible
(as things now stand) for such Englishmen as know not the Hebrew or Greek
Characters and Words, yet for all that to know the most proper and effectual
signification of the Hebrew and Greek Text of the Old and New Testaments.

That thus it may be, and is, will thus appear; Either the Translations which
we have, are the same in substance and effect with the Hebrew and Greek Bible,
or they are not. If they be the same, in substance and effect, Then such as
know the Scripture, as translated into English, do know the substance and
effect of the Hebrew and Greek Bible. Yea, further; If the learned Translators
(whether Cantabrigians and Oxonians, or else the Rhemists) themselves knew the
meaning of the Hebrew and Greek Text of the Bible, Then we who are unlearned do
know the same. This must needs be true; or else we must conclude, that they
knew the true meaning, and yet delivered a false: but this were a great
violation of Charity, to think that they would thus abuse themselves and the
whole race of Englishmen; or expose their Credit to everlasting contempt, and
themselves and followers to eternal destruction, and all this wilfully, and
only about the signification of Words and Letters, and not about the Doctrine
contained therein (for Translation and Exposition are two things:) But this (I
say) were a great breach of Charity to think, and must needs argue great pride
in any to affirm; and would certainly expose not only such particular
Learned-men, who so highly stand upon their Learning, but also whole
Conventions of them, to unavoidable suspicion, let them give forth never so
sincere a Translation; and the rather, because so many eminent for Learning and
Industry, have vigorously and unanimously pressed the Unlearned to adhere to
the English Text, as the undoubted Voice of God, speaking by his lively Oracles
the Scriptures. Now then, if our English-Translation be indeed the same in
substance and effect with the Hebrew and Greek Bibles, at least to the best of
the understanding of the Learned Translators; and that their understanding may
well be preferred before the understanding of any one learned Englishman now
living; Then it follows, that such as know the English-Text, do in substance
and effect know the Hebrew and Greek Text, at least so far as may equallize the
knowledge of any learned Englishman now living; Because that which the
Translators DID know, the same for substance We DO know; And that which they
attained to through much study, we know without either learning or study,
further than to hear or read the Text of Scripture in our Mother Tongue. For
the Translation which they gave forth was (by their own solemn protestation)
the utmost, for substance, of their knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek Text of
the Bible: But we have this their Translation, Therefore we have in substance
the same knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek Text of the Bible which the learned
Translators had.

This might be further illustrated by the consideration of diverse Arts, and
obscure Mysteries, which at the first were not found out without great learning
and travel; but when once a familiar discovery thereof was made, diverse have
been expert therein, and that without the help of that learning and study which
first brought them forth.

As thus; The Unlearned may defend themselves in the use of Holy Scriptures,
when concerned in any Controversy with the Learned about matters of Religion;
So also may they defend themselves in using the Works of Greek or Latin
Writers, so far as they are found to be translated into the English Tongue. And
this may also serve for an Apology for the Quotations alleged in the ensuing
Dialogue, whether from Scriptures or Ancient Writers.

If now it should be objected, That many words in holy Writ are left
untranslated; and that therefore we must needs depend upon the present Learned
for help in such cases, etc.

To this it may well be answered, That there are such Lexicons, Dictionaries
and Tables, long ago extant, and yet remaining, as may well suffice the
Unlearned for their attaining to the true etymology of all such words, at least
in such sort as may be thought equivolent with what the present Learned are
capable to accommodate us with.

Hence it may be perceived that the mode of diverse of our present Scholars
(under what form of Religion soever) in their contradicting of Translators and
Interpretors, which have communicated to us the holy Scriptures, or other
Authors, in the English Tongue, is so far from forcing the Unlearned to a
necessary reliance upon them in these cases, that in truth it will rather
enforce them to a necessary disclaiming them, as not much regarding what they
either say or write. For if we have been deceived by all that have formerly
pretended to serve their Generations in these weighty and eternal
Soul-concerns, We shall have small ground of encouragement to believe that we
shall be ingeniously dealt with, by such men, as (to the intent they may bring
us under their devised fables and antiscriptural Traditions) do run that
desperate adventure to traduce the Scriptures as falsely translated.

For that diversity which may seem to be among our English Editions of Holy
Scripture (which perhaps may thrust it self in Objection-wise in this place)
Augustine Aug. De Civ. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 43, 44.
has said well, who advises the Reader, not to leave the signification of the
History for the circumstance of a word, nor to condemn either of the
Authorities.

From the premises I will conclude with the words of the Problem; No Learned
Englishman can with modesty pretend to know the meaning of the Hebrew and
Greek Tongues (so far as they only concern the Holy Scriptures) any whit more
in substance or effect than such as are unlearned.

Tho. Grantham.

The Authors Expostulation with himself, and his Appeal to God about the
Publication of the Ensuing POEMS.
LOrd, have I any other end in what
My purpose is at present to relate,
Than to advance thy Truth, thy Name and Praise,
In these so much divided, dismal days?
If so, thou know how much I have desired,
These lines ere they came forth, may have expired;
So as to have found their end, before they had
Their full beginnings in these Poems made.
Or is it for vain fleshly ostentation
That I appear against the prevarication
Of these our days? Then let my hand forget
Her cunning, once a Pen to draw or set
On Paper; yea Lord, let my Tongue also;
Forget to speak that any it may know,
Till of such evils I convinced be,
And own my faults to all, but more to thee.
For what can it avail the Sons of Men,
To seek applause (by using thus their Pen)
From mortal flesh, if thou Lord, the erst while,
Upon them and their doings do not smile?
But worm that I am, wherefore do I name,
On this account, men's praises, or their fame
(As they are such) to be to me extended,
For this my work where at they will be offended.
Partly because no Learning therein shines,
Partly for that these Poems undermineth.
Those things which they do much more estimate,
Than what I here to them communicate.
Well then, my Muse, look for no commendation,
For this thy work, from this crook'd Generation.
They are prepared for those things to requite thee,
As did that Troop which lately came to fright thee.
When they, without producing any power,
Bereaved thee of thy Fam'ly in an hour;
And dragged thee up and down from place to place,
Till in the Goal a period took thy race.
Lord since it is thus, advise me what to do;
Shall I speak now? or will thou thereunto
Appoint some other; if but so it pleases,
Thy self, it is that thy servant greatly eases.
But, O my God, the have taught me this to know
That thou on me did not in vain bestow
Any good gift, so, but to thee I must,
Give an account thereof, for thou art just.
But yet the have many, which have spoke and cried,
Against those errors which are fortified
With many School-shifts, and with Martial strength,
Whereby their life has had so large a length,
As that through many Ages they have run,
Though some from thee, to blame them did not shun;
So that, may not I silent sit as well,
As now approach to publish or to tell,
What has been told by others, and is known
Much more to many, than can here be shown;
If that which those have done may free me from,
The exercise of thy free donation,
I could be well content; but in this Meeter,
I call to mind the word once spoke to Peter,
When Christ to him a service did assign,
He strait looked back on John, that great Divine.
With expectation he should him excuse,
In part of that charge. But stay here my Muse,
Thou must not equalize thy case with theirs,
Yet thou must faithful be in Christ's affairs.
Though you are the Least, yet may make thy abode
Amongst those in England that dare speak for God.
But O the times, are they not perilous
To publish Truth in? mind how quarellous
Is this poor Age against such, as would tear
The hood of blind Devotion from their Ear
And Eye, that so the Ancient Gospel-pathes
Might extirpate our fears, our jarrs, our wraths.
But oh! speak of this matter, and Sedition
Is charged upon us, or a deep suspicion
We must lie under; as, if to the Peace,
Some danger by our freedom would increase:
Yea, and our words such heavy things betoken,
As if within our Land they once be spoken,
It Is strait supposed they cannot well be born,
But England will by the weight thereof be torn.
So thought the High Priest once of Amos words,
And cried, Amos conspired has by swords;
And so commands the Prophet for his Life
To fly, and so avoid the dismal strife
Which Truth occasioned. Thus be it noted,
That always Truth with Treason has been spotted.
(I mean by way of calumny) that so
Truths friends might find Authority their foe.
And by this means (alas) what floods of Lives
Have been destroyed? and yet blessed Truth survives.
Yet here I must needs grant, that there has been
Too much of Tragical deportment seen
In some that have the Truth (pretendedly)
Embraced in its ancient purity.
Yea, I do heartily this day desire
That none that own Gods way may stir that fire
Of war or strife, Which by Gods Providence
From this our Land's but newly driven hence.
At least, I pray, if any have attempted
To stir up war, yet those may be exempted
From punishment, whose hearts are clear therefrom,
And let the guilty only bear their doom.
But O, my Lord, why am I busied here,
Thou know from war my heart and hands are clear.
And yet, O Lord, I pray thee, teach me fight
Courageously, that warfare which thy might
Only can manage, since it is war Divine;
And Lord, I thank thee, that thou do incline
My heart and hand thereto, and have assisted
My soul therein, since what time I was listed
Within thy Roll; and in this undertaking,
I pray thee ke^p my hand and mind from shaking.
That so the Truth, with comely boldness, I
May practice, preach, write, teach and testify.
For Lord, if Truth be Truth, and still the same,
In nature, worth and usefulness, then blame
Must be their Lot, who are right bold to speak it
In times of Peace, and afterward for sake it,
Because the times do turn. O God forbid,
That I should for such cause, let Truth lie hid
In fleshly fears. O God, how great would le
My shame, when I thy glorious face shall see
In that great Day, the Day of final Sentence,
When none their loss regain can by Repentance.
The thoughts whereof, O Lord, does give me boldness
To speak for Truth, though in a day of coldness;
Wherein the Wa^ers are not more congeald,
Than men's cold Zeal, has all thy Laws repealed.
For what do they less than repeal thy Law,
Who of poor mortal flesh stand S O in awe,
As they will not act, nor speak one word for thee,
But as great men do give them liberty?
But Lord I speak of Truth, which all confess
To be more worth than all that men possess:
But thou Lord know, how doubtful in this day
It is become to find that blessed way
Of Truth: for though there is nothing more pretended,
Yet surely there is nothing less befriended.
What one man says is true, another man
Does say is false; yea, even such as can
Skill all the Sciences and Liberal Arts,
Are so divided into sects and parts,
That there is no end of their most hot Divisions;
Yea such the multitude of their Confusions,
As thou Lord know, cannot be lightly numbered,
And herewith Europe has been greatly cumber'd.
What then shall I poor dust now signify
In Truth's behalf? will any think that I
Have found this Pearl, or can assign the Field,
(Or Church) which does this precious Treasure yield?
Well, whether I have found that Church or no,
Let him that reads judge: But this I Will do,
I Will show the Church I Have found, even the Truth,
Which I have fallen in love with from my youth.
That so, if I be right, another may
By this means get some help into the way
Of blessed Truth: Or else if I be wrong, (throng)
Some one that is right, may break forth (through the
And she^ me that Old Way, where Rest and Peace
May be obtained, that my own ways may cease.
For is not this that which poor souls desire,
Where is the good Old Way? (others enquire)
Where Is blessed Sion? Mother of the Saints!
Yea, for a sight of her, some hearts now faints:
Yea thou, my soul, remember can the Days,
The Weeks, the Months, the Years, and dolful ways
Wherein thou Pilgrim-like, did mournful walk,
And in thy Solitudes, would often talk
With thy Creator, by Prayers, Vows, and Tears,
That if he would but free thee of thy fears,
(Which these crook'd ways did minister to thee)
And of his Sion once but make thee free,
To set thy feet upon that holy Hill,
Then would thou wholly yield up to his Will;
To be, to do, to suffer Gods good pleasure,
If he thereto would fill thee with his treasur^.
And now, my soul, what is it wherein thy Lord
Has failed of in making good his Word,
In setting thy bound feet free from the band
Of miry paths, and in his blessed Land,
(His dearest Church) has given thee a Station,
A dwelling place, in his beloved Nation?
Yea, thou a name, and a rememberance
Have there obtained, with an Inheritance
So rich, so full, so ample every way,
That what it is, no words can fully say.
Now then, my soul, see thou perform thy Vows,
Lest thy Engagements prove but empty Shows.
What Truth thou know, the same communicate,
That others may thereof participate.
Remember how the Labors of the Saints,
In former times, did much supply thy wants,
And so do still: yea, some the Seed-time knew,
And thou camst but to reap their Harvest true,
Yet thou a Seed-time, with respect to those,
That are to follow, must perhaps disclose.
Or at the least (my Muse) bring forth thy gains
Which thou achieved have by others pains:
That so the Sower, and the Reaper may,
Rejoice in mutual profiting that day;
Which shall in Praises to our Lord be spended,
And yet nor Day nor Praises shall be ended.
But now my Pen, stay here, and let us muse
Upon the subject which thou must peruse,
Use seriousness, for they are Divine things,
(For the most part) whereof thy Muse thus sings.
Gods precious Statutes are the chiefest Objects:
Implore his aid in handling so great Projects,
To clear his Laws, wherein men do abuse them,
And to declare how rightly they should use them.
Again, there is many things which thou here blam'st,
Speak of them seriously, when thou them nam'st;
For some do deem as highly of those doings,
As of the Apostles Precepts, Walks, or Goings;
Yea, some are ma^ked so, they think those ways
Had their beginning in the Apostles days;
(As Pedorantisme, and other things,
Which their procedure had from humane springs.)
And whereas thy most weighty subject is
About the Church, that heavenly place of Bliss,
Deal clearly in this point, for that indeed
In this one Question lies both Fruit and Seed.
Defend her in thy place, she will thee defend,
Yea God will him protect that is her Friend.
Dispute for Truth, then will the Truth approve thee:
See to thy charge, my Muse, it does behove thee.
Bear in thy mind the days wherein thy thought
Was no way's like to that which I am taught,
More by Tradition (humane) than by those
Instructions which the Scriptures do disclose.
This if thou do remember, it may serve
To lay thee low, and in thy self preserve,
A due respect to those that do not see,
The error of their way. But if there be
Any that do maliciously oppose,
The Truth, see thou give them the sharper blows.
Fear not my Muse, if Truth be on thy side,
(As he which fanned Babel, well has cried,
That Truth is strongest) by it thou will be
Made Victor unto all Eternity.
My Muse, since thou a Prisoner art this day,
Because thou can not walk in the Minsters way,
Now therefore go thee forth in form of Jayle,
To Dispute with the Minster do not fail.
If she sound Reason with the Truth produce,
I do conjure thee, make with her a Truce.
But if of these thou destitute do find her,
Then freely of her fallacies remind her:
And if she mind thee not, appeal to him
Whom she pretends to serve, and so come in
To Goal again, till Liberty from Heaven,
Thee further to confer with her be given.
An Introduction, showing the occasion of the Dialogue Ensuing.
UPon a time, I had in me a mo^ion,
To take some cognizance of that Devotion,
Which in Old Lincoln's great Cathederal
Is used in the way Prelatical;
Which, I confess, did outwardly appear
Right glorious, for to please both Eye and Ear.
But when I called to mind the greatest end,
Of Divine Worship, which is to amend
Man's pravity, by good edification,
I found that Worship, a mere desolation.
One thing to me prodigious did appear
Above the rest, 'twas two men which did wear,
Great Linen Coats, and one had on his back
A Red Cloth tied, as some men tie their Pack.
These did themselves divide from all the rest,
And walked Eastward, bowing down their breast
At certain places, and obedience yielded,
Unto a covered Board which there was builded,
Where on a Cushon each man kneeled down,
And when their Arms, on other two were thrown
They seemed to pray, having their eyes cast down
Upon two Printed Books: where having shown
Their skill in Reading, he on th'right hand rose,
And turning West, he did his Book unclose,
And therein read a Chapter, which Paul wrote
In th'second of the Corinths, which I quote 2 Cor. 3.

The rather, for because, methinks it might
Have given these two Readers much more Light
Than to have worshipped Wood or Cloth utensels,
Or tied themselves in Prayers to what men's pensels
Had measured out. This read, some other things
They also read, and then a Black man brings
Them off their stage, bearing a silver Mace
Before these white men, to their former place.
Now when these Obsequies and Postulations
Were finished, then many made Orations
Around the Quire: but what was said or sung,
If I should say I know, I should but wrong
My self and them; for there was such confusion
Of Voices, that were Truth, or were Delusion;
Nor hurt nor profit, did thereof ensue
To me, since what they said I no whit knew,
Yet these strange sights do cause me still to wonder
Why Prelates do against the Papists thunder,
So much, because of Image-adoration:
For if that Wood or Stone, built in the fashion
Of Tables, may adored be by Saints,
What lets the same, when some like Men it prints
Especially, if Christ his form it bears,
As reverend as a Table it appears.
Now having these men's doings thus far viewed,
I left them all within their stalls impued.
And having heard that some in Prison lay,
Because they could not close with that fine way
of Worship, I therefore anon repaired
To see how these distressed persons fared;
And being come unto their lodging place,
I found the Prisoners, with erected face
To Heaven, with their knees prostrate before
The mighty God, whom they did there adore
With Prayer and Praises (which I understood)
And so far fervent, that I gained some good
By this Devotion; for my cogitations
Provoked were to heavenly meditations,
And Christian conference with those distressed,
About the end reserved for all the Blessed.
These things I thought upon when home returned,
And in the sense thereof I partly mourned,
And partly did rejoice; I also thought
How these things might into some form be brought,
For others and my own edification,
In Truth to stand, and to have Preservation,
Somewhat by this means, from the several snares,
Which do or may lie hid in Forms of Prayers.
And since the Prison and the Minster were
The places wherein I these Prayers did hear,
I therefore have the Conference compiled
Between these two. And now to be reviled
For this my work, it is my expectation,
From all such persons as in this our Nation
Are preresolv'd to follow Man's Invention:
But hap as'twill, that shall be no prevention
To me from speaking Truth, and more than that,
To speak, if I do know it, my soul does hate.
But now of time I Will make no more expense,
But let the Goal begin the Conference.
The CONFERENCE.
CHAP. I.
The Argument.
About Antiquity
The Jayle does first Dispute,
The Minster makes Repply;
The Jayle does her Confute.
Jayle. I Greet thee well thou great Cathederal,
Now shining in thy Form Prelatical,
Whilst others lie within my Cells, because
They cannot conform to thy Prelatick Laws;
Whose case yet seems just and good to me,
Although, it is true, they do dissent from thee.

Cathedral. Is this a Jayle-like-greeting? what is the cause
Thou thus declin'st thy work, to take a pause
About Religion? and I further strange,
To hear the Jayle once intimate a Change
'Twixt her and me, who wont with one consent
All talk that is too religious to prevent.

Jayle. It Is I, even I, thy old deluded Friend,
Which used to keep in hold whom thou did send,
Without a due inquiry of their c^use;
And now behold, such as do keep God's Laws
Thou have again committed unto me,
And let'st the breakers of his Law go free.

Cathederal. Fie, my Old Friend, It grieves me thus to hear
Thee side with those, who do against me bear
So great an opposition, that if they
Should freely speak, perhaps my glorious way
Might get a blot; now therefore I advise thee
Be gone, lest I for this attempt chastise thee.

Jayle. Persuade me not, for I Am concerned to know
The Truth from Falsehood, full as much as thou.
Now therefore give me leave with thee to reason
About Religion, whilst we have a season
Wherein to do it; for the day's at hand
We must give an account how here we stand.

Cathederal. Thou reason 'bout Religion! When did thou
Take thy degrees, the Liberal Arts to know?
Thou art profane, and I a Holy Place,
Nor can I with thee reason 'thout disgrace.
Since therefore thus I may my self abuse,
I think it best thy offer to refuse.

Jayle. Religion is not tied to Humane Learning,
For this is plain to all men of discerning,
That God has chose the foolish, and the poor
Of this world, rich in Faith. Yea furthermore,
It seemed well-pleasing to the Lord, that Babes
Should see true Light, whilst th'wise lie in dark shades.

Cathederal. It Is true the Scripture speaks of such a thing,
When first the Gospel Light began to spring,
But since that time it is said, th'unlearned do
The Scriptures wrest unto their overthrow:
And this (O Jayle) is like to be thy fate,
Unless thou keep thee to thy former state.

Jayle. Th'unlearned and th'unstable ones, which do
The Scriptures wrest unto their overthrow,
Are Learned Jews, and famous Athens Scholars,
And not the poor, who are our Saviors followers.
Th'first Churches were unlearned, yet had skiil
In holy Writ, to know Gods holy Will.

Cathederal. My other reason may suffice (though this
Should fail) the Disputation to dismiss:
Defile not then my place by thy intrusion,
Nor think thou here to vent thy new Delusion:
for each must know their place and keep the same
Or else receive their due deserved blame.

Jayle. I do presume no holiness can be
A good pretense this Conference to flee,
Nor yet can I thy place more holy deem,
Than other places, this, though strange it seem,
I can prove true, for in the Gospel day,
Distinctions of this kind are done away.

Cathederal. It seems then I no holier am then thou
In thy conceit, but Scripture does us show,
There Is holy ground, as well as ground profane,
Place where God will be worshipped, and again
Place where he will no Sacrifice accept,
But th'Off'rer and th'Oblation both reject.

Jayle. The Scripture shows that such esteem there WAS
Of Place, but shows that such esteem should pass
Away from Christians; wherefore, I say,
Thy Ground or Place no holier is this day,
Than other places; wherefore every where
Men may with holy hearts in prayer appear.

Cathederal. My Place must needs be holy; for this cause
It builded was, therein to teach Gods Laws.
It consecrated was also by those
Whom God to minister his Word there chose,
So was not every place: then thou do ill,
Thus to compare thy Place with this my Hill.

Jayle. Were all this proved (which thou never can)
Yet mine is as holy, seeing such a man
As Christ, has sanctified each place so far
As therein he will accept of holy Prayer.
And Paul in the Jayle; at Midnight sang an Hymn,
Such as few singers ever sang in thine.

Cathederal. Well, I perceive, I must with thee engage
In a Religious contest, ere this Age
Does terminate: Then let us now propose
The Point to be Disputed, and then close
In Argument. The Question then shall he
About the Church, Whether't be Me or Th^e?

Jayle. No Question like to this, the Church once found,
Will for our finding all Truth, prove a Ground
So clear, that we no Truth shall need to know,
But she will strait be ready it to show.
Then fit thy self thy Church for to maintain,
For that is the thing I question (to be plain.)

Cathederal. Do question that? then that will I defend
Against thy Opposition: Now descend
To some particularities, that we
The reason of thy doubt may fully see,
And fairly Answer. Then let us see the ground
Thou have to prove thy Church and Doctrine sound?)

Jayle. Well then, the first place where I shall detect thee
For no true Church (now let who can protect thee) First Argum. from Antiquity.

Is thy Minority, or want of Age,
To be esteemed for that Matron sage,
Espoused to Christ 'bove sixteen hundred years
Ago, whilst thou as yesterday appears.

Cathederal. Blis me! Did ever any creature know
A Jayl that had a more unshamefac'd brow,
Than thou in this? What, do not I well know ye
To be of Leidens breed, of Munster, trow ye?
For shame leave talking of Antiquity,
Thou art in no respect so old as I.

Jayle. Alas I see thou know me not in the least See the London Apology,
Printed in the Year, 1648.

Whilst thou deriv'st my line from that mad beast
Of Munster, against whose pranks I did protest,
Even in those days as Cassander has pressed
Me forth in Print, and since he does acquit me.
Thy Callumny in this case cannot hit me.

Cathederal. What? wilt deny thy Father? do not each
My Pulpits sound thee forth when there I preach,
For such an Upstart? Yea, my Doctors all
There show thy Radix, this their Volumns shall
Attest, yea th'Papists, whom thou say acquit thee
Say Munster, as thy Patriarch, befits thee.

Jayle. Thy Doctors and the Papists sometimes say,
I am no older than that Germans fray,
Yet otherwhile they both confess I came,
Down from th'Apostls times; now then for shame
Insist not on their witness, which appears
In its Concordance, like two Dogs by the ears.

Cathederal. Sure thou do wrong both Papists and my Men,
Beware how thou do thus employ thy Pen;
For if thou show not from sufficient ground,
Where they themselves, in this case thus confound,
I will requite thee as a false accuser,
And of these reverend Clerks a great abuser.

Jayle. First, Willet, in's Synopsis Papismi,
Opposing Papists 'bout Antiquity,
Observes that Bernard names some Sectaries
(Who Pedobaptisme did much despise)
They Are called Apostolicks, because it is thought
From th'Postles times these Sectaries came out.

Cathederal. I find that Willet speaks to this effect,
But those bore not the name of thy proud Sect:
Men may deny to baptize Infants, so
They may deny Believers Baptism too;
So then, this Instance thee no way assists
Unless these men were proved Anabaptists.

Jayle. The Papists in their Book of Motives, say,
Th'Apostolicks were such as at this day,
Are called Anabaptists, yea, that name,
They do expressly give them; and the same,
Thy old Friend Marbeck gives to some in Rome,
In Anno Dom. One hundred fifty one.

Cathedral. I read these Books, and must confess I find
These things are so* What then? Thou art behind
Some which do boast of their Antiq^ity
From such like proves, to wit, the Papacy.
But yet all this cannot evince the truth
Of their Church State, nor yet of thine, forfooth.

Jayle. If I no better Plea in this respect,
Can show, than th'Papists, thou shall me reject,
As one that is noval; but at present I
Am not engaged for my Antiquity:
It Is thou, O Minster, which must now engage
To prove thy self Christ's Church in point of age.

Cathederal. Come on: I reason thus from Featly's mouth, Featly, against Fisher.

That Church is of full age, whose Doctrine's Truth,
Perpetual, unchanged; and I say,
Such is my Doctrine; wherefore now I may
Conclude with him, that thus my Church is true.
Thy Answer now bring forth to open view.

Jayle. I do deny thy Minor, and I say,
Thy Doctrine, which gives entrance to thy way
Of Church-ship, is not true, nor yet so old,
As in the Scriptures to be found enrol'd.
For thou without Christ's Soul-converting Word,
Thy Church with carnal members have bestor'd.

Cathederal. It Is true, my Members now are wholly such,
When I receive them, as no word can touch
In order to Conversion, yet I say,
The holy Scripture will evince my way.
Was not our Father Abra'm and his Seed
Brought into one Church State? search now and read.

Jayle. I search, and find, That unto every Nation,
To every Creature, good news of Salvation:
For Faith and for Repentance must be taught,
Before into Christ's Church they can be brought;
Contrary-wise, it is clear, that Abr'ams Seed,
Had no such Obligation, that we read.

Cathederal. The Parents do believe, and so the Child;
For Abra'ms Seed in Holy Writ are styled
Gods Covenant, which Abram, is the same
That Is made with us; now therefore here again
See how thou err'st, making Parental-Faith
So needful to let in to th'Churches Path.

Jayle. The Scripture shows most plain, that Abrams Seed
In Gospel Times, are such as own his Creed.
Also the Scriptures quite dissolve that Plea, Mat. 3.

Of Parent-interest in a Gospel-day.
The Jews are Abrams Seed, and yet it is plain,
That makes them not in's Covenant remain.

Cathederal. I tell thee, Christian-Infants are as free
To Gospel-Priviledges, as we see
The Children of the Jews were in their time
To Legal Rites; thus does my Doctrine shine
And is most Ancient, being not denied
Till such as thou opposed it in your pride.

Jayle. I know thy Conscience tells thee, there is need See the Vulgar
Catechism in the Common Prayer Book.

Of FAITH, to give admittance to the Seed
Of Christians unto Gospel-Sacraments;
For, of thy Doctrine, these are the Contents,
That Faith and true Repentance are expected
Of all, ere they to Bapti'm are elected.

Cathederal. It Is true, I say, Faith and Repentance are
Required of All, as needful to prepare
Them unto Baptism; but then you know,
Since Infants cannot do this, I allow
Them Sureties, who for them do then Believe,
And eke Repent, before I them receive.

Jayle. Well, now you grant Repentance joined with Faith,
Must be before any Admittance has
Into the Church. TO THIS I DO AGREE:
So that the Difference 'twixt th^e and me
Is this; thou cal'st Grown Persons to Repent,
And then Baptisest a poor Viz. A Sucking-Child.
Innocent.

Cathederal. Though this I hold, it is not a Noval thing:
For proof of this Authorities I Will bring
From Ancient times, which are irrefragable,
At least they are such, as thou can not disable.
The Wisdom of the Church did Infants give
This Privilege, that they for aye might live.

Jayle. This Doctrine is too new to be esteemed,
True or Perpetual, though by you deemed
Of such great worth; Reduce this false account,
For it to more than naught, will never amount.
O Rotten Church, not now one member's known
When he is Unchurch'd to have Faith of his own.

Cathederal. Thou lay'st so great a stress on this one Point,
As if 'twould prove each member out of Joint:
What must my Doctrine stand or fall, as here
I Vanquished or Victor do appear?
Sure though this ground I yield, I never shall
To ruin in my Church or Doctrine fall.

Jayle. Well, yield this ground, and then thou have no faith
When thou art enchurched so, thou may be grath.
Thou art foundationsess, therefore must fall:
For what is another Faith? a rotten Wall
For thee to lean upon; wherefore I say,
This false Prop gone, thy Church soon fades away.

Cathederal. That Doctrine which I preach for a Foundation,
Is Christ as Crucified for man's Salvation,
There is no Name nor Thing, whereon I found
My Church, save this, wherefore my Root issound.
It Is neither Baptism, nor yet Sureties,
Which a Foundation-place for me supplies.

Jayle. Alas! what is all this Talk, if without Faith?
Which I have showed, none of thy Members has
At their Admission, nor for many Years,
The least lota of true Faith appears?
This is thy State, O Minster, at the best,
Another not thy own Faith which thou have.

Cathederal. I told thee, I can prove what here I hold,
To be the same the Church received of old,
As that is my Task; and were my Study here,
I Would show this Custom, 'bove One thousand year
The Church has used, wherefore it is no new
Devised Fable, but a Point most true.

Jayle. No Study can accommodate thee so,
As to prove Sponsers Faith, the Means which do
Give any entrance (in a Scripture way)
Into Christ's Church, wherefore I boldly say,
It Is a mere Novalty, and did arise
When darkness came by means of Heresies.

Cathederal. I see thou standst upon Antiquity,
Only as Scripture does it amplify;
From whence, I must confess an Evidence,
Cannot, in terminis, be fetched thence.
But let us hear, what further thou can say,
Against the use of Sponsers Faith, this day.

Jayle. I note this further (as a consequence)
Of what thou'st said, me thinks it follows thence
That Infants must sit down at Christ his Table,
If others Faith to Baptism them enable.
For can the Church in this their wants supply,
And not in that? This sounds monstrously.

Cathederal. The Case is not alike; for God requires,
A Self-examination, and desires
Men should the Body of our Lord discern,
When they approach that holy Rite to learn,
That so they may not drink their Condemnation
In that which is ordained for Consolation.

Jayle. It Is true, God call for this, then pray thee why,
Can thou not learn, these Reasons to apply
To holy Baptism, in which our Lord
More Frequently requires Faith in his Word,
With true Repentance; thus these Cases are
Alike made manifest, and so appear.

Cathederal. The Churches Judgment does the one allow,
And not the other, unto Infants. Now
Either the Church or thou, O Jayle, must be
Deceived: but can thou more clearly see,
Than she, who has the eye of Learning bright?
Sure no; then cease against the Church to fight.

Jayle. How like to Rome is this thy Argument?
Do thou not know, that this same Sacrament
Was also given to Infants, in Old time?
Sure there is as plain a ground for this, as thine
Alleag'd for Infant Baptism; hence it is clear,
As the one, so the other thou should quite forbear.

Cathederal. I know that Rome this Argument does bring
To force us, when the Text says no such thing;
And sure the Churches Judgment will outweigh
The private Judgment of such as inveigh
Against her doings, and I Will hold me here,
Until a means of greater strength appear.

Jayle. Admit the Sentence of the Church be great,
In things most doubtful; yet I must entreat
Thee not to use it, till thou'st proved plain,
Thy self to be that Church. Yet here again
I needs must tell thee, That the Doctors all,
Engaged against Rome, about thine ears do fall.

Cathederal. Some of my Doctors sang a Strain too high,
When in this Point engaged against Popery.
I likewise grant before this Plea be mine,
I must, as a true Church, conspicuous shine.
Which I shall do ere this Discourse have end;
Then to the next Objection let us descend.

CHAP. II.
The Arg.
Against Nations by the Lump,
For Churches being made
The Jayle Disputes; the Minster strives
T'uphold that golden Trade.
Jayle. MY next Objection, O Cathederal,
Is this. Christ has no Church that is National:
But National thy Church is known to be,
Ergo, Not Christ's Church, but a Pedigree
Of Persons, yet unfit for Church Communion,
Though thou with them, and they with thee have Union.)

Cathederal. Fond Jayle, did never read what David said,
In Psalm the second, were description's made
Of Christ his Church, to have her propagation,
Amongst the Gentiles, to their utmost Nations:
And when the Kingdom was taken from the Jews,
'Twas given unto a Nation, Scripture shows.

Jayle. Peter does well expound the second Psalm,
In Acts the tenth, when sent with Gospel-Balm
Unto Cesaria, where Gods acceptance,
Extends to such, as fear him in each Nation. Acts 10. 36, 37.

In Peter's time, no Church was National,
Yet, Holy Nation, Peter does her call.

Cathederal. So then, it seems the Church is National
But by a Figure Metaphorical,
Consisting but of such, as jointly hold
A Union in those Laws, which are enrol'd
In Divine Writ, as touching Church Affairs;
I like not this, for it my Pomp impairs.

Jayle. Christ says, The Gospel would Divisions cause,
Such as were not occasioned by the Laws
Of Moses; for, in Families there should,
Two this, three that; three this, and two that hold.
But if Christ's Church for Constitution be,
Like Moses Church, what need they disagree.

Cathederal. It seems my Union thou approvest not,
This savours of Sedition, or some Plot.
The Land shall never quiet be, untel
Rulers, by their Edicts, all sorts compel
To Uniformity, in things Religious;
And therefore thy Opinion is Prodigious.

Jayl. Rulers, by Edicts, Uniformity
May well require in things transitory:
But Rulers, as they are such, in things divine
Ought not t'compel men in the Gospel-time.
Rulers may miss the Truth, which if they do,
Destruction unto their Commands is due.

Cathedral. Until the Rulers did by force compel
All to the Church which under them did dwell,
The Church was thin, and maintenance was scant,
But since they nourish't her she feels no want.
Her Honor's great, her Members like the sands,
As well in this as many other Lands.

Jayl. I do confess of Christians nominal
The world abounds by th'Church that is National;
But it is most plain thy Church no semblance has
With those that walked in The Apostles path;
Whose Honor lay not in the outward State,
But with true Grace their Souls were eonsolate.

Cathedral. Come, tell not me of The Apostles days; for then
Christ's Church was small, and of the meanest men:
But when the Nobler sort possession took
Of Christianity, the Church forsook
Her subterranean places, and her Head
Did lift up, as one risen from the dead.

Jayl. The Churches outward glory does not prove
That she from death to life does nearer move,
But may as soon portend her Vacuation
Of Grace, as John hints in his Revelation. Rev. 3. 17

And for the Nobler sort, it seems this day
They Are too great strangers to the Gospel-way.

Cathedral. How can thou say this? do not daily see,
With one consent they do resort to me?
Yea, they unto the Church are so united,
As that with none like her they are delighted;
And by their strength the Church is now protected
And her Opposers unto her subjected.

Jayl. The Church does not subject by worldly powers 2. Cor. 5. 19, 20.

Her Opposites. Nor is this plea of yours
A better plea for you than it is for Rome,
To whom the Nobler sort more freely come:
Yea, Nations, Kinreds, Peoples, to the Whore Rev. 18. 3

Of Babylon resort, her to adore.

Cathedral. The Prophets do presage that Nations shall
Flow to the Church, and bring their Glory all
Into the Church, the New-Jerusalem.
And this my Doctors do expound of them,
Who now by Kingly Power their Subjects bring
Into my Church, my divine songs to sing.

Jayl. Thou know right well the Papists do the same,
Their present pomp and glory to maintain:
But you are both deceived, for it is clear,
Before that blessed joyful day appear,
The Jews (a People chiefly there concerned)
In Can'ans Land must once more be confirmed.

Cathedral. If this be true, I must confess I h've erred,
When to my present state I have referred
These Prophecies: But thus much I perceive,
A State that is National thou do believe
The Church may yet enjoy, although it be
When Israel their desired Land shall see.

Jayl. This weighty case I will not undertake
Here to dispute; but this is what I spoke:
I say, the Prophets mainly have an eye
In these Presages, to the Jews. Then why
Should thou imagine this thy present glory
To be the subject of the Prophets story.

Cathedral. Well, we will leave unto consideration
What has been said of that Prophetic Nation,
Wherein the Jews (I must acknowledge here)
Are often mentioned, as may appear
By reading of the places. Now let us see
What thou have further, which must answered be.

Jayl. Thy bringing Nations by the lump into
The Name of Christian Churches, plainly do
Destroy the use of Preaching, to convert
The sons of men; and makes their carnal heart
Believe they are Christians from the womb, and so
Their souls deceive, unto their overthrow.

Cathedral. What though by preaching I do not convert
My Members, yet I have another Art
Them to renew; for this my Book does say,
When any I receive into my way,
They are regenerate, and born anew:
See therefore how thy charge is found untrue.

Jayl. I know thy Book does say it, but it is not true:
For Christ's Book tells us, all that is born anew
Are like the Wind, which in such sort does blow J^h. 3. 8.

As others by their hearing it may know.
Again, it is said, the World they overcome.
Of all which signs thy Converts can show none.

Cathedral. I grant where true Conversion is, there is ceasing
From fleshly sins; There Is likewise some increasing
In holy life: And truly in these cases
My Infant Converts claim no real places
Amongst Scripture Converts: But (I say) unless
They Converts be, they have no Blessedness.

Jayl. God does not gather where he has not strewed*
But from the Word it never can be showed
Where Infants are required to convert;
Nor yet can thou, with thy most subtle Art,
Discov'ry make 'twixt Infants eight days old,
To say, This is renewed, That under sin is sold.

Cathedral. I must confess such a discovery
Does pass my art: for Babes in Infancy
Do not demonstrate whereby we may know
Which have the Spirit, or whether or no
Any whom I baptize have yet received it;
But as I have been taught I have believed it.

Jayl. Thou said (even now) Infants no Blessedness
Can have, unless they converts be. To this
I answer; As old Adams sin involves them
('Thout their consent) in death, So Christ absolve^ them
('Thout their concurrence) for Paul does profess
The Grace by Christ exceeds Adams loss.

Cathedral. So then this is thy judgment, I perceive,
That look how Adam Infants did bereave
('Thout their committing sin) of happiness;
So Christ ('thout their obedience) shall them bless*
I hold the contrary to this: but now
Some other Argument I pray thee show.

CHAP. III.
The Arg.
The Minister Papal Rome disclaims;
The Jayle from thence does show
Her own Prelatick state she mains,
If not unchurch her too.
Jayl. IN this great Question, Where the Church must be
It may do well thy radix for to see.
The more I look, the more I see thee come
In thy Church State but from great Papal Rome.
From whence I argue, If Rome have no Church,
Then thou will scarce be found to have a Porch.

Cathedral. Presumptuous Jayl! my Chronicles do show
I cast off Rome, and all her Popish crew;
Yea, of their Bones a fire I have made:
And she sometimes with same coin has me paid.
Which clearly shows I have her quite disserted,
As an old Harlot, from all Truth diverted.

Jayl. Thou cast off Rome thou say, but thou have neither
Baptism nor Church Power, but what either
Thou brought from thence; this Rome thee boldly tells
And thou can find no answer which refels
This their Objection. So it is evident,
Unless Rome be a Church, thy Church is spent.

Cathedral. What though their Baptism I do valid deem?
What though their Ordination I esteem?
Must it needs follow Rome is Christ his Spouse,
Or else the title of Christ's Church I loose?
This is Jayl-Logick, and to Jayl must go,
Or else the reason I Am resolved to know.

Jayl. It follows clearly, and I marvel why
Any wiseman can Rome the name deny
Of Church; if they true Baptism and Power,
In Church-concerns, retain unto this hour.
If these Essentials be truly there,
For lesser faults it is hard the Church to tear.

Cathedral. O but she is full of faults, and those most great,
For by unwritten things she does defeat
Poor souls of Gods most holy Ordinances,
Which Saints have counted rich Inheritances.
My Doctors show how much I do detect her
Of this Abuse, and therefore do reject her.

Jayle. Unwritten things! Thou can not without shame
Blame her in this, because thou do the same.
For where is thy Common Pray'r-Book or thy Crossings
Found in the Scripture, more than Popish-Massings?
Were not thy Organ Pipes and Antic Dressings
Found in one Chapter, with the Popes Confessings?

Cathederal. Well, but they worship Images, which I
Reject, as being gross Idolatry:
Indeed it is unsufferable folly
For men to count a carved Post for holy,
And then to bow before what their own hands
Have made, contrary to our Lords Commands.

Jayle. Alas, you are every whit as far amiss,
For I have seen thee do as much as this:
What means thy frequent bowing to that Board
In this thy Quire? How can thou think our Lord
Will 'low thee this, and not allow them that?
Since all is but Wood, by you set up in State.

Cathederal. It Is true, I bow to The Altar, but what tho?
I do not worship it, as these men do
Their graven Images; for it is most plain
They Idolize: But as for me, I feign
No holiness inherent for to be
In The Altar, when to it I bow my knee.

Jayle. This is the Papists Plea for what they do Certam. Relig.

In Image Worship; yea, they tell thee so
In express words, accursing every one
Which worship Images of Wood or Stone.
Now therefore if this Plea for thee will serve,
'T will Image Worship full as well preserve.

Cathederal. I wish thou be no Papist all this while,
Thy disputation savours of their Style;
Nor need I doubt, but Rome has her Consorts
With thee; who in a hidden way deports
Themselves, that so they may advantage take,
My Church and all her holy things to shake.

Jayle. Mistake not Minster, I no Papist am,
I only show what thou must say, and can
No^ choose but say (till thou be better grounded)
That when thou call'st Rome Whore, thou art confounded
With her; because in truth she is thy Mother:
She tells thee so, and thou can show no other.

Cathederal. All this thou speak, because I was baptized
By the Roman Church, and also emolliz'd
Or formed into a Church, and there Ordained
By Babylonish Priests, with whordoms stained;
This I must grant. We likewise had from thence
The Scriptures; yet thou can with them dispense.

Jayle. The latter will not prove the former sound,
For though a Jew or Turk the Book had found,
And so from them I should receive the same,
Yet hence no man could argue (without shame)
That now if by the Jew or Turk we be
Ordained Bishops, it must satisfy.

Cathederal. Well, if it be so that th'VVhore of Babylon
Can give no Baptism, then I have none:
Or if she could no Bishops well Ordain,
I must confess my calling will prove vain.
But yet I Will hold me where I am, till thou
A way more clear than this my way can show.

Jayle. Who ere they be gives others holy Orders,
Must needs be such as are within the borders
Of holy Church; now since thou do exclude
Rome from the Church, to thee she is not endu'd
With power Ordinative. But the way
Of Ordination, I Will anon display.

CHAP. IV.
The Arg.
The Jayle the Minster does detect,
As unbaptiz'd and vain.
The Minster does the Charge reject;
The Jayle does it maintain.
Jayle. BEcause six Lines no Preface will allow,
My next Objection presently I Will show,
Which on an Ancient Maxim I will ground;
No BAPTISM No CHURCH can well be found.
Wherefore the Point for thee to Answer shall
Be this, Thou have no Baptism at all.

Cathederal. Prodigious Jayl! where got'st thou this Objection?
It Is some Anabaptistical infection.
But since thou ha^t my Christendom denied;
First I Will appeal to Rome, there to be tried,
From whom my Infant-sprinkling I received,
Which to be Baptism is now believed.

Jayle. It Is well confessed, and lo, what shall I think?
How can thou now refuse with Rome to drink
Their Transubstantiated Cup, since thou
Thy Babyes-Sprinkling from Rome must avow?
But let Rome judge and she will tell thee plain;
No Scripture owns thy Sprinkling, so it is vain.

Cathederal. Rome does indeed tell thee and all men so;
But she had be^ter have said nothing tho.
But as for me, I Scriptures can produce
Which show Infant-Bapti'm The Apostles use.
I other proves from Circumcision draw,
To prove the point in hand a divine Law.

Jayle. If Circumcision be thy President, Bell. de Bapt. S. N. Antidote. T. B.
End to Controv.

The Papists say, Baptism has no extent
To Femals; for the Law only assigns
For Circumcisions subjects Masculines.
And for thy other Texts it is a vain crack,
The Learned Papists say, such Texts you lack.

Cathederal. What? art thou turned Papist, that thou do Mat 28. 19.

Of their Confessions in this case so boast?
But see my Texts; Matthew the twenty eight, Acts 16. Act. 2. 38, 39.

With Acts the second, gives apparent light
For Infant Baptism. So the sixteenth 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Of the Acts; and seventh of the first Corinth.

Jayle. Teaching precedes Baptizing, Matthew says;
Both Texts in the Acts the same in substance has.
(That Text in Corinths speaks not of Baptizing)
So then since Infants are of Catechizing
Incapable, these Texts teach no such thing
As that for which thou do them hither bring.

Cathederal. Infants are holy, Ergo they must be
Baptized in the name of th'Trinity.
All Nations are enjoined to be baptized.
Herein whole Families were not despised.
Here Is ground enough to prove Infant Baptism,
And consequently to rebuke thy Schism.

Jayle. The unbelieving Husband's sanctified.
Thy Logic says, Baptism must be applied
To them. Yea They are part of every Nation;
Ergo must be Baptized, if thy fashon
O^ arguing be good: but this may show
How it is unsound, inconsequent, untrue.

Cathederal. Thou take no notice of the Families,
Which I observed The Apostles did Baptize.
This Allegation is unanswerable,
Ergo Infant Baptism stands here most stable.
I challenge thee, resolve this if thou can:
For it is not yet resolved by any man.

Jayle. The Texts are clear, the same that were Baptized,
Were first by Paul and Silas Catechized.
It Is said they did Believe in God also. Acts 16. 14, 15, -- 32, 23, 34 -- 40.

The Apostles for to visit them did go.
As they were Brethren: which things considered,
Thy boasting of thy proof from hence is withered.

Cathederal. Proud Jayle! how is it thou dare thus contemn
The Expositions of my Learned men?
Who with one voice these Texts do explicate,
My Pedobaptisme to vindicate.
Art thou grown wiser than my Doctors all?
It Is time that I thee to account should call.

Jayle. Thy Learned men! why I have more than thou,
Who do my sentence on these Texts allow,
To wit the Papacy, who do exceed
The number of thy Doctors, and can read
As well as thou. And now I further add,
Thou have no Baptism, for thy Manner's badd.

Cathederal. O I perceive my Sprinkling does offend thee,
And by thy Dipping thou assay'st to rend me.
But will thou know the Scripture does thee quash;
For BAPTIZO is taken there to wash.
The Pharisees did wash their Cups and Hands:
They did Baptize them, so in Greek it stands.

Jayle. Some drops of Water sprinkled on some part
Of Cups or hands alone, all washers art
Does scorn to call a washing: for except
The water wholly drench them, we'll suspect
They are not washed; so in those Texts is nothing
But what does bring thy Sprinkling into loathing.

Cathederal. The Arguments for both these points are known
Some by the Papists, some by me are shown.
And lately some by Calvin's offspring were
Brought into light; now therefore let me heat
Thee briefly touch each parties Argument,
In which Discourse to hear thee I Am content.

Jayle. I Am well content; And now to what is spoken
I Will here add something, as a further token
Of the unsoundness of Pedorantism,
As they maintain who are of Calvin's Schism.
Yet first I will endeavor to confute
The Papal Ple^; for they do much repute*
Infant Baptism to be such a Tradition,
As stands upon Apostolic Commission.
Most strange it is, to see how our three sorts
Of Clergymen three ways themselves deports,
For vindication of their Babish-washing:
FIRST Papists by Tradition come forth slashing
All down before them, in their own conceit.
NEXT comes the Prelate forth, us to defeat
With CIRCUMCISED Arguments, and those
Which from the 7th of Corinths never rose.
THEN comes the Presbyter, and he will maintain,
Infants Disciples are, and so remain,
Subjects for Baptism. But by and by
I hope to show their Plea's a fallacy.
But though the Papists boast of their Tradition
For Infant Baptism (that ground of Division)
To be Apostolically descended
From the first Age, and by the whole Church commended
To these our days. Yet diverse reasons may
Be rendered, which their falsehood does betray.
First this, The Apostles by Tradition would
Not null the way wherein Christ bad them build 1 Reason

His Church: but Infant-Baptization has
To D^solation brought that Ancient Path,
Almost in every Nation of Europe,
Chiefly where Kings are Subjects to the Pope.
Therefore this Popish way Traditional,
Is no Tradition Apostolical.
The second Reason may thus framed be: 2 Reason

No Writing of approved Authority,
In the first hundred, names Infant Baptism;
Therefore it is but an innovated Schism.
Yea, in the second hundred's latter end
It scarce was heard of; nor did it extend
To any large dimention; and beside,
Some Ancients the^ against it boldly cried,
As an unnecessary practice. Here
Tertullian my witness does appear.
I Will add to him the record which is given Tertul. chap. 39.

By Vives on Augustine, where it is driven
(Infant Baptism I mean) from all reception
In ancient times, see therefore his Collection,
As Englished by J. H. and many other.
Yea, see Augustine, where that Learned Brother
Does write to this effect. Now those whom we Augustine.

Into the Church by Baptism (says he)
Do give admittance, we the same do teach
To live so chaste, that none may them impeach
In Widowhood, or Marr' age honorable,
That they the Gospel fame do not disable.
Upon this sentence Vives says, Lest we Vives.

Should be deceived through its obscurity,
We ought to understand that None of old
Baptized were, till they could well unfold
What the Baptismal purgation did mean.
So then of Old Infants were quite and clean
Exempt from Baptism, in the opinion
Of Vives, whose words must have some dominion
With such as rest on Learned-mens persuasion,
As that is now become the most men's fashion.
The learned Grotins does the same aver, Grotius judgment on points controv. p.
91.

Saying, In ancient time for to defer
Baptism till ripe years, at liberty
Was left. Thus he with Truth does well comply,
Whilst our late learned men the Truth withstand,
To force all men to stoop to their Command,
Against truth of Scripture and Antiquity,
And so involves this Age in misery.
Add further, That which no man can gainfay,
That Jeroms, Nazienzen, and I may
Add Austin, Ambrose, and that Emperor See Den contra Marshal.

Called Theodosius, who though they were
Children of Christians, right much commended
For such as holy Church right well befriended,
Yet these their Children they did not baptize, See a book, called a well
grounded Treatise of Bapt.

Till they discretion had the same to prize:
Yea thirty years diverse of them attained
Ere Christ in Baptism was on them named.
And since Augustine is afirm'd to be
The ablest Doctor which Antiquity
Does name, I Will therefore show that he was rather August. Contess.

To Us than Papists a true ancient Father.
Unto which purpose see his own Confessions,
Where you may find in very plain expressions,
His pious Mother was right virtuous
In Christian Faith, and of Life courteous.
And how that he, being but a youth of years,
Did much desire in faith, with prayers and tears,
That he, as then, might forthwith be baptized;
But to defer the same he was advised.
Because the Church did fear lest sin should be
A hindrance to the life of Sanctity.
Yea, though at this time he was sick to death,
(As was supposed) yet he no Baptism has
Allowed him, but he was well restored,
And lived till thirty years, and then adored
The Name of CHRIST, in that his Ordinance
Of holy Baptism, And did advance
To perseverance in that great Profession
Of Christianity. Now who possession
Can claim so rightly of this boly Man
(For one of their Church) as the Baptists can?
The same I think I might well say of all
The ancient Fathers; so that here I shall
Desire any learned man to name
Some One that has attained to the fame
Of Ancient Father, for the first four Ages,
That was baptized an Infant; and his wages
Shall be my thanks. Till when I Will take it for true
There Is no man can me such a Father show.
Now these things weighed, gives clear demonstration
That Infant Baptism had no general station
Till more than half a thousand years revolved
From Christ. So this tradition is dissolved
From Apostolical repute; therefore
Let all true Christian locked out of their door.
What our late Prelates urge for its defense,
Confuted is above in the Conference.
And now let us hear what the Presbyter has said
In his late Catechise-Book, which was made
By well-nigh threescore of their choice Divines,
Who unto Baxter the first place assigns.
Their words at length I Will faithfully set down,
And then the weakness of them shall be shown.
Weakness, I say, as they pretend to show
Ground for Infant Baptism: for else they are true.
A Book, entitled, The Agreement of diverse Ministers in the County of
Worcester, etc. coming To my hands, being sent to a Friend of mine; The party
sending it, supposing it gave very clear evidence against the Anabaptists. I
therefore searched what it said in that respect; and found in their Answer to
the ninth Question the very thing which we hold in the point of Baptism,
clearly asse^ted and proved. The Question and Answer are verbatim as follows.

Question.

What are the public means which Christ has appointed to Salvation?

Answer.

Christ has appointed that fit men shall be ordained his Ministers to disciple
the uncalled, and to baptize all that are Disciples. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16.
15.

This is all they say in that Book concerning Baptism, nor quote they any other
Scriptures: whereupon I wrote is follows.

What! shall nigh fixty of wise learned men
(Yea of the prime) be contradicted, when,
After no small debate, they published
This Book, which seems with Zeal and Truth bespred?
Our Catechisers, grave and learned all,
How can a work by such performed fall?
Good Reader, bow thine heart to understand
What Is true, though it be from an unlearned hand.
The wisdom of the wise must come to naught;
For so it was foretold, and now is brought Isa. 29. 15 1 Cor. 1. 29, 26, 27,
28.

In part to pass; since thus much may be said,
Even of these men, they quite destroy the trade
Of their so much adored baptizing
Of Infants. Wherefore them this song I Will sing.
Our Catechisers must be catechized,
How and what persons ought to be baptized.
For here they lie in the dark, and will not see
What Is true, what is false, though by themselves it be
Made manifest, in this their little Book,
To every Reader, who does please to look
In page the one and thirtieth, where they say
Concerning Baptising, This is Christ's Way;
That such as are uncalled must first be taught.
Now Infants are uncalled, and therefore ought,
By their direction, not to be baptized,
And yet, as though all this had not sufficed;
They further tell us, All that are Disciples
Baptized must be into the sacred Titles
Of Father, Son, and Spirit. Then they cite
Matthew the eight and twenteth, which gives light;
With Mark the sixteenth, full to what they say,
And we say the same; and thus they cast away
Their Infant Baptism, since Infants can
Be no Disciples made by the wisest man,
That is amongst this Catalogue I mean,
Or else their skill is more than we have seen.
For since Disciple does import a Learner
By others teaching, he is a weak discerner
That takes newborn Infants for to be
Disciples; Thus we may man's folly see.

Cathederal. As for the Presbyters, let them maintain
Their plea. But for Tradition it is most plain
It stands with me. And tho thou have now shown
Some few who did thy way of Baptism own:
Thou do not prove that ever these men taught
Against Infant Baptism, yet this thou ought
To show; but this can in no wise be shown:
For it is most clear they did my Baptim own.

Jayl. Because I hate disingenuity,
I grant some Ancients did with thee comply.
But yet I say, th'most Ancient (if not all)
Such doctrine taught, as does in question call
Thy Infant Baptism. And some did so
Oppose it, that their lives they did forgo
In opposition to it, in our Nation,
When first upon our Land it made invasion.
But ere I come to speak of these sad days,
We'll cast our eye on some doctrinal rays
Of the Ancients, that the mist they may expel,
And clear our way. First Jerome in Mar 28
Jerome does us tell,
The Lord commanded first to teach, and then
Baptize such as appeared faithful men.
And Justin Mart. in Orat. ad Autho. pium.
Justin Martyr does the same avow.
And Ath^n. Sermon 3. contra Arian.
Athanasius does that truth allow.
Haim. in Mat 28
Haimo avoucheth this for verity.
And Rab. decret.
Rabinus the same does testify.
Beda in Act. 19
Beda is of this mind, and plainly says,
The Apostles did instruct men in the Faith
And then baptize them. So Strig. in Act. 8.
Strigelius
Did likewise teach. So did Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 6.
Eusebius.
Basil. l. 3. cont. Eunomi.
Basil and Aug. ad Salcot
Austin do this Doctrine own.
Cyp. Epist. ad Magnus. Fab. 5th part, f^l. 107.
Cyprian before them did the same make known;
With others, whom I now refuse to name,
Since these are persons of the greatest fame.
And now, O Minster, pray thee well observe
What strength I have from Records, which preserve
The memory of our Nations first reception
Of Gospel Light; see therefore this collection
Out of Fabian his right ancient story,
In the fifth part, where though he greatly glory
Of that great Monk, Augustine called by name,
Yet, unto his and thy no little shame,
He does confess that Brittons Bishops did
Refuse to baptize Infants, tho much chid
By that great Monk. Their reason was, they say,
Such things had not been taught them till that day.
Yet they the Gospel long before obeyed,
And in the love thereof were firm and stayed.
But now (alas) for this their just denial
Of Austins motion, they strait met with trial:
For Fabian relates how they were slain;
And Fox upon Augustine lays the blame, Fox Acts and Mon.

At least in part: and can assign no cause,
But that they did not bow to Austins Laws.
Now Minster, if we take the perfect time
When in this Land the Gospel first did shine,
Which was more than four hundred years before
Austin the Monk set foot upon our shore,
(During which time no persons were baptized,
That I can find, till they were catechized.)
Then it is most clear my Baptism thine out dates
Four hundred years, as Fabian relates,
In this our Island; and in other places,
Mine has the old footsteps, thine noval traces.
But why do I thy doing daign to name
Baptism! for in truth it is a shame
For to vouchsafe it such an appellation,
Only I use it, 'cause our disputation
Does so require. But Sprinkling never can
Suit with God's Word, delivered unto man
For his direction in that Ordinance
Of Baptizontes, since that clear instance
In John the third, and twenty third, has said,
The Reason why John Baptist used his trade
In Enon, was because of plenitude
Of Water, which does Sprinkling Clear exclude
From being Baptism. As also does
The act of Philip and the Eunuch both;
Since both went into the Water for to act
What Baptism requires in the outward fact.
Yea, Christ our Lord, who knew the Father's will,
Went Into Water, Baptism to fulfill.
Now whether Scripture, or thy Doctors be
The safest guide herein, I leave to thee.

Cathedral. Doubtless, O Jayl, in this bend of quotations
You Are guilty of no small falsifications.
I ask thee whether thou have read each Father,
Whose words in this sort thou have scratched together?
If not (as doubtless not) since you are unlearned,
O how presumptuous then art thou discerned!

Jayle. I answer freely; some I Have read, not all
The Works of these whose witness forth I call.
The most I Have read, even as they are translated,
By those to whom thy self art 'sociated:
Which therefore must more claim thy estimation,
Than if they were the fruit of my translation.

Cathederal. Whereas my Sprinkling thou so ill do brook,
Thou may remember, if thou please to look.
Into my Common Prayer Book, I allow See vulg. Catechize in Com. p^ayer-book.

That way in case of weakness. But I show,
In the same place, that dipping is God's way
For Baptism to be performed this day.

Jayle. I do confess thou say so; but, behold,
When thou presumed for to be so bold
To give an inch, thy Doctors took an ell:
And now this weakness does all strength expel
Out of thy Church. And God's way is rejected,
And, as a foolish thing, by thee neglected.

Cathedral. No Alteration in these things I see
Will be assented to by such as thee!
As if we must in these cold Climates go
Into the Water when baptized! But lo.
The time requires the Conference should end,
Now therefore unto what remains descend.

CHAP. V.
The Arg.
The Minster's Consistory Court
The Jayle to visit goes:
The Minster takes it in ill sort
She should that place disclose.
Jayle. Among other things whereby Christ's Church does shine,
We are to reckon Christian Discipline.
This Ornament thou wants. Whence I conclude
Christ's Church consists not of thy multitude,
Nor yet of this thy gorgious Courtly Tent;
Because you all reject Christ's Government.

Cathederal. What! do 'come here to hold thy Visitation?
That thou beginst to make this exclamation
Against my Court; whose ways thou cast not know,
Nor will I unto thee my secrets show.
Yet will I this my Government maintain
Against which thou may strive, but all in vain.

Jayl. Well, but before we try thy Discipline,
Let Us take a view of those brave men of thine,
Which are thy Officers; let us know their names
(Or Titles) for, behold their glorious Trains
Seem to import they are no Fishers mates,
Nor yet (like Paul) Tent-makers sociates.

Cathederal. These are their Titles; and the first degree
Archbishops are; the next Lord-Bishops be,
Attended with their Bishops, Suffragans,
Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters, Courtezans;
With Judges, Surrogates, and Proctors store,
Apparitors, with very many more.

Jayle. Archbishops and Lord-Bishops! what is this?
Did not our Savior all such titles hiss
Out of his Church, when his Disciples would
Have bin the chief, that so they might have ruled
By Domination over those, to whom
Christ did intend they servants should become?

Cathederal. Unless these Titles against plain Scripture be,
Thou can not them condemn, nor do I see
Those Texts alleged which any whit oppose
These Titles, but it is meant of such as those
Which Papists give unto their Popes: But I
Have eft condemned that Supremacy.

Jayle. Thy Titles are as much beyond the Line
Of holy Writ, and full as clandestine
As those amongst the Papists: for whilst they
Make one great Pope (now heed well what I say)
Thou make many Popes; for thy Arch-Lords
Their Fancies force upon us for God's words.

Cathedral. I thee require some Scriptures to produce
Which shows my Titles to be such abuse
As they prohibit; otherwise thy plea
In this our contest cannot mine outweigh:
For all things which amongst Papists are esteemed
Must not unlawful for that cause be deemed.

Jayle. Peter (an Elder) Elders does command
The Churches oversight to take in hand, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

Without becoming Lords; and Paul avows
He preached Christ as Lord, and likewise shows
He preached himself a servant (for Christ's sake) 2 Cor, 4. 5

To th'Church; now this against thy Lords does make.

Cathedral. It Is true, the letter of these Scriptures do
Seem to oppose Lord-Bishops, but you know
The Scripture has a secret sense, and can
Not easily be understood; now then
How can thou tell the Lordship here, is meant
Of those Lord-Bishops which my Church frequent.

Jayl. The Texts must needs be meant of some that lord it
In things Temporal: or (as thou do word it)
Of Lords Spiritual. But Peter does
Allow the first; yea, and to speak the t^oth,
Commands the Church all such (as such) to obey:
Ergo, it is Spirit' Lords he thrusts away.

Cathedral. Thy major Proposition must be true,
Since needs it must be meant of one of th'two.
Thy minor's likewise true: Peter does call
The Church to obey Lords Magistratical.
That then I must deny, is thy Conclusion:
And truly why? It makes for my confusion.

Jayl. If the Propositions both be verified,
The Conclusion can in no wise be denied,
Logicians say: and therefore thou art one,
That from both Truth and Reason's so far gone,
As neither will thy Lordship cause to bend,
Till Christ the Lord his Judgments on thee send.

Cathedral. Leave off, proud Jayl, thou art not yet my Judge;
But thou should rather know thy self my Drudg.
Nor will I thus permit thee, at this season,
To charge me with the want of Truth or Reason.
Turn then thy course unto my Discipline,
And do not thus my Lordship undermine.

Jayl. Thy Discipline we must find in thy Court,
To which I see poor men (compelled) refort
To pay their Money. And I also see
Thy Officers as greedy of their Fee
As any Lawyers; And I likewise hear
These Fees do make them reel with Wine and Beer.

Cathedral. Touching my Court thou shall instructed be
Ere long what they do there, I Will warrant thee.
And as for those who come unwillingly,
They Are such as from my Laws have trod awry:
And I shall let such know their punishment
Must pierce their purse, till they be penitent.

Jayl. Purse-penalties the Church of Christ knows none,
As she is such, nor can it once be shown
In all the Apostolical Directions
In holy Writ, there should be such exactions.
And doubtless whilst thou thus minds earthly things
Paul under a most sharp reproof thee brings.

Cathedral. Purse-penalties alone may not excuse
Those that my Laws presumptuously abuse:
for Heresy deserves the most severe
Chastisement, others for to put in fear,
Even Confiscation, (...),
This crime (...), the holy Scripture says.

Jayle. This i^ a Monstr^^^ Disciplin^ for you,
Who Gospel Laws pretend for what you do.
'Ti^ true, by (...), Death might be inflicted
On some (...):
But if the Church in (...)
Should so proceed, 'twould now prove Persecution.

Cathederal. Here thou (...)*
But I am clear from such (...):
For I no (...); but (...),
I punish such (...),
That I might them reduce from Heresy,
Or others keep in Christian purity*

Jayle. That thou' it a (...)
Witness in part some (...) whom thou ha^t slain*
And partly some thou do^t at this day keep
In Prison, only cause they cannot sleep
With thee in (...), but the L^^d's Precept^
Have chosen as a Rule unto their steps.

Cathederal. Those I (...), and these I have slain,
Are such as would in Here^ie remain;
Yet it is not really I, but 't^^ the Power^
Which punish (...) these Ma^^^ of yours.
It Is true, it is I advi^e them thus to do it,
And so shall still, and care not who do know it.

Jayle. So it is my will, is all the rule indeed
By which thou do^^ thus ^idgedly proceed.
For from good ground it never can be showed
That thou or other ought to have imb^ewed
Your hands in their blood, who did well behave them
In all things civil, but to God should leave them.

Cathederal. So then it seems for things merely religious
Thou would have no man flain; O most prodigious!
But then the T^res will over-grow the Wheat,
And every one will publish his d^ceit.
Whereas by ^^ans of my sharp punishment
These evils I can easily prevent.

Jayle. It Is known that for more than three hundred years
The Church had no defense from worldly Peers;
Yet Truth with purity did greatly prosper;
Errors they quashed as falt as they did foster;
At least in such sort as may equallize
What thou have done by severe penalties.

Cathederal. I said that (...) would amongst the Wheat increase,
But this thou tacitly go by in peace.
It Is not the Heresy, but Heretics,
There is the spinch where this Conference sticks.
Now if to Kings it do not appertain
These Tares to put away, they must remain.

Jayle. To them it appertains not as they are Kings:
For so men may be, though plunged deep in things
Which makes them Heretics: Also the Tare
Which Christ intends, by him suffered are
Here to ^e^ain* until the Judgment-day,
Yet has the Church them always put away.

Cathedral. Well; this in short I see is thy opinion,
Kings ought protect all those in their Dominion
In Life, Estate, and all things necessary,
If from their Civil Laws they do not vary.
As for the Church she only may do this,
Punish with Censures such ^s do amiss.

Jayle. What is the utmost bounds of Kingly powers
I Will not dispute in this discourse of ours,
Which may perhaps be more than I well know:
Yet sure in Church-respects the Scriptures do
Not give them power (as Kings) to execute
Church Discipline, and that is what I dispute.

Cathedral. If Kings did not assist by penalties
My Church, I see men would me soon despise:
Nor could I live, since all my Maintenance
I chiefly have by their good Countenance.
And hence it is men readily obey
My Discipline in whatsoere I say.

Jayl. Alas, alas, that thus it should be said,
And truly too! O how is Christ's Gospel made
A mere pretense, whilst men their Bellies do
Make their great God. But this the Apostles show
Was once the, way that false Apostles went;
And to the same way they are still intent.

Cathederal. What, would thou have men sit in the Church as Judges
Of her misdoings, only as her Drudges.
Take from my Church the profits thereto due,
And Officers thou would find but few.
And thus the Church Affairs would soon be slighted
Yea and perhaps the Church would be benighted.

Jayl. Benighted! why? Is Silver your great Candle,
Or th'Oyl that feeds it? One this point did handle
In the Affirmative (who appertains
Unto thy Church) when like to lose his gains
Of Tithes. But Paul, yea and all such as he,
Used to perform their Office without Fee.

Cathedral. Paul does allow such as do minister
In Church affairs, thus to be sinister,
So as to live upon the Church; So then
We do what Paul allows, ev'^ all my men,
Which at my Altar serve, or in my Court.
Thus have we Fees and Tithes in Gospel-sort.

Jayl^. Such as are taught, ought to communicate
By gift to such as do officiate;
That it might be a fruit to the account
Of such as give: but no Text does amount
To prove, that you by force should ought compel
For what you p^^ach, from those among whom ye dwell.

Cathedral. I see thou would all our holy things
Proceed as fruits which from the Spirit springs,
Whether our service to the Church, or their
Respects to us for all our pious care.
But still I tell thee n^ll thus my Revenue,
Nor Church nor Ministry would long continue.

Jayle. No Argument more clear that thou art none
Of Christ his Spouse, that fair and lovely one;
Whose things are all performed by Charity,
Which works by love. Now this disparity
'Twixt her and thee, shows you cannot be one,
Till Grace abound, and Selfishness be gone.

Cathederal. I will not yield to this thy Argument,
Yet further talk about it I Will prevent,
And hear if thou have yet a fresh Objection
Left unpropounded, more for my detection.
Then prove thy self, what thou denieft to me,
To wit, Christ's Church; now let us thy Answer see.

Jayle. Object! a very redious thing it were
To say all that might be objected here.
But this I say, the walking of thy Churches
Shows that amongst you all uncleanness lurches;
So that, as Paul says, it were a great shame
The things you do in secret, once to name.

Cathederal. What then, it is known we have a discipline
Provided, to the end we may refine
Our selves from these enormious voluptions,
And we have now removed some corruptions,
The rest in time may be removed all;
Intending this, I am not criminal.

Jayle. Thy Discipline small power has, but where
Thou may stiget money; or something appear
That Is truly godly, those are punished:
But even in thy Court is found inbred
Great vileness, and of late it is increased
Abroad much more than when thy Court last ceased.

Cathederal. Leave prying thus into my Churches walking.
I Am tired out with thy unpleasant talking;
I'now expect to hear thine own defense,
But not in this enterchang'd conference,
But by a speech continued, till thou do
The heads of what thou hold plainly show.

Jayle. The heads of what I hold, then I will show,
As 'twas presented to the Kings own view;
Signed with forty hands of such as own
The said Confession, which has now been shown
In most parts of this miserable Nation,
Whose Church does change, (...) Powers have translation.

CHAP. VI.
The Arg.
The Jayl the Symbol of her Faith
With Scripture tight does sing,
And brings some of the Ancients forth
To witness every thing.
I. ARTICLE.
ONe God alone (the Father) I believe,
From whom all things their being did receive, 1 Cor. 8. 6

Eternal, glor'ous, and his Attributes Isa. 40. 28

To tell forth fully no tongue once reputes
It self sufficient, but with admiration
Must give to him the highest Adoration.
The Witness of Antiquity.
There is but one God; in Trinity three Persons, Athanasin Symb.
in Unity one God.

We believe, hold and faithfully maintain, that God the Father, begat his
Wisdom, by which all Aug. de Civitar. Dei, chap 11. and chap. 24.
was made, his only Son, one with one, coeternal, most equal; and that the
Spirit is both of the Father and of the Son, consubstantial and coeternal with
them both; and that this is a trinity in respect of the persons, and but one
God in the inseparable Divinity, etc.

II. ARTICLE.
In the beginning God created Man,
In a condition so complete, as then Genesis 1. 31 Eccles. 7. 29. Genesis 2. 27 and
3. 17, 18, 19.

No misery was mixed therewithal;
From which he by transgression took a fall,
And hereupon he misery archieved
On him and's off spring: yet it is believed
By me, that both this death and misery
Extends not to all eternity.
The Witness of Antiquity.
By the death of the body, we read, that some Aug cont Advers. l. 1. c. 16.
have died not for their own, but for the sin of others: -- But in the death of
the soul none dies for the sin of another.

For as in Adam all die, both just and unjust; so Ambros. in 1 Cor 15. 22.
in Christ shall all, both believers and unbelievers, rise, though unto
punishment.

III. ARTICLE.
There Is one Lord Jesus Christ I do believe, Luke 20. 24. Rev. 22. 16. 1 Timothy
2. 5, 6. Heb 2. 9. 1 John 2. 2.

By whom all things their beings do receive,
The only (natural) Son of the most High,
Yet born of Mary in virginity,
And so considered is as David's Son
And Offspring for to sit upon his Throne.
Yet as he is the Son of God, he is Lord,
And Root of David, and the Eternal Word.
This is he whom the Father freely sent
In his great Love, into the World, who went
As freely, and to death for all he gave
Himself, that all to life recourse might have.
The witness of Antiquity.
The World being all at peace, Christ (according Aug. de Civitat. Dei. l. 18.
c. 46. and lib. 1^. cap. 11. and lib. 11. c. 2.
to the precedent Prophecy) was born in Bethlehem Judah, being openly Man of
the Virgin his Mother, and secretly God of God his Father -- Christ Jesus, the
substance of Israel, and the son of David; -- God's Son of God, taking on our
Man without wasting Godhead, ordained Faith to be a pass for man to God, by his
mean that was both God and Man.

IV. ARTICLE.
God's will is not that any man should perish;
Wherefore, that dying mankind he might cherish, 1 Timothy 2. 4 Mark 16. 25. 2.
Pet. 2. 1. Joh. 3. 18 and 3. 17. and 1. 7. Act. 17. 30 1 John 5. 10.

His Son, the Lord of all, has given Order
The Gospel should be preached in each Border,
to every Creature, and to every Nation,
To wit, that God holds forth Non-imputation
Of sins; so that men shall not die, because
Christ died not for them; but because his Laws,
And Word, which calls for Faith in his rich Death,
Men do reject, and so themselves bequeath Heb. 3. 10, 18, 19.

To Infidelity. Hence it is clear,
That to all men at sometime does appear
So much of Grace, as if they rightly mind it,
It holds forth Life to them that they find it.
The test of Antiquity.
God would have all men to be saved, but if Ambr. in 1 Timothy 2.
they come to him, he so would it, not as that he would save them against their
will.

Christ in mercy was born for all; but the unfaithfulness of Heretics is the
c^use that he that Ambr. l. 3 de Fide. cap. 4. ^ug. tom. 7. Artic. falso.
was born to all, is not born for all.

In respect of the greatness of the price, the Blood of Christ is the
Redemption of the whole World.

V. ARTICLE.
Concerning those whom Christ appoints for such Act. If. 22 23, 24. Acts 11.
19, 20. and 13 2, 3 and 1. 23.

As are the Pastors of the Gospel Church,
I do believe that they must first be added
Unto the Church, as were those who were gladded
With Peter's words; and growing in their stations
In gtacious gifts and good qualifications,
And thoroughly tried, by their exereising
Their gifts, the holy Scripture so advising;
Such men the Church may choose and them ordain, 1 Cor. 1. 19, 21. 1 Cor. 2. 1,
4, 5.

(To minister as Pastors in Christ's Name)
By laying on of hands with holy prayers,
Assigning them to their respective cares,
To gather Churches; or to feed and guide them. Romans 2. 21.

But as for such who for a while abide them
In humane Schools, only to be instructed
In humane Arts, and so to be inducted
(Without Repentance, and Baptism succeeding,
With growth in Grace) unto a Parish feedi^n;
Or rather to feed on their large Revenue,
Than to gain souls to Truth, there to continue:
Such I do say no Teachers ought to be,
But should be taught the Christian A. B. C.
The rest of Antiquity.
Eusebius all edging the Epistle of Alexander Bp Eus^^. (...) l. c. 11.
of Jernsalem, against Demetrius, says; Thou say it was never seen that the
lay and secular people should dispute of the Faith in the presence of the
Bishops. I marvel what moved thee to affirm a Lie so evident, inasmuch that as
often as there is found any man that is sufficient and apt to give good
counsel, and to instruct the people, the Bishops have accustomed to desire him
to do it; as the Bishop of M^o^ did Enelpius, etc. -- And there is no doubt but
that the other Bishops may do the like in their Diocesses, when they find any
one which is a man fit to profit the people.

Ye drive them from God's Word, and will let Eccius Book of Obead. fol. 19.
no man come thereto, till he have been two years Master of Arts. First you
nurse them up in Sophistry, and in been fundantum, and there corrupt their
judgments; -- then they begin not at the Scripture, but each one chooses
himself a Doctor severally, etc.

VI. ARTICLE.
Touching the way of man's Justification
Before the Lord, in order to Salvation; Romans 5. 1 2 Cor. 5. 15. Rom, 4. 22,
23, 24

I say, it is by Faith in Christ our Lord,
That is, with heart believing that sweet word,
Which shows to man in Christ there is remission
Of sins for all through faith and through contrition;
For which great cause Christ worthily bespeaketh Romans 3. 25, 26.

Their chief affections, and their fouls so breaks
Wholly to yield to Christ's most just Commands,
And to deny all Self, which Christ withstands;
And eke with godly sorrow do commit
Themselves to Christ's Grace to depend on it.
Such like believing men are justified;
Their Faith will Righteousness be found when tried.
The test of Antiquity.
The Medicine of the Soul is the only propitiation for the sins of all; that
is, to believe in Christ.

How virtuous soever the ancient righteous persons Aug. in verb Dom sermon. 40.
Aug. lib. cont. Felag c. 21.
have been, they were not saved but by Faith.

It is manifest that such as have Faith in Christ, shall not be saved unless
they have the Life of Greg. l. 6 ep. 15.
Faith.

VII. ARTICLE.
There is but only one most holy Spirit,
Which God does give such richly to inherit Ephesians. 4. 4.

As do obey his Voice, that they thereby
May have the Grace themselves to mortify,
And be enabled in the Truth to stand Act, 5. 31.

Immovably (thout which no mortal hand
Can do the work of God) and that we may
Honor the Father and the Son each day,
Who is the Author and the Consummator
Of all our Faith. And John (that Revelator) 1 Cor. 6. 11. Gal 5. 22. 23.

Does say, this Father, Son and holy Spirit
Are One; and so the Name of God they merit.
The fruits which follow this great gifts reception
Is growth in every grace, and sins rejection.
Wherefore we say, these have it not received
Who are of Love (that Spirit fruit) bereaved,
Or destitute; so as they such deny
A quiet life, that would live peaceably.
The test of Antiquity.
That Spirit being the Fathers and the Sons, is Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 11. c. 10
properly in Scripture called the Holy Spirit; It is neither Father nor Son,
but personally distinct from both; and this Trinity is one God.

Behold the sign and token, whereby ye shall know those that are of God from
the evil and Rupert. in Apoc. c. 13.
wicked. Those are the wicked which do kill and lead into captivity, the which
all those that are of God have not done nor do.

O Lord God, these are the chiefest and first that Bernard sermon. conver. Paul
persecuted thee, whom men see to love the highest seats and rooms in thy
Church, and which bear the greatest rule. They have taken the Ark of Zion; they
have occupied and used the Castle; and have afterward frankly and by power set
all the City on fire: Their conversation is miserable: The subversion of thy
People is pitiful. -- Now holy Orders are given for occasion of most filthy
gain, and they think gain to be piety and godliness.

VIII. ARTICLE.
About Election this is that I Have said,
That God from aye, before the World was made, Joh. 3. 16. Ephesians. 1 4.

Has chosen unto Life such as believe,
And so in Christ through grace he will them receive.
Yet I am confident God's purpose here 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Rom 9. 11

Stands not upon what Faith did fore-appear,
Or Works done by the creature, but alone
God's Mercy, Kindness and Compassion. Psalm. 4. 3.

Thus it is of God who calls: Yet behold
Let no man think that now he may be bold
To live in sin: for as our God is pure,
So can he no ungodly man endure.
Then this Decree to every Godly man
Has its extent, as David witness can.
The test of Antiquity.
According to his mercy he saved us. This goodness which does flourish in
Christians does Amb. in Tit. 3.
arise out of the root of Divine Piety or Love; for God by his Mercy has saved
us in Christ.

The Apostle says not, he has chosen us when we were holy, but that we should
be holy. Jerome apol. ad Ruffin. August.


Election goes not only before Works, but before Faith, where all good Works
do begin.

IX. ARTICLE.
Concerning Reprobation this I say,
No men (as men) of old were cast away, Jude 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2 10, 11, 12.

But as they have God's Grace in wantonness
Abused, and lived in ungodliness; Romans 2. 9, 10, 11.

To those indeed God sends strong delusions,
That they might damned be. Since vain confusions
They rather chose than Truth in faithful love;
And hence it is God's Wrath against men does move;
Yea against every soul that does evil,
So as to die the servant of the Devil.
The test of Antiquity.
The Damned cannot complain justly, because Amb. l. 2. de vocat. Gent. c. 1.
etc. 2.
it is their wickedness that does cast them down into pain. -- He was worthy to
lose an unprofitable Faith, which did not exercise Charity.

God is good, and he is just. He may save a man without good works of his,
because he is Aug,
good; but he cannot condemn any man without his evil deserts, because he is
just.

X. ARTICLE.
Concerning Infants, I believe they shall
Suffer no death, but that that is temporal;
And this their father Adam brought upon them:
But th'second Adam shall take it quite from them. 1 Cor. 15. 22.

And further than that death that is temporal
No one shall die for Adams sinful fall.
Christ has avouched Infants 'thout exception
To appertain to Heaven: Then rejection Mat. 19. 14.

Of Infants into Hell, is such a preaching
As does want Charity, and cross the teaching
And nature of our God. Yet thus they teach
Who do the Church her Baptism impeach,
Contending that to Infants it pertains,
To some of whom yet they allow no gains
By means of Christ his Death; for this they say,
He only died for some. And now we may
Demand how they did know he died for those
Whom they baptize, and did the rest dispose
To hellish torments? See the cruelty
Of those who sprinkle Babes infancy!
The test of Antiquity.
By the death of the body, we read of some that have dyed not for their own but
for others sins; Aug, cont ad verse.
But in the death of the soul none dies for another.

God cannot condemn any man without his evil Aug.
deserts, because he is just.

XI. ARTICLE.
The only way by God and Christ ordained,
Whereby the sons of men should be constrained Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 16.

To sit down in Christ's Church, is Gospel-preaching,
Wherein a reconciled God is stretching
His Hand of Love extensively to all; Acts 2. 38 Acts 8. 12

And then to dip or baptize such as shall
Repent from sin, and faith in Christ profess,
Through Gods forbearance and great tenderness. and 18. 12.

I say, such only as are catechized, Gal. 4. 22 23, 24.

Are in the Scripture bid to be baptized
Into the Name of Father, Son, and Spirit.
But as for those who would by Legal merit, Matthew. 3. 8, 9.

Or Parent interest, bring a fleshly seed
Into the Gospel Church, all such indeed
I do deny, with that Scriptureless thing, Ephesians. 5. 11

Most truly called Infant Sprinkling.
Which custom has, or would make void God's Word,
And bind the Church still with a Legal cord
Unto a fleshly line; And the New Birth
Would, as a useless thing, fall to the Earth.
This is one reason why we separate
From all such persons, that participate
We may not with these darksome ways of theirs,
But rather by reproofs break through these snares.
The test of Antiquity.
The Lord commanded his Apostles that they should first instruct and teach all
Nations, and Jerome in Mat. 28.
afterward should baptize those that were instructed in the mysteries of Faith.
For it cannot be that the body should receive the Sacrament of Baptism, unless
the soul has received before the true Faith.

The dipping into the Water, is the going down into Hell: the coming up out of
the Water is Council of Worms chap. 5. Wilfrid. Strabo de rebus Eccles. c. 26
the Resurrection.

We must know that at the first, Believers were baptized simply in Floods and
Fountains.

XII. ARTICLE.
I also do believe that the baptized
Believing souls, ought thus to be advised, Heb. 6. 1, 2.

To seek unto the Lord for his donation Acts 8. 12 5, 17.

(The Spirits gifts) for their mortification,
That by that Grace, their Life and their Profession Acts 19 6. 2 Timothy 1 6 Romans
8. 13.

May not unto each other seem oppression.
The way to ask this Gift in Scripture stands,
Known to be Prayer, with laying on of hands,
As one first point which in Christ's doctrin's shown,
Whereby his Saints are from all others known.
The test of Antiquity.
Laying on of hands has ever been the custom of the Church. Jerome ad Lucif.
Aug de Bapt. l. 3. c. 16. Eras. paraph. on Heb. 6. 1, 2.


Laying on of hands, what is it but prayer over a man?

The first degree of Christianity, is, to be repentant of our former life; --
Next to be taught that true-innocency and soul-health is to be hoped-for of
God. Then forthwith that we be purged by holy Baptism. Then that we receive the
holy Ghost by laying-on of hands.

XIII. Article.
Concerning Perseverence, this I say,
And do believe, that in Christ's blessed way
Men ought, without a tossing to and fro, Act. 2. 42.

Continue steadfast; and these things must do,
Meet in a Church-Society together,
In the Apofiles Doctrine, to consider
And call to mind in Prayer, with breaking Bread,
Their Savior, till he come to raise the dead.
The test of Antiquity.
I pray you, O ye Bishops, which do think your Hillary contra Auxent.
selves to be so, What Suffrages have the Apostles used for to preach the
Gospel? with what power were they aided? Did they assemble the Church by the
Kings Edict? They nourished and kept themselves by their hand-labour -- and
assembled the Church -- against the Edicts of Kings.

-- When wise and good People do meet together, we must not call that a Faction
or Sect. -- Tertull. Apol. c. 29
Saint Luke declares the Order of the Primitive-Church; That the Faithful
assembled themselves often times -- for to preach the Word, and celebrate the
Lords Supper. -- We assemble to pray for the Emperor, etc. -- and for Peace --
to make commemoration of Divine Scriptures, and do feed and nourish the Faith
with voice and holy words -- We plant and graft most strongly our Faith; And do
labor much to imprint in our hearts the discipline of the Commandments.

XIV. Article.
I say moreover, though I thus contend
For the old Church way, that men must either mend Heb. 12. 14 Isa. 1. 11, 12,
15, 16

As well in point of Life, as their Profession,
Shunning with all their might sin and transgression;
And in religious things be still devout,
Else from Heavens joys the Lord will thrust them out.
He that wants Holiness sees not the Lord.
Let him that reads meditate that word.
The test of Antiquity.
Let not sinnets therefore and wicked men secure Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 21. c. 25
themselves by their continuance in the Church -- nor renounce Christ their
Justice, in committing any or all of the fleshly works, spoken of, Gal. 5. for
he says expressly, they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God which do such
deeds.

-- He that abides in Christ, etc. has taken the meat of Life -- but he that
discordeth from Prosp. in l. de sent:
Christ does not eat the flesh of Christ -- although he do take every day the
Sacrament of so great a thing.

XV. Article.
(As once I said) The Churches Pastors ought
From amongst wel-graced Christians to be sought,
Chiefly such as have learned self-denial, Act. 14. 23 Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3.

(In which few worldly Priests will bide the trial)
And such as by the Church are thus elected,
And eke ordained (as God's Word directed) 2 Cor. 12* 14.

Knowing 'to feed the Flock with meat in season,
And to bear rule with Godliness and Reason, Ezekiel. 34.

With love and care seeking such Sheep as stray;
Such I do own as Teachers of God's way.
But such as feed themselves with others fat,
And keep the Flock from such like food as that
Which only can their soul relieve: And who
To seek for great Revenues rather go,
Than to enquire into the state of souls:
I say such Teachers do transgress the Rolls
Of holy Writ, And therefore I deny them,
And by this Testimony do decry them.
The test of Antiquity.
The Church was governed in times past by the Hieron^ ep. ad Evag.
common counsel and advice of the Presbyters -- And that, Episcopum and
Presbyterium unum esse; A Bishop and an Elder are all one.

Frederick sent this Message to Adrian the 4th; We shut up our Cities against
your Cardinals, because we see that they prey upon the People. They do not
ratify Peace, but rake together Pence: They do not repair the World, but
impair their Wealth.

Let none be ordained to the Ministry, unless Con. Carthagene^s can. 22.
he first be examined of the Bishop, and approved by the People.

-- The Pastors should seek the Salvation of men's Con. Cahil. c. 6.
souls, not earthly commodity.

All Clergy men that are strong to labor, let Con. Carthag. can. 51, 53.
them learn some Handicraft as well as Letters.

XVI. Article.
Such Ministers of Christ as have obtained
Free gifts from God, freely they are ordained
To serve the Church: and yet the Scripture wills 1 Cor. 9. 17. ver. 11. G^l.
6. 6.

Some fruit for him which that ground rightly tills.
Wherefore such as are taught, as freely should
Communicate to them who forth do hold
The Word of Life, upon their Work-account,
That to the Givers good it may amount.
But as for Tithes (th^se forced consecrations)
I say, they are no Gospel-Ordinations.
The test of Antiquity.
If thou despisest not a Beggar, how much more ought thou to regard the Ox
that treads out Aug. in Psalm. 13.
the corn in the floor. And in Psalm. 146. He says -- Thou scarce payest the
thousand part, yet I find no fault; do so still: for I so thirst after your
well-doing, that I refuse not your very crumbs.

O Lord Jesus, thou have multiplied the people, and thou have not increased
their joy-They have B^rnard.
removed the Offices -- into shameful gain, and the health of souls is not
searched for -- they strive and contend most impudently daily by process for
Bishoprics, Archbishopricks, etc. there remains nothing but the Man of Sin
to be revealed, the Son of Perdition.

XVII. Article.
The Scripture says that Heresies must be,
And shows the way appointed us to free
Our souls therefrom; for such as do erect them, Tit. 3. 10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
Romans 16. 17.

The Church has power wholly to reject them,
After the first or second Admonition.
Moreover, by Apostolic Commission
She has a power also to withdraw
From such Disciples as transgress the Law
Of Christ, in point of Worship, or of life;
Peace to preserve, and terminate her strife.
The test of Antiquity.
The Ancient Canons make two kinds of Excommunications; one greater, the other
less: Decret Greg. 5. tit. 39. cap. 59.
the greater not to be inflicted but upon the account of mortal or deadly sin.

Sins are not loosed nor retained at the pleasure of men, but according to the
will of God, Aug de Bapt. l. 3. c. 13.
and prayers of the Church.

XVIII. Article.
Touching the point of falling off from Grace,
I do believe men so may lose their place Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5

In Christ the Vine (yea such as he does say
Is in him) and, lest they should fall away,
Exhorts them to make their biding-place 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6, 7. John 15. 6.

In him; yea, such may fall away from Grace
As once had Charity in pure heart,
And conscience good; yea, that unfeigned part 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.

Of Faith: yet, wanting constant Watchfulness,
May turn aside, so foully to transgress
As to be withered branches, and in fire
Burn and consume. But yet such as defire
(With constancy) and do the same indeed,
Add Grace to Grace, so certainly shall speed,
As they shall never fall; yea, no deceit
Of false Christ's can them possibly defeat.
The test of Antiquity.
It is to be believed that some of the children of perdition, receiving not the
gift of Perseverence Aug. de corep. and gra. c. 13.
to the end, do begin to live in Faith that works by Charity, and for a time
do live faithfully and justly, and after do fall.

In time of temptation they fall away -- Some therefore revolt from Faith,
because Verity avoucheth Bernard ep. 42.
it; and by consequence from Salvation, because our Savior rebukes it; from
whence we conclude from Charity also, without which Salvation cannot be
obtained.

XIX. Article.
Such as are Poor in Christ his Congregation, ^ Cor. 9. 7

Ought to be cared for by the Donation,
Or bounty of the Church (not by constraint) 1 Cor. 8. 11, 12.

Which care should hold proportion with the want.
And for the more sufficient management
Of this affair, the Church ought to appoint Acts 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Some faithful men therefore to be deputed,
With laying on of hands: Thus constituted,
They must now undertake this sacred Function, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 3

The Church to keep in peace and sweet conjunction.
Here be it noted, since men did decline
From this appointment (holy and divine)
And did by force compel, both rich and poor, Job 31. 14

To pay a stinted portion to the Poor,
(Which is but small) allotted for their living;
It has destroyed the Ordinance of giving
By free-Collection; And now Charity
With men's Estates holds no parity,
But their large sums are laid out to maintain
Gay clothing, Pearls, and all things which are vain.
What will these men do when God rises up
To cause all men to taste his Judgment-Cup?
The test of Antiquity.
Sacred Orders we call Deacons and Presbyters; I^noc. 3. dec. Greg l 1. c. 14.
for these two the Primitive Church is found only to have had.

That which men do by compulsion is not a sacrisice; forasmuch as if it be not
done voluntarily Lactant. Fi^mian.
and with the heart, it is most execrable and accursed,

If thou have riches, labor by well-doing to Aug. ep: c 6. con. cabil. c. 6
store them up in Heaven.

Christians must not be compelled to give their substance.

XX. Article.
I do believe through Christ the Dead shall rise,
Because he lives, who once did not despise Isa. 26. 19

To die for them. Yea from the graves of earth Act. 24. 15

Each individual body shall come forth,
Both just and unjust; though when they were sown, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22, 42, 43,
44, 49

Weakness, and all Infirmity was shown;
Yet in the Refurrection they shall be
Made strong and firm to all eternity,
Each pious man, body and spirit joined,
To their desired place shall be assigned.
The test of Antiquity.
Every part of the bodies, perishing either in death, or after it in the grave,
or wheresoever; Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 21.
shall be restored, renewed; and of a natural and corruptible body, it shall
become immortal, spiritual, and incorruptible: Be it all made into powder or
dust, or by chance or cruelty dissolved into air or water, yet can it not be
kept hid from the omnipotency of the Creator, who will not have one hair of the
head to perish. Thus shall the spiritual flesh become subject to the spirit,
yet shall it be flesh still.

XXI. Article.
After the dead are come forth of the graves,
Whether of Earth, or Seas fierce raging waves, 2 Timothy 4. 1

A Judgment that is eternal shall be given Heb. 7. 27.

At Christ's appearing, coming down from Heaven,
Which Judgment and which everlasting Sentence,
Can never be revoked by repentance. 2 Cor. 5. 10.

Then good and bad, each must rewarded be,
As Christ the nature of their work shall see.
The test of Antiquity.
In all these Chapters Augustine asserteth and proves the resurrection of the
Bodies of all men Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 20. c. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20,
21.
from the graves of earth, or howsoever consumed; and he proves the Bodies of
the Saints shall be spiritual and glorious in the Resurrection, and yet that
they cease not to be bodies of real flesh.

And he proves that a body of flesh, and living, may endure in the fire
unconsumed, and yet tormented. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 2.
There are (says he) a kind of Worms that live in the fervent Springs of hot
Baths, whose heat is such as none can endure it at certain times, and yet those
Worms do so love to live in it, that they cannot live without. Whence he
observes, seeing bodies of flesh may live in fire, and be nourished by it, it is
easy to believe that a body of flesh may live in the fine, and be tormented by
it; because to nourish is not proper to the fervent heat of fire, but to
torment is proper thereunto.

XXII. Article.
I do believe the same Christ which did show
Himself alive by tokens plain and true; Acts 1. 3.

Who was beheld ascending into Heaven, Luke 24. 51. Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. Col. 3.
4. Re^. 19. 16. Psalm. 22. 28. Zech. 14. 9. Psa. 72. 4 Rev. 5. 10 and 13. 15. 1
Cor. 3. 22, 23.

Quite from the sight of the select Eleven;
The same, the very same shall come again,
In the same manner wherein he was taken
Up from the Earth. And when he shall appear,
The Saints their fruits of Faith shall richly wear.
For Christ the King of kings and Lord of lords,
Shall reign according to the holy words
Of these great Prophets in the Margent quoted:
For every Kingdom under Heaven's allotted
Unto our Christ; yea, and unto his Saints,
Whose heads a place to rest (sometimes) now wants.
Yea, God has said, they then shall rule the Nations, Dan. 7. 27 Rev. 2. 26,
27.

Though here erst while they meet with Tribulations.
The test of Antiquity.
John's mention of a thousand years, Rev. 21. L^dovic. Vives coment on! Aug. de
civit. Dei l. 20. c. 7.
and Christ's words, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine,
until the day that I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, with many
Prophecies touching Christ's Kingdom in Jerusalem, made some think that Christ
would return into the World, raise the Saints in their Bodies, and live a
thousand years here on Earth in all joy, peace and prosperity -- The first
Author of this Opinion was Papias Bishop of Jerusalem, who lived in the
Apostles times. He was seconded by Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian,
Victorinus, Picktaviences and Lactantius -- -And many Martyrs and righteous
persons held this opinion.

XXIII. Article.
The holy Scriptures are the Rule of Saints,
In Faith and Life, sufficient for their wants, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. Joh. 20.
31 Isa 8. 20.

Through Jesus Christ: Yea they are profitable
To all good works, God's servants to enable.
The test of Antiquity.
The error of our forefathers ought not to be followed, but the Authority of
Scripture and the Jerome Tom 6 in Jer. c. 9.
Commandments of God, which he teaches us. Truly, through ignorance of the
Law, they receive Christ for Antichrist.

I dare not use to receive that which I read not. Amb. de incarnat. c. 9. Aug.
in Psalm. 6^.


Think not that it is in any other writing, if it be not in the Scripture: Let
us seek to be resolved in the Gospel; If we find it not there, where shall we
find it?

XXIV. Article.
In Gospel Times I do believe men ought
In things Religious to be forced to naught Mat. 7. 12

Against their Consciences, by Persecutions, and 13. 29, 30, 38, 39

Or Penal Laws against Gospel-Institutions:
But all should have like liberty, as those
Who in like cases do desire to chose
What they think near'st the Truth. But if the Powers
Will take what is theirs, and not give us what is ours,
We say they act not as the Lord directed,
When he bad do to others what is expected
By us from them. And tells us Tares with Wheat
Must grow together till the Harvest great.
The test of Antiquity.
Ambition does aid it self by the Name of Christ; Hill. cont. Auxent.
The Church does fear and compel the people -- She that was made holy by
Persecutors terror, now persecuteth, etc.

Let them both grow together until harvest -- Which thing he spoke to forbid
the shedding of Chrisost. Hom. 47. in Mat. 13.
Bold -- for if the Heretics should be put to death, War should be without
Truce, etc.

This is then our desire unto your Reverence, -- if it may be, that you would
confer with our August. ep 58.
Bishop peaceably, to the end that Error might be taken away -- and not Men
taken away.

But we, to the contrary, do not desire any, will Lactant. Firmian. Divin.
Instit. lib. 5. cap. 21.
he nill he, to worship or adore our God -- for we trust in his Majesty that he
has great power to avenge himself on them that contemn him.

XXV. Article.
This I believe concerning Magistrates
In every Nation should be Potentates,
For punishment of all that do transgress
By sleshly lewdness or dishonestness; 1 Pet. 2. 14.

And that, in order thereto, Civil Laws,
Who Are just and wholesome, ought 'decide the cause
Amongst Men (as such) 'thout having vain respect Tit. 3. 1.

Of persons; or to this or the other Sect.
Due Punishment, and likewise due Reward, 1 Pet. 2. 13.

Each one should have, 'thout partial regard.
And we believe Christ's Gospel does enjoin Act. 5. 29.

Our selves, and all men, freely to resign
Our selves, as Subjects, unto Magistrates
In their appointments. Only what relates
Unto God's Worship, wherein this we say,
That there such Rulers have no power to lay
Their Edicts on men's Consciences by force.
But if they do, yet shall we take it no worse,
Than humbly tell them we must needs obey
What God commands, rather than what they
Herein appoint us: and shall never bow
To Men in these concerns; Nor shall we show
Our selves rebellious, though they go to wrong us,
But bear with patience what is imposed upon us.
The test of Antiquity.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers. He that enjoyneth this to
every soul, whom has L^odens. Ep cont. Paschal. 2
he exempted from subjection to Earthly Powers?

-- I may not demand or ask these things but of him of whom I know I shall
obtain them -- I am Tertull. Apol. c. 30
his Servant -- and am killed for his Doctrine -- And do offer the best and
greatest Sacrifice which he has commanded.

Trajan the Emperor did send to Pliny to make enquiry of the manner of the
Christians Life, and afterward to persecute them them. Pliny Plin. lib. 10 ep.
317
writ again, That after he had thoroughly enquired with most cruel torments,
until such time as he delivered them into the Hangmans hand to see them
executed, yet he never did find any other thing, but that they accustomed to
assemble at certain times to sing praises unto Christ as unto God.

Thus have I of my Faith confession made,
To which the test of the Ancients I did add,
Not that I think there is any such like plea
(Drawn from Antiquity) which more does weigh
Than does the Holy Text, which I have brought
In proof of every point; nor is there ought
So truly Ancient as their divine sayings.
But since some tell us tales, to your dismayings,
As though there is nothing in Antiquity
Which stands with that Ancient Verity
Which now I hold; I for this cause have brought
These Witnesses, to show, that whilst thou thought
Antiquity was on thy side, thou do,
In very deed, of empty nothings boast:
For since I can from thine own Allegations
Out of the Fathers, bring such clear quotations
For what I hold, then doubtless I might show
Yet many more, and them both full and true,
For what I hold; and had I the skill which thou
Have in the Ancients writings, might them show.
And herein I could wish that men of parts
(Who love the Truth) might so improve their Arts.
Cathederal. As touching this thy tedious Confession,
To speak to every point would be oppression
Unto my patience; Then wait my pleasure,
For I to answer it must take some leisure.
But I remember thou did me detect
As one inconstant. But that is thy defect.

Jayle. Since to thy charge I laid Inconstancy,
I Will make it appear: For when the Papacy
Possession took of the Commanding Power,
Thou then turned Papist as 'twas in an hour.
When Protestants got head, thou did the same;
When Neuter N O L, thou promptly bore his frame.

Cathederal. Why, must we not subject unto the Powers?
We are not their Commanders, they are ours:
So that if they command, we must obey,
Tho Pa. Prel. Pres. or a compounded way;
The Mass Book, Comon-Pray'r-book, or else neither;
If so the King command, I Will observe either.

Jayle. God's Worship never stood on such a pin
To turn with Man's breath either out or in.
God's Faithful Ones, in this case, did withstand
The things that mighty Kings did often command;
And yet, as Kings, they ever them obeyed,
And for their peace and good devoutly prayed.

Cathederal. This point, with others, has been controverted.
What I hold, and what thou holdst, is asserted.
We will therefore appeal to him for trial,
Who does no falsehood own, nor give denial
To any Truth. And now for a Conclusion,
I do conjure thee pray against Delusion.

Jayle. That is my prayer; but I Will not pray with thee
Till in the Truth we shall united be;
Which we may be, if we our selves deny,
And learn of God in due humility;
Which when thou do in Truth, it is in my mind,
Not here, but in the Jayl, I shall thee find.

Cathederal. What! is the Jayl and Truth so near united?
This dreadful doctrine will make men affrighted,
And few will find the Truth; for if 't be so,
There Is few to seek the Truth to Jayl will go.
Now fare thee well, keep that place as thy treasure,
And I Will keep this, and here enjoy my pleasure.

Jayle. Adi^u Cathederal! go take thy fill
Of Organ-Musick; And, since it is God's will,
I Will back to that unpleasant Cell of mine,
Where some Truth's known, which else would never shine
In its bright splendour: Also there our God
Does show himself a Father by his Rod.

CHAP. VII.
The Arg.
The Jayl does soberly reflect upon the Conference,
And several things to that effect having some reference.
MY Muse you are now returned into the Jayl,
And can not with the Minster yet prevail
To bow her ear to Truth, that it might win
Her to the Ancient Truth, and from Romes Sin.
Now since in this place of disconsolation
None can deprive thy heart of meditation,
Let us reflect upon what sights w^ have seen
In yonder Minster, who as some great Queen,
Does seem to sit in joy, in pomp and pleasure,
With wealth and mirth, and other such like treasure.
But yet in this Reflection, let us give
Precedence to Christ's Church, which does live
This day in Jayl^, in holes and dens of Thieves,
Whose life, though such, yet there is naught that grieves
A sinful Generation more, than that
Her being here is not wholly extirpate.
Lord, I have viewed thy most holy House,
Thy Church, as it at first erected was,
And with the beauty thereof I was moved
There to sit down, as the place I chiefly loved.
In which Church I have seen my Savior sweet,
Rise up and wash his poor Disciples feet.
There have I seen such as do minister,
Deny themselves of all things sinister.
There were thy Servants cl^d like other men;
Their Instruments of Music were not Tin.
There have I seen thy Servants generally
Perform their Duty all in Charity.
There have I seen thy Spirit giving Graces,
Whereby each one were fitted for their places.
There have I seen those Graces exercised,
And none for doing so have been despised,
Nor persecuted; But each one required
To seek with choicest gifts to be inspired.
There did I see a holy Discipline,
The exercise whereof made Zion shine.
And many other precious things I saw,
In point of observation of God's Law.
And having heard the Minster laid great claim
Unto thy Churches Interest and Name;
And yet, by her most earnest procuration,
Some men she did surprise by captivation,
And locked them up within my gates, because
They would not cease to keep thy Ancient Laws.
At this I marvelled, and therefore went
To see what her pretense and practice meant:
For I suspected deeply by these doings,
Her feet were strayed from Zions Ancient goings;
Because from those men I could nothing gather,
That showed them guilty of what she would father
On them, to wit, that they were Peace-disturbers;
Whereas in truth 'twas cause they were Vicecurbers
Which caused them to be shut within my bars,
Under pretense of Law, turned into snares.
Now when I came into the Minster, walking
I veiwed certain men which there were talking;
Gallants of all sorts they appeared to be,
And seemed to live in mirth and melody.
On my right hand there 'spide I a Convention,
From whence proceeded very hot contention
For Money-matters; Then I went to the Quire,
Where I saw many men in black attire;
These took a little room one after other,
And hereupon I did a little hover
To see the period of that Conventicle,
Or-Private Meeting; staying there a little,
I saw their black all covered with white,
And some so dressed they did me somewhat fright:
For they had things upon them of the shape
Of black Sheepskins, which hung down as the cape
Of Cloaks, save that they reached to their ham^,
Where hung a black tail, like unto a Rams.
Some others had long shreds of black upon them,
Like Hanging-sleeves, which hung down al along
With cov'red Caps, such as I never saw (them,
Amongst men that feared God, and kept his Law.
And some had red clothes girt about their shoulders
Which seemed very strange to some beholders.
And chiefly for, because the Protestants
So frequently against the Pope descants
With merry songs, because of such like dressings
As the Papists use when they go to Mass-blessings.
Yet thus arrayed, themselves did now address them
Into the Quire, and prayed the Lord to bless them.
And by and by I heard some Pipes resounding,
Unto the Singers Voic^s quite confounding.
At which indeed I stood as 'twere amazed,
And on these roaring Instruments I gazed;
As also on the Quire of Singing-Boyes,
Until my head was 'stonish'd with the noise:
For little else in truth could I retain,
And so I thought to tarry there 'twas vain.
Lord, this I speak to thee as not but knowing
How they behave themselves; but whilst thus showing
Their strange deportments, I do often propose
Unto my self such Questions as those.
What if our Lord should come and view these men, 1.

And hear their Music, and demand of them,
Who 'twas commanded them thus to be dressed,
And use those Pipes, when they came to be blessed?
What Answer could they make? This I must say,
(Were my case theirs) I Would blush and run away.
If that be true (which some men do conjecture) 2.

That John yet lives, and should come to their Lecture;
Could John suppose this Church was of his founding?
Or would he close with the Pipes mellodious sounding?
Or bear a part in the Song which these men sing?
Or would he not, as one amazed, fling
Out of their Quire? Doubtless all wise men think
The last most likely, except those that wink
At that clear Light which John has set before him,
In Christ's behalf, how men ought to adore him.
Imagine Peter should among them stand 3.

In's Fishers coat, and there but take in hand
A Text to open; would not such a sight
Put these brave Gallants to a ghastly fright?
But were this Generation truly lighted,
They would see much more cause to be affrighted
At those who love to walk in Garments long,
As did the Pharisees, which used to wrong
The People of God's Word, and took the Key
Of Knowledge quite away, lest men should weigh
And ponder their Devices and Traditions,
And so discern their peccant Superstitions.
Admit a pious Christian should come 4.

In Shepherds russit-garb into their Room,
And having of the Fathers free Donation
Received a proper gift of Exhortation;
Would not these Queristers strait thrust him thence
Should he his Gift but offer to dispense?
And for his Coat-sake. Truth would be despised;
A trick by Satan heretofore devised.
Lord, see to what a pass poor man's inventions
Has brought us, since they serve but for preventious
To us from exercising of our Talents,
Unless we be arrayed like these brave Gallants.
Lord, at this door of man's Imaginations
Has crept in many great Prevarications,
Under the specious name of Decency,
And honoring of thy Name more reverently.
But these pretenses those ill fruits have born,
Men's ways have got the applause, and thine the scorn.
It is so at this day, O Lord behold it;
For men are grown too lofty to be told it,
Though they the bitter fruits thereof do feel,
And must feel more and more, until they reel
Into the ditch: For this, Lord, thou have said
Shall be the end of such as void have made
Thy holy Word, that they their own Tradition
May here observe, though unto their perdition;
Unless it please thee by thy Gospel-sentence
To call them timely unto true Repentance.
FINIS.

