THE GOVERNMENT OP THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, And the
Dominions thereto belonging; As it was publicly declared at Westminster, the
16. day of December 1653. In the presence of the Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal of England, the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London,
diverse of the Judges of the Land, the Officers of State and Army, and many
other Persons of quality. At which time and place his Highness OLIVER, LORD
PROTECTOR of the said Commonwealth, took a Solemn Oath for observing the same.

Published by His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR'S special Commandment.

Printed at London, and reprinted at Leith, Anno Dom. 1654.

The Government of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.
I. THat the Supreme Legislative Authority of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, shall be, and
reside in One Person, and the People assembled in Parliament; The Style of
which Person shall be, LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

II. That the Exercise of the chief Magistracy and Administration of the
Government over the said Countries and Dommions, and the People thereof, shall
be in the Lord PROTECTOR, assisted with a Council; the Number whereof shall not
exceed Twenty one, nor be less than Thirteen.

III. That all Writs, Processes, Commissions, Patents, Grants, and other
things, which now run in the Name and Style of the Keepers of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament, shall run in the Name and Style of the Lord
PROTECTOR; from whom for the future, shall be derived all Magistracy and
Honors in these three Nations, and shall have the power of Pardons, (except in
case of Murder and Treason) and benefit of all forfeitures for the public use.
And shall govern the said Countries and Dominions in all things by the Advice
of the Council; and according to these Presents, and the Laws.

IV. That the Lord PROTECTOR, the Parliament sitting, shall dispose and order
the Militia and Forces both by Sea and Land, for the peace and good of the
three Nations, by Consent of Parliament; And that the Lord PROTECTOR, with the
Advice and Consent of the major part of the Council, shall dispose and order
the Militia for the ends aforesaid in the Intervals of Parliament.

V. That the Lord PROTECTOR by the Advice aforesaid, shall direct in all things,
concerning the keeping and holding of a good Correspondencie with foreign
Kings, Princes and States, and also with the Consent of the major part of the
Council, have the power of War and Peace.

VI. That the Laws shall not be altered, suspended, abrogated, or repealed nor
any new Law made, nor any Tax, Charge, or Imposition laid upon the People, but
by common consent in Parliament, save only as ^s expressed in the 30. A ticle.

VII. That there shall be a Parliament summoned to meet at W^^tminst^r upon the
third day of September, one thousand six hundred fifty four; and that
successively a Parliament shall be summoned once in every third year, to be
accounted from the dissolution of the preceding Parliament.

VIII. That neither the Parliament to be next summoned, nor any successive
Parliaments, shall, during the time of five Months, to be accounted from the
day of their first meeting, be adjourned, prorogned, or dissolved without their
own Consent.

IX. That as well the next, as all other successive Parliaments, shall be
summoned and elected in manner hereafter expressed, That is to say, The Persons
to be chosen within England, Wales, the Isles of Jers^y and Guernsey and the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, to sit and serve^h Parliament shall be, and not
exceed the Number of Four hundred. The Persons to be chosen within Scotland to
sit and serve in P^^liament, shall be, and not exceed the Number of Th^rty. And
the Persons to be chosen to sit in Parliament for Ireland, shall be, and not
exceed the number of thirty.

X. That the Persons to be elected to sit in Parliament from time to time for
the several Counties of England, Wales, the Isles of Jer^ey and Guernsey, and
the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and all places w^thin the same respectively,
shall be according to the proportions and numbers hereafter expressed, That is to
say,

For the County of Bedford, six, viz. For the Town of Bedford, one. For the
County of Bedford, five.
For the County of Berks, seven, viz. For the Borough of Abingdon, one. For
the Borough of Reading, one. For the County of Berks, five.
For the County of Bucks, eight, viz. For the Town of Buckingham, one. For the
Borough of Alisburie, one. For the Borough of Wiccomb, one. For the County of
Bucks, five.
For the County of Cambridge and Isle of Ely, eight, viz. for the Town of
Cambridge, one. for the University of Cambridge, one. for the Isle of Ely, two.
for the County of Cambridge, four.
For the County of Chester, Five, viz. for the City of Chester, one. for the
County of Chester, four.
For the County of Cornwel, Twelve, viz. for the Borough of Dunishwet,
otherwise Launceston, one. for the Borough of Truro, one. for the Borough of
Penryn, one. for the Boroughs of Eastlow and Westlow, one. for the County of
Cornwall, eight.
For the County of Cumberland; Three, viz. for the City of Carlisle, one. for
the County of Cumberland, two.
For the County of Derby, Five, viz. for the Town of Derby, one. for the County
of Derby, four.
For the County of Devon, Twenty, viz. for the City of Excester, two. for the
Borough of Plymouth, two. for the Borough of Dartmouth, Clifton, and Hardness,
one. for the Borough of Totness, one. for the Borough of Barnstable, one. for
the Borough of Tiverton, one. for the Borough of Honyton, one. for the County
of Devon, eleven.
For the County of Dorset, Ten, viz. for the Borough of Dorchester, one. for
the Borough of Weymouth, and Melcomb-Regis, one. for the Burough of Lyme-Regis,
one. for the Town and County of Pool, one. for the County of Dorset, six.
For the County of Durham, Three, viz. for the City of Durham, one. for the
County of Durham, two.
For the County of York, Twenty two, viz. for the City of York, two. for the
Town of Kingston upon Hull, one. for the Borough of Beverley, one. for the
Borough of Scarborough, one. for the Burough of Richmond, one. for the Town of
Leeds, one. for the Town and Parish of Hallifax, one. for the County of York,
fourteen, to be chosen distinctly by the three Ridings: That is to say, for the
West- riding, six, for the East- riding, four, for the North- riding, four.
For the County of Essex, Sixteen, viz. for the Burough of Maldon, one, for the
Borough of Colchester, two. for the County of Essex, thirteen.
For the County of Gloucester, and County of the City of Gloucester, Nine, viz.
for the City of Gloucester, two. for the Brough of Tewksberry, one. for the
Borough of Cirencester, one. for the County, and the County of the City of
Gloucester, except the said City, five.
For the County of Hereford, Six, viz. for the City of Hereford, one. for the
Borough of Leompster, one. for the County of Hereford, four.
For the County of Hartford, Seven, viz. for the Town of St. Alban, one. for
the Borough of Hartford, one. for the County of Hartford, five.
For the County of Huntingdon, four viz. for the Borough of Huntingdon, one.
for the County of Huntingdon, three.
For the County of Kent, Eighteen, viz. for the City of Canterbury, two. for
the City of Rochester, one. for the Borough of Maydston, one. for the Port of
Dover, one. for the Port of Sandwich, one. for the Borough of Quinborough, one.
for the County of Kent, eleven.
For the County of Lancaster, Eight, viz. for the Borough of Preston in
Anderness, one. for the Borough of Lancaster, one. for the Borough of
Leverpool, one. for the Town and Parish of Manchester, one. for the County of
Lancaster, four.
For the County of Lecester, Six, viz. for the Borrough of Lecester, two. for
the County of Lecester, four.
For the County of Lilcoln, Sixteen, viz. for the City of Lincoln, two. for the
Town of Boston, one. for the Borough of Grantham, one. for the Town of
Stamford, one. for the Town of Great Grimsby, one. for the County of Lincoln.
ten.
For the County of Middlesex, Six, viz. for the City of Westminster, two. for
the County of Middlesex, four.
For the City of London, six. For the County of Monmouth, three. For the County
of Northfolk, Sixteen, viz. for the City of Norwich, two. for the Town of
Lyn-Regis, two. for the Town of Great Yarmouth, two. for the County of
Northfolk, ten.
For the County of Northampton, eight. viz. for the City of Peterborough, one.
for the Town of Northampton, one. for the County of Northampton, six.
For the County of Notingham, six, viz. for the Town of Notingham, two. for the
County of Notingham, four.
For the County of Northumberland, five, viz. for the Town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, one. for the Town of Berwick, one. for the County of Northumberland,
three.
For the County of Oxford, eight, viz. for the City of Oxford. one. for the
University of Oxford, one. for the Borough of Woodstock, one. for the County
of Oxford, five.
For the County of Rutland, two. For the County of Salop, eight, viz. for the
Town of Shrewsbury, two. for the Borough of Bruges alias Bridgnorth, one. for
the Borough of Ludlow, one. for the County of Salop, four.
For the County of Stafford, six, viz. for the City of Litchfield, one. for
the Town of Stafford, one. for the Borough of Newcastle on the Line, one. for
the County of Stafford, three.
For the County of Sommerset, sixteen, viz. for the Borough of Taunton, two.
for the City of Bath, one. for the City of Wells, one. for the Borough of
Bridgwater, one. for the County of Sommerset, elevens
For the City of Bristol, two. For the County of Southampton, fourteen, viz.
for the City of Winchester, one. for the Town of Southampton, one. for the Town
of Portsmouth, one. for the Isle of Wight, two. for the Borough of Andover,
one. for the County of Southampton, eight.
For the County of Suffolk, sixteen, viz. for the Borough of Ipswitch, two. for
the Borough of Bury St. Edmonds, two for the Burough of Dunwich, one. for the
Borough of Sudbury, one. for the County of Suffolk, ten.
For the County of Surry, ten, viz. for the Borough of Southwark, two. for the
Borough of Guilford, one. for the Borough of Rygate, one. for the County of
Surry, six.
For the County of Sussex, fourteen, viz. for the City of Chichester, one. for
the Borough of Lewis, one. for the Borough of East-greenstead, one. for the
Borough of Arundel, one. for the Borough of Rye, one. for the County of Sussex,
nine.
For the County of Westmoreland, two. For the County of Warwick, seven, viz.
for the City of Coventry, two. for the Borough of Warwick, one. for the
County of Warwick, four.
For the County of Worcester, seven, viz. for the City and County of the
City of Worcester, two. for the County of Worcester, five.
for the County of Wilts, fourteen, viz. for the City of New Sarum, two. for
the Borough of Marleborough, one. for the Borough of the Devizes, one. for the
County of Wilts, ten.
For the County of Anglesey, two. For the County of Brecon, two. For the
County of Cardigan, two. For the County of Carmarthen, two. For the County
of Carnarvon, two. For the County of Denbigh, two. For the County of Flint,
two. For the County of Glamorgan, three, viz. for the Town of Card^ffe, one.
for the County of Glamorgan, two.
For the C^untie of Merioneth, one. For the County of Montgomery, two. For the
County of Pembrook, three, viz. for the Town of Haverfordwest, one. for the
County of Pembrook, two.
For the County of Radnor, two.
The distribution of the Persons to be chosen for Scotland, and the several
Counties C^ties, and places within the same, shall be according to such
proportions and number, as shall be agreed upon, and declar^d by the Lord
Protector and the major part of the Council, before the sending forth Writs of
Summons for the next Parliament. The distribution of the Persons to be chosen
for Ireland, and the several Counties, Cities, and places within the same,
shall be according to such proportions and number, as shall be agreed upon, and
declared by the Lord Protector, and the major part of the Council, before the
sending forth Writs of Summons for the next Parliament.

XI. That the Summons to Parliament shall be by Writ under the Great Seal of
England, directed to the Sh^^^ffs of the several and respective Counties, with
such alteration as may suit with the present Government, to be made by the Lord
Protector and his Council, which the Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of
the Great Seal, shall seal, issue, and send abroad by Warrant from the Lord
Protector. If the Lord Protector shall not give warrant for issuing of Writs of
Summons for the next Parliament, before the first day of June, one thousand
six-hundred fifty four, or for the Triennial Parliaments before the first day
of August in every third year, to be accounted as aforesaid; That then the
Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of the Great Seal for the time being
shall, without any Warrant or direction, within seven days after the said
first day of June, one thousand fix hundred fifty four, Seal, Issue, and send
abroad Writs of Summons (changing th^rein what is to be changed as aforesaid)
to the several and respective Sheriffs of England, Scotland, and Ireland, for
summoning the Parliament to meet at Westminster, the third of September next;
and shall likewise within seven days after the said first day of August, in
every third year, to be accounted from the dissolution of the precedent
Parliament, Seal, Issue, and send abroad several Writs of Summons, changing
therein what is to be changed, as aforesaid, for Summoning the Parliament to
meet at Westminster the sixth of November in that third year, That the said
several and respective Sheriffs shall, within ten days after the receipt of
such Writs as aforesaid, cause the same to be proclaimed and published in every
Market Town within his County, upon the Market-daies thereof, between Twelve
and Three of the Clock; and shall then also publish and declare the certain day
of the week and month for choosing Members to serve in Parliament for the Body
of the said County, according to the tenor of the said Writ, which shall be
upon Wednesday five weeks after the date of the Writ; and shall likewise
declare the place where the Election shall be made; for which purpose he shall
appoint the most convenient place for the whole County to meet in, and shall
send Precepts for Elections to be made in all and every City, Town, Borough or
place within his County, where Elections are to be made by virtue of these
Presents, to the Major, Sheriff, or other H^ad-Officer of such City, Town,
Borough or place, within Three days after the receipt of such Writ and Writs,
which the said Majors, Sheriffs and Officers respectively are to make
publication of, and of the certain day for such Elections to be made in the
said City, Town or place aforesaid, and to cause Elections to be made
accordingly.

XII. That at the day and place of Elections, the Sheriff of each Coun^y, and
the said Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other H^ad-Officers within their
Cities, Towns, Borough, and places respectively, shall take view of the said
Elections, and shall make return into the Chancery within Twenty-dayes after
the said Elections of the persons elected by the greater number of Electors,
under their hands and seals, between him on the one part, and the Electors on
the other part; wherein shall be contained, That the persons elected shall not
have power to alter the Government as it is hereby settled in one single Person
and a Parliament.

XIII. That the Sheriff, who shall writtingly and willingly make any f^ll
return, or neglect his duty, shall incur the penalty of Two thousand M^rks of
lawful English Money; the one moiety to the Lord Protector, and the other
moiety to such person as will sue for the same.

XIV. That all and every person and persons, who have aided, advis^d, assisted,
or abetted in any War against the Parliament, since the First day of January,
One thousand six hundred forty one (unless they have been since in the service
of the Parliament, and given signal Testimo^y of their good Affections
thereunto) shall be disabled, and be incapable to be elected, or to give any
Vote in the El^ction of any Members to serve in the next Parliament, or in the
three succeeding Tr^enniall Parliaments.

XV. That all such, who have advised, assisted, or abetted the Rebellion of
Ireland, shall be disabled and incapable for ever to be elected, or to give any
Vote in the Election of any Member to serve in Parliament: as also all such who
do or shall profess the Roman Catholic Religion.

XVI. Tha^ all Votes and Elections given or made contrary, or not according to
these Qualifications, shall be null and void: And if any person who is hereby
made incapable, shall give his Vote for Election of Members to serve in
Parliament, such person shall lose and forfe^t one full years value of his
real estate, and one full third part of his personal estate, one moiety
thereof to the Lord Protector, and the other moyetie to him, or them who shall
sue for the same.

XVII. That the persons who shall be elected to serve in Parliament shall be
such (and no other then such) as are persons of known Integrity, fearing God,
and of good conversation, and being of the age of One and twenty years.

XVIII. That all and every person and persons seized or possessed to his own
use, of any estate real^ or personal, to the value of Two hundred pounds, and
not within the aforesaid Exceptions, shall be capable to elect Members to serve
in Parliament for Counties.

XIX. That the Chancellor, Keeper or Commissioners of the Great Seal, shall be
sworn before they enter into their Offices, truly and faithfully to ^ssue forth
and send abroad Writs of Summons to Parliaments at the times, and in the manner
before expressed And in case of neglect or failer, to issue and send abroad Writs
accordingly, he or they shall for every such offense, be guilty of High
Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties thereof.

XX. That in case Writs be not issued out, as is before expressed, but that there
be a neglect therein, fifteen days after the time wherein the same ought to be
issued out by the Chancellor, Keeper or Commissioners of the Great Seal, that
then the Parliament shall, as often as such failer shall happen, assemble and
be held at Westminster, in the usual place, at the times prefixed, in manner,
and by the means hereafter expressed, That is to say, That the Sheriffs of the
several and respective Counties, Sheriffdoms, Cities, Boroughs and places
aforesaid, within England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland, the Chancellor, Masters
and Scholars of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the Major and
Bailiffs of the Borough of Borwick upon Tweed, and other the places aforesaid
respectively, shall at the several Courts and places to be appointed, as
aforesaid, within Thirty days after the said Fifteen days, cause such Members
to be chosen for their said several and respective Counties Sheriffdoms,
Universities, Cities, Boroughs, and places aforesaid, by such persons, and in
such manner, as if several and respective Writs of Summons to Parliament under
the Great Seal had issued and been awarded according to the Tenor abovesaid:
That if the Sheriff or other persons authorized, shall neglect his or their
duty herein; That all and every such Sheriff and person authorized as
aforesaid, so neglecting his or their duty, shall, for every such Offense, be
guilty of High Treason, and shall suffer the pains and penalties thereof.

XXI. That the Clerk, called The Clerk of the Commonwealth, in Chancery for the
time being, and all others who shall afterward execute that Office, to whom
the Returns shall be made, shall for the next Parliament and the two succeeding
Triennial Parliaments, the next day after such Return, certify the Names of
the several persons so returned, and of the places for which he and they were
chosen respectively, unto the Council, who shall peruse the said Returns, and
examine whether the persons so Elected and Returned be such as is ag^eeable to
the Qualifications, and not dis^bled to be elected: And that every person and
persons being so duly Elected, and being approved of by the major part of the
Council to be persons not disabled, but qualified as aforesaid, shall be
esteemed a Member of Parliament, and be admitted to sit in Parliament, and not
otherwise.

XXII. That the persons chosen and assembled in manner aforesaid, or any Sixty
of them, shall be, and be deemed the Parliament of England, Scotland and
Ireland; and the Supreme Legislative Power to be and reside in the Lord
Protector and such Parliament, in manner herein expressed.

XXIII. That the Lord Protector, with the advice of the major part of the
Council, shall at any other time then is before expressed, when the necessities
of the State shall require it, summon Parliaments in manner before expressed,
which shall not be Adjourned, Prorogued or Dissolved without their own Consent,
during the first three Months of their Sitting: And in case of future War with
any Foreign State, a Parliament shall be forthwith Summoned for their Advice
concerning the same.

XXIV. That all Bills agreed unto by the Parliament, shall be presented to the
Lord Protector for his consent; and in case he shall not give his consent
thereto, within Twenty days after they shall be presented to him, or give
satisfaction to the Parliament within the time limited; That then, upon
Declaration of the Parliament, That the Lord Protector has not consented nor
given Satisfaction, such Bills shall pass into, and become Laws, although he
shall not give his consent thereunto; provided such Bills contein nothing in
them contrary to the matters contained in these Presents.

XXV. That Philip Lord Viscount Lisle, Charles Fleetwood Esquire, John Lambert
Esquire, Sir Gilbert Pickering Baronet, Sir Charles Wolseley Baronet, Sir
Anthony Ashley-Cooper Baronet, Edward Montagu Esquire, John Disborow Esquire,
Walter Strickland Esquire, Henry Lawrence Esquire, William Sydenham Esquire,
Philip Jones Esquire, Richard Major Esquire, Francis Rous, Phil. Skippon
Esquires, or any seven of them, shall be a Council for the purposes expressed in
this Writing, and upon the death, or other removal of any of them, the
Parliament shall nominate six persons of Ability, Integrity, and fearing God,
for every one that is dead or removed, out of which the major part of the
Council shall elect two, and present them to the Lord Protector, of which he
shall elect one; And in case the Parliament shall not nominate within Twenty
days after notice given unto them thereof, the major part of the Council of
shall nominate three as aforesaid, to the Lord Protector, who out of them shall
supply the vacancy; And until this Choice be made, the remaining part of the
Council shall execute as fully in all things, as if their number were full: And
in case of corruption, or other mis-carriage in any of the Council in their
Trust, the Parliament shall appoint seven of their numbers, and the Council
six, who, together with the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Commissioners of
the Great Seal for the time being, shall have power to hear and determine LAM
such corruption and mis-carriage, and to award and inflict punishment, as the
nature of the Offense shall deserve; which punishment shall not be pardoned or
remitted by the Lord Protector: And in the interval of Parliaments, the major
part of the Council, with the consent of the Lord Protector, may, for Corrupt
on, or other mis-carriage, as aforesaid, suspend any of their number from the
exercise of their Trust, if they shall find it just, until the matter shall
be heard and examined, as aforesaid.

XXVI. That the Lord Protector, and the major part of the Council aforesaid,
may at any time before the meeting of the next Parliament, add to the Council
such persons as they shall think fit; provided the number of the Council be not
made thereby to exceed One and twenty, and the Quorum to be prop^rtioned
accordingly by the Lord Protector, and the major part of the Council.

XXVII. That a constant yearly Revenue shall be raised, settled and established
for maintaining of Ten thousand Horse and Dragoons, and Twenty thousand Foot,
in England, Scotland and Ireland, for the Defense and Security thereof, and
also for a convenient number of Ships for guarding of the Seas; besides Two
hundred thousand pounds per annum, for defraying the other necessary Charges
for administration of Justice, and other Expenses of the Government: Which
Revenue shall be raised by the Customs, and such other ways and means as shall
be agreed upon by the Lord Protector and Council, and shall not be taken away
or diminisht, nor the way agreed upon for raising the same altered, but by the
consent of the Lord Protector and the Parliament.

XXVIII. That the said yearly Revenue shall be paid into the publ^ck Treasury,
and shall be issued out for the Uses aforesaid.

XXIX. That in case there shall not be cause hereafter to keep up so great a
Defense at Land or Sea, but that there be an abatement made thereof; the Money
which w^ll be saved thereby, shall remain in bank for the Public Service, and
not be employed to any other use but by consent of Parliament; or in the
intervals of Parliament, by the Lord Protector and major part of the Council.

XXX. That the raising of Money for defraying the Charge of present
extraordinary Forces both at Land and Sea, in respect of the present Wars,
shall be by consent in Parliament, and not otherwise; save only that the Lord
Protector, with the consent of the major part of the Council, for preventing
the Disorders and Dangers which may otherwise fall out both at Sea and Land,
shall have power, until the meeting of the first Parliament, to raise Money
for the purposes aforesaid, and also to make Laws and Ordinances for the Peace
and Welfare of these Nations where it shall be necessary, which shall be
binding and in force, until Order shall be taken in Parliament concerning the
same.

XXXI. That the Lands, Tenements, Rents, Royalties, Jurisdictions and
Hereditaments which remain yet unfold or undisposed of by Act or Ordinance of
Parliament, belonging to the Commonwealth, (except the Forests and Chases, and
the Honors and Manors belonging to the same; the Lands of the Rebels in
Ireland, lying in the four Counties of Dublin, Cork, Kildare, and Katerlaugh;
the Lands forfeited by the People of Scotland in the late Wars; and also the
Lands of Papists and Delinquents in England, who have not yet compounded) shall
be vested in the Lord Protector; To hold to him and his Successors, Lord
Protectors of these Nations, and shall not be aliened, but by consent in
Parliament: And all Debts, Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Penalties and Profits,
certain and casual, due to the Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority
of Parliament, shall be due to the Lord Protector, and be payable into his
Public Receipt, and shall be recovered and prosecuted in his Name.

XXXII. That the Office of the Lord Protector over these Nations, shall be
Elective, and not Hereditary; and upon the death of the Lord Protector, an
other fit Person shall be forthwith elected to succeed Him in the Government,
which Election shall be by the Council; who, immediately upon the death of the
Lord Protector, shall assemble in the Chamber where they usually fit in
Council, and having given notice to all their number, of the cause of their
assembling, shall (being thirteen at least present) proceed to the Election;
and before they depart out of the said Chamber, shall elect a fit Person to
succeed in the Government, and forthwith cause Procamation thereof to be made
in all the three Nations as shall be requisite: And the Person that they, or
the major part of them shall elect, as aforesaid, shall be, and shall be taken
to be Lord Protector over these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereto belonging: Provided, that none of the Children of the
late King, nor any or his Line or Fam^ly, be elected to be Lord Protector or
other Chief Magistrate over these Nations, or any the Dominions thereto
belonging. And until the aforesaid Election be past, the Council shall take
care of the Government, and administer in all things as fully as the Lord
Protector, or the Lord Protector and Council are enabled to do.

XXXIII. That OLIVER CROMWELL, Captain General of the Forces of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, shall be, and is hereby declared to be LORD PROTECTOR of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, for his life.

XXXIV. That the Chancellor, Keeper or Commissioners of the Great Seal, the
Treasurer, Admiral, Chief Governors of Ireland and Scotland, and the Chief
Justices of both the Benches, shall be chosen by the approbation of Parliament;
and in the intervals of Parliament, by the approbation of the major part of the
Council, to be afterward approved by the Parliament.

XXXV. That the Christian Religion, contained in the Scriptures, be held forth
and recomended as the Public Profession of these Nations; and that as soon as
may be, a provision less subject to scruple and contention, and more certain
than the present, be made for the Encouragement and Maintenance of able and
painful Teachers, for instructing the People, and for discovery and confutation
of Error, Heresy, and whatever is contrary to sound Doctrine: And that, until
such Provision be made, the present Maintenance shall not be taken away nor
impeached.

XXXVI. That to the public Profession held forth, none shall be compelled by
penalries or otherwise, but that Endeavors be used to win them by sound
Doctrine, and the Example of a good Conversation.

XXXVII. That such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, (though differing
in judgment from the Doctrine, Worship or Discipline publicly held forth)
shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of the
Faith, and exercise of their Religion; so as they abuse not this Liberty, to
the civil Injury of others, and to the actual Disturbance of the Public Peace
on their parts: Provided, this Liberty be not extended to Popery or Prelacy,
nor to such as (under the profession of Christ) hold forth and practis^^
Licentiousness.

38 XXXVIII. That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Clauses in any Law,
Statute and Ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid Liberty shall be
esteemed as null and void.

XXXIX. That the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament; made for the Sale or other
Disposition of the Lands, Rents and Hereditaments of the late King, Queen and
Prince, of Archbishops and Bishops, etc. Deans and Chapters, the Lands of
Delinquents, and Fo^^st Lu^ds, or any of them; or of any other Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments belonging to the Commonwealth, shall no way
be impeached or made invalid; but shall remain good and firm: And that the
Securities given by Act and Ordinance of Parliament for any sum or sums of
Money, by any of the said Lands, the Excize, or by any other public Revenue;
and also the Securities given by the Public Faith of the Nation; and the
Engagement of the Publ^ck Faith for satisfaction of Debts and Damages, shall
remain firm and good, and not be made void and invalid upon any pretense
whatsoever.

XL. That the Articles given to, or made with the Enemy, and afterward
confirmed by Parliament, shall be performed and made good to the persons
concerned therein. And that such Appeals, as were depending in the last
Parliament, for relief concerning Bills of Sale of Delinquents Estates, may be
heard and determined the next Parliament, Any thing in this Writing, or
otherwise to the contrary notwithstanding.

XLI. That every successive Lord Protector over these Nations, shall take and
subscribe a Solemn Oath, in the presence of the Council, and such others as
they shall call to them, That he will seek the Peace, Quiet, and Welfare of
these Nations, cause Law and Justice to be equally administered and that he will
not violate or infringe the matters and things contained in this Writing; and
in all other things will to his power, and to the best of his understand^ng,
govern these Nations, according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs.

XLII. That each person of the Council shall, before they enter upon their
Trust, take, and subscribe an Oath, That they will be true and faithful in
their Trust, according to the best of their knowledge; And, that in the
Election of every successive Lord Protector, they shall proceed therein
impartially, and do nothing therein for any promise, fear, favor or reward.

The OATH taken by his Highness Oliver Cromwell, LORD PROTECTOR.
WHereas the major part of the last Parliament (judging that their sitting any
longer, as then constituted, would not be for the good of this Commonwealth)
did dissolve the same, and by a Writing under their Hands, dated the 12. day of
this instant December, resigned unto Me their Powers and Authorities; And
whereas it was necessary thereupon, That some speedy course should be taken for
the settlement of these Nations upon such a Basis and foundation, as, by the
blessing of God, might be lasting, secure Property, and answer those great Ends
of Religion and Liberty, so long contended for; And upon full and mature
Consideration had of the Form of Government hereunto annexed, being satisfied
that the same, through Divine assistance, may answer the Ends aforementioned;
And having also been desired, and advised, as well by several persons of
Interest and Fidelity in this Commonwealth, as the Officers of the Army, to
take upon me the Protection and Government of these Nations in the manner
expressed in the said Form of Government, I have accepted thereof, and do
hereby declare my Acceptance accordingly. And do promise in the presence of
God, That I will not violate, or infringe the matters and things contained
therein, but, to my power, observe the same, and cause them to be observed; And
shall in all other things to the best of my understanding, govern these Nations
according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs, seeking their Peace, and causing
Justice and Law to be equally administered.

O. CROMWELL.
Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of all the Forces of this Commonwealth, and
now delared Lord Protector thereof, did this sixteenth day of December, 1653.
sign this Writing, and solemnly promise as is therein contained, in the
presence of the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, who
administered the same Oath, and of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, diverse of the Judges of the Land, the Officers of State and Army, and
many other persons of quality.




