A Marriage Sermon.

A SERMON CALLED A Wife mistaken, or a Wife and no Wife: or Leah in stead of
Rachel.

A Sermon accused for Railing against Women; for maintaining Poligamy, many
Wives, for calling Jacob a Hocus-Pocus.

A Sermon laughed at more than a Play (by the Ignorant) for many such mistakes:
Justified by the Wife.

Wisdom is Justified of her Children. By Tho. Grantham, M. Art, sometimes
Curate of High Barnet near London; now Professor of a speedy way of teaching
the Greek and Latin tongue in Mugwell street, near the sign of the Sun.

Jnvenies aliquem -- LONDON, Printed for T. P. in Queens-head Alley, near
Pater noster-row. 1643.

To the Reader.
REader, this Sermon was more disfigured then David's Servants were by Hanun
when he shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their Garments in
the middle even to their Buttocks. 2. Sam. 10.4. So shaved, so cut, so
ridiculously mangled was this Sermon, that when I saw it I could not tell
whether I should laugh or cry. Thou know the Learning, Zeal, Patience,
Apologies of the Saints have been brought forth by the Herisies, Vices,
Tyrannies, Slanders of the Times; so comes out this Little Work ambitious
only to be a Saver, which if thy discretion in judgings will strive to make,
I shall be thine, or else hold thee like one of those who condemned it: But Id
quod dicere nolo.

Genesis 29. verse. 25. And it came to pass that in the morning behold it was
Leah. And he said unto Laban, What is this thou have done unto me? did not I
serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then have thou beguiled me?


IN the text you may observe a Conjunction and a division: a Conjunction, here
are two together that should be asunder, Jacob and Leah, And in the morning
behold it was Leah. A division, here are two asunder that should be together,
Jacob and Rachel: and first of the Conjunction as fittest for this season, and
opportunity; you have seen the quality of this conjunction, it was an ill
Conjunction, a great deal of deceit in it, and where is there a Conjunction, a
Marriage, but there is deceit in it, and least this deceit should cause a
separation, the Church binds them together before God and man, for better for
worse, for richer for poorer. And unless this course were taken, how soon
would there be a partition, their qualities being almost as different as heaven
and hell, as the good Angels and the bad. Nabal and Abigail, Nabal a fool and
churl, and of so base a disposition, such a man of Belial, that his own
servants said a man could not tell how to speak to him: and she a kind
complementall woman she fell at David's feet, and offered to wash the feet of
his servants. David and Michal, Michal a scoffing woman, deriding David for
dancing before the Arc, and he a man after Gods own heart; Socrates with
Xantippe, she is like a Quotidian Ague, or at the best she is like Saul's evil
spirit that comes too often upon him. Moses and Zipporah, she a terrible fiery
woman, Thou art a bloody husband to me, says she, and Moses the meekest man
above all the men of the earth. The learned distinguish a fourfold deceit in
Marriage, the first is error persona, when Leah is given in stead of Rachel,
one party for another, as to Jacob, and this mistake does hinder and nullify
Marriage: for in Marriage there is a mutual love and consent One to another, but
this is not where Leah is given in stead of Rachel, and therefore no Marriage.
But will some say, is it possible that Jacob (who was so subtle a man) should
be so deceived, he was noted for a supplanter by his Brother Esau; Is he not
rightly called Jacob, for he has supplanted me these two times of my
birthright and blessing. He was so grave, so arch a supplanter, that he could
deceive his father although his voice betrayed him, and although his father
told him it was the voice of Jacob, yet he pressed him to bless him in stead
of his brother Esau. We say that man is an excellent Hocus-Pocus, excellent in
legerdemaine, and slight of hand that can deceive one that looks upon him. But
he that can deceive the hearing, and the feeling, he is far more excellent: my
sight may be deceived for I may take that which is Pictured to be lively and
zeal, but my hearing, my feeling cannot be so easily deceived. Thomas would not
believe his seeing, his hearing, but when he came to feeling to lay his hand in
our Saviors side, then he cried out, My Lord and my God. And now I suppose you
are ready to ask, how this Subtle man was deceived? The deceit was thus, solene
olim sponsae obvelata facie traduci ad torum mortalem pudoris causa: In those
days the Brides came veiled and Masked to their Marriage Beds, for modesty
sake, and it was a sign of Modesty to be silent. And thus much for the first
deceit, which is error personae, a mistake of the person, as this text
represents to you. There is another deceit, which is error qualitatis, when a
man takes as he thinks he has, one thrifty, honest, fair, and she proves a
painted whorish, liquorish slut. And this deceit is general, for many women
show like the Egyptian Temples, very beautiful without and built, and adorned
with precious stones, says, Lucian, but if you seek what god they worship
within, you shall find him to be a Cat, or a Goat, or an Ape, or some such
ridiculous ill favored creature: so, many women, although they be fair and
beautiful without, are full of many vanities, fickle, unconstant, lascivious
affections: many a man thinks he has a saint, when he has a Devil, a fair
woman, when she is a painted plaistered faced Iesabel; I will not speak of
these painted tombs and sepulchers, beautiful without, but loathsome within,
these Apples of Sodom, that seem fair to the sight but at the least touch
they fall to dust: so the least approaching discovers the corruption of these
creatures, so great is their corruption it corrupts the sweetest perfumes, and
makes them loathsome as themselves: but I will not rake any longer in this
unsavory dunghill, There are two other errors, or deceits in Marriage, as
error Conditionis, and error fortunae: but I let them pass, for fear I should
run into the error of being tedious to this assembly. I come now to the
division, or separation, there is discovery of an ill Conjunction, therefore I
will cast my meditations a little upon this appearance, or discovery of this
Conjunction, In the morning behold it was Leah. There is many a man sleeps with
Leah and thinks it is Rachel, there is many a man so blinded in his love and
affection that he is as much or more mistaken in the qualities of his wife then
Jacob was in the person of Leah: many a man thinks he has a wife that loves
him, when she cares not for him, and he may think that she is sighing and
sorrowing in his absence, when she is Revelling and Dancing. You may read Pro.
7.18. there is a woman speaks to a man in her husbands absence to take his fill
of love with her: he (may be) thinks, she is weeping in his absence, when she
is tumbling in her perfumed bed, as you may read there, verse 17. I have
perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cynamon; I have decked it with
coverings of tapestry, and fine linen of Egypt: no question this woman
embraces her husband when he comes home, and he discovers nothing: for the way
of an whorish woman, (as Solomon says) is like the flight of a Bird in the
air, like the passage of a ship upon the sea, like a serpent creeping into a
rock: no sign of the birds flying, of the serpents creeping, of the ships
passage.

Look upon Ioseph's Mistress, she has his coat to show for honesty, Ecce
signum, Behold the coat of this Hebrew: did Sampson think those hands would
have clipped his locks, that had so often embraced his body? Some rash men do
maintain, that the reason why men think there are so many good women, is,
because they are so blind and ignorant themselves; if they had but the eyes of
the Wise, to see with Solomon's eyes, may be they would say, There was not one
good of a thousand, and he had told them one by one. And how does Solomon
define a good woman? just as the Philosopher does, Vacuum ex supposito quod
detur; if there be a Vacuum, it is Locus non repletus corpore; if there be, or
shall ever be such a thing in the world as a good woman, then she is this and
that, she is like a merchants Ship that brings her food from far: and what of
greater value! she is like to precious jewels, she is like to them, but there
is none like to her, none of equal value with her. Solomon says, She is a
crown to her husband, she is the glory of her husband, says Saint Paul, the
very skarlet she clothes her servants in does show her honorable, God
himself calls her an helper, and such a helper she is, that man could not have
been capable of that blessing, Increase and multiply, without her, then it was
The Seed of the woman that brake the Serpents head: she was Deipora, she
brought forth a God, and here I will bebold to say out of the due honor to
that Sex, that there have been women have deserved these praises of Solomon:
What was that Ester? that Cherubin of the Church under whose wings it was safe:
the Papists call the Virgin Mary, Regina Coeli, Queen of Heaven, and they pray
to her to command our Savior, Matter impera Filio, Mother command thy Son; She
has more Churches dedicated to her than our Savior, than all the Trinity,
although she paid her Fine in milk, but He in blood, (as a great Divine
says.) How happy has this Kingdom been under a Queen, there are many eyes now
living that have seen it, and not a man but knows it; I need not instance in
particulars the elect Lady and her sister, to whom Saint John writ, Priscilla
able to inform a learned man Apollos in the Scripture: these women were highly
honored by that Apostle called from Heaven, Greet Priscilla and Aquila, Romans
16.3. Aquila and Priscilla salute you. 1. Cor. 16.19. salute Priscilla and
Aquila, 3. Tim. 4.19. Priscilla went with him into Syria, Act. 18.18. and thus
much for the discovery, how long may a man sleep before he knows with whom, or
what she is he sleeps withal, before he knows whether it be Leah or Rachel. I
am come now to the division or separation, and you see it is a high and great
division, Jacob begins to word it, to fall to terms with Laban (who was his
Master) What is this thou have done unto me did not I serve with thee for
Rachel? wherefore then have thou beguiled me? And indeed the inconveniences
were very many that befell Jacob by this wicked act of Laban: first of all he
made his daughter a whore, and a whore is odious to the children of God, she
was either to be burnt, or to be stoned. Then the wrong done to Rachel, being
deceived of her expectation, was enough to make her weep her self blear eyed
like Leah, then he brought an inconvenience upon Jacob, having more wives then
one, some say it was a sin, some hold it a great Inconvenience to have one,
therefore much more to have two.

The married man is entangled like a fish in a net; he comes merrily in, but he
is mightily perplexed when he cannot get out: then this action of Laban was
enough to set the sisters at variance, and what joy could Jacob have when his
wives were divided, it was enough to devide his heart: then the desire of rule,
and jealousies, and distrusts that one has of the other, then the charges to
maintain two, whereas Jacob if he had had but one, he would never have sought
further: God made but one for Adam, and Lamech was the first that had two
Wives, and he had no more then two, and he was of the posterity of Cain, and
condemned by the fathers: and from Adam to Abraham none of the posterity of
Seth had more then one wife (that we read of) they two shall be one flesh, and
how can that be if a man have many wives. God made only male and female, and
he took but one rib, and made of one rib, One Woman, not many. I will not say,
it was a sin to have many wives, for I find it in the Law, Deuteronomy. 21.15. If a
man have two wives, one that he loves, and another that he hates, and there
the Law speaks of both their sons as legitimate, Deuteronomy. 17.17. the Law does
forbid the King to have many wives which may draw away his mind, and Saint
Augustine (upon that place) says, permissum and Regi habere plures uxores non
plurimas, he may have more then one or two, but not many, and Iehoiada that was
a most holy Priest, took two wives, for King Ioash, 2. Chron. 24.3. but me
thinks I hear some say, Laban is unjustly condemned for dealing so strictly
with Jacob: was it not a great kindness in Laban to take Jacob, Jacob that had
cosined his Father, his Brother, and to trust him with his flock, and then it
was a kindness that he gave him his daughter, and for ought I know the better
of the two, the fairest is not always the best, Beautiful Rachel sold Jacob
for Mandrakes, whereas blear eyed Leah bought him and went out to meet him,
Genesis 30.16. Tender eyed Leah will be weeping at my misfortunes, when beautiful
Rachel will be laughing with another: Abraham went in danger with beautiful
Sarah, but Jacob lives secure with tender eyed Leah, Rachel stole her fathers
gods, and could see her Father and husband quarrel the while, when Leah was
continually weeping, Rachel will be impatient if she have not what she desires,
give me Children or else I dye: and what is beauty with such disquietnesse, but
like a fair house haunted with sprites, or a bed of violets with a serpent,
but look upon Leah she is more moderate, tender eyed, she will be weeping in
stead of scoulding, Rachel will be subject to be wandering like Dina, Leah is
tender eyed, and the wind will hurt her, veniunt spectantur ut Ipse, they
delight to be looked upon, what are these many fancies in their dressings but
so many signs to invite a man to Inn there if he please, whereas the
Passenger else had gone on his way, what does the fowler whistle for but to
catch the Bird and such is the end of their enchantments. Thus you see the
danger of beauty, there is more danger in it then in the most unruly Elements,
the fire has no power of a man if he do not touch it, nor the water, but if a
man look but upon beauty, it will endanger him, and it is kept with a great
deal of danger and care, as the Apples of the Hesperides with a watchful
Dragon. But will some say, why do you maintain bleare eyed Leah against
beautiful Rachel, Leahs fault was great in lying with Jacob. To this I answer,
fornication was held no sin amongst the Gentiles, and the Church of Rome holds,
fornicationem non vagam, that if a man keep constantly to one woman it is no
sin: and here let no man be harsh against Leah, for she is tender eyed, and
can weep tears enough to wash away her sin, tears enough to wash our Saviors
feet, alas be not harsh against her, she is blear eyed already and too much
weeping will make her blind; what if Leah have a blemish in the eye of her
body, yet her understanding, the eye of her soul may be clear, and
beautiful, and if men consider rightly, the greatest deformity and blemish in
a woman is, to be bleare eyed in her understanding, to mistake a man's actions,
not to see them clearly, if her husband be sociable, then he is given to
drunkenness, if silent, then he has no discourse in him, if merry, not that
gravity that becomes him, if he put not himself upon hard adventures to raise
his fortunes, she is disquieted, and if he do, and be foiled, then she
contemnes him; give me the eye of the understanding, let the other eye be as
clear as Crystal, if this be blemished there is no joy. For ought I know, this
Laban, this Idolater, shall rise up against many Christians: how usual is it,
for many a man to make fair promises, to promise a man Rachel, he shall have
this and that, and any thing his heart can desire if he will serve them, but
when a man has done all he can, they will put Leah upon him, some bleare eyed
unhandsome thing, upon which so soon as a man can but look, he shall find it
to be Leah, it is plain enough to be seen, behold it was Leah, it is a hard
thing for a man to get a Rachel of his Master, to get any thing that has any
delight or pleasure in it, great men will not part with their Rachels. And
still I say, this Laban had more honesty and goodness then many a Christian, for
although he had done Jacob a little wrong, yet he had so much mildnes, and
Gentleness, and Gentility, as he did suffer Jacob to speak to him and to tell
him of it, why have thou beguiled me thus. Now there are rich men, if they have
done a man a displeasure, will not be told of it. Nay if a poor man trust a
rich man with money, if he be not disposed to give it, or is unwilling, will be
angry if the poor man ask it, and do him all the mischief that may be, and
what is this but like thieves that do not only rob a man, but bind a man
too, and gag him that he shall not speak, or like Rogues that murder a man
because they shall not betray them; God send me to deal with Laban, with an
Idolater, I shall find a man that I dare speak to, I shall find a mate that
will give me Leah, that will give me something and cousin me of all.

God complained of his vinyard, that when he had taken a great deal of pains
with it, it brought forth wild grapes, ecce Labruscus, behold wild grapes
plain enough to be seen. And here if I should show to the world with an Ecce,
the wild grapes, the Basest actions of men, I make no question but men would
pass the same judgment that David did upon the rich man that took the poor
man's Lamb. And here let every man be exhorted not to deceive his servant or
his kinsman or his friend, Jacob for deceiving his brother and his Father, was
paid in his own Coin, and enjoyed not the blessing twenty years after: Laban
deceived him in his wife, Laban for deceiving Jacob, was deceived by Jacob,
with the rods he laid. Rachel stole Labans gods for deceiving her of her
husband at first. Jacob deceived his Father with Goats skins, and he himself
was deceived with the blood of a Goat. David cut off the lap of Saul's coat, and
his clothes would not keep him warm in his old age. Sampsons eye lusted after
a Philistine, and Sampsons eye was put out, Ieroboams hand reached to the
Prophet, and that hand withered. Thus you see how God punishes sin in the same
act, in the same part, in the same kind. Time will not give me leave here to
show you how many a man sleeps with Leah, with some ugly deformed sin, and
being blinded in sin and darkness, thinks it is Rachel, (very beautiful) and
loves it entirely, till the morning light of Gods grace arise, and then he sees
the deformity of his sin, how bleare eyed it is, how ill-favored, and now let
every man consider how we are all servants to God, and we serve him for Rachel,
for some pleasant thing we delight in, as the Apostles dreamed of a Kingdom,
if it please God to give us Leah, in stead of Rachel, to give us that which
pleases us not so well, let us be content with it and serve him on still, he
will at the last give us Rachel, we shall be married to him in whom are all
joys, such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive. To which God of his mercy bring us: to God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost be all honor, etc.

Exceptions taken at these words in a Sermon.

Malum non est nisi in bono, every evil is grounded upon some good, as in
adultery, there is congressus viri and foeminae naturalis, there is that good
of generation, increase of the world: In drunkenness society, but in pride
there is no good, by this men and Angels fell.

They accuse me for saying good is joined with evil.

This same you may read in M. Perkins his Treatise of Predestination, p. 6. 15.
There is not any absolute evil says he, because their is nothing so evil but
it has some good joined therewith: and p. 616. If so be that evil were
absolutely evil, as good is Absolutely good, he would in no wise will the event
of evil, neither should there be any evil existent at all: his adversary
agrees with him: read King Bishop of London upon Jonah, lecture 18. p. 238. In
sin two things, the act, the defect, good and bad, he has if from the schools,
as you may read there: read the same Lecture, p. 240. In Adultery the
commination of the Adulterers wicked, the creature good. Anselme, de casu
Diaboli, Every creature of God is good, ens and bonum convertuntur, Adultery
naught: thou shall not commit adultery. In drunkenness, society, that is good,
it is not good for man to be alone, drunkenness naught, woe be to them that
rise up early to follow drunkenness, Isa. 5.11. he that will be further
satisfied let him read Anselme, Perkins, Arminius, Twiss. Bishop King in the
places cited,

If they had objected thus, they had showed less ignorance.

If every evil have his good, why is pride excepted.

To this I answer, In other sins man turns from God either ignorantly, or out
of infirmity, or his delight and pleasure draws him: but pride turns from
God, merely out of a self will, because it will not be subject to God. And
therefore say Divines, that when other vices fly from God, pride stands to it,
and opposes God; know therefore it is expressly said, Iam. 4.6. That God
resists the proud, sets himself in battle array against him, as the Original
signifies, and that which is a consequent in other sins, is the beginning and
chief in pride: for in other sins a man does not hate God first, but he loves
the creature first inordinately, and then he hates God, his love being contrary
to his desire: but pride hates God at first, that is the chief, the first
onset. And the hating the Aversion, the Turning from God, is formalis and
completiva ratio peccati, say the schools, The conversion has it self only
materialiter in peccato. And whereas the Act of other sins is good, The very
act of this sin is naught cujus actus est contemptus Dei, say the schools:
upon these reasons I was bold to say there was no good in pride, that is, no
such good as there is in other sins, or no good in comparison of the good other
sins have. And if I should say absolutely there was no good in pride, these
words would defend me, cujus actus est contemptus Dei. Gregory in his Morals
does not number pride amongst the seven chief and capital sins, but makes it
the Queen and Mother of all, Ipsa vitiorum Regina superbia, then he says, it
has a general influence into all things; some are proud of their riches, some
of Eloquence, some of earthly, some of heavenly gifts. If it be in David's
Arithmetic, in his numbering of the people it is dangerous: If in Paul's
Revelations, but God gives sufficient grace, It is a Pestiferous deadly
disease, says he, corrupting all the body: others call it the ruin of all
virtues. Prosper says there is no sin without it lib. de vita Contemplat.
And in some kind the schools agree to it: other sins corrupt, but the
contrary virtue, this corrupts al, It is that dead fly in the precious ointment
of all the virtues, and makes them send forth a stinking savor, from whence
comes blasphemy, the evil actions of Satan, opposition to God, but from pride
that will not be subject to God, nor limited within his Laws; Apostasy comes
from pride, Eccles. 10. Initiu^ superbiae Apostatate a Deo est prima superbiae
pars, say the schools: and the blasphemy of the Devils ascends from Pride, Ps.
73. superbia eorum qui te oderunt ascendit semper: there blasphemy is called
pride: Pride is the beginning of all sin, Eccles. 10.14. And although it be
said of coveteousnesse. Tim. 6.10. that it is the root of all evil, yet it
differs much from pride, because coveteousnesse is a turning to a Mutable good,
by which this sin is nourished, and fed, but pride is an Aversion from God, an
Absolute denial of Obedience to God, and therefore it is called the beginning
of sin, quia e^ part aversionis Incipit ratio mali.

As for that passage of a good fellow, If there be any good in drunkenness let
us take the other Cup: I answer, you must not sin because there is pleasure
or profit in a sin, both which are good: There is Esca and Laqueus, the honey,
and the sting, take one, avoid the other. And thus you have seen the fall of
this reeling Argument.

FINIS.

