A New Way of Reading the Bible, According to the Three Norfolk Clergymen,
THOSE Champions against the QUAKERS. Norfolk.
Edward Beekham, D. D. and Rector of Gayten-Thorpe. Henry Meriton, Rector of
Oxborough. Lancaster Topcliffe, L. B. sometimes Sen. Fell. of Gone. and Caius
College, Cambridge.

Inferred from an Instance of Theirs, in a Book Entitled, A Brief Discovery of
some of the Blasphemous and Seditious, Principles and Practices of the People
called Quakers, taken out of their most noted and approved Authors: Humbly
Offered to the Consideration of the King and both Houses of Parliament.
UPon sight whereof I was curious to peruse a Book that carried so rare and
extraordinary a Title: And to be brief in my Observation thereupon, shall only
consider their first Paragraph, and therein show how Egregiously these Scholars
and Divines stumbles at the Threshould: And that I may be just to them, take
the Paragraph at large; a Justice they have not observed toward the Quakers;
They say, George Fox, the first Founder, and great Apostle of this Sect, Great
Mystery, Page 209. says against his Opponent thus, This Light, that does
enlighten every one that comes into the World, which he ( viz. G. F's
Opponent) calls Conscience, is not Conscience. And in Page 331. ( G. F. further
faith.). The Light which every one that comes into the World is enlightened
withal, is Not Conscience; for the Light was before any thing was made, or
Conscience named. And again, to aggravate the supposed Blasphemy upon them,
they make this Marginal Note, viz. The Quakers teach, that the Light within, by
which they are guided is not Conscience.

Now this being in the Front of their Book, to be sure it was not intended for
one of the least of the Quakers Blasphemies; though they might as well have
called it Sedition (the other Crime they lay to their Charge) as to make it
Blasphemy, to say, That the Light within is not Conscience. But if this be
Blasphemy, pray let us hear how the Scripture will Read after their new way of
Translating Conscience for Light, which the Quakers, according to the Holy
Evangelist, etc. call Christ, and they call Conscience. John 1. 4, 9. In him (
meaning the Divine Word) was Life, and the Life was the Conscience of Men: And
the Conscience shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not.
There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John, the same came for a
Witness, to bear witness of the Conscience, that all Men through him might
believe. He was not that Conscience, but was sent to bear witness of that
Conscience: That was the true Conscience, that lights every Man that comes
into the World. John 8. 12. I am the Conscience of the World, he that follows
me, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Conscience of Life. And
also, 1 John 1. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. This then is the Message which we have heard of
Him, and declare unto you, That God is Conscience, and in him is no Darkness at
all: If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we Lie, and
do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Conscience, as he is in the Conscience,
we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin. Again, Romans 13. 12. Put on the Armor of Conscience.
Lest the Conscience of the Glorious Gospel, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 4. God, who
commanded the Conscience to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts,
to give us the Conscience of the Knowledge, etc 2 Cor. 4. 6. Lastly, The
Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the Conscience of the Lamb.

But to read those Scripture Quotations truly, leave out the word Conscience,
and read the word Light instead thereof.

It is to be lamented, that Men that wear so Religious a Character, and would
pass for the Key and Keepers of the Holy Scripture to the People, should be so
much too hard for themselves, by letting their Mistake of the Quakers
Principles carry them into so great an abuse of the Scriptures, as to be guilty
of the Crime they would fasten upon them; as certainly they all are, who
degrade the Divine Light of Christ, in alleging it to be Conscience, which may
as well be Blind and Defiled, as Knowing and Pure.

Besides, it is to be admired, that these Three Clergymen, who by virtue of
their Function, are obliged frequently to read the Common Prayer, should be
ignorant of a Principle so Emphatically Expressed therein, as may be read in that
Book, viz. The Gospel on Christmas Day. The Collect. on John the Evangelist,
and the Epistle on the same Day, with the Collects on Whitsunday and Monday;
and many other places, too tedious to mention, considering my intended Brevity.
And why they should Brand the Quakers, that agree with the Church of England in
so great a Principle, I know not, unless in Reallity they are not what their
Character bespeaks them to be.

FINIS.

