THE Seventh-day Sabbath Ceased as Ceremonial, AND YET The Morality of the
fourth COMMAND Remains: OR, Seven Reasons tending to prove, that the fourth
COMMAND in the Decalogue is of a different nature from the other nine.

Being partly Moral, and so it obliges all men; partly Ceremonial, and so it is
done away by Christ.

Also certain Answers to some of the said Reasons, proved insufficient.

WHEREUNTO Is added a Postscript, showing the Judgment of the Jews and Ancient
Christians, touching the SABBATH DAY.

By Tho. Grantham.

Gal. 4. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

Gal. 2. 4, 5. And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came
in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they
might bring us into bondage. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an
hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1667.

To the Church of Jesus Christ, built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, of which Jesus Christ is the chief corner Stone. Salutation.
Christian Brethren,
HAving (by Providence) this occasion put into my hand, I am desirous to make
use of it, thereby to impart a word or two, if so I may be useful to you, in
recommending to your thoughts, these short Labors of my Companion in the Work
of Christ. The work (I say) is short, yet surely it contains much of matter in
it, wherein (if you be studious) you may find occasion greatly to enlarge. It
is true, he hat^ not meddled so much with the particular Controversies
denpeding, as with the searching into the Basis, or Root of the Matter; wherein
(I hope) he has performed the part of a serious and profitable Christian.

If it should so fall out, that in Reading these seven Grounds or Reasons, some
of them should not seem so clear as you could wish; yet know, that if any one
of them be undeniable, it is sufficient; for truth stands not so much in the
multitude, as in the clearness of the Proofs alleged.

This I speak not, as being doubtful of the soundness of any of the Grounds
proposed (being fairly considered) but to prevent an evil, which is incident to
many, which is, to reject a work altogether because some part may seem to be
dubious.

Among other things contained in this Book, there is one thing especially to be
observed, and that is, those three things left at liberty under Christ in the
Gospel, which were limited under Mose's Law; namely, time, place, and cost, for
the Worship of God: It is a point (if well heeded) which may conduce much to
the rectifying Christians in this weighty controversy about the Sabbath.
Again, observe well the distinction noted, concerning some Laws, how the
preceptive part may remain, and yet the penal part changed: The want of heeding
this, seems to have run some men into great extremes at this day. Furthermore,
I pray consider the design of this Discourse, it is to help you to keep your
selves, in the enjoyment of Gospel Liberty, and from the bondage of the Law,
whither we see too many inclining; as if having begun in the Spirit, they now
seek to be made perfect in the Flesh. Brethren, it is a good thing that our
hearts be established with Grace (to wit the Gospel) and not with meats brews
13.
(to wit the Law) which has not profited them that have been exercised
therewith. You see grace is proposed, as that which is proper for the
establishment of the heart; and that kind of stability was never more needful
than now, because nothing seems now remaining to fix upon, if this be
neglected; for all things seem to reel to and fro like a Drunkard, as if all
those things which must be shaken were even at their period. Wherefore Brethren
let us have Grace, etc. so shall we have Faith, and receive a Kingdom which
cannot be moved, etc.

Beloved, be exhorted, to beware of those (and that Doctrine) that leads into
bondage, for these days are perilous in that respect. And howsoever many may
be led on in their simplicity, having great zeal to Godward, Romans 10. 2. yet
See a Paper called the Counterfeit Jew.
how do I fear that some of the great Masters of our late Judaizers have been
no other than the appointed servants of her, whose design is to infatuate by
Sophistical devices, those whom she could not turn from the right way, by her
more gross and superstitious devices: For can we think, that the several late
exorbitant errors, have not had some deputed by subtilty to project and set
them on broach? it is not credible.

Let your eyes (therefore) be ever beholding the grace that is in Christ
Jesus, by which you will be kept free from the yoke of bondage, as well as from
the fantastical conceits of our late Enthusiasts: and in the beholding
whereof, always remember, that this grace is accompanied with a denying all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and with a sober, godly, and righteous life in
this present world; and let not this your greatest good, be evil spoken of by
any mis-use of your Liberty, which you have by the Gospel; but ever let the
sound of these words be in your ears. Brethren, you are called unto Liberty,
only use not your Liberty as an occasion to the Flesh.

Brethren, the God of all Grace, fill you with Grace and Peace in believing, is
the humble supplication of

Your unworthy John Lupton.

THE Seventh-day Sabbath Ceased a Ceremonial, AND YET The Morality of the
Fourth COMMAND Remains.
The POSITION.
The Fourth Command in the Decalogue is partly Moral, and so considered, it is
binding to all; and partly Ceremonial, and so considered, it is done away by
Christ.

I Little thought that my Reasons for non-observation of the Seventh-day (as
it is now observed by many) should have been divulged in Writing, till my self
had done it; but since the impatience of some could not stay my leisure, but
without my knowledge or advice has spread them abroad, I am thereupon
occasioned to appear at this time, partly to correct, and partly to amplify
the Reasons, which under the Characters of T. G. are ascribed to me.

First therefore, I hold it meet to demonstrate the Positio^s, wherein I say
the Fourth Command, Exod^s (...) is partly Moral, etc. This Motality whereof I
speak, lies in this, ^c. That God the Creator of all men, has put a law in
man's heart, by which he understands, that part of the time he is allowed to
live upon the Earth, is to be set apart for the service of his Creator, and
not all to be spent in doing his own work; a time of repose he also knows by
the same Law to be necessary, as well for his Servants and Cattle as for
Himself; and this also the fourth Command in the Decalogue does teach us.

But now if the Question be, How much of his time man must set apart to serve
and worship the Lord his Creator, and for the repose of his Servants and
Cattle? The Answer will be according to the Letter of the fourth Precept only,
the Seventh day of every week; but in the Moral consideration, it will be, so
much time as is sufficient to answer these ends, which as things may, and often
do fall out, may require more than seven days time together, notwithstanding
the Letter of the fourth Precept, which says, six days shall thou labor, or
six days may work be done. And this is the sense wherein I take the fourth
Command in the Decalogue to be Moral, and under this consideration I say it
obliges universally, I mean, it binds all men in all times and places, to
set sufficient time apart to worship their Creator, and to give their Servants
and Cattle convenient rest, and this the light of Reason, or Law of Nature does
clearly teach; and hence our Apostle might well say, the Gentiles having not
the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law; since all Nations (so far
as I ever yet Romans 2.
heard) do reserve a competent time for his Worship, whom they acknowledge for
their God.

But whereas the fourth Command does precisely limit a certain point of time
(viz.) the seventh day of every week, not requiring more or less: In this
respect, I say, the fourth Command in the Decalogue is Ceremonial, and done
away by Christ, Done away I say, as it was part of the yoke of bondage, as also
other things of like nature were; for example, the place of worship, which in
many respects was only the Temple at Jerusalem; neither of which are so done
away, as to destroy either time or place for serving the Lord; but rather, so,
as that all times, and all places are so far sanctified unto us by Christ, as
that we may in every place, and at all times, serve him with as great
acceptance, as if we were in the Temple of Jerusalem on the SABBATH DAY.

Be it farther considered, that the relief of the poor, and the maintenance of
such as are Ministers of Gods Word, do appertain to Moral duty, being grounded
upon the Law of right reason, Do to others as you would be done to. Thou shall
not muzzle Mat. 7. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10
the mouth of the Ox which treads out the Corn, etc. Now says Paul, for our
sakes no doubt this is written; that is, for the sake, or in the behalf of the
Ministers of Christ. But now if the Question be, What is the portion of the
poor and such as Minister the Word? The Answer will be according to Moses's
Law, The tenth part of the increase of thy Land, must be set apart for that
purpose, [yea before Moses, it is evident that Tithes were paid, but before
Moses no man can be assigned that ever kept the Sabbath.] But in Moral
consideration, the Answer to the Question will be this, So much as is necessary
ought to be set apart for the poor, and for such as Minister the Word. So then
it is clear, that some part of our time, some part of our substance, and some
place must be set apart for the Worship of God, etc. And what part that must
be, either Christ and right reason, or the Law of Moses must inform us; If
Moses's Law, then the Seventh day of every week, the Temple at Jerusalem, and
Tithes must be assigned: But if Christ and right reason, then the time is,
whenever you can; the place is, wheresoever you can; and for substance, what
you can, or what is necessary.

The two last (I suppose) will not be denied, and for the first it may thus
appear; The Lords Supper is ordained as a standing Ordinance in the Church of
Christ, as the Passover was in the Church under Moses; but yet there is no set
time assigned by Christ for its Celebration, as we know there was for the
Celebration of the Passover. Again, the Church under Moses were commanded to
offer many Sacrifices to the Lord, and had their their respective times limited
wherein to do it. Christians are bound to offer to the Lord spiritual
Sacrifices, even the fruits of Heb.
their lips, giving thanks to his name, but this without the limitation of
time, having rather this general rule in that case, namely, to do it
continually, that is, as often as we can. Furthermore, the work of exhortation
is a standing Ordinance in Christ's Church, but not limited to any set time, but
rather to be performed daily, that it to say, as frequently as we can. And
hence we may perceive a very great difference as to the liberty of time He^
in things pertaining to God, between the Law of bondage and the Gospel of
Christ; for, certainly the work of Christian exhortation, praising the Lord,
and the celebration of his divine Supper, does as it were comprize the whole
body of Christian Worship (as it consists in Practicals) and answers to that
which comprised the body of Legal worship, but with this remarkable difference,
the one is left free as to the circumstance of time, while the other was tied
to their strict points of time, under which consideration we have cause to say
(as the Apostle said) of some (who went from Christ to Moses) ye observe
days, and months, and times, and years; I am afraid of you, etc. Among which
days I have no doubt the Jews Sabbath Day was included, and that because it was
of a ceremonial consideration, and so done away by Christ; and that it was of
such a consideration, I shall endeavor to demonstrate by the grounds which
here ensues.

The first Reason.
Because nothing which is really moral is impossible, but upon due
consideration it will be found impossible for the whole Universe, i e. all
mankind (with their Cattle) to observe one certain point of time to rest from
labor, etc. because the bounds of their habitations has made the time so far
various, as the time of midnight, is the time of midday in their respective
Regions where they live: so that unavoidably, one part of the world will be
found in the dead of the night, asleep on their beds, when the other in the
heat of the day, are in devotion to the Lord.

But that which makes this matter the more considerable, is the great diversity
of time which happens to those, who live in the I speak not here of the utmost
South and North, but the most remote habitable parts of the World.
far Southern and Northern parts of the world, a day in these places, being as
long as many of ours: so that to enjoin a Sabbath-so emnity in those places,
would prove a strange undert^king, and would not answer the Morality of the
fourth Comm^nd, which undoubredly requires a sufficient time of rest for man
and beast, and that his Name may be sanctisied by all men in the celebration of
his Ordinances.

The substance of S. J. his Answer to this Reason is this: If the Inhabitants
of these remote places do observe the seaventh-day consisting of Evening and
Morning, it will answer the intent of God in the fourth Precept, as to the
letter of it.

To which I reply, Then it is clear, that it was not Gods intent to bind all
men to one point of time in Sabbath-solemnities, which I desire may be well
observed, and how the precise point of time the seventh-day can then be Moral,
I cannot conceive.

Secondly, Let it be observed, that it will follow from S. J. his Answer, that
these remote Inhabitants may lawfully work for many of our Sabbath-day-evening,
for six days of theirs, counting from Evening to Morning, will contain a good
part of six of our weeks, all which time they keeping no Sabbath, will badly
answer the intent of God in the fourth Precept; and their Servants and Cattle
would soon complain against them.

The second Reason.
Precepts which are purely Moral give not place to Precepts Ceremonial, but
when two such Laws come in Competition, that which is Ceremonial gives place to
that which is Moral: Go ye and learn what this means, I will have mercy and
not sacrifice.

But it is evident that the Seaventh-days-sabbath frequently gave place to
Ceremonial Laws, John 7. 22, 23. -- Ye on the Sabbath Day circumcise a man,
etc. that the Law of Moses should not be broken; Here the Law of Circumcision
takes place in point of observation before the Sabbath; for, Circumcision did
not only prevent the Circumcisers from resting, but the circumcised were
especially in capacitated to sabbathize, and thus the Law of the Sabbath was
broken (if I may so speak, as doubtless I may) by the interposition of a
Ceremonial Law.

To this instance we will join another, Mat. 12. 5. 6, 7. where it is plainly
said, that the Sabbath was profaned, or broken, and that in the Temple at
Jerusalem, and yet the profaners thereof were blameless, because their
profanation lay in the observation of certain ceremonies of Moses Law, as
killing and dressing of beasts and sheep too, be offered for sacrifices on that
day; and not only for the Sabbath Day, which was done continually, but also for
the yearly Sabbaths or Festivities if they fell on the Sabbath day, as they
often did; in which cases there was (as I take it) seven times as much labor
in killing and dressing beasts for sacrifices on such solemnities, as on the
weekly Sabbath. See Number. 28. 29. Chapters.

It is in any wise to be seriously considered, how clearly our Savior does
rank the Sabbath with Laws ceremonial, seeing all the instances which he brings
to vindicate his Disciples, are instances out of the Ceremonial Law. For, when
his Disciples were found fault with for rubbing the ears of Corn, etc. on the
Sabbath Day, Christ defends them by alleging David, who in a like hungty
condition, broke the Ceremonial Law of Shewbread; and the argument seems to
conclude thus, If David being hungry, might without blame do contrary to the
ceremonial Law of Shewbread, then my Disciples being also hungry, may without
blame do contrary to the ceremonial Law of the Sabbath. And certainly, if the
argument lie not here a worse thing will follow, for then our Savior brought
an instance very unsuitable and such as will be dangerous, as will be discerned
if it be considered, that it is no reasoning from Gods dispensing with a
ceremonial Law, to his dispensing with a moral Law, for then one may reason
thus: God dispensed with David breaking his Law concerning Shewbread, in a
case of necessity, therefore he will dispense with another in worshipping a
false God, if he be necessitated, which God forbid.

So then, it is plain, that our Savior compared the Sabbath with the law
Ceremonial, which is yet more evident by the next instance of the Priests
profaning, the Sabbath (to which I have spoken) as also from the conclusion he
makes upon the whole matter in these words, Go ye and learn what this means,
I will have mercy and not sacrifice; where it is evident the word Mercy, has
relation to Moral duty, and is applied to the Disciples preservation from
hunger; and the word Sacrifice, has relation to the Ceremonial Law, and is
applied to the Sabbath Day.

The substance of S. J. his answer to this Reason is this: That the sixth
Precept which is Moral, gave place to a Command of God, which was Typical, and
a Figure in it self to Abraham in offering up his son Isaac.

To which I reply, It is very strange that men do not consider before they
speak against evident truth! Can S. J. believe that all manner of killing is
forbidden in these words, Thou shall not kill: if so, what will become of the
penal part of his Sabbath-Principle, which tells us, that such as break the
Sabbath wilfully must be put to Death. It has hitherto been the received
Exposition of this Precept, that Homicide and Murder, whether in desire or
fact, is the killing which in this Command is prohibited. It does not then, nor
never did, prohibit man for killing any man, in that way, and upon that
account, for which God commands him so to do, viz. either in executing justice,
or in offering to God a sacrifice; and therefore no man well advised will say,
that the sixth Command was broken (for such a giving place the Reason intends)
when Abraham offered his son Isaac; but I have showed, that what was done on
the Sabbath by the Priests was a breach, or profanation of the Sabbath, and
yet the prophaners blameless, only because they kept the Ceremonial Law
unbroken.

I do offer this further in this place; that our Savior did not justify the
fact of his Disciples to be a lawful fact in it self, but rather seems to grant
it to be unlawful, as to the law of the Sabbath, as indeed it was; for it was
not lawful to prepare meat, or dress it for eating on that day, as appears,
Exodus 16. 23. Now their plucking the ears of Corn, and rubbing them in their
hands, was a preparing or dressing of it for their eating it. Wherefore when
the Pharisees told our Savior his Disciples did that which was not lawful to
be done, he did not (I say) vindicate the fact to be lawful, but rather grants
it to be unlawful, by alleging a fact for its defense as unlawful as it self.
From whence I further infer, the ceremonial nature of the Sabbath Day, because
I see not how any Moral Precept could be broken by such a fact: nay, the fact
is defended by the consideration of Moral Duty.

The third Reason.
All Commands purely Moral, are indispensible in cases of Necessity: it is
better to dye for hunger, than to deny the true God to obtain meat to preserve
Life; yea, he that should so save his life, should lose it; Nor may I commit
Murder, Adultery, or bear false witness against my Neighbor to preserve my
own life, for I know no necessity that can make my so doing in any wise
dispensible.

But behold, the Sabbath Day is such in its observation, as it has been
frequently dispensed with in very low cases of Necessity, insomuch that the
saving the life of a beast, is preferred before its observation, as to the
point, of time the seaventh-day; and then much more in cases of necessity which
concern the life of a man, insomuch, that I conceive, there was never yet a
Sabbath Day, but it was broken, and that by lawful cases of necessity, I say,
Lawful cases, (considering the cases still by the Moral Law): notwithstanding
the Law of the Sabbath (in the ceremony thereof) to the contrary.

No man that reads the Scriptures, can lightly be ignorant, how much our
Savior insisteth upon cases of Necessity, as sufficient Answers to those,
whoever carped at his doings on the Sabbath Day; whose conclusion was, that he
was not of God because he kept not the Sabbath. And certainly, if we consider
the fourth Precept, according to the letter of that Law, our Savior both did,
and commanded to be done; some things utterly inconsistent with the sabbathical
observation of the seaventh-day, as appears by comparing Jer. 17. 22. with John
5. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. John 9. 14. Hence it is plain, that our Savior went
further then cases of necessity in the non-observation of the Sabbath, since
there was no necessity for the Lame to carry his bed on the sabbath day; nor
yet for our Savior to make Clay on the Sabbath, since he frequently wrought
Cures by the words of his lips, and could have done it on the Sabbath, as well
as at other times; I conceive therefore it was his pleasure to do thus on the
Sabbath Days, that he might hereby give some intimation of the abrogation of
the Sabbath, as he did the like concerning other ceremonial observations: for
Example, his eating with Publicans and sinners; as also his taking persons off
from their esteem of the sanctity of one place above another: thereby
fore-shewing that he would take John 4.
away that sanctity which had been ascribed to the Jewish Nation above the
Gentiles; and to Jorusalem above Samaria, and then why not the same kind of
sanctity ascribed to one day above another? I say, the same kind of sanctity;
for certainly, the seaventh-day has no real sanctity in it above any other
day, no more than the Jewish Nation had above any other Nations, or the City
Jerusalem above Samaria; the holiness in all these, being only Ceremonial. Of
this Reason S. J. takes no notice: therefore I proceed to the next.

The fourth Reason.
Thus says the Lord to the Christian Church, Let no man judge you in meat or
in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or the new Col. 2. 16.
Moons, or of the Sabbath-dayes, which are a shadow of good things to come, but
the body is of Christ. From these words it appears, that, not only the holy
days, yeatly to be observed by the Jews (which are confessed on all hands to be
Ceremonial) but also the Sabbath days It is a poor shift to except against the
supplement (days) in Col. 2. 16. Since in other Texts, the like supplements are
allowed, but if the supplement were omitted, yet the word Sabbath, is
comprehensive enough.
themselves were with the rest to pass away, as a shadow when Christ the Body
was come: which will yet more fully appear by Hebr. 4. from the 3d. verse to
the 12. where it is evident, that the seaventh-day-sabbath is reckoned among
other legal Types: for here Isreal's Rest in Canaan, and the seaventh-dayes Rest
are both made Typical of our entering into rest by faith in Christ; wherefore
let all that are entered into rest by faith in him, take heed how they stand
upon this sabbathical shadow, least they know not how to avoid other things,
which (though Legal shadows) will claim a place with it.

The substance of S. J. his Answer to this Reason is this: If the Seaventh-day,
which is the pillar of the fourth Precept, be one of these shadows mentioned.
Col. 2. 16. how can the fourth Command be Moral, as is granted by the Author of
the Reasons.

I Reply, First, it is worth observing how the circumstance of time is made the
Pillar of the Precept, which may so many ways be dispensed with, as has been
showed. But must we think the pillar of a Moral Precept must give place to the
the preservation of an Ox or an Ass? Not so, for I showed before, that other
moral Laws admit not of such Dispensations, in nocase of Necessity, for a man's
own preservation. And how this Precept may be held meral; notwithstanding the
abrogation of the Circumstance of time, I have already showed; Nor is this the
only precept which may thus be distinguished upon; for certainly it is Moral
duty to relieve the poor and the stranger, yet this may be done without letting
the corners of our fields be unmown, our Grapes ungleaned, or the paying of
Tithes; all which was once assigned by the Law of God as the portion of the
poor and stranger. Add hereunto (as before observed) the maintenance of such as
minister the Word, which is moral duty; yet the set portion of Tithes, or the
tenth part of every man's increase, once due by the law of God, are not
necessarily to be paid, for which I am of opinion as much may be said, as for
the observation of the Seventh-day; for the tenth part of our Substance seems
to be as equal a proportion as the seventh part of our time; the ends for both
are equally remaining, the law for both equally obliging; but I will not insist
further, being well satisfied: Christians are made free from these impositions,
and yet stand engaged to do their duties, both toward God, the Poor, and his
Ministers.

The fifth Reason.
The Seventh-day Sabbath was a sign of their Sanctification to whom it was
given, therefore of a Ceremonial nature and not given to all men. Exodus 31. 13.
Ezekiel. 20. 12. Thus says the Lord, speak thou also to the Children of Israel,
saying, verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you,
throughout your generations, that you may know that I am the Lord that do
sanctify you. Hence it appears that as other holy (or if I may so speak)
Sacramental constitutions are peculiar to the Church, and not delivered to all
men, even so the Sabbath was peculiar to the Church of the Jews [as for the
stranger among them, etc. their resting was no more a Sabbathizing, than the
resting of the Cattle, and so not to be accounted a divine solemnization of the
Sabbath] for how could it be a sign that the Lord did sanctify the world in
general, who had no part in such privileges, they being without God, without
hope, and strangers and aliens from the Covenants of Promises, Ephesians. 2. 12.

Again, from this form of speech, It shall be a sign, or it is a sign. It
appears that the Sabbath is Ceremonial, because such Laws as are Moral and
imprinted in the heart of man, are no where called signs, that I know of, but
this kind of speech (when used with respect to Laws) is appropriate to such as
were temporary, and ordained upon some special occasion, for the Church as
such, and hence Circumcision is called a sign or token of the Covenant, Romans 4.
Genesis 17.

Now let us consider wherein the Sabbath was a sign, that so we may the better
perceive to whom it was given. First then, it was a sign of Isreal's cleansing
from sin, to which, Exodus 31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. do well agree, showing that the
Sabbath was a sign that Israel might know that the Lord did sanctify them,
here it is plainly of a Sacramental use and appropriate to the Church; it is a
sign between me and you, i. e. between me as your God, and you as my Church.

Secondly, The Sabbath was a sign of remembrance, that Israel should remember
they were once bondmen in Egypt, where convenient rest was denied them, and
that now they should let their servants rest as well as themselves, Deuteronomy. 5. 15.

Thirdly, It was a sign that the true sabbathizing, is to take up our Rest by
faith in Christ, Heb. 4. As for the thousand years Rest at Christ's second
coming, and eternal Rest in Heaven, of which some would have the Sabbath to be
a sign or Type, I will not insist upon them, because I have not yet met with
clear Texts to satisfy me therein. But admit the Sabbath for a sign in all
these respects, yet will it not prejudice, but rather strengthen us, in saying,
the Seaventh-days-sabbath was Ceremonial, and particular, in respect of the
persons to whom it was given.

For first, The Sabbath could not be a sign to all men, or the World
universally that They were sanctified, because in the time of the Law the whole
World, except the Jewish Nation was counted unclean, that is to say,
unsanctified.

Secondly, Neither could the Sabbath be a sign (literally, or spiritually) to
the whole World, of their deliverance out of Egyptian bondage, for literally
the whole World was never in Egypt, and spiritually they are not yet delivered
from the bondage thereof, 1 John 5. 19.

Thirdly, The Sabbath could not be a sign to the whole World of their entering
into rest by Faith in Christ, because, as such they are, and ever were in
unbelief.

Fourthly, Neither could the Sabbath be a sign to the whole World, in either of
the two last respects, since as such, they have no part in the first
resurrection, nor yet in that eternal Inheritance of the Saints in Light. From
these Considerations it may appear, that the Sabbath was never given as a sign
to all men, and thence I conclude it was never given to all men. For the more
ready discerning the meaning of this Ground or Reason, I will digest it into
this Syllogism.

Those to whom the Sabbath was given, to them 'twas a sign of their present
sanctification, But it was no sign of the present sanctification of the whole
World. Therefore it was never given to the whole World; therefore of no moral
consideration: therefore Ceremonial.

The sixth Reason.
The Festivals of the Jews, was Cerimonial, and therefore the
Seventh-day Sabbath was Ceremonial.

Thus says the Lord, The Feasts of the Lord which ye shall proclaim to be holy
convocations, even these are my feasts: Six days shall work be done, but the
seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation, ye shall do no work
therein; it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings -- The fourteenth
day of the first month is the Lords Passover, and on the fifteenth day of the
same month is the feast of unleavened-bread -- in the first day ye shall have
an holy convocation, etc.

We learn from these Scriptures, that as the Passover, so the
Seventh-day Sabbath was a feast unto the Jews, and equally called the feast of
the Lord, and therefore reasonably to be concluded, to be one and the same
Ceremonial consideration, and by consequence to vanish, or terminate with them.

If this be denied, let us see what will follow; we must then hold that some of
the Jewish feasts were Moral and perpetual, and so obligatory to such as had
not the Law, as well as to those that had it: Or else, that the Sabbath was
delivered as a feast to the Jews, but not so to the rest of mankind; but the
first of th^se can never be proved (as I conceive) and if the latter be
accepted, it must be proved, which I take to be a very difficult undertaking;
and if it could be proved, it will confirm what we have said (at least in part)
because it will evince the Seventh-day Sabbath to be Ceremonial, to that part
of Mankind to whom it was delivered as a Feast. And here it may well be
enquired, from what ground men do now pretend to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath
according to the Law of Moses, and yet keep it not as a Feast of the Lord in
all their dwellings? And because we see here the Seventh-day Sabbath reckoned
with the Ceremonial Feasts of the Jews, it will not be impertinent here to add
a parralel between the Seventh-day Sabbath, and the yearly Sabbath, as also the
Sabbath of years, that so we may the better discern it to be of a Ceremonial
consideration.

To begin with the Institution; Most certain it is, that no mention is made in
the book of God, of the observation of any of these Sabbaths, neither weekly,
nor annual, etc. until the seed of Abraham became a Nation, to whom the Law of
all the Sabbaths was given by Moses; neither is the Seventh-day Sabbath the
first in observation for the Passover (in which were Sabbaths of rest) was in
use before it, and the rest followed As for that passage Genesis 2. which some
conceive to enforce the institution of the Seventh-day Sabbath from the
beginning: and others conceive it to speak of the Sabbath only by a prolepsis,
or anticipation; I shall omit at this time, being satisfied first, that if it
were even then instituted (which I do not grant) yet would it not necessarily
bind all the world to the perpetual solemnity of the seventh day of every
week; nor in the least infer the time to be of a Moral consideration, seeing
the Almighty was at liberty to give either a positive, or Ceremonial Law at
that time, which yet might not equally extend to all persons, in all times and
places, as indeed he seems to have done, in the Law concerning the forbidden
fruit. But secondly, I am satisfied that those who take that mention of the
Sabbath Genesis 2. by a prolepsis are not without considerable grounds for so
doing, the Scriptures in many other cases necessarily requiring, as might be
showed, were it my business to prosecute the argument.
it.

The second Parallel is in the time of the continuance of these Sabbaths, the
Seventh-day Sabbath having nothing in that respect above the rest, as will be
seen by the scriptures following.

For the continuance of the weekly Sabbath, see Exodus 31. 16. For the
continuance of the Paschal Sabbath, see Exodus 12. 14. For the continuance of
Penticost Sabbath, see Lev. 23. 21. For the continuance of the Expiation
Sabbath, see Lev. 23. 31 For the continuance of the Feast of Tabernacles
Sabbath, see Lev. 23. 41.
The third parallel is in the Service of these Sabbaths, and that I have showed
already, wherein it appears, that the Services of the annual Sabbaths was not
only greater than those of the weekly, but to be done as exactly; yea, though
they fell upon the seventh day; Numb. 28, 29. chap.

The fourth Parallel is, of forbearing Labor, which was as strictly to be
observed on the yearly, as on the weekly Sabbaths, Exodus 31. 14. compared with
Lev. 23. 30.

The fifth Parallel, of the time to begin to keep the Sabbath,' which is
supposed to be the evening before; but in this, the annual Sabbaths are not
only equal to the weekly, but indeed the pattern; for of one of them only it
is said, from Even to Even shall you sanctify your Sabbath, Lev. 23. 32.

The sixth Parallel is of the Penalties, which was death, and was as well the
penalty for breach of the yearly Sabbaths, as for breach of the
Seventh-day Sabbath Lev. 23. 30. Note that these words in the Texts [that soul
shall be cut off from his people, is meant of the Magistrates executing the Law
for breach of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and then why not in the other cases also?
And although it be not expressed, that the Magistrate must execute the penalty
for breach of the yearly Sabbath, yet it may be gathered, that he must do it.
See and compare these Scriptures, Exodus 30. 28. Note that these words in the
Texts [that soul shall be cut off from his people, is meant of the Magistrates
executing the Law for breach of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and then why not in
the other cases also?
and Exodus 31. 14. Note that these words in the Texts [that soul shall be cut
off from his people, is meant of the Magistrates executing the Law for breach
of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and then why not in the other cases also?
And this may serve as an answer to some, when they did us show that the
penalty of death was ever to be inflicted upon the breakers of any Law, but the
moral Law; Nor is this the only instance, for the holy Persume might not be
imitated under pain of Death, Exodus 30. 28. Neither might man or beast so much
as touch the holy Mount, but be punished by stoning, or by being thrust through
with a Dart, Exodus 19. 23. compared with 12, and 13. verses of the same chapter.

The seventh and last Parallel shall be of the Sabbath of years; in which we
may observe, that at the giving thereof to Israel, the Lord gave them the bread
of three years, the year before the Sabbathical year, as he gave them the bread
of two days, before the Sabbath Day.

Now let it be considered, what sollid Reason there remains for the
continuation of the Seventh-day Sabbath, more than for the yearly Sabbaths, and
Sabbath of years, since there is no more express prohibition of the one, than
the other, in the Scriptures, (except in Col. 2. 16. Where in truth, the
Seventh-day Sabbath is rather more expressly prohibited than the rest) and
seeing we do as constantly enjoy the time of first fruits, in-gathering, etc.
as the Jews did, wherein they held holy Sabbathisms, to rejoice before the
Lord, for all the good things wherewith he blessed them; it might very justly
be enquired of some, why they observe not these solemnities, together with the
seventh-day?

The seventh Reason.
The Observation of the Seventh-day Sabbath, according to the Law of Moses,
cannot stand without the Execution of the Penalty of death upon such as break
it: Were it not so, it should not be the religious Observation of the day which
is in it self a thing tolerable, and about which Christians need not judge one
another; I say, were it only this, it should not offend me. But now, these
which stand for the observation of the seventh-day, according to the Law of
Moses, do also stand for the penalty of death, to be inflicted upon such as
they judge wilful breakers thereof; confessing, even in their printed Books,
that the reason why they do not execute that penalty, is, Because they are no
Magistrates; Stennet against Russel.
So then, it seems such men want but opportunity; and doubtless, by how much
men are the more zealous, by so much they would drive the more furiously; and
indeed S. J. does peremptorily conclude, that such their proceedings (if
Magistrates) would be no more an act of Persecution, than killing a Murderer
in our days by the hand of a Magistrate, can be termed Persecution -- We see
then, there is cause to fay (as sometimes we have said) that this present
Sabbath-Doctrine does bring in with it a state of Persecution. In which we have
deliverd no Fable of our own, for beside the light of reason, by which we are
in some measure able to judge of the consequence of men's tenants, mine ears are
mine evidence, that putting the case those men were Magistrates, we must either
submit to their government concerning the Sabbath, etc. or else seek a place,
where we might enjoy our liberty; to which as formerly, even so now I answer,
that is much what the same liberty which is granted us now.

It is a maxim to be well heeded, that Truth has no bad consequences: but
admit once this Sabbath Principle in the penal part, and then we must admit of
all the penalties once due for breach of the three precedent Commands, and then
must all Blasphemers and Idolaters be destroyed, their Cities and substance
consumed by fire, Deuteronomy. 13. and then the lives of the greatest part of men,
must be ascribed to the sin of the Magistrates. But would this proceeding be
like a Gospel dispensation, wherein God is suffering the contradiction of
sinners against himself, and waits if peradventure his long-suffering may lead
them to repentance, as it did Saul who was once a Blasphemer, etc. In whom God
showed forth a pattern of his patience to those who should live after.
Wherefore fith the Execution of the said penalties are inconsistent with Gods
clemency in Christ, in this day of his Gospel patience; we therefore dare not
subscribe to the Doctrine of the present Sabbath-keepers concerning their
Sabbath-observation.

The substance of S. J. his Answer to this Reason, is this.

That we are like those that run into the fire to keep from burning; into the
water to keep from drowning: to kill because we must be killed for our pains:
to approve of Man-stealing because death is the due punishment for that sin;
and here he lays us under nonsense, foolishness, etc. together with these
absurdities.

To which I reply, that the dis-ingenuity of these retortings will appear if it
be considered. First, that we distinguish of commands according to the time or
dispensation wherein they were given, and we say, persons may now be under the
authority of a Precept formerly attended with the penalty of death, and yet not
now attended therewith; For example, God commands that his name be not taken in
vain, and assigned the punishment of death to them that did Prophecy Lies in
his Name; But will any man say, that all false Prophets ought now to be put to
death? Let them say so that can prove it. Again, that kind of Fornication
mentioned in 1 Cor. 5. 1. was punishable by death, Lev. 20 11. We are under the
power of the Precept which forbids that sin, and yet not under that penalty, 2
Cor. 2. 6, 7. And now concerning the fourth Precept, we say we are under the
moral part thereof, and yet we say men's not setting sufficient time apart to
serve God, is not now punishable by death. It does not therefore follow, that
we break this Law to avoid the penalty; But we say, first, we are not bound to
the Cerimonial part thereof, and therefore we observe it not; Secondly, we deny
your observation of it, because you urge a necessity of the penalty.

And whereas it is alleged, that our plea will as well conclude against the
sixth Precept, as against the observation of the seventh-day. I answer, not so,
for the penalty of death to him that commits murder, is discernable to be due
by the Law of Reason, and was exacted by Gods appointment long before the Law
of the Sabbath Day was given. And albeit according to our reasoning (but yet by
our Saviors tolleration) some of the children of the wicked one must be let
alone in the field, to wit, the world, and that till Harvest, even the end of
the world; yet this can only be understood of those whose errors happen in
matters of Religion; for as touching Murderers, etc. they must either be taken
away, or humane society would fail. Spiritual wickedness then is (for ought I
see) only punishable by the Word of God, and censures of the Church whilst
here, by God himself hereafter; corporal sins are punishable by Magistrates
here, though the sinner be never so repentant, by God himself hereafter also if
he repent not.

Finally, I offer it to the consideration of sober men, whether it would be
Gospel like, for Believers in Christ to compel their Families to celebrate the
Sabbath, such of them especially as are of Faith and Religion contradistinct to
them in that point, and yet behold, this must they do (according to Moses) for
the Law of the Sabbath requires the Master of the house to order his Children
and Servants in point of Sabbathizing.

An Objection answered.
The most important Objection here to be removed, is this; If Christians be not
bound to observe the Seventh-day, how can any be blamed, for neglecting any
time whatsoever agreed upon by the Church, for the worship of God?

Answ. This Objection is the best answered by considering some cases like the
case propounded. As first, God appointed a certain place where to be
worshipped, as well as a time when, and required that thrice every year his
people should appear before him in the place which he should choose, etc. Now we
know there is as little possibility to congregate Gods people without place, as
without time to that purpose, and such as will cavil at the time agreed on by
the Church, may as well cavil at the place agreed on by the Church; for how can
I bind any man to come to my house, or to permit me to come to his, unless I
acknowledge the power of the Churches agreement to be sufficient for both?

Thus then this Objection will enforce a particular and constant place, as well
as a particular and constant time; as then he cannot escape just reproof, who
regards not the place which the Church by mutual consent asligneth for Gods
Worship; so neither can he escape, who regards not the time in like manner
assigned to that end and purpose.

Secondly, it is Christians duty to celebrate the memorial of the passion of
Christ, with bread and wine, and to wait upon-God in fasting and prayer. But if
I ask when, and where these things must be done, it would prove as difficult to
answer, as the question propounded.

Thirdly, there is much to be said for the first day of the week, as having
been religiously observed by the Apostles and primitive Churches, both from
holy Scripture and some other authorities worth our consideration: But for my
part I do not think any set time was so imposed, but that the Church if
occasion should press, might yet without sin, observe another time.

Brethren, ^e are called unto Liberty, only use not your Liberty as an occasion
to the Flesh -- Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of Bondage.

THE END.
The POSTSCRIPT.
Showing the opinion of some of the Jewish Rabbis concerning the Sabbath Day.
And certain Ancient Christians concerning the Sabbath Day and the First day.

The Rabbis.
We read says Pet. Galatinus, on the Jews gloss upon these words, The Lord
has given you the Sabbath, What means these words, The Lord has given Ex
Heylin Hist. de Sabbath.
you? Because it was given to the Jews, and not unto the Gentiles

Rabbi Johanan says, that whatsoever Statute God gave Israel, he gave it to
them publicly, except the Sabbath, and that was given to them in secret,
according to that! of Exodus, it is a sign between me and the children of
Israel.

Josephus in his book of Antiquities, and Wars of the Jews, calls the Sabbath
Antiq l. 14 c. 18 de Bello, l. 2. c. 16
a National and Local custom; a Law peculiar to that people.

The Ancient Christians of the 1, 2, 3, 4. Centuries.
Justin Martyr says, none of the righteous men, and such as walked with
Justin. in Dyal. cum Trypho.
God, were either Circumcised or kept the Sabbath, until the several times of
Abraham and Moses.

Ireneus says, that Circumcision and the Sabbath were both given for signs,
Iren. advers. Here Is. l. 4. c. 30
and that all the multitude of the faithful before Abraham, were justified
without the one (i. e. Circumcision) and that the Patriarks, which preceded
Moses, were justified without the other.

Tertullian requires the Jews to prove (if they can) that the Fathers of former
Tertul. advers. Judaeos.
times [meaning before the time of Abraham] were Circumcised, or kept the
Sabbath, or that thereby they obtained to be called (or accounted) the friends
of God.

Eusebius says, The Religion of the Patriarks of old, was like the Christian,
Euscb. Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
and he proves it thus, They were not Circumcised, no more are we; They kept
not the Sabbath, no more do we; They were not bound to abstain from sundry
kinds of meats, no more are we.

And elsewhere he says, Melchesideck was a Priest of the most high God,
neither being Circumcised, nor anointed with the holy Oil, etc. no not so
much as knowing that there was a Sabbath, etc. and living most agreeable to the
Gospel.

Concerning the First day.
Ignatius was of this mind, that both the Seventh and First days was to be
observed; these are his words. -- After we have thus kept the Sabbath, Ignat.
l. 8.
let every one that loves Christ, keep the Lords day Festival; the
Resurrection day; the Queen and Empress of all days; wherein our life was
raised again, and death was overcome by our Lord and Savior.

Justin Martyr says, upon the Sunday all of us assemble in the Congregation,
as being the First day wherein God separated the Light from the Darkness, Just.
Mart.
Created the World, and Jesus Christ our Savior rose again from the Dead.

Augustine says, The Lords day was made known to us Christians by the Aug. Ep.
119.
Resurrection, and from that began to be accounted holy.

Read this, yet know, all the Ancients did not say,
One self same thing 'bout the First or Seventh day.
FINIS.

