THREE SERMONS Preached at the CATHEDRAL IN NORWICH. And a Fourth at a
Parochial Church in Norfolk. Humbly Recommending, I. True Reformation of our
Selves. II. Pious Reverence toward God and the King. III. Just Abhorrence of
Usurping Republicans, And IV. Due Affection to the Monarchy.

By John Graile, Rector of Blickling in Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

To the Most High, Puissant, and Noble Prince, HENRY Duke of Norfolk; Earl
Marshal of England; Earl of Arundel, Surry, Norfolk, and Norwich; Lord Howard,
Mowbray, Segrave, Brews of Gower, Fitz-Alan, Warren, Clun, Oswaldestre,
Matravers, Scales, Graystock, Furnedal of Sheffeild, and Howard of
Castle-Rising; Constable and Governor of His Majesty's Royal Castle, and
Honor of Windsor, Lord Warden of the Forest of Windsor, Lord Lieutenant of
Norfolk, Surry, and Berks, and of the City, and County of the City of Norwich,
etc.
May it please Your Grace,
AS there is a small Annual Rent payable to one of your Norfolk Manors, from
that little Spot of ground which I possess; so there is a great and perpetual
Tribute of Honor due to your Grace, from the Possessor of it. And as the
holding that Land gives me the Privilege, to be one of the Tenants of a most
Just and Generous Lord; so the Tenure of my Reason, while I shall be Master of
any, will make it my Duty, to be one of the most Humble, most Awful, and most
Obsequious Admirers, of such a truly Noble and Puissant Prince, as Personal
Virtue would have made your Grace, if Glory of Ancestors had not.

This I have been ambitious publicly to acknowledge, and I kneel to your
Clemency for a Pardon of the bold Product of that Ambition, the almost
unpardonable Confidence of a Dedicatory Address from so mean to so great a
Person, and the presuming to offer such imperfect Discourses, as these Sermons,
to your most piercing and discerning Judgment.

But whatever Defects they may labor under, they were Preached with an Honest
Design of doing God and the King the most seasonable Service I could, in these
Licentious and Seditious Times. And they are now Published with an encouraging
Hope, as well as with an humble Desire, of receiving the best Advantage they
are capable of, toward the promoting their well chosen Design, if they may be
sheltered under the auspicious and favorable Protection of such an Illustrious
Patron of Pious Loyalty, as the First and Highest Duke in England, next to
those of the Blood Royal, manifesty is, I had almost said, necessarily must be.

Your Grace well knows that Loyalty is a considerable Part of Christian
Religion; and that it is no where more strenuously asserted, than in the Church
of England; a Church signally Eminent as upon all other Accounts, so
particularly for requiring of all her Members the most faithful Allegiance and
Subjection to their Lawful Sovereign, his Heirs and Successors.

Hence it was, that (although the present Age has afforded but few Proselytes
from the Church of Rome to us, and too many from us to them) neither the
Corruption of the Times, nor the prejudices of Education, nor the powerful
Influence of the Nearest and Noblest Relations, nor any of those tempting
Considerations, which bear so great a sway with other Men, could keep Your
Grace from the Communion of our Church; a thing very memorable and worthy to be
known by all Posterity, both to our Churches eternal Honor, and to Your Graces
immortal Renown.

My Lord, The very Height of your Dignity, inferior only to Sacred Majesty, and
Royal Highness, does hardly equal the transcendent Height of your Great and
Noble Spirit; which makes it a Province worthy of an Angel, to give a just
Character of Your Grace, and forbids my weak Pen to attempt it, lest I should
affront Your Heroic Virtue, with a dissonant and deformed Panegyric. But yet,
as an Echo of public Fame, I shall adventure to repeat, what with an unanimous
Voice is generally said of Your Grace, That none ever more deservedly enjoyed
the Favor of his Prince, or the love of his Country. And long may your Grace
live to enjoy more and more of both, until you be at last translated from this
great Happiness to a far Greater. So prays,

My Lord, Your Graces most humbly devoted Servant John Graile.

An Advertisement.
THE Author of these Sermons being induced to publish the three former, by the
Desires and Approbation of some considerable Persons, who heard them preached,
has chosen himself to add the fourth; in which he has endeavored to finish
what he began in the third. He knows they are sent forth into a Learned and
Critical, and (which is more discouraging) into a Contentious and Censorious
World. But he is willing to sacrifice his Name and Reputation, and whatever he
accounts dear or precious, to the Cause of God and the King, and to the
Interests of Peace, and Truth, and Justice. He is content to pass through evil
Report, or good Report, if by the Divine Favor and Blessing, these plain
Discourses may be any way beneficial even to the meanest Readers, by convincing
them whom they are to Reform, and whom they are to Obey, and how impossible it
is to be good Christians, if they be not good Subjects; that being preserved
from the pernicious contagion of Seditious Principles, and having a due sense
of, and a grateful Affection unto the most Ancient and Excellent Constitution
of Government, which God has placed over us, they may lead under it a quiet
and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I.
OF true Repentance and Reformation of our Selves, our universal Obligation to
it, the Divine Assistance we may expect therein, and the present necessity of
it, not admitting any delays.

Preached Jan. 13. 16 77/78. On Jer. 35. 15 -- Return ye now every man from his
evil way and amend your doings.

SERMON II.
Of the Duties of Revering and Honoring God and the King, and the danger of
Associating with Seditious Innovators.

Preached Feb. 4. 16 82/83. On Prove. 24. 21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and
the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their Calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

SERMON III.
Of the Inconvenience of Polyarchy and Popular Sovereignty, the Plagues and
Mischiefs of Usurpations, and the true cause from whence they spring.

Preached Jan. 30. 16 83/84. On Prove. 28. the former part of the 2 Verse. For
the Transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof, but by a man, etc.

SERMON IV.
Of the Excellency of Monarchy, and the great Blessing of a Wise Monarch.

Preached May 29. 1684. On Prove. 28. the latter part of 2. Verse. -- But by a
man of understanding and knowledge the State thereof shall be prolonged.

TRUE REFORMATION OF Our Selves.

SERMON I,
Preached Jan. 13. 16 77/78.
Jer. XXXV. 15. -- Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your
doings.
THIS Admonition, how plainly soever it may sound in your ears, is very seldom
improper to be given in any Place, or unfit to be pressed at any Time. It was
the most frequent and constant Message delivered unto the People, by all the
Prophets under the Law, Jer. 7. 3. and 18. 11. and 25. 4, 5. and 26. 13.
I have sent unto you (says God in the former part of the Verse) all my
Servants the Prophets, rising early and sending them, 2 Kings, 17. 13.
saying, Return ye every man, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Jonah. 3. 8.
etc. It is repeated several times both in this Prophecy, and in other Books of
the Old Testament. It is also the great Design of the Gospel, by the clearest
Methods of Instruction, by the most powerful Arts of Persuasion, by all its
excellent Precepts, encouraging Promises, and awakening Threatenings,
effectually to enforce this very Exhortation. Our Lord and Savior came into
the World to call sinners to repentance; Mat 9. 13.
that is, to a removal out of the paths of sin, or a return from their evil
ways, into a better course of Life and Actions. His eminent Forerunner cried in
the Wilderness, Mat. 3. 2.
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Which he himself too, while he
lived upon earth, earnestly urged with his own most gracious lips; warning and
assuring men, that except they would repent, Luke 13. 3, 5.
they should all perish. And when he ascended to Heaven, he left this Charge
with his Apostles, that Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in
his Name among all Nations. Luk 24. 47
He commanded them to publish and declare to all the World, That he, who is the
Son of God, 1 Timothy 2. 6.
having given himself a Ransom for all, Heb. 2. 9.
and tasted Death for every man; by Virtue of his Death and Passion, all those
of Mankind that repent of their Rebellion against God, and return to a sincere
Obedience to him, shall obtain Pardon of sin, escape that Eternal Death, which
is their deserved Punishment, and be made partakers of Everlasting Happiness.

In Obedience to this Command, and in Imitation of those Examples, the Doctrine
of Repentance has been much insisted on by the Apostles and their Successors
in every Age. And yet, as much as it has been preached, there are some persons
in almost all places widely mistaken about the Nature of it, and very many that
neglect to practice it; among which, some think themselves privileged and
exempted, and so take no care about a matter wherein they suppose they are
unconcerned; others imagine it to be a work altogether out of their power, and
therefore despair of doing it; others presume they can do it any time, when
they will, which makes them continually delay it. I hope, by the help of God,
to speak something to the Conviction at least of these several sorts of
Impenitents, and with respect to each of them, I shall consider these four
things.

The true Nature of Repentance.

The Obligation that lies upon all men to repent.

The Power God gives them to do this. And

The proper Season for it.

All which Heads of Discourse offer themselves to us in the Text. The first,
which is the Nature of Repentance, is here plainly described by Returning from
our evil Ways, and Amending our Doings. The second, The Obligation that lies
upon all men, without exception, thus to repent, to return, and amend, is also
clearly expressed, Return ye every man. The third, The Power men have to do
this, is implied in the whole Precept, as delivered from God, since it cannot
consist with his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness to require an Impossible
Undertaking. And lastly, The proper Time and Season for this Work is declared
to be Now, the present Time. Return ye now, etc.

Returning and Amending. And here I shall not detain you with any long Harangue
on an Argument that has exercised so many Tongues and Pens, but shall only
endeavor in a few words, to give such an Account thereof, as may serve to
disabuse the deluded Sinner, and detect some prevailing Errors in this Affair
of so great consequence.

To say nothing of the mere Shadows and Appearances, those Pictures and Images
of this Great Duty, the rent Garments, disfigured Faces, demure Looks, Heads
bowed down like a Bul-rush, etc. There are many things which, with a more fair
and plausible pretense, pass under the Name and Notion of Repentance. There are

Convictions and Awakenings of Conscience,

Confessions and Supplications,

Sorrow and Regret occasioned by sin,

Purposes and Resolutions against it.

But all these put together will not constitute us true Penitents, unless we
add what the Text requires, a real Conversion and Reformation, a Returning from
our evil ways, and an Amendment of our doings. The former may be precursive
Acts, good preparatives to Repentance, but this latter is the Thing it self.

When Repentance is spoken of, or called for in Holy Scripture, it is usually
described by such Phrases as these, 2 Timothy 2. 19
Departing from Iniquity, Isay. 55. 7.
Forsaking our evil ways and thoughts, Dan. 4. 27.
Breaking off our sins by righteousness, Isa. 1. 16. and 44. 22. and 55. 7.
Ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well, Jer. 4. 1.
Turning and Returning to the Lord, 1 Pet. 2. 25
Returning to the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, James 4. 8.
Cleansing our Hands, Romans 13. 12
Purifying our Hearts, and drawing nigh unto God, Casting off the Works of
darkness, and putting on the Armor of light. From which, and the like
Expressions, it is very evident, That true Repentance is a real Conversion, a
turning from all sin unto God. St Peter words his advice thus, Acts 3. 19.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. And thus God
himself interprets his own Command, when he requires Repentance, Ezekiel. 18. 30.
Repent, says the Lord, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. And whenever Repentance is set forth in
Scripture by any kind of Convictions, Confessions, Sorrow, or Resolutions, they
are supposed to be truly sincere, and immediately productive of Conversion and
Amendment; but without this Effect, they are totally invalid.

The clearest Convictions, and the most enlightened Apprehensions of all that
Evil, which is to be found in any of our Ways or doings, are no Arguments of
true Repentance, unless that Light has a genuine and free Operation upon our
Wills and Affections, to move them to such an Abhorrence of all those evil Ways
and Doings, as concludes in the Amendment of them. For otherwise Balaam whose
Eyes were opened, and Esau and Judas, who had so great Apprehensions of Sin and
their Loss by it, and Nebuchadnezar and Darius, who had such a Sense of the
Majesty of God, and Herod who heard St. John Baptist gladly, and Felix who
trembled at St. Paul's Discourse, yea, and the very Devils, who are said to
believe and tremble, must all be placed in the Catalogue of Penitents.

And although these inward Convictions may break out into Confessions and
Supplications, yet no Confession or Petition whatsoever, is any Act of sincere
Repentance, except it flow from a real Hatred of Sin, and be attended with an
Endeavor to forsake it. It Is sad to see, how Men run the Round of Sinning and
Confessing, and Sinning again and then Confessing again, all the while
conceiting themselves to be secure enough in that black Circle: As if every
sin, although never so often repeated, were as soon expiated as confessed. But
do they think to cheat and charm God Almighty thus easily, when they come to
him, with their Hypocritical Acknowledgments, and feigned Promises of
Amendment, made perhaps with much appearance of Affection, but not without some
kind of mental Reservation, or secret Intention of affronting him again? Will
the great Searcher of Hearts be appeased by such a Mock Devotion, as Lewis the
eleventh paid to the little Image he wore in his Cap, which, when he designed
the Murder of any whom he feared or hated, he would take from his Head and
kiss, beseeching it to pardon him that one Evil Act more, and it should be the
last? What performance can be more slight, what more easy and trivial, than to
give God a few good words, like the Complements we bestow upon Men, and to
exclaim against our selves in perfunctory Confessions? There is no
Mortification in all this; it exhausts neither Blood nor Spirits; it lops off
none of our Limbs; it breaks none of our Bones.

And what if our Confessions be made with some pain and sorrow? That does not
presently argue the sincerity of our Repentance. Every Melancholy Fit at the
Remembrance of our sins, is not to be accounted Godly Sorrow. For no small
grief and sadness may arise in the Mind of the most impenitent Criminal, not
out of any Dislike of his Fault, but of the Punishment that follows it; not
because himself is wicked, but because there are good Laws against him, and a
just Power and Authority to put them in Execution. The sinner may be extremely
troubled to see, that what is so pleasant to him is not safe. The Presage of
the uneasiness of Hell, Acts. 5. 33.
in which all the Delights of sin are like to conclude, Acts. 7. 54.
may often cut him to the Heart, and yet this Grief may little or nothing abate
his Affection to it. He may still look kindly on his beloved Lusts, although he
behold them with Tears in his Eyes. But when he thus weeps not at the Evil, but
at the Danger of those ways in which he walks, and will not return from the
Evil, although though he has so sad a Prospect of the Danger, his wilful Guilt
defiles his Tears, but his Tears will never cleanse his Guilt. When all the
Terrors of his Mind, and all those Anticipations of Hell, those gnawings of the
Worm, which he feels in his Conscience, cannot persuade him to amend his
doings; such a high Fortitude in sin, such a resolute Embracing it under so
difficult Circumstances, plainly shows that he is wedded to it with
indissoluble Bonds, has taken it for better and for worse, and will keep and
maintain it, with its Delights and Pleasures, and with its Plagues and Torments
too, never intending to be divorced from it.

But if the Apprehension of infinite Danger, and the formidable Aspect of
insupportable Misery, have some Influence upon him to cool his Affection to his
Sins, and produce Resolutions of Amendment, this indeed is a good Step toward
Repentance, but still there may be a considerable Distance, betweeen the
Purpose and the Thing it self. When Men have surfeited with their sins, they
cast them up with Bitterness, make passionate Resolutions against them, and
wash themselves, as they think, in penitential Tears, but as soon as the Tears
are dried up, the Resolutions are forgotten, and they return to the Vomit and
Mire. Thus he who was intemperate the last Meal, resolves to fast the next; but
when a few Hours have wrought off the heavy Load of his first Excess, he adds a
second, and his Vow of Abstinence is either not remembered, or not regarded. But
such ineffectual Resolutions, so suddenly broken, do rather enhance, than
expiate our Guilt; and surely the Aggravations of sin deserve not to be numbered
among the Acts of Repentance.

Thus we see, set a man have the clearest Convictions of the Evil of his Ways,
let him make solemn Confessions and Supplications, and do it with some Regret
at the sad Consequences of his sins, and some Resolutions against them, he has
not yet repented with that Repentance, which will procure a Pardon from God,
unless he return and amend. Therefore our Church, to prevent all mistakes,
begins her Absolution with these Words. Almighty God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who desires not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he may
turn from his Wickedness and live, -- implying that there is no Repentance unto
Life, without turning from sin; no true Penitent, but the true Convert. And
thus much is evident, even from the proper and natural signification of those
two words in the New Testament, by which Repentance is expressed, (...) and
(...), the one importing a real change of Mind, the other better care for the
future. So that if we be sinners, there is an indispensable Necessity of
altering the Temper of our Minds, and the Course of our Actions. Nothing can
secure us but a real Reformation; nothing less than this can evince the Truth
of our Repentance. And the Work of Reformation ought to be applied by us to the
right Objects, to our own evil Ways and Doings, and to all of them without
Exception. This the Text expressly requires, Return ye now every man from his
(his own) evil ways, amend your (your own) doings.

The World is full of Reformers, and yet there is but little Reformation. The
Reason is, because most men love to reform without their own Province, and
beyond their own Jurisdiction, to reform every thing besides themselves. They
are Curiosi in aliena Republica, critically censuring and controlling the
Actions of others, without any Authority, intermedling where they have no
Commission, dictating Counsel before it is asked, and correcting those matters
which belong not to them. They are very zealous for the Reformation of their
Neighbors, yea and their Superiors too, they will teach their Teachers, and
direct their Governors. As little Friends as some men are to the sacred
Episcopal Order, they will needs be, in St. Peter's Phrase, 1 Pet. 4. 17
(...), the worst sort of Prelates, the Visiters and Reformers of another
Diocese: And as great Enemies as they profess themselves to Popery, they will
needs be little Popes and Universal Bishops where ever they come. The very
Mechanics and Peasants of this Age have their new Schemes of Theology, and new
Models of Government, by which they will undertake to regulate and reform the
whole Frame of things among us, both in Church and State; when in the mean time
they suffer their most proper Charge, their own souls, to lie under a Chaos of
Disorder and Confusion, overrun, wasted, defiled, and almost destroyed by
unreasonable Appetites, rebellious Lusts, and ungoverned Passions. These men
can rip up the Vices of the Times, without any Reflection upon themselves, who
help to make the times so vicious; never calling their own Ways to Remembrance,
nor once considering, how sadly the general and public Guilt is increased, by
the no small Addition of their particular and personal Sins. They will attempt
to sweep and cleanse all the Town and Country, and every Corner of the
Kingdom, rather than the Dunghill at their own Doors.

But the true Penitent is a more humble and Modest Reformer, 1 These. 4. 7.
one who studies to be quiet, and to do his own business, keeping at home, and
being chiefly, if not only, employed in reforming himself. Neither does he
think it enough to return from some of his Evil Ways, or to amend some of his
Doings, while the rest are neglected; but he will endeavor to make an
impartial Reformation of every thing that is amiss.

If we forsake our sins only in part, or commute one for another; if we leave
some troublesome and inconvenient Vices, and take up such as seem more
expedient; if we avoid Swearing in common Discourse, that our solemn Perjury
may be less suspected; Romans 2. 22.
if we abhor Idolatry, because we desire to commit Sacrilege; if we learn to
suppress the Eruptions of ^ash Anger, that our designed Revenge may at a fitter
Opportunity be more secretly and effectually accomplished; what kind of
Reformation is this? Can we think our selves grown better Men, by such an
Exchange and Bartering of sins? Or, is not this rather the very Policy and
Subtilty of Wickedness, whereby we discover our deeper Skill in the Trade and
Mystery of Iniquity?

Thus I have endeavored to vindicate Repentance from some false and dangerous
Notions, and to give some Account of the true Nature of it, as it is described
in the Text by Returning and Amending.

The next thing to be considered is the Return ye every man. We have all been
like Sheep going astray, therefore every man is admonished to return; There is
none that does good, no not one, so constantly and perfectly as he should;
therefore every one must amend his Doings. If we say, that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves. And yet there is a Generation of men among us, Pro. 30. 12
like those Agur speaks of, so pure in their own eyes, that they will not be
washed from their filthiness, a sort of Enthusiasts, who pretend to be
absolutely perfect with out the least sin in any of their Ways or Doings, and
consequently to be privileged and exempted from all the troublesome work of
Reformation. This is the Boast of diverse Quakers, and some other Fanatical
Spirits. But the prodigious Extravagance of this pretense, being so openly
exposed in the Incivility and Immorality, as well as Irreligion of their Lives
and Actions, I need not use any words to confute them.

Neither shall I stay to represent the grand Imposture of the Roman Indulgences
and Dispensations, that vain and ridiculous Purchase of a certain Supersedea^
from the Labors of Repentance, or (...) strange kind of Passport, by Virtue
o^ which the miserably deluded sinner think^ himself safely conducted in his
Evi^ Ways, as if he might securely retain his Sins, when he has parted with a
little o^ his Money.

But since the indispensable Obligation that lies upon every man, to return and
amend, is so plainly expressed in the Text, I proceed to the third Observable,
The Power God gives men to do this; which, although it be not so expressly
declared, is most certainly implied; as we must needs acknowledge, if we
consider, that this is the great, constant, and peremptory Command of God,
delivered by all his Servants the Prophets. And the words, in which it is
delivered, are Verbs active of the Imperative Mood, Return ye, Amend ye. They
call for Action, the Effect of Power, which always supposes the Being of its
Cause. For no Effect can be produced, where there is not a capable Efficient;
neither does God ever require that it should. It cannot consist with his
infinite Wisdom and Goodness, to put us upon an impossible Undertaking, or to
command us any Thing, which we have no Power or Capacity to perform, although
we use the most sincere Endeavor. If he did, such a Command would not be
Obligatory. No Person can be obliged by any Law of God or Man to do that, which
is not possible for him to do. By all the Measures of Reason and Equity, the
total Want of a Power to obey, excuses from Obedience. As we may clearly see
in some particular Commands of God, which in some Cases we are not obliged,
because not able, to observe. The Man that lies languishing upon the Bed of
Sickness, is not bound to come to the public Prayers of the Church; nor the
Deaf, to hear Sermons; nor the Dumb, to make an Oral Confession of his Faith.
But the general Precept of Forsaking our Sins and Reforming our Actions,
obliges every Man in what Circumstances soever he be placed; because every one
may do this, if he be unfeignedly willing.

It Is very plain, that the great Obstacle to Repentance and Amendment of Life,
lies in Men's Wills, and not in their Want of Power. For if they had no Power at
all to reform their Lives and Actions, if they were forced to go on still in
the Ways of Sin their walking in them would not be sinful. They could be
charged with no Fault, in doing, what they could not help. But that which makes
men truly criminal, that which makes them Sinners, and guilty before God, is
this, That they omit something required, which they might perform if they
would, or do something forbidden, which they might avoid.

All actual Sin is either the Neglect or Abuse of some Power or Faculty given
us by God, which we should and might employ to a better Purpose.

It is therefore in the Power of every man to forsake his Sins in good measure,
and to amend his course of Life; This every Rational Man would certainly do, if
he did not wilfully neglect or abuse the Power he has. Men indeed, by their
sad degeneracy from the Primitive State of Humane Nature, have contracted a
great Impotency and Weakness; but this Impotency they might in some measure put
off and be freed from, if they would; this is not such a Weakness, as is really
distinct from Wilfulness. If the By as of their Wills were not so propense to
their Evil Ways, they might return from them; and when the Scripture seems to
represent their Condition to be such, that they cannot, the Sense of such Texts
may be no more than this, That their Wills are so depraved, so bent to
Wickedness, that they cannot obtain of themselves to be Willing to do what they
easily might do, if they were not unwilling. For Instance, St. Paul tells us in
the eight Chapter to the Romans, Verse the seventh, The carnal Mind cannot be
subject to the Law of God. Not, as if sinful men were perfectly unable to
forsake their Vicious Practices, and obey the Holy Commandments. But he means,
that through the Love of Sin, and Hatred of the Div^ne Law, they cannot obtain
of themselves to be willing to renounce the one, and submit to the other. For
he says in the same Place, that the carnal mind is Enmity to God; and this is
the chief Reason, why it cannot be subject to his Law. The Man that heads an
intestine Rebellion, cannot pretend that he has no Ability to serve his
Prince: He has Strength and Forces at his command, if they were not
misemployed by his disloyal Affection. And every Sinner has Faculties and
Powers, which he might call off from the Service of Sin to the Service of God,
were it not for the Naughtiness of his Heart.

If it be objected, That although Men have the Power to repent and amend, yet
the Want of a willing Mind will certainly hinder them from it; neither can they
obtain a Willingness of Mind, without the Grace of God renewing their Wills,
and effectually inclining them to better Ways and Doings. All this I readily
acknowledge, but this should not discourage any from endeavoring to repent and
reform themselves: Because the Divine Grace and Assistance is never denied to
men's sincere and earnest Endeavors; our Blessed Savior having assured us,
that God will give his holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. No man
therefore is so far void of Power to repent and amend, but he might do it if he
were willing, and he shall also by Degrees be made willing, if he heartily pray
for the Grace of the Holy Spirit, and with his Prayers join his constant
Endeavors to bring his Will to some compliance with the Will of God. Whoever
takes this course and perseveres in it; let him not be afraid, he shall not
miscarry.

If any shall still contend, that men cannot so much as pray for the Grace of
God with any degree of Sincerity, nor use any sincere Endeavor to reform
themselves, except God enable them so to pray and so to endeavor, and
therefore that they have no Power at all, and can do nothing in the least
toward these Effects; this Sequel is to be denied. For although no man has
any Power in and from himself, either of Repenting, or of Fraying to God for
his Grace; yet all, even the worst of Men, have some Power toward it given
them from God, and those that use the Power given them shall still receive more
and more.

Is there not such a Thing as the Preventing Grace of God, whereby he is
aforehand with us, and most freely begins to dispose and incline us to
Repentance and Reformation, before we do in the least either desire it or
endeavor it. The Beginning of such a good Disposition and Inclination, is I
conceive at some time or other generally wrought by the most just and merciful
God in all the Children of Men. He finds a Time to awaken the Natural
Conscience of every Sinner, to raise in him a Sense of his Guilt, and a Fear of
his Danger; which Apprehensions, if they be not obliterated or suppressed, will
put him upon Endeavors to provide for his own Safety.

And upon such Awakenings of Conscience, there are none but might begin to
amend their Doings, and to become less sinful by leaving off some of their ill
Practices. Although they cannot arrive at a Mature State of Piety and Virtue
all on a sudden, yet they might look, and make toward it, with some desires
and Endeavors to attain it. They have Power doubtless to reform in part, which
if they do, God will supply them with more Power; and if they proceed in
improving the Divine Grace and Assistance, as it is afforded them, they shall
still receive larger and larger Measures thereof, until the Work of Reformation
be perfected. He that has (that is, he that improves what he has) to him more
shall be given; but he that has not (that is, he that does not improve what he
has) from him shall be taken away, even that which he has, Mark 4. 25.

In short, The Holy Spirit of God does sooner or later come home to all our
Souls, in some measure, communicating the Aids of his Grace to every one of us.
Now when men quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 9.
and resist the holy Ghost, as often as he strives with them; when they stifle
his Convictions, Acts. 7. 51.
reject his Motions, and put off all serious and awakning Considerations
working in them; when they endeavor to drown the Voice of Conscience, which is
the Voice of God, either by the continual Noise and Throng of Worldly Business,
or by constant Diversions to false Pleasures, and vain Entertainments of Fancy,
which so possess their Imaginations, that they quickly expel all pious
Thoughts; it is no Wonder, that the Holy Spirit, being often resisted does at
least leave such men to walk on still in their evil ways, and to die and perish
in their Sins. But if we be willing and obedient, under the Power and Conduct
of Gods Spirit working in us; if we hearken to his Dictates, and comply with
his Motions, he will still come in to our Assistance with greater and greater
Aids, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
and we may be assured, that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. If we
will cooperate with the Grace of God, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
his Grace shall be sufficient for us. If we will do our Parts toward the
making us holy and happy, God will certainly do His. If we use our sincere
endeavor, that is, if we do what we can toward it, (and none can say, that
they cannot do that) God will infallibly bless our Endeavors, and make them
prosperous and successful. So great is our Encouragement to work out our
Salvation, Phil. 2. 12, 13.
although we are to do it with fear and trembling, when it is God that works
in us both to Will and to Do of his good pleasure.

But because there are not so many of those, who are kept off from Repentance
and Reformation through despair of Success, as there are of those, who
continually delay this necessary Work upon a bold Presumption, that they can do
it at any Time when they will; the Remainder of my Discourse shall be spent in
the Consideration of the proper Season for it; which was my last Observable.
Return ye now every man.

2 Cor. 6. 2.
Now is the accepted Time, Now is the Day of Salvation; to day while it is
called to day. Heb. 3. 13.
No other Time is ours, but the present; We can no more command the future,
than recall what is past. And therefore it was good Advice, which a Jewish
Doctor gave his Scholar, that he should repent one day before he died, meaning,
that he should do it that very day, because he had no Assurance of another. He
that does not presently return from the Paths of Sin, may perhaps the next Step
be beyond all possibility of Retreat. He that adjourns the Amendment of his
Doings to another Day, may within a few Moments be cut off from all further
acting in this Life.

And yet, how securely do men defer their Repentance and Reformation from Time
to Time, as if they were the absolute Lords and Masters of Time, to recall it
or prolong it, as they please. Of these Persons we may observe three Sorts.

Some put off this Work to the very End of their Days, walking in the Counsel
of the Ungodly all their lives, and yet hoping to die the Death of the
righteous.

Others think, their old Age will be soon enough to become serious and
penitent, wise and religious.

Others design to defer their Repentance only to the next more convenient
Opportunity, when they hope to have better Leisure for it.

I wish it were as easy, effectually to dissuade these Persons from such
Delays, as it is to discover the great and present Danger of the least of them.
As for the first, The putting off Repentance to the Time of Sickness and the
Approaches of Death, this is a most unreasonable Presumption and hardly differs
from perfect Madness. For a Deathbed Repentance is a Thing so very uncertain,
whether it will prove Sincere and acceptable to God, that there cannot be a
more prodigious Folly, than to commit an Eternal Concern to such an infinite
Hazard. What Assurance can there be of any ones Sincerity, who delays his
Return to God, till at the very last he be forced to it, by the Exigence of his
dying Condition? It Is to be feared, he is not a free and ingenious, but a
necessitated, and very like to prove a fatally wretched and eternal Penitent
who with much Grief and Sadness forsakes his evil Ways, when he can walk in
them no longer; who begins to amend, when the Season of Sinning is over; and to
cast out his ^usts, when Nature it self does it, whether he will or no: For
although he love his Sin never so passionately, he must now leave them; and
although he has hated God and Goodness all his days, he must now fly to them,
or else be dashed upon everlasting Misery.

When a man is tumbling off from the World, and sinking toward the Bottomless
Pit; it is no wonder, he should catch at God. Being arrived at the Non Vltra of
his Evil Ways, at the Chambers of Death and the Suburbs of Hell, it is no
strange thing, that he should stop his carreer, and begin to give back. When he
stands upon the Brink of the deep and devouring Gulf of Tophet, sees the Mouth
of the Infernal Furnace opened to receive him, smells the Brimstone, hears the
noise of the Damned, and begins to be singed with the Flames; it cannot be
supposed that he should leap in without any Reluctance. No, no, having so near
a Prospect of immediate Ruin, the natural Desire of Self-preservation will
cause him to try his utmost, whether there be any possibility of Escape? Now he
will cry aloud to God for Mercy, make great Acknowledgments of the Evil of his
former Ways, high Professions of his desires to return from them, and strong
Resolutions to devote unto God a Thousand Lives, if he had them to give.

But it is a great Question, whether there be any thing of Grace or Goodness in
all this Repentance, which is extorted from the dying Sinner, by such a
pressing Necessity. This Repentance, so hastily brought forth in the very last
Extremity, must needs without a Miracle prove an Abortion and wither before it
grows up. Most even of its fairest Appearances do undoubtedly miscarry, and
though in regard of their Vehemence, they are called Early seekings of God, yet
being so late in respect of the Time, when they commence, they are as it were
prepared for the Triumphs of the Justice and Indignation of God, who laughs at
the Calamity of those, who in their Health and Prosperity have set at naught
all his Counsel, Pro. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
and would none of his Reproof.

And what if there be some Hopes, that this late Repentance may sometimes prove
to be of the right Kind, and Effectual to Salvation? Let us suppose it
possible, that the dying Sinner, who has spent his Days in the broad way to
Ruin, and just finished his Journey thither, may in his last minutes retract
all his former Course, and draw within the hollow of that little Span, the
vastness of that Action, which is necessary to remove the Sins of a whole Life.
And let us grant it pos^ible, that the holy and righteous God may so far even
prostitute his Grace, ^s to receive to Favor, one who has ^tood out in
Rebellion against him to ^he very utmost so long as he was able; yet seeing
this is only possible, and no more; will any Wise Man ex^ose himself to such
Extremity of Danger; because there is not an absolute ^mpossibility of
Deliverance?

Indeed the deferring our Repentance and Amendment of Life, until we are ^ust
ready to dye, is so irrational ^n Act, that although very many, as ^t sadly
falls out through continual De^ays, have this great Work to do at that Time;
yet I suppose there are out few, who in their serious Thoughts do really design
and forecast a dying Repentance. No, although men will not yet return from
their evil ways, they intend not to run on so far, until they come to the very
Brink of Destruction. They resolve to stop in good time, as they think, and
while they may retreat with Safety. When the young Man has rejoiced a little
longer in his Youth, and walked in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of
his Eyes, he fully intends to return and amend in his old Age, Eccl. 11. 9.
soon enough to prevent his being brought to Judgment for these Things.

But art thou sure, O foolish Sinner, that thou shall live to Old Age? Alas,
how suddenly may thou be arrested by the cold Hands of Death, even in the
Heat of thy Youth, when thou least think of such a Thing? The most
flourishing Vigor and Strength is liable to innumerable Dangers, and may be
consumed in a Moment. Sometimes men are taken away without any Warning, in the
midst of their Pleasures and Enjoyments; so that none can be certain of long
Life; and none are more unlikely to attain it, than those who most expect it;
especially when such Expectation is used as an Encouragement to delay
Repentance. Such Presumptuous Sinners may very justly provoke God to blast
their vain Hopes with a sudden Disappointment. When the Rich man in the Gospel,
having laid up much Goods, promised himself many years to enjoy them, how
sharply and suddenly was he both confuted and confounded, with that bitter and
surprising Rebuke, Luke 12. 18, 19.
Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee.

But suppose men escape the various Accidents of an untimely Death, and have
their Lives prolonged to many years; yet if they run through all the Stages of
their youth in a Wicked Course, and never stop till Gray Hairs overtake them;
if they forsake not their Sins, while they have Strength to commit them, but
follow their Lusts, until a decrepit Age puts out their Fire; the Repentance of
such old Sinners may be very doubtful, whether it be sincere and acceptable to
God, as well as that of the Deathbed Penitent. Mal. 1. 14.
He, that has had a Male in his flock, and yet has kept for God only a
corrupt thing, will hardly escape the Curse of the Deceiver. There is but
little Hope, that God should be pleased with that man, who never draws nigh to
him, until the years draw nigh in which himself has no pleasure, who comes
with the very Ruins of Nature, with a shattered Understanding, a crazy Body,
feeble Limbs, and decayed Senses, presenting himself a rotten and unsavory
Sacrifice; like that old decrepit Mimick at Rome, who being grown out of date,
and slighted by the People, made his Recourse to the Capitol, and there acted
his Part as well as he could, before the Image of Jupiter, and the rest of
their Gods, as if they would accept what Men had despised.

But perhaps we do not intend so unworthily to requite the Author and Preserver
of our Lives, by pouring out unto him only the Dregs and Lees of them. Neither
will we so improvidently adjourn the Care of our Souls to those evil Days, when
we can hardly bear the Infirmities of the Body. We will repent, and serve God,
and reform our selves very speedily. Only we desire that this Work may be
postponed a little while, until we have a more convenient Season when we hope
to be in a better Temper for it.

And do we only hope? Alas! alas! if we cannot infallibly foretell, that such a
fitter Opportunity and better Disposition will both together happen to us, we
still run a great Hazard.

How foolishly do we boast of to morrow, Pro. 27. 1.
when we know not what a day may bring forth? Nay, perhaps to morrow may never
be brought forth: For who can tell, whether the Sun may live to make another
Day? or whether the next Night may not close his Eye, bury him in Darkness, and
hang the World in Mourning at his Funeral? Or if he shine forth again, we may
not live to see his Light. There is no future Time that we can certainly
promise our selves, no, not that of which we have the nearest Prospect. Perhaps
this very Time is our last Opportunity, and if we let it slip, it is
irrecoverable. For ought we know our eternal State in Happiness or Misery may
depend upon our well or ill employing the few Hours that are left of this very
Day: And these are passing from us with a swift and insensible Motion; one of
them is gone while I have been speaking to you, and the rest will follow apace.
And although, when this Day is spent, we may possibly have many more to come,
yet all the moments of our Time are winged, and will continually fly away like
an Eagle, or Post, or Ship, or like an Arrow that leaves no Path. So that
unless we be very watchful, and take a strict Account of them, they will slip
from us and be utterly lost. And if we carelessly or wilfully lose those
precious Moments, which now offer themselves to us, it is much to be feared,
that we shall still do so with the next, and the next, and the next until all
our Time be expired.

If we be unwilling to reform to day we have no Reason to imagine, that we
shall be more willing to do it to morrow. The longer men walk in their evil
ways, the more strongly are they inclined to continue in them and the
Difficulty of forsaking them grows greater and greater by every Delay; their
vicious Habits are still more deeply rooted, Gods Patience more highly
provoked, and the obtaining hi^ Favor and Mercy more uncertain. So that if men
refuse to repent now, they can have no Assurance, that they shall ever have,
either the Time, o^ the Grace to do it hereafter; and i^ they die impenitent
and unreformed, they may be most certainly assured, that they shall perish
everlastingly.

Let us therefore be Wise, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
before it be too late, let us understand this, and consider our latter End.

God Almighty give every one of us this Wisdom, to lay hold on the present
Opportunity, and to perform that without delay, which is so much our Safety as
well as Duty; to repent and turn our selves from all our Transgressions, that
Iniquity may not be our Ruin; Ezekiel. 18. 30.
to deny all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, Tit 2. 12, 13.
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for
that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost be all Honor,
Praise, and Power, Now and for ever, Amen.

PIOUS REVERENCE TOWARD GOD and the KING.

SERMON II.
Preached Feb. 4. 16. 82/83
Prove. XXIV. 21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change. For their Calamity shall rise suddenly; and
who knows the ruin of them both.
IF the Counsel, which Solomon has given to Subjects, should be suspected to
be guilty of any Error or Partiality, or any sinister self-seeking design,
because himself was (...) King; as if therefore he regarded ^nely the Princes
Interest, and not the Peoples; whoever considers the admirable Perfections of
his Heroic Mind, the vastness of his Understanding, and the Largeness of his
Heart, may easily clear him from all Suspicion of that Nature, that can
possibly arise from the Quality of his Place and Office. For since he was not
only the King of Israel and Judah, but the Prince of all the Philosophers in
the World, the Wisest of all Mankind, his Dictates are worthy to be received as
Oracles; and where he speaks in his own Cause, the Greatness of his Wisdom puts
his. Truth and Justice beyond Question. At least his Integrity cannot be
disputed, nor his Authority denied, where he speaks by Divine Inspiration, as
he does in this Collection of his Proverbs. Amongst which, that that I have
pitched upon, is not the least remarkable. Melanctho^, and others of the first
Reformers, who were for promoting at once both Piety and Peace, have
recommended it as one of the Principal Sentences of this Book; and not
undeservedly: For it has in it the best Advice that can in so few words be
given, to prevent our Ruin, and to make us happy both in this Life, and in
that which is to come. It contains these following Parts.

First, A serious Exhortation to Religion, My Son, fear thou the Lord.

Secondly, A parallel Exhortation to Loyalty, to fear also the King.

Thirdly, A useful Caution against ^oyning or associating with Seditious
innovators, who are some of the chief Enemies both to Religion and Loyalty,
Meddle not with them that are given ^o change; or, according to the old
Translation, Meddle not with them that are seditious.

Fourthly, A pressing Argument to ^nforce the Caution, taken from the ^wift
Vengeance that shall surprise such (...) men, and the unknown Miseries into
which both they and their Associates may tumble headlong; For their Ca^mity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows ^e Ruin of them both?

Before we consider each of these Particulars distinctly, and by it self, it
may not be amiss to take along with us some ^rief Remarks upon the close
Con^exion of them in the same Rule or ^recept.

We see here at the first View, Religion and Loyalty, the Fear of God, and the
Fear of the King do very well consist together. Solomon exhorts to both in the
same breath; and St. Peter has also done the same, in almost the same words
that Solomon speaks. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King. And what God has
joined, let not vain Man think to put asunder. The most subtle Heads of our
separating Factions cannot separate these one from the other. They cannot
indeed break off one Link from the inviolable Chain of Truths and Virtues. The
greatest Fomenters of Division can breed no Jars nor Oppositions, where there
is an innate Union, an essential Harmony, an eternal Concord The men that are
most of all given to change, can never alter the Nature of Things.

We see here Loyalty to our Prince is a thing commanded by God himself together
with Piety and Devotion toward himself; yea and commanded in the very next
place to it; so that the one is a part, an inseparable part, a very
considerable part of the other. And it follows from hence by apparent
consequence, that men's Disloyalty is a clea^ Indication of their Irreligion. If
they fear not the King, they fear not God. If any man seem to be religious and
bridleth not his Tongue, Jam. 1. 26.
from speaking evil of Dignities or higher Powers, 2 Pet. 2. 10.
that man's Religion is vain; Jud. 8.
and it is much more so, Romans 13. 2.
if he holds not his hands from Resisting those Powers. In like manner, on
the other side, if any man seem to be loyal; if he profess the most awful
Veneration, the most dutiful Affection to the King, yet, if he be void of
Religion, his Allegiance is very uncertain. He that is a bold Rebel against
Heaven, and a false Traitor to his Maker, is not like to be true and faithful
to his Prince. He may indeed be Loyal for a Time, so long as his Interest or
his Humor inclines him to it, but when he has an Opportunity to rebel with
advantage, all his Allegiance will be cast off.

Here also we may perceive, in order to the preserving a due Fear and Reverence
toward God and the King, how necessary it is, that People should be forewarned
of ill men, that they should be cautioned against associating with dangerous
Persons, particularly, those that are given to change, those that are for
Alterations and Innovations, those factious Malcontents, who being weary of
the good and ancient Constitutions ordained by God and the King, make it their
Study and Endeavor, to undermine and Subvert the established Religion and
Government.

And since both they and their Accomplices shall be pursued with Vengeance;
since none can tell what severe Chastisements a Provoked God, and an angry
Prince, may prepare for them, it cleary follows, that those who join with the
Seditious, are very ill advised, and have no true Regard to Self-Preservation,
while to prevent imaginary and fictitious Dangers, they throw themselves into
real and certain Misery.

But to come to a more distinct consideration of each Particular observed in
the Text; I begin with the first, the Exhortation to Religion, My Son, fear
thou the Lord. Of which Fear I shall briefly consider, The Nature, The Degrees,
The Effects, and The Contraries.


First, As for the Nature of the Fear

If we could behold nothing in God but irresistible Power, sovereign Will, and
Severities of Justice, our case would be like that of the Devils, our Fear
would then be nothing but pure Dread and Horror, and the only Product of our
Faith would be to make us tremble. Jam. 2. 19.
But although the Majesty of God Almighty has such an overpowring Glory in it,
Isay. 6. 2, 3.
as dazles and confounds all Mortal Creatures, and makes the very Seraphims
cover their Faces, yet since the astonishing Terror of it is allayed and
mitigated by his Goodness, and since we believe him to be the Lord God merciful
and gracious, that Fear, which we are to have of him, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
is not pure solitary Fear, but Reverence, or Veneration, which suffers Love to
cohabite.

Dr. Outram.
For (if I may take the liberty to borrow some Demonstration of this from a
late excellent Divine) suppose we fear any Thing or Person in all the World
more than God, then when ever there happens a Competition between the Fear of
that Thing, or that Person, and the Fear of God, the greater Fear will overcome
the less, and so cause a Neglect or Violation of our Duty to him. But where the
Fear of God is predominant, there it will secure our Duty, there it will be
attended with sincere Obedience.

And this in the Third Place, is the

If we choose to disobey God, it is because we do not fear his Threatenings; and
if they are not feared, it is because they are either not believed, or not
considered. But the clear and firm Belief, joined with the serious
consideration, of the Miseries threatened to Disobedience, cannot but restrain
and deter us from it. We cannot indulge our selves in Sin, unless we enjoy some
Pleasure in it; and we can enjoy no Pleasure in it, unless we forget or
disbelieve the everlasting Punishments, which Almighty God has prepared for
it. While men have real and settled Apprehensions of those Punishments, and
while the Remembrance of them, keeps them under the Awe of Fear and Dread,
their Sins will appear so grievous to them, that they will be forced to abstain
from them for their own Ease and Satisfaction.

And if the Fear of God be considered; as it is a filial Reverence compounded
with Love, it will be much more powerful to move and excite Obedience to him.
Reverence willingly offers, readily pays, and cheerfully performs what was
forced and constrained by mere Fear. If Awe and Affection be united in a devout
Veneration of the God whom we serve, his Service, which before was a Yoke and a
Burden, then becomes perfect Freedom, so pleasant and so natural to us that to
refuse it will be an Extinguishing of our own Joys, a Resisting o^ our own
Desires, and a Violence to ourselves. A man, that highly reveres another, is as
much inclined to please him as he is to please himself, and as unwilling to
offend him, as he is to wound his own Breast.

Obedience therefore is an Inseparable Effect of filial Fear or Reverence And
that which is so, is the most certain^ Mark of the Truth and Reality o^ our
Religion. We all profess Religion, and the Fear of God, we all pretend the
highest Awe and Reverence to his divine Majesty; But do we sincerely endeavor
to serve and please him? Are we guilty of no wilful disobedience, no chosen and
deliberate violations of his holy Laws? If we indulge any of these, the true
Fear of God is not in us.

For it is, fourthly, to be noted, That an Awful Sense we have of the Majesty
and Sovereignty of the most high God, both in our Words, and in our Actions,
let both our Words and Actions declare, how much we revere his Power and
Authority, not only in himself, but in those also whom he has set over us.

Solomon's Advice, wherein we are admonished unto the Fear of God, to subjoyn
the Fear of the King, who is Gods Vicegerent. Of which I shall discourse in the
same Method, as I have done of the former, by considering its Nature, Degrees,
Effects, and Contraries.


England looking upon the King as a God upon Earth, do attribute unto him in
some Analogy diverse Excellencies, that belong properly to God alone; such as
are a kind of Omnipotency in raising men from Death to life, by pardoning whom
the Law has condemned; a certain Omnipresency, by his numerous Officers, who
every where represent him; and little less than an Infallibility, and an
absolute Perfection of Wisdom and Righteousness: For our Law will have no
Error, no Injustice, no Folly, no Imperfection whatsoever to be found in the
King.

The Fear therefore which we owe to our dread Sovereign, even like that which
we render to the divine Majesty, is a most profound Reverence for, an high
Esteem of, and a most humble and dutiful Affection unto, his Sacred Person and
Authority. It is a filial Fear compounded of Dread and Love: For the King is
the Father of our Country, by whose Providence and Protection, we are supported
and defended, by whose vigilant Care and Conduct we quietly enjoy all that we
possess. Of this (as St. Jerome has observed) even the Philistines were so
sensible, Hieron. l. 9. in Ezekiel.
that it was a constant Custom among them, to call all their Princes by the
name of Abimelech, which signifies both Father and King. And it was the Promise
of God to his Church, that in the Times of the Gospel, Isay. 49. 23.
Kings should be her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers. Which
great Blessing has been, and is, most visibly enjoyed by us in this Nation, as
much as by any People under Heaven.

Since then by being born the Kings Subjects, we have the Happiness to be his
Children, the very law of Nature does oblige us, to pay him all the Awfulness,
and Affection, and Duty of Children. Mal. 1. 6.
If I be a Father (says God) where is mine Honor? If I be a Master, where is
my Fear? Now the King next and immediately under God, is the great and common
Father, the supreme Lord and Master of us all.

God, being lodged in the sacred Person of the Sovereign Prince, he may justly
demand the supreme Honor. Within his own Dominions he is only less and lower
than God, he is greater and higher than all Ranks and Orders of Men. Yea all
the States of the Realm joined together, all the Nobles and Commons, and the
whole Body of the People have not a Power and Authority equal to his. All his
Subjects, whether Public Magistrates or private men, not only severally and
apart, but jointly and together are under his Command. For otherwise, he would
not be the King of a Kingdom, or a Political Society, united under one Form of
Government, but only a King of single men separately taken, and so he would be
a strange kind of Chimerical and imaginary Prince, a King of nothing but a Rope
of sands.

In the first Epistle of St. Peter, Chap. 2. ver. 13 and 14. that great Apostle
makes this plain Distinction between our Subjection to the King, and to all
other Magistrates, whether taken collectively or distributively, We are to
submit to the King as Supreme, to all others as his Officers and Delegates Sent
and Commissioned by him; all of them together, as well as each of them apart
having received all their Power and Authority from him, and he having received
his from God alone. Romans 13. 2. 4.
For the King is no Substitute of the People but the Minister of God, and his
Power is the Ordinance of God.

This is the Voice of Scripture and of Reason, and this I may with the greatest
Confidence, because I can with the strongest Evidence affirm; it being not only
the unanimous Opinion of all the Wisest Politicians, and Statesmen in the
World, but also the Catholic Doctrine of the Christian Church for many
hundreds of years together, that a Monarch or Sovereign in his own Dominions
has no Superior, but God Almighty.

And indeed it would be very strange, if any considering men should think
otherwise: For it is a manifest Contradiction to be a Sovereign or Supreme
Prince, and to have a Superior. Those Kings, who have any Power above them, are
only titular, not real Kings. The Sovereignty is always lodged, where there is
the highest Authority; And according to the Constitution of our Nation, it is
most certainly in the King, for the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, together
with all the Commons assembled in Parliament, do by a Solemn Oath acknowledge
the King to be Supreme, and themselves to be his Subjects; and they have in
public Statutes particularly declared, the sole Supreme Command and Government
of the Militia, ever to be, and to have been, by the Law of England the
undoubted Right of his Majesty, and his Predecessors; and that both or either
Houses of Parliament cannot, nor lawfully may raise or levy any War, offensive
or defensive, against his Majesty his Heirs and lawful Successors. Neither can
any Laws or Statutes be made by them, but only such as the King approves.
Neither is the King accountable to them, or to any other, or liable to be
punished by them or by any other, besides God.

These are the Essentials of Sovereignty, or supreme Power, to have the sole
Power of the Sword, to have the Legislative Power, to have a Power which is
irresistible and unaccountable, and no way subject to the coercive Authority of
any other. Every complete and Imperial Sovereign has all these? And that we
are under such a Sovereign, the whole Parliament did acknowledge in the 24. H.
8. c. 12. in which it was Resolved, That by sundry Authentic Histories and
Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed, that this Realm of England
is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the World, governed by one Supreme
Head and King, having Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the
same.

The Kings Majesty being therefore the only Supreme Governor in his Dominions,
next under God, and having full, perfect, and entire Jurisdiction and Authority
from God alone, which no other Magistrates have, but by Emanation from him,
ought to be revered by us, with the highest Degrees of Awfulness and
Veneration, that can justly be paid to any Person or Power upon Earth. The Fear
and Hoour we owe to him is greater than we owe to any other, and is the very
greatest that can possibly be expressed, except only that Divine Honor and
Adoration, which is peculiar to the Deity.

Thirdly, This Awful Fear of our Sovereign more than any mortal Man, more than
the greatest Monarch in the World. But there is no Case whatsoever, wherein he
dares, either to resist or reproach the Person or the Authority of the King,
or to offer any Indignity to him.

Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, Eccles. 8. 4. But if his Word be
slighted, and his Power despised, he is not honored as a King. Who may say
unto him, what do thou? None surely can without great irreverence. Is it fit
to say to a King, thou art Wicked, or to Princes, ye are Ungodly? Job. 34. 18.
No, it is very unfit, it is one of the highest Instances of Impudence,
Rudeness, and Unmannerliness. It is such Behavior as does no way consist with
the Deference, Obsequiousness, and profound Lowliness which ought to be in
Subjects.

But what is it then, to take Arms against him? Is it not plainly a fighting
against God, whom the King represents, and with whose Authority he is invested,
Prove. 30. 31. A King (like God) is one, against whom there is no rising up; No,
not upon any pretense whatsoever, without open Perfidiousness and Rebellion; of
which when any are guilty, they not only affront their Prince, and contemn his
Laws and Government; they not only act contrary to their Duty and Allegiance,
but they totally cast off the very State, and Quality, and Relation of
Subjects; yea, they are such Monsters of Men as do in a great Degree renounce
humane Nature, and common Civility; They are as natural Brute beasts, made to
be taken and destroyed. So St. Peter describes them, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 12.

If we have therefore any Fear of God or the King, if we have any Regard to
Religion or Loyalty, Humanity, or Civility, we will abhor the thoughts of ever
joining with such salvage, untamed, ungovernable Creatures, such Wolves and
Tigers in humane Shape as Rebels and Traitors are* Yea if we desire to keep our
selves out of danger, we will have nothing to do with any of the Friends or
Correspondents of such ill men, with any factious Designers, who do more
remotely attempt to destroy the Government, by introducing the Changes and
alterations of it. Which brings me to

Meddle not with them that are given to change. That is, join not thy self to
any turbulent Sect or Party, whose Discontent with the present State of Things,
or desire of Novelty makes them affect a change, especially in those two great
Interests of a Nation, Religion, and Government, both which the due Fear of God
and the King would preserve inviolate.

Now by how much the better the established Religion and Government is, by so
much the worse and the more detestable are all such Combinations and
Confederacies for the Change of either of them. Upon which Account I verily
believe no People in the World have greater Reason to hearken to this Counsel
of Solomon's, than we have. For wherefore should we desire or endeavor an
Alteration either of our Religion, or our Government?

Our Religion is the true Christian Religion restored to its primitive Purity,
and reformed from the Corruptions and Abuses both of Heretics and
Schismatics. And shall we join with those who would exchange this sober,
rational, well-tempered Religion, either for the Extravagancies of Enthusiasm,
or the Follies of Superstition, the Delusions of the Sectaries, or the
Idolatries of the Romanists? Shall we join with those, who would exchange
decent and duly regulated Ceremonies, either for rude and unseemly Gestures on
the one side, or for a Multitude of ridiculous and pompous Rites on the other;
who would turn pious and primitive Discipline into lawless liberty, or
intolerable Impositions; sound and ancient Doctrine, in all Points agreeable to
the written Word of God, either into uncertain and unwritten Traditions, or
into novel Enthusiastic Divinity; and serious well composed Forms of Prayer,
understood by the People, either into mere Battologies and Extemporary
Effusions, or into unedifying Masses in an unknown Tongue.

It is a great and a most true commendation of our Religion, worthy to be ever
remembered, which was given by his late Sacred Majesty, in some of his last
Words to the then Prince of Wales, our now most Gracious Sovereign. His words
are these, I do require and entreat you, as your Father, and your King, that
you never suffer your Heart to receive the least check against, or Disaffection
from the true Religion established in the Church of England. I tell you, I have
tried it, and after much Search, (...). c. 27.
and many Disputes, have concluded it to be the best in the World; not only in
the Community as Christian, but also in the special Notion as Reformed; keeping
the middle way between the Pomp of Superstitious Tyranny, and the Meanness of
Fantastic Anarchy.

And as for the Government over us if Reason and Scripture may be heard it is
the most excellent Form of Government. It is a Monarchy, and the best sort of
Monarchy, not a Despotical and Arbitrary, but a Political or Paternal Monarchy,
such as is administered by Just and equal Laws; not an Elective but an
Hereditary Monarchy, free from all Interregnum, and from many Mischiefs to
which Elective Kingdoms are subject. It is such a Monarchy as by an adadmirable
Temperament preserves at once, both the just Liberty of the Subject, and the
Sovereign Majesty of the King. It is a Monarchy of great Antiquity. We have
been under the Government of Kings, beyond the utmost Records of all History.
Of Kings we may justly boast, more than any other Nation in the World: For it
was our Island, that yielded the first King, and the first Emperor, that ever
embraced the Faith of Christ, Lucius and Constantine, Princes who in the Glory,
and Stability of their Actions, abundantly answered the significant Omens of
their Illustrious Names. One of our Kings also was the first, who cast of the
Antichristian Usurpations of the Church of Rome, and settled the Reformation by
a Law. And it has been ever since under the same good Conduct of Kings, that
the true Christian Reformed Religion has been hitherto preserved among us.

Shall we then be so unwise, as to hearken to the Antimonarchical Insinuations
of those restless Demagogues, who would alter and change, subvert and destroy
this most excellent this most ancient, Form of Government? And what if some
Men, will not, or cannot apprehend, that our Government deserves to be thus
extolled? What if they suppose this Constitution to be none of the best? Yet
every plain Countryman may understand, That the Mischiefs of a Change are
unspeakable. A Change of Government cannot ordinarily be introduced without a
Rebellion, and all the fatal Consequences that attend it; a Rebellion which
commonly begins with factious Combinations under Pretense of Defending
Religion, Liberty, and Property; proceeds by armed Force, and all the Ways of
secret Stratagem or open Assault; and ends in Blood and Slaughter, Spoil and
Devastation, Rapine and Plunder, Oppression and Sacrilege; a Rebellion, I say
which, if prosperous and successful, make a great Change indeed, overturns all
Order, and Rule, and licenses all the Injustice in the World; lays the Reins
upon men's necks, and takes off the Restraints of their Appetites; throws down
the Fences of Law, and leaves all open to the Incursions of Violence; gathers
men's Lusts into a common Storm, and fills all things with Horror and Confusion;
breaks up the Foundations of the Earth and lets in a kind of Hell upon us. All
these dire Effects of Subverting the Government this Nation has sadly felt;
and if we took any Notice of the Black and Fatal Day in the last week, Januar.
30.
they must needs at this Time be fresh in our Memories.

But perhaps all this does not discourage the men that are given to Change. The
seditious Incendiaries care not, although the whole Kingdom be in a Flame, if
they can but warm themselves at the Fire; and at the End of all this
Bloodshed, Ruin, and Devastation, they expect nothing less than the rich
Spoils of a happy Victory, and the Glory of Triumph. I shall therefore consider
in the last Place, what may abundantly confute and confound such vain Hopes.

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them
both? that is, both of them that are given to change, and those that join with
them. Or else it may be understood of the Destruction that shall come upon
them, both from the Lord and the King. Who can tell what terrible Judgment,
what heavy Punishment, both God and his Vicegerent may inflict upon them? Who
can measure the divine Vengeance, which is armed with infinite Power? Who can
limite or appease the Wrath of a King, which is as the Roaring of a Lion, Prove.
16. 14. and 19. 12.
or as a Messenger of Death. Kings are said to have long Hands; and God has
longer and heavier, which can soon reach, and will most severely chastise such
Disturbers and Overturners of Peace and Government. In the Thirteenth to the
Romans, St. Paul has very plainly foretold their Fate, that they shall receive
to themselves (...), Judgment, or as we render it, Damnation. If we take the
Word in the mildest Sense, the meaning is, that according to the ordinary
Course of Gods Providence, they shall receive some grievous Punishment, here in
this World. They seldom die the common Death of men, Numb. 16. 29.
nor are they visited, after the visitation of all men, but are usually cut off
by the visible Strokes of Vindictive Justice. And their Punishment is as signal
as their Villainy. They resist the Ordinance of God, and they receive a
Punishment worthy of God.

Every Age has afforded Examples of this; but I will only instance in the
Judgments, which followed the first notorious Sedition that happened in World,
and the last great Rebellion in our own Nation.

That first Sedition (of which we have a large and full Account in the sixteen
Chapter of Numbers) was the Insurrection of Corah and his Accomplices against
Moses and Aaron, under pretense of asserting the Rights and Liberties of the
People, in Opposition to the arbitrary Government of Moses, whom they accused
of Tyranny (as Josephus expressly says, agreeably to what the Scripture it self
does imply) and the freeing themselves from the Encroachments upon their
spiritual Privileges, by the Usurpations of Aaron and the Priesthood. Which
specious Designs drew into the Conspiracy a great Number of Considerable
Persons, even two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly, famous in the
Congregation, Men of Renown. But notwithstanding their Popular Pretenses,
(which were, for substance, the very same, that gave the first Rise and Birth
to our late Confusions;) and although they acted under some show of Authority,
when such an Assembly of Princes and Great Men joined with them; (as our Rebels
also endeavored to justify their Proceedings, by the pretended Power of a
Parliament;) although, I say, they had such fair Colors, for what they did,
and such Eminent Men on their side, they were made to suffer the just desert of
their Sin. Both Earth and Heaven conspired to punish them, and their
Destruction was no less terrible than sudden. They had disturbed the Earth by
their Faction, and the Earth as it were moved with Indignation against them,
rent asunder, and opened its Mouth to swallow those in its Bowels, who were
unworthy to live upon the Face of it. When they had been dividing the People,
the very Ground divides it self under their feet, and breaks into a Chasm in
the Place where they stood, that they might go down quick into the Pit of
Destruction, Death and the Grave both seizing them at once. And those two
hundred and fifty of the Seditious Incendiaries that offered Incense, were as
swiftly consumed by Fire from Heaven. So suitable were their Punishments both
to the Nature and the Degree of their Crimes.

And when the Israelites, instead of learning their Duty by these dreadful
Spectacles, took upon them the next Day in another Insurrection to justify the
Plea of Corah, to own those Rebels as the People of the Lord, and to charge
Moses and Aaron as being guilty of their Blood; the Wrath of God went out
against them and consumed them, as in a moment, with such a quick dispatch,
that, although Aaron with all possible Haste made an Atonement for them, there
were destroyed by the Plague, no less than Fourteen thousand and seven hundred.

But to come to the Instance nearer home, What, I pray were the Effects of the
late Rebellion in our Native Land? Was it not in the Event most pernicious and
destructive to the Rebels themselves, at least to the Chiefest of them? Did not
their Calamity arise suddenly, so suddenly that themselves scarce sore-saw it?
Those malignant Comets, having blazed a little while, quickly expired in
Stench. Their Rise was sudden and their Fall too. Their restless Ambition made
them violently introduce a Change of Government; but what a Change did
themselves meet with, when they were thrown down from the Top of all their vain
False Glory, to be the Hatred and the Hissing of the People? They had divided
the Kingdom, and embroiled it in a Destructive War: God therefore divided them
among themselves, and made them their own Scourges, like an Army of
Philistines, still beating and threshing down one another, until the
Restoration of his sacred Majesty, when the Hand of God was illustriously
visible, both in bringing him to the Throne of his Father, and the principal
Rebels and Murderers to Public Justice.

Some indeed there were, who had no small share in the Guilt, and yet escaped
the Punishment; But they may thank their most Gracious and Merciful Prince,
whose matchless Clemency has been greater than the greatest of their Bloody
Villainies. And after such a Pardon of such Guilt, if any Subjects of this Crown
have a mind to rebel again, let them take heed lest they sin beyond all
Possibility of Forgiveness and bar themselves eternally, not only from the
Mercies of the King, but also from the Mercies of God Almighty.

As for our selves, if we suspect or perceive any Factious Men to have designs
against the Government, let not our Souls come into their Secret: Let us not
meddle in the least with such Sons of Corah, except it be by all lawful means
to detect, oppose, and suppress them. Let us no way join with them in their
Cursed Attempts and Machinations, unless we desire to fall with them, in their
Ruin and Calamity. But as it was Prophesied by Hosea of the Children of
Israel, That after their Captivity they should return and seek the Lord their
God and David their King; Hos. 3. 5.
still, David their King, although it was then some hundreds of years after
David's Reign, because the Succession was still in the Family of David; so God
grant, that we and our Posterity may fear, and honor, and obey the Lord our
God, and our David, our most Gracious Sovereign, and all his Lawful Successors,
without any change of our excellently established Religion, or our happy
Constitution of Government, to the End of the World.

JUST ABHORRENCE OF USURPING REPUBLICANS.

SERMON III.
Preached Jan. 30. 16 83/84.
Prove. XXVIII. 2. For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof: But by a man of understanding and knowledge, the State thereof shall
be prolonged.
IF the great Blessings and Calamities of a Nation be not thrown into it at all
adventure, by the uncertain cast of blind Contingency, nor irresistibly thrust
upon it, by the overbearing force of inevitable Fate; if they proceed not from
the confused and for^uitous Concourse of various Smooth-shap'd or Ill-figured
Atoms, nor from the predominant Influences of auspicious or malignant Stars or
Planets; but are both of them the certain Effects of an intelligent and
voluntary Providential Administration, a Divine Power, Wisdom, and Justice
ruling in the Kingdoms of Men; if the one be the benign Favors of Almighty
God, the liberal Emanations of his Immense Goodness, wherewith he rewards and
encourages Piety and Virtue; if the other be his penal Srokes, the awakening
Thunderbolts of that Righteous Indignation, which Men's Sins have provoked;
from hence it will follow, that we have most just and real occasions for Solemn
Days of public Thansgiving for the one, and Humiliations under the other,
which sort of Days, though sometimes illegally consecrated by Factious Powers,
and hypocritically celebrated with Mock-devotions to sanctify Treason and
Rebellion, ought to be so much the more sincerely, so much the more religiously
observed by us, when our lawful Superiors have advisedly appointed them. And
from hence it will particularly follow, that we have still great reason, with
Weeping, Fasting, and Prayer, thus annually to commemorate the Fatal Period of
Time, in which our multiplied Sins, and overflowing Transgressions, after they
had deprived us of all the Blessings, with which a just and peaceful Monarchy
could make us happy, and introduced the plentiful Calamities of a Civil War,
together with the numerous Plagues of many Princes, many Tyrannical Usurpers of
Royal Authority, swelled at length into such a Deluge of boundless Wickedness,
as quite extinguished the Light of our Israel, and pulled down upon as, so
singular an Instance of the Divine Vengeance, as no Nation had felt before, the
most barbarous and unparalled Murder of one of the best Kings that ever sat
upon a Throne, our late most Gracious Sovereign. From hence (...) say it will
appear, that this Days humble and mournful Reflection, on that blackest of
Britain's Tragedies, is (...) great and common Duty, to which ^ll, even the
most innocent Natives of his piacular Island, are indispensibly obliged.

These Conclusions I take to be clearly inferred from those Premises, and I
believe no sober and knowing Man can think otherwise, if he seriously and
thoroughly consider this Royal and Divine Aphorism, which came from the Pen of
Solomon, and the Mouth of God. For the transgression of a Land, many are the
Princes thereof: But by a man of understanding and knowledge, the State thereof
shall be prolonged. In which words there lie before us these Four Observables.

First, a public National Judgment and that is the ill State of a Nation under
Polyarchy, or Plurality of Supreme Governors, when many are the Princes
thereof.

Secondly, the notorious Cause of such a Judgment, it is expressly ascribed to
the Wickedness of a People, the transgression of a Land.

Thirdly, the opposite National Mercy, or the Happiness of a Nation under a
well settled Monarchy, when (...) a man of understanding and knowledge the
State thereof is prolonged: A man that is to say, one Man, one Sovereign
Prince, in opposition to the many Princes before mentioned.

Fourthly, The principal means whereby so great a Mercy is procured, and that
is the Wisdom of the Monarch, his understanding and knowledge.

I begin with the first of these, the many Princes; by which it is plain, we
are to understand Supreme or Sovereign Princes: For many inferior Magistrates
or subordinate Governors, are at all times necessary to every State and
Kingdom, even in their most peaceful and flourishing Condition. It is therefore
the multiplication of Sovereigns, that Solomon here speaks of; by many of whom
may be meant, either many lawful Sovereigns, or many Usurpers; both which are
public Evils, although the latter be the more signal Judgment.

First then, by Princes in the Text we may understand lawful Sovereigns; and of
them there may be either many successively, or many at once. There may be many
successively in a Monarchical State; sometimes by the very Nature of the
Constitution, as in an Elective Monarchy, where the Crown is not inviolably
fixed in one Royal Family, and in the one ^ight Line according to Privilege of
^irth, and Proximity of Blood; but is conferred on various Persons of diverse
Families or different Lines, according to the Will and Pleasure of the
Electors. This is an ill State in comparison of Hereditary Monarchy. At the
Death of every Prince, it is subject to an Interregnum, in which the whole Frame
of things may be unsettled; and every new Election not only commits the
Administration of Affairs to untried hands, but may also expose the Kingdom to
great Chages, and dangerous Revolutions, arising from the opposite Interests,
Affections, and Inclinations of various Families, and consequently of such
Persons as are chosen out of them.

Indeed if it happen that the Elected King be the Son of Nobles, as Solomon
speaks, if he descended from the Sacred Race of Kings, and has been educated
among Princes from his Youth; i^ he has not only the Title, Place, and Office,
but the real Majesty and Authority, the God-like Spirit, the Wisdom, Justice,
and Clemency of a King matters may go well while he Reigns. Blessed art thou,
O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, Eccles. 10. 17. But if it so fall
out (as it often may i^ an Arbitrary Election) that the Prince be chosen out of
the meanest of the People; if he be a Person of low Birth and servile
Condition, the Kingdom can never be happy under such a Governor. For a Servant
when he reigns, is one of those three things, for which the Earth is
disquieted, and one of the four, which it cannot bear, Prove. 30. 21. 22.

Sometimes also by the Will and Pleasure of Heaven, and by the Visitation of
God, there may be many Princes successively even in an Hereditary Monarchy,
when by reason of the frequent Deaths, and short Reigns of Kings, there is a
Succession of diverse of them within a few years. This is generally
disadvantageous to the Happiness of (...) Nation, if it does not prove fatal to

When there is such a Mortality of Monarchs, Psalm 82. 6, 7.
that the Earthly Gods die ^^ster than common Men; when the children of the
most High are brought ^^w, and not one alone, but many of ^^e Princes fall by
an untimely Dissolution, before they can bring their de^ns and endeavors for
the safety and ^elfare of their People, to any good ^aturity; and when the
Crown thus swiftly passing from one to another, is devolved upon Infants, who
are unskilful in the Arts of Empire, obnoxious to the unfaithfulness of Tutors,
and easy to be misled by the treacherous Conduct of ill Ministers, this
ruffles the public Affairs, and usually causes great discomposures. Woe to
thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, Eccles.10. 16. Although this Woe may be
in good measure prevented, where the Change and the loss of Princes, is
recompensed by the continuance of the same wise Counselors, and the defect of
Age made up by the uncorrupted Innocence, and the early Piety of the Crowned
Child.

But as the having many Princes successively, is sometimes the misfortune o^
the best of Monarchies; so the having many together and at once, is the
constant mischief of a Republic; when the Sovereignty is actually invested
more than one, either in a certain number of Select Persons, which is
inco^modious enouh, or, which is mu^^ worse, in the very Multitude and general
Crowd, in the whole Body of (...) People; the Head and the Feet, (...) Brains
and the Heels, the Honoura^^^ the Wise, the Sober, and all the base and blind
and boisterous Rabble, having their share in the Government.

I deny not that these Republics are lawful Powers in those places where by
Divine permission they have had a durable continuance and establishment. Long
Possession may give them a Title, and as bad as they are, Use and Custom and
the Situation of some Countries, may make them tolerable in some few particular
places.

Neither will I say, that Solomon did expressly and designedly pronounce this
Sentence concerning them. The truth is, they cannot boast of so great
Antiquity. It does not appear, that any such Forms of Government had ever been
heard of in his Days. But because many in this Age, and in this Nation, have
been such fond Admirers of Commonwealths, I shall for their sakes enquire,
whether these rare Models of Government, although they do not fall directly
under Solomon's Censure, be really any better than the many Princes in my Text
are supposed to be? Whether they be not, for the most part, Judgments and
Punishments sent from Heaven, for the transgression of a Land?

That they were generally so in their Original, I think is not much to be
doubted. For what was it that brought Republics into the World? Was it not
Faction and Sedition? Were they not all at first mere Usurpations? Where is
then any People, Nation, or Language, which was not anciently subject to Kings?
We cannot suppose that any was not, unless we will take upon us (as some of our
Republicans have confidently done) to question the truth of all ancient
History. Plato Redivivus. p. 27.
Tully places it inter notiora, Tull. l. 3. de legibus.
among the things of known certainty, that all were of old under Regal
Government. Justin begins his Epitome thus, Principio Rerum, Gentium,
Nationumque Imperium penes Reges erat. To which agrees that of Salust, Salust.
l. 1.
Initio Reges diversi, nam in terris nomen Imperii id primum fuit. Yea the
sacred and infallible Story in the Writings of Moses, who had both the Power of
a King, and the Spirit of a Prophet, gives us sufficient poof thereof. And if
we search after the first Rise and Birth of Aristocratical or Democratical
States, we shall constantly find upon Record, that they were the natural
products of Perfidiousness and Rebellion.

When men shook off their Allegiance to their Prince, and revolted from that
Establishment, to which they were born Subjects, then they Erected a
Commonwealth Thus the Roman Republic began by a Regifugium, the fickle and
inconstant People changing the very Form of their Government, because of the
particular miscarriages of one of their Governors. Thus the united Netherlands
upon their Defection from the King of Spain, made up a Combination of many
Independent Jurisdictions, joining together of mere necessity, to keep
themselves from being punished, for rebelling against, and abjuring their
rightful Prince. Thus the Swiss Cantons revolting from the House of Austria,
Genoa from the Empire, and Geneva from the Duke of Savoy, set up for themselves
as Commonwealths or free States, as they love to be called, casting off their
ancient, and for the most part easy dependence upon their lawful Sovereigns,
that they might aspire to the Name and Shadow of a troublesome Freedom. And
even the so much celebrated Venetians stole their Republic at first, taking
advantage of the common Fears and Disorders, when Italy was alarmed by the
Hunns.

Neither is there any such Commodiousness in Republics, after they are
settled, as will make amends for the badness of their Original. If we look into
their Administration, we shall find them attended with so many and so great
Inconveniences, that the chief end of Government, which is the public Peace
and Happiness, or the well being of a Community, cannot be ordinarily obtained
by them.

Nothing is more pernicious to any Society, than Contention and Discord. Can
two walk together, says God except they be agreed? Amos 3. 3. And if Two
cannot, it is not to be expected that Many should. There can be no peace
without Agreement, and the Agreement of many, if there be no Superior to unite
them, is almost impossible. As Anarchy is constantly attended with confusion,
so is Polyarchy with Division.

Where there is a considerable number of Men, that have an equal share in the
Sovereign Power, there will be inevitable Discords, Jealousies, and Emulations
issuing from their different Judgments, and opposite Counsels, as to the
Conduct of State Affairs. And although their Debates be ended by Majority of
Suffrages, their Animosities, especially in the weaker side, will be the more
inflamed. For since all Men naturally desire to have their own advice followed,
those that are out-voted will be apt to look upon themselves as both disparaged
and disappointed, from whence will arise Anger, Hatred, and Discontent; which
Passions, if there be opportunity, will break out into Conspiracies and
Insurrections, to suppress and ruin those whom they could not counterballance.

And the Reason why there are no greater Tumults and Seditions in our Modern
Republics, is because being almost perpetually engaged, either as Principals
or Confederates in Foreign Wars, the Factious Spirits have not leisure to
quarrel at home. Pax tibi Mart, which is the Motto of Venice, may very well
suit all the rest of them; For when they have no work cut out for their Swords
abroad, they are always running into Domestic Mutinies, and by these the most
flourishing of them, might long ago have been ruined, had it not been for the
little mixture of Monarchy, with which their Constitutions are compounded; such
as that of a Duke, or a State-holder, who reduces the Factions to some Temper,
and keeps the State from a Dissolution.

Neither are Republics in less danger from Foreign, than they are from
Intestine Enemies, which makes them live in perpetual fears of Invasion; and
being unable to defend themselves, in this case also they are beholden to
Monarchy: For the usual Asylum where they take shelter, is under the Wing of
some Potent Neighboring Prince, whom they choose for their Protector.

Besides, nothing is of greater Moment to the good success of arduous Affairs,
than Secrecy. But is there any hope of secrecy, where there are an hundred
Ears to hear the Counsels, and fifty Tongues to publish them; and where ten or
twenty of those fifty (as it usually happens) dissent from the rest? Will not
these be hugely tempted to revenge the neglect and refusal of their own Advice,
by divulging the most important Secrets of the prevailing Faction?

And though there be sometimes a tolerable Acquiescence, in the Opinion of the
Major part; yet the Debates and Consultations among so many different
Judgments, are commonly so long protracted, that before they can arrive at a
Resolution, many favorable opportunities for Action are irrecoverably lost,
and their best Designs miscarry for want of timely Execution.

But beyond all that has been said, there is this great mischief in every
Aristocratical or Democratical Commonwealth, that the many Princes or chief
Magistrates by which it is governed, being only temporary Officers of no long
continuance, have a separate Interest of their own, distinct from that of the
Public; by which means they will be very apt, to aim chiefly at their own
private advantage, in all their public Trusts, and may be sometimes so far
corrupted, as to betray their Country to a Foreign Power, when sufficient
Assurance is given them, that they shall not only survive the Fate of the
expiring Government, but enlarge their Fortunes by its Dissolution.

A King and his Kingdom have but one and the same inseparable Interest. If the
Kingdom be ruined, the King perishes. But it is otherwise in a Commonwealth,
where some that sit at the Helm of State, See some of these, and diverse other
Inconveniences of Republics, more largely considered in Dr. Nalfon's Common
Interest of King and people Chapter 3.
may have the opportunity both to secure and to enrich their own private
Vessel, by sinking the public Bottom. Neither will they be at all concerned
for the loss of their share in the Government of it, when by selling that
Power, which they must shortly resign, and bartering away the public Interest
together with it, they purchase a higher and a more durable Grandeur, than
otherwise they could ever have obtained.

And now let any one judge, whether this Form of Government, in which many have
a Copartnership, be so great a Happiness to a People, as some have pretended it
to be.

Secondly, if by many Princes we understand many Usurpers of the Government, it
will be much more evident that they are the Rods, and Scourges of Heaven, the
Plagues and Judgments of a provoked God, with which he Visits a sinful People.

Usurpers are such men as are neither born to Empire, nor legally chosen to it,
but being inspired by insatiable Ambition, possessed with unbounded Hopes, and
mounted on the soaring Wings of Arrogance and Presumption, raise themselves
with an insuperable boldness, and violently invade the Seat of Majesty.

They acquire their Power by the most wicked and unlawful means, and by the
same evil Arts keep and maintain it; by treasonable Leagues and Bonds of
Iniquity, by Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, Perjury and Cruelty, Blood and
Slaughter, and the total subversion of all Lawful Government, Right and
Justice, Peace and Order.

They inveigle the giddy Multitude with specious Declamations against many
pretended miscarriages in the whole conduct of Public Affairs; that by
exciting the wild Commotion of Popular Fury, and the restless Ferment of blind
and bitter Zeal, they may have Instruments and Tools ready whet and prepared,
for the great Work of a through Reformation, that is to say, of hewing down, and
cutting in pieces, of pulling up Root and Branch, whatever has not the luck to
please them.

They fill all places with false Fears and groundless Jealousies of Arbritary
Government, that when their successful and triumphant Rebellion has dethroned
their Rightful Prince, themselves may Reign in his stead, with the greatest
Heights of Arbitrariness. And when they have Lorded and Tyrannized a little
while, others get up and depose them. And these also, in a short time, are
forced to give place to stronger Rebels, and greater Villains, perhaps to some
of their own Creatures and Servants, by whose help themselves were raised.

Thus the Government of a Nation, being once removed from its right Basis, is
tossed about from one to another, and various Usurpers successively possess
themselves of it, as this or that Faction grows predominant. But O the
Insolences, the Oppressions, the Sacrilege, the Murders, Desolations, and
Confusions, the Crimes and Calamities of all sorts, that such a Land must
suffer under! How deplorable is the Condition of that People, where such dire
Revolutions do happen! How terribly are they shaken by these State-Tempests!
Psalm. 107. 27.
How do they reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and are even at
their wits end! How distressed must be the case of all that have any
Conscience, any Principles, any Faith, any Honesty to keep, yea any Estates,
any Honor, any Lives to lose! What Preys and Sacrifices must they be to those
great Thieves and Oppressors, under the glorious Titles of Patriots and
Protectors, those bloody Murderers in the room of Nursing Fathers, those
ravenous Wolves in the Shepherd's place! O the sudden Convulsions, surprising
Paroxysms, insupportable Agonies of the Body Politic, when she is forced to be
the Patient of such cruel Physicians, who pretend to heal her Breaches, by
giving her the widest and deepest Wounds, and to restore her to a sound and
healthful Constitution, by drawing forth her very Heart-Blood and vital Spirits!

This! this is the lamentable State of a Nation, when Usurpers, when many
Usurpers have Dominion over her! Of all This, the execrable Occasion of the
present mournful Solemnity affords the most convincing Proofs. Of all This, our
own Native Country had a long, a sad Experience, for near twenty years
together. And although more than twenty be past, since our happy Deliverance
from these Miseries, and the just Vengeance of Heaven upon the Authors of them;
yet we see the same Faction begins now to lift up its head again, the same
Antimonarchical Spirit is revived, and under the same Pretensions too, of
securing our Religion, Liberty, and Property, of keeping out Popery, Slavery,
and Arbitrary Government. Witness the late horrid Phanatick Conspiracy against
His Majesty's Sacred Person, his Royal Brother, and this Hereditary Monarchy.

I never took delight in calling to remembrance the impious Follies of any sort
of Men. Would to God they might have been buried in the deepest Oblivion,
without any hope of a Refurrection. But since the same Generation of men,
instead of forgetting the Practice of them, are still returning to the same;
and since we have still cause to humble our selves under the Hand of God, which
so severely chastised us by them; I must crave your Patience, while I briefly
reflect on the Plagues and Mischiefs of those old Treasons and Usurpations,
that we may be the more awakened, by all lawful means vigorously to oppose the
first beginnings of any new ones.

And here I must present you with a dismal Scene of things: For whoever shall
consider our numerous Calamities, under the Infamous Reign of our numerous
Usurpers, those before the Murder of the King, that horrid Fact it self, the
very Center of all the rest, and those that followed after, will soon perceive,
that the Floodgates of Ruin were set wide open, and that all manner of
Confusion and Destruction came in upon us with an overwhelming Deluge.

Our Usurpers began their Tyranny, as such generally do, by a bloody Rebellion.
For Rebels and Usurpers are of the same Species; Rebels are Usurpers Militant,
and Usurpers are Rebels Triumphant.

As soon as the Faction of the long Parliament departed from their Allegiance
to him, on whom all their Authority depended, and instead of offering their
humble Advice in dutiful Counsels, endeavored to obtrude their imperious
Dictates, by an overbearing Force, our Land was immediately under many Princes;
one Lawful Sovereign, and as many Invaders of the Regal Power, as there were
Seditious Members in either of the two Houses.

These heady Demagogues, after they had reproached the Government in
contumelious Harangues, and injuriously Impeached the Chief Ministers of State,
that the most able and faithful Servants being removed, they might more easily
wound their Lord and Master; after they had largly Remonstrated the Nations
Grievances, among which they reckoned all the Complaints that Malcontents,
with whom the easiest subjection is a Yoke and Bondage, could frame or imagine;
after they had thrown down the Mitres, that the Crown might fall with them;
excluded the Bishops from their Rights of sitting in the House of Lords, and
affronted the King with the highest Irreverences, animating the insolent and
clamorous Crowd in great Numbers to assault his Majesty, with their
unreasonable Demands and tumultuous Petitions; until His Sacred Person and Life
being in danger, he was forced to withdraw in his own defense; they at length
formed an Army, commenced their unnatural War, actually resisted the Ordinance
of God, persecuted his Vicegerent with Fire and Sword, and ingulphed the Nation
in a Sea of Blood.

Which perfidious and inhumane Enterprises, that they might the better carry on
and justify, they pretended to aim at nothing more, than the Honor and
Happiness of the King in delivering him from evil Counselors, the security of
the Subjects in their Rights and Liberties, and the Glory of God in the Purity
of Religion.

By these Artifices they strangely ^rought upon the cheated People, yea upon
diverse of the better sort of men, those Wisdom and Virtue might have ^ade them
eminent, if they had not ^en unhappily infected with some particular Errors
destructive of Government. By these Methods, I say, they obtained large
Contributions from Persons of all Conditions, and all Sexes, who freely
sacrificed their Moneys to the Treasury, for the promoting so specious Designs.
And besides these voluntary Offerings, they seized the Revenues of the King,
Queen, Prince, Deans and Chapters, and Plundered the Houses of the Nobility and
Gentry whom they knew or suspected, to be true and faithful to their Sovereign.

Hence it came to pass, that a formidable strength was gathered to them, and
great Multitudes amassed in such considerable Bodies, that they confidently
promised themselves an easy Triumph over Captive Majesty. And then, after
various Skirmishes, and Battles, Sieges and Storms, after innumerable
Butcheries, and boundless Outrages of Violence and Cruelty, Spoil, and Rapine,
and Devastation, in which many Thousands, and Ten Thousand of Brave Men, and
Loyal Subjects were either Murdered, or Maimed, o^ Imprisoned, or Impoverished,
by the Permission of Heaven, Villainy and Treason was Crowned with succes^ the
Friends of Loyalty were scattered, and the Combination of Wicked Usurpers
prevailed over the most Just and Gracious Prince.

But how did they now manage their Victory, and what was the blessed
Reformation they purchased at the expense of so much Blood and Treasure? They
reformed the Church, by pulling down her Walls and Pillars, by devouring her
Lands, destroying her Ornaments, Vestments, and Utensils, defacing her Beauty,
sequestring her regular Ministry, extirpating her Primitive and Apostolic
Government, abolishing her excellent Liturgy, throwing away all Forms of
Public Worship, and tolerating all Religions, or rather, Irreligions, Schisms,
and Heresies. They reformed the State by the oppression of the People, the
invading and exhausting the Wealth of the Kingdom, the Subversion of the
Fundamental Laws, the Violating those before accounted so sacred Privileges of
Parliament, for which they pretended to have taken Arms; the Cashiering the
Peers of the Realm, and the Ruin of the Monarchy. They brought us to a
glorious Liberty indeed, when the King and the Lords being laid aside as
useless, the Nations Ears were nailed to the Door-posts of the House of
Commons, and when that House too, having Imprisoned or Excluded the far greater
and sounder part of her own Members, acted all things according to the mere
Will and Pleasure of a whole Legion of Arbitrary Princes, an Insolent,
Imperious, and Tyrannical Army.

These things happened to us before the horrid Fact of this Black and Guilty
Day, these made way for it. But then at the Perpetration of that incomparable
and unexampled Wickedness, all manner of Sins and Mischiefs seemed to be as it
were concentred in one Point.

That execrable Murder and Martyrdom of the most Sacred British Monarch,
Charles the First, of Glorious Memory, taking it with all its Circumstances,
was perhaps the greatest and most comprehensive Sin, next to the Crucifixion of
the Son of God, and the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that any of Adam's
Degenerate Race was ever guilty of, since the Creation of the World: Was
perhaps the greatest Judgment, that the inflamed Wrath of Heaven did ever
inflict on these sinful Nations, since they were Nations; was such a Sin of
this then Barbarous Island, and such a Judgment upon it, as the wide Ocean,
with which it is environed, could hardly afford us briny Tears enough to lament
and deplore.

That a King should be Tried and Sentenced in a Judicial manner, with
ceremonious Pomp, as a Capital Criminal, by the meanest of his own Subjects,
against all Laws Divine and Humane, and contrary to their own public
Remonstrances, Declarations, Promises, Vows, and Covenants: That a Protestant
King should be Murdered, not secretly in a Corner by the Dagger or Pistol, or
Poison, of a bigoted Jesuit, a Clement, a Raviliac, or some such Roman
Assassin; but openly upon a Scaffold, near the Gates of his own Palace, by a
bold barefaced Protestant Execution, before the Sun at Noon Day, before
thousands of his own Subjects, before diverse Foreigners of all Neighboring
Countries, this is such a monstrous Parricide, as has been an astonishing
Spectacle to the present Age, and will be an incredible History in the future.
In short, that a King so Wise and Just, so Pious and Virtuous, One whose Life
was the visible Transcript of the excellent Religion he professed; whose
Government by a Redundancy of Goodness, made his Subjects seem to Reign with
him; one who was so great a Patren of the Church, so tender a Father of his
Country, should be persecuted and driven out of the World, by his own
rebellious Children, with all this hellish Insolency and Indignity; after they
had most solemnly professed, that they would make him a Glorious King; after he
had most sincerely endeavored to make them a Happy People; and after they had
obtained from him so large Concessions, as no King granted before, as no
Subjects before demanded: I say, that men should ever be so wicked, as to act
such an ungrateful Villainy among us; that God should ever be so angry, as to
permit such an overwhelming Calamity to befall us, this is a strange, and a
new thing in the Earth, such as our Ancestors never heard of, such as I wish
Posterity may never imitate.

Thus they made their Sovereign a Glorious King indeed, when they would not
have him to Reign over them, when they would not suffer him to be any longer,
Rex Diabolorum, as the King of England has been sometimes called, and then
truly was, but furiously removed him to a Celestial Throne, among the blessed
Saints and Angels. Thus they effectually separated him from ill Counselors,
when they sent him to that High and Holy Place, where it is impossible there
should be any. But that Angelical advancement, which made his Martyrdom a Royal
Triumph, was the greater aggravation of the Regicides Diabolical Guilt; 2 Cor.
4. 17.
And that far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which turned his Loss
of three Temporal Crowns into a light Affliction to himself, made his three
Kingdoms Loss of so Glorious a Prince the heavier Judgment upon them.

Had our many Usurpers, been only the Authors of this one Mischief, this alone
would have abundantly proved them, the great Plague of Heaven for the
Transgression of our Land.

But after and besides this, behold a long Train of direful Consequences. The
King being Murdered, his only lawful Successor, the Heir apparent both of his
Virtues and his Kingdoms, was forced to be an Exile for his own safety, and all
lawful Government was banished with him. Those who had the boldness to Arraign
sacred and inviolable Majesty, made no scruple to pass their unrighteous
Sentence on the most Innocent of the People. The Ax, which had tasted Royal
Blood, could not afterward be satisfied, without frequent Sacrifices of the
most Dutiful Subjects, whom the devouring Sword had spared. And the truly
Keepers of our Liberties took care to secure them, by making the whole Nation
but one great Prison, and themselves the Jaylors.

These Birds of Prey began now to divide the Spoil, bestowing upon one another
the Lands of the Crown, the Revenues of the Church, and the Estates of
Delinquents, as the Rewards of their great Service, in delivering their Country
from one pretended Tyrant, and setting up forty or fifty real ones in his room.
For we were now governed, by a vile Remnant of Representatives, who justly
deserved the Infamous Name that was generally given them.

And when these upstart Mushrom Princes of the New Commonwealth had pretty
well blooded, and fleeced the Nation; when they had Condemned without any Law,
Executed without any Crime, and sequestered without any Mercy; until like the
Locusts and Caterpillars, they hardly left any thing green, and flourishing
among us; in a word, when they had done every thing that was good in their own
Eyes, and bad in the Eyes of all the World besides; at length a leading Member
of their Tyrannical Juncto, who also bore the greatest sway in their Murdering
Army, being a more cunning Impostor than the rest, out-wits them all, pulls
them down, and Rules by himself with as absolute a Power, as was ever assumed
by the most Arbitrary Monarch.

This English Grand Seignior set over the Land a company of Bashaws, under the
Title of Major-Generals, who in their respective Provinces, according to the
Command of their Imperious Master, insolently domineered over the Nobility and
Gentry, disarming, decimating, and banishing several miles from London, all
whom they pleased to call Malignants, that is to say, all the Kings Friends,
that had survived the soregoing Miseries. The Power he gave to these Decimators
was great and boundless, and their Proceedings were purely Arbitrary, in
Oppressing, Robbing, and Spoiling; wheresoever they suspected any to be guilty
of Loyalty, taking from them yearly the Tenth Penny, unless they bought off
that annual vexation with a valuable Composition. So that the Free People of
England were become as very Slaves as any that live under the Turkish
Government.

And after this great Usurper was called into another World, to give an account
of the cruel and bloody Tyranny he exercised in this; we were under perpetual
Confusions, and various Changes of Government and Governors; Britain seemed
then no fixed Island, but as it were a rolling Ship in the boistrous Ocean,
steered by no Pilots, but the mutable and alternate blasts of contrary Winds;
tossed up and down from one Wave to another, and made the sport of the proud
insulting Billows; until the miraculous Goodness of Heaven settled us again
upon our Ancient Foundations, restored our Rightful Monarch, and Excellent
Monarchy, of which our great sins had so long deprived us.

And so I come to the Second Observable the Transgression of a Land.

It is the multitude of National Sins, that introduces the multitude of
Governors. If a People suffer under the successive Invasions, numerous
Oppressions, and unbounded Tyranny of many Princes; all this mischief, whoever
are the Instruments in bringing it upon them, is the just Punishment, and
genuine Product of their own Iniquities.

God often permits the Hands of Sinners to execute his Wrath upon Sinners, and
makes the Wickedness of some the Chastisement of others. When his Indignation
is moved, by the provok-Impieties of a sinful Kingdom, and when the time for
Judgment is fully come; he will no longer shelter it by his Providence, from
the Sons of Violence and Blood; no longer restrain the Tumults of the Rabble,
and the Madness of the Crowd; no longer obstruct and defeat the mischievous
Designs of turbulent Malcontents, who hope to raise themselves by the public
distractions. 2 Samuel 15. 6.
In such a Kingdom he often suffers a fawning Absalom to steal away the Hearts
of the People, 2 Samuel 20. 1.
or a cursed Sheba to blow a Trumpet and cry, To your Tents O Israel.

As God turns a Fruitful Land into Barrenness, Psalm. 107. 34.
for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein; so he many times permits the
best of Governments to be subverted, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
because Men will not lead under it a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness
and Honesty. If a Nation happy in their full Possession of their Rights and
Liberties, in the most excellent Laws for their security, and in a Wise and
Gentle Prince to rule over them, have no due sense of their own happiness, but
shall grow discontented and clamorous, and affect a Change, when they know not
what to wish, it is just with Heaven to plague such a froward and ungrateful
People with Changes enough, with all the various Miseries and Confusions, with
which prosperous Rebellions and Usurpations are constantly attended.

The Life and Safety of the King is the Life and Safety of the People; their
Welfare depends upon his. And therefore one usual Method, which God takes, to
punish the Sins of Subjects, is to deprive them of their Lawful Sovereign, of
him who is the Breath of their Nostrils, the very Soul of the Body Politic,
and to give them up to the cruel and killing Mercies of all, that by Fraud or
Violence can invade the Government.

Samuel plainly told the Israelites, that if they should do wickedly, they
should be destroyed, both they and their King, 1 Samuel 12. 25. This was verified
in good King Josiah; He must fall, 2 Kings 23. 26, 29.
When God would remove Judah out of his sight. He who did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord, 2 Kings 22. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
and walked in all the ways of David his Father, and turned not aside to the
right hand, or to the left; He who was so great an Enemy to Idolatry, so
Eminent a restorer of the Law, so munificent a Repairer of the Temple; Kings 3.
25.
like unto whom there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the
Law of Moses; like unto whom, there arose none after him; even he must be cut
off in the Prime of his Days, when the Wrath of Heaven was kindled against the
Sins and Provocations, not of himself, but of his Subjects. And it has been
the Fate of diverse excellent Princes, to be snatched away from a People
unworthy of them, when God has determined to visit the Transgressions of such
a People with Rods, and their Iniquities with Stripes, with the worst of Rods,
the Scorpions of Usurpers, with the heaviest Stripes, the Lashes of base-bred,
Judge. 9. 15.
and new-raised Tyrants. In this case Fire has come out of the Bramble to
consume the Cedars of Lebanon; or to speak plainly, zealous Incendiaries, those
crackling blazing Thorns, being all in a flame, have burnt down the Royal
Palaces, and put whole Kingdoms into a combustion. On this occasion the very
Abyss of Sedition has been opened, the Smoke of hellish Faction has ascended,
and the Sun and the Air have been darkened by reason of the Smoke, Rev. 9. 2,
3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and out of the Smoke there have come Locusts. Their Faces have been as the
Faces of Men, and their Hair as the Hair of Women, but their Teeth as the Teeth
of Lions. They have carried kindness and humanity in their Countenances, and
smooth fairness in their Pretenses; but their Actions have been Savage and
Cruel. They have seemed to have only Breast-plates of Iron and defensive
Armor; but their sound has been as of many Horses and Chariots, running to
the Battle, loudly proclaiming an offensive War. And they have had Tails like
unto Scorpions, and Stings in their Tails, with Power to hurt Men certain
Months and Years. They have had a King too, a King like the Angel of the
bottomless Pit, in Hebrew Abaddon, in Greek Apollyon. Such horrible Plagues as
these, have been sometimes used to chastise a Land, when she has filled up the
measure of her Iniquities.

And an impious People have the more Reason to expect these or such like
Judgments from Heaven, according to the degree of their Guilt; because public
Societies of States and Kingdoms can suffer no other Punishments, but only such
as are inflicted in this present Life. Particular Sinners, who shall receive
their Doom at the last Day, may sometimes pass through this world with Impunity.
But all Political Bodies and Communities of Men, will be dissolved before the
final Judgment: and therefore the Holy and Righteous God has always a time
sooner or later, to punish sinful Nations here upon Earth, unless his just
Vengeance be prevented by a general Repentance.

Neither are these Calamities only sent down from the Justice of Divine
Providence, they also naturally spring up from the Transgression of a Land. The
prevalency of Vice, and the general dissoluteness of Manners, does in its own
Nature produce many great and public Mischiefs. Pride and Self-conceit,
Ambition and Covetousness, Uncharitableness and Animosity, Hatred and Envy,
Malice and Revenge, are the very Seed and Spawn of all Factions and Seditions,
Treasons and Conspiracies, Insurrections and Rebellions, Subversions of
Government, and Changes of Governors. Whence come Wars and Fightings among
you, Jam. 4. 1.
(says St. James) are they not hence, even from your Lusts which war in your
Members?

When Men have dethroned their Reason, that private Monarch, which God has set
up within them, to rule ^ll their inferior Powers, and suffered the promiscuous
Democratical Crowd of ^ebellious Passions, to usurp that Royal ^uthority, it is
no wonder that being ^laves to so many Lords and Tyrants within themselves,
they desire to bring ^^eir Country under as many and as (...) Princes too; it
is no wonder, that ^ey are then so turbulent and vexa^us in humane Societies,
so zealous for ^^lling down the public Sovereign al^ and for placing
themselves and others of their own Rank in his room. The restless Lusts of Men,
if predo^^nant and generally raging in a Nation, must inevitably excite and
foment mutual Enmities and Discords, intestine Commotions, Civil Wars, and
various Disturbances, in which the tossing and wavering Government has no
fixed Establishment, but is continuly new modelled, changed, and altered, by
every Faction that can usurp it. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt. Isa. 57. 20. Wickedness brings
a Land into such an unquiet and tumultuous State, that the very mire and dirt,
the vile dregs of the Populace do often times get uppermost* Thus we plainly
see, that the Tyranny of many Princes, and numerous Usurpers is both the just
Punishment, and the natural Effect of the reigning Power the over-spreading
Dominion, of men Lusts and Sins.

It remains that I consider the two last Observables in the Text, the National
Mercy, or the Happiness of a Lan^ under a well settled Monarchy, when by one
Sovereign Prince, When by (...) man of understanding and knowledge the State
thereof is prolonged; and the principal means, whereby so great a Mercy is
procured, The Wisdom of the Monarch, his understanding and knowledge. But that
I may not be thought guilty my self of a bold Usurpation, in detaining you too
long beyond my Commission, I shall omit what I had prepared to speak upon these
copious Heads of Discourse, and shall only conclude with some brief Application.

First then, if many Princes be public Transgression of a Land; how great is
the Folly of their Wickedness, who desire and choose Gods Plagues, who contend
and wrestle for the Vengeance of Heaven, and will not be content without it. We
have lived in an Age, in which men have Fasted and Prayed, and Fought for the
procuring of Divine Judgments, for the subversion of our Lawful Government, the
extirpation of our excellently tempered Monarchy, and the setting up the
Usurping Powers of a many-headed Democracy. We have had Bon-fires in our
Streets, and loud Thansgivings in our Pulpits, when the desired Calamities have
been obtained; when the raving Petitions of such bewitched Enthusiasts have in
just Punishment been granted them; yea some of their Lay-Preachers solemnly
praised God for that very prodigious Sin and Judgment, which was the cause of
this days Fasting and Humiliation. Such was the infatuating perverseness, the
senseless extravagance, the impudent wildness of their monstrous Impiety!

And is it not strange, that even now, after the Impostures of Religious Rebels
have been so plainly detected, after all that our Eyes have seen, and our Ears
heard of the Miseries and Calamities, which Seditious Republicans have brought
upon us, Men should attempt the dissolving the Ligaments of the Monarchy a
second time, and the opening a Door to let in another Scene of numerous
Usurpers, to enslave and ruin us? That the Machinations of the late
Conspirators had a direct tendency this way, needs no Proof. And all Wise men
can easily judge, whether the cutting the great Cable that holds the
Government, or the violating the Fundamental Hereditary Right of Lineal
Succession to this Imperial Crown, would not be like to have the very same
pernicious Effects?

Will our Fears of our Roman Adversaries justify a Contrivance, so manifestly
contrary to Law and Equity, to our most Solemn Oaths both of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and to those very Interests of Peace, and Religion, which are
supposed to be in danger? Is not this the ready way, to introduce Wars and
Confusions; in which we shall have many Religions, without the settlement of
any; in which we shall have many Princes, and no Government, but all contending
for the Supremacy, one to obtain his just Right, others to acquire or to hold
an unjust Possession? Is the imitating of the Papists themselves in some of the
worst of their wicked Practices a good Expedient to keep out Popery? Or can
this sinful Nation reasonably hope to prevent those Judgments of Almighty God,
which may be still hanging over us, for the execrable Murder of the Royal
Father, by another high Injustice in disinheriting the Son?

And what if it should be granted, that the Cause of men's Fears, and Jealousies
concerning the Future State of a Kingdom, is true and real? The worst that any
good man can fear, from any lawful Sovereign whatsoever, is suffering under
him; but it is far better to suffer wrong, than to do it. And when suffering
cannot be avoided, (as in this World it sometimes cannot) it is far more
tolerable to suffer under the severest Government of one rightful Prince, than
under the illegal Tyranny of numerous Invaders, who assume the greatest, and
most unbounded Power, without the least right to any Authority.

Although these more immediately do Execution, yet there be others that make us
liable to Condemnation.

If Atheism and Profaneness, Swearing and Cursing, Drunkenness and Debauchery,
Fraud and Oppression abound among us, shall not God visit for such
Transgressions as these? especially when men glory in them, and make them the
Marks and Badges of their Loyalty; as if they could not be good Subjects,
without Rioting and Ranting, Tearing and Hectoring. This Goddamming Tribe,
whatever their Pretensions or Intentions be, are as real Enemies to their
Sovereign and their Country, as any of the Papists or Phanaticks. For men may
fight against their Prince, though they be not up in Arms, and give him a fatal
Blow, though they never Assassinate him. All great and National Vices have
Treason in them, and are not only levelled against the Honor and Majesty of
God Almighty, but also against the Crown and Dignity of the King, and the
Peace and Safety of the Kingdom.

Let us not therefore join with any Wicked men in their God-provoking and
King-killing Sins, whereby we shall contract at once the complicated Guilt,
Infamy and Misery of being Promoters of the Common Ruin. But let us all
unanimously, according to the Station in which God has placed us, avoid,
discountenance, and suppress all manner of Wickedness, and Irreligion. At least
let us abate the Public Guilt, by lessening the Number of our own Sins.

by a man of understanding and knowledge, that the happy State of a Nation is
prolonged; let us bless and praise God for remembering Mercy in the midst of
Wrath, for restoring our Gracious Sovereign, after a long Exile, to sit upon
the Throne of his Father, for wonderfully delivering him from all Hellish Plots
and Conspiracies, and for lengthening out our Tranquillity, under his most just,
and gentle, and prudent Government; humbly imploring the same Divine Protection
over him for the future, to establish his Throne, and strengthen what has been
wrought for him, that (as our Church prays) He may still continue to be a
Religious Defender of the true Christian Faith, a mighty Protector of his
People, and a Glorious Conqueror over all his Enemies; that when he has
reigned many and many years, with all Prosperity and Honor, he may receive an
immortal Crown, and leave Flourishing Kingdoms to his Successor, and Peaceful
Times to his Subjects.

DUE AFFECTION TO THE MONARCHY.

SERMON IV.
Preached May 29. 1684.
Prove. XXVIII. 2. -- But by a Man of understanding and knowledge, the State
thereof shall be prolonged.
ON the last Anniversary of our late Sovereign's Martyrdom, the former part of
this Verse, which begins thus, For the Transgression of a Land, many are the
the Princes thereof, gave me occasion to consider the Plagues and Mischiefs of
numerous Usurpers, and many-headed Republican Factions, together with the
corrupt Fountain from whence they spring; Arguments suitable to that Day of
Darkness, 2 Kings 19 3.
that Day of trouble, and rebuke, Isa. 37. 3.
and blasphemy. The latter Part of it will now furnish me with no less suitable
matter of Discourse on this Day of Joy and Thanksgiving, for the Birth and
Happy Return of our present most August Monarch, by whom, through the great
Blessing of Almighty God, the flourishing condition of these Kingdoms was most
auspiciously restored, and has been hitherto preserved.

In the whole Verse I noted these four things.

First, the ill State of a Nation under Polyarchy or Plurality of Supreme
Governors, When many are the Princes thereof.

Secondly, the notorious Cause of such a Judgment; it is expressly ascribed to
the Wickedness of a People, the Transgression of a Land.

Thirdly, the opposite National Mercy, or the Happiness of a Nation under a
well settled Monarchy, When by a man of understanding and knowledge, the State
thereof is prolonged.

Fourthly, the principal means whereby so great a Mercy is procured, The Wisdom
of the Monarch, his understanding and knowledge.

The Two former of these I have already discoursed of, and now come to the
Third of them, The National Mercy, or the Happiness of a Nation under a well
settled Monarchy, when by a man of understanding and knowledge, the State
thereof is prolonged. By a Man, that is to say, by one Man, one Sovereign
Prince, in opposition to the many Princes before mentioned. And how great a
Blessing a well settled Monarchy must needs be unto any Nation, we may more
than conjecture from the following Particulars, in which I shall endeavor to
give some account of its incomparable Dignity and Excellency, beyond all other
Models of Government.

First, Monarchy is the Government the one Almighty, independent, and eternal
Rector of the Universe, who ever did, does, and shall rule and command all
other Beings; who alone has all Power of himself, and is the Fountain from
whence all Dominion in any other is derived. Thine, O Lord, says David, is the
Greatness, and the Power, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12.
and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: for all that is in the Heaven
and the Earth is thine. Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted
above all. Both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all.
Theocracy or the Government of God himself is most perfectly and necessarily
Monarchical, which is a clear Indication of the supereminent Excellency of this
Form of Government, and that the happy Settlement and durable Establishment of
a Nation may be most effectually promoted by it.

has an immense Monarchy over all the World; so he has ordained finite, and
limited Monarchies, in the several Regions of the Earth, in each of which it
pleased his Divine Providence always to set up one Deputy, or Vicegerent, who
next and immediately under himself, was Supreme Lord and Governor of all, until
at length Rebellions and Usurpations in some few of them violated the Order of
God, converted Monarchies into Popular States, and advanced the Subjects above
the Sovereign. As it is in Gods Power alone to appoint Rulers and Magistrates,
and to confer an Authority to govern the World; so his Wisdom is best able to
judge, what Form of Polity is most conducive to the Welfare of Mankind. And
therefore such sort of Governors, and Governments, as by his Providence have
been most anciently and universally established, ought by infinite Degrees to
be preferred before any of the new Models, which have been contrived and
introduced by those Troublers of the World that are given to Change.

We justly value things according to their Original, and their Antiquity. Now
if we would know the Original and the Antiquity of Monarchical Government, we
must look back as far as Adam, and look up as high as God. Monarchy began in
Heaven, and to make this lower World happy, it was soon after established upon
Earth. Although the Empire of Nimrod be the first that is expressly mentioned in
the Sacred Writings, yet the first of Men was undoubtedly a Monarch, who,
during the many hundred years he lived in the World, was the only Sovereign
under God, and all his numerous Posterity were as much his Subjects as they
were his Children, being obliged by the Law of God and Nature to revere his
irresistible Authority, and to pay a dutiful Obedience to him. After his Death
(his second Son Abel being slain, and Cain the Eldest cursed by God for the
Murder of him) the Empire descended to Seth his third Son, who, as it is
conceived, established Religion, and made Laws and Constitutions concerning
Divine Worship: For in his Days we read that Men began to call on the Name of
the Lord, Genesis 4. 26.
After Seth, Enosh his Son succeeded in the Government; After Enosh, the
following Patriarchs. And so long as the World was but one Nation, and of one
Language, we may rationally suppose, that they had but one King. But at the
Confusion of Languages, each Division of People had their Head, who undertook
to conduct them to some convenient Region, where they might dwell together; and
so he who was their Leader, became their Prince; as Heber was the King of the
Hebrews.

From hence-forward there were various Kingdoms, dispersed over the Face of the
Earth, which were both distinguished, and protected from each other, by the
separate Rule and Government of their several Princes. And such was the firm
and stable Foundation which Monarchy had in all the former Ages of the World,
that the Earth knew no other Power for above three thousand years. For the
first Republic that History takes notice of, was at Athens; and it began, as
some say, after the Expiration of the Reign of Eryxias, which happened in the
thirteenth Olympiad, and near the Year of the World 3275, or at the farthest
after the Death of King Codrus, who lived somewhat above an hundred years
before, and is said to be the last King of Athens, Just. Hist. l. 2.
by Justin and some others. Afterward Sparta, Corinth, Thebes, and other
Cities of Greece followed the Example of Athens. But those little
Commonwealths were continually plagued, either with intestine Broils, or
Foreign Wars; and the Athenians in particular, which were the first that
changed their Government, paid dearly for it, when instead of one King, they
had thirty Tyrants reigning over them. And at last, when these quarrelsome
States had almost ruined one another, they were all made to submit to the
Macedonian Empire, and never suffered to erect that Form of Government again.
After these, I have not read of any Republic of Note in the World, besides the
Roman, until our few Modern Commonwealths were set up, whose later Date is
easily known. Since then it was Monarchy under which the Nations of the world
lived and flourished, in a settled and uninterrupted course, for so many
thousand years, it is not probable, that the happy State of a Land should be so
well prolonged under any sort of Popular Government, which turbulent
Innovations have introduced.

Thirdly, As it is not to be doubted, Israel, whom he had chosen above all
other Nations, to be the Objects of his singular Favor. Their Government was
Monarchical as soon as they became a Nation, even from the time of their
Deliverance out of the Egyptian Slavery; and so it all along continued, until
after that the Son of God came down from Heaven to be their King, their Nation
was most justly destroyed, for their horrid Impiety, in rejecting and
crucifying that Prince of Peace.

The first Governor God placed over them was Moses, who was their Lawgiver and
Judge, and as real a Sovereign as ever reigned. He was King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy.
33. 5. or according to some Versions, King in Israel. He was a King, as the
Learned Grotius says upon the Place, Non quidem Nomine and Pompa, sed Jure
regio. His Power was Supreme, Sacred, and Inviolable, his Will and Command
uncontrolable; and those that denied or disputed his Authority, received the
most exemplary Vengeance from Heaven, that was ever inflicted upon the worst of
Mankind. He appointed indeed diverse inferior Magistrates and Judges, as Jethro
advised him; he chose able men out of all Israel, and made them Heads over the
People, Rulers of Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties, and Tens; but the Supreme Power
he wisely reserved in his own Hands; and all the most difficult and weighty
Causes were brought to him, that they might be decided by his final and
determinative Sentence, from whence there was no Appeal. Neither were any
Sacred, or Ecclesiastical matters exempted from his Regulation and Government.
The whole Aaronical Ministry, which consisted in Typical Rites, Ceremonies, and
Sacrifices, was ordered and appointed by him, although executed by the Hand of
Aaron.

And after the Death of Moses, the Supreme Authority of the Jewish Nation was
still in a single Person, being committed by God, either to the High Priest, or
to some Eminent Man, whom he was pleased to raise up, such as Joshuah and the
several Judges. For, that the High Priest or the Judge, when there was one in
those days, had the Sovereign Power invested in him, is evident from that
Command of God, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will
not hearken unto the Priest, that stands to minister there before the Lord,
(viz. to the High Priest, as the scope of the place plainly shows) or unto the
Judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel,
and all the People shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. Is not
this as great an Authority as any Monarch in the World can desire, thus to have
all Persons obliged to acquiesce in his determinative Sentence and final
Decree, and to have a Power to punish all wilful and presumptuous disobedience
with Death? Josephus expressly calls their Judges Monarchs; and Grotius
supposes them to have all things belonging to Kings, except their pompous
Train and external Grandeur. Isti vero Judices plane similes erant Romany
Interregibus, Gro. in Deuteronomy. cap. 17.
nisi quod Satellitium, and Pompam Regiam non habebant; ac propterea nec
Vectigalia exigebant.

If it be objected, That in those days, as some Texts speak, there was no King
in Israel. The meaning of those places is not, that the Judges were not real
Monarchs, but that at some certain times there was no particular Judge, who sat
as their Supreme Dictator, and exercised regal Authority among them; as also,
that the High Priest whose Office it was to govern, when there was no Judge,
was negligent and careless of the public Affairs. And the great Blessings of
Kings and Monarchs may be understood, even by the horrid Impieties and
Disorders that happened in those Days, when there was no King in Israel; Judge.
17. 6.
such as was the detestable Idolatry of Micha, in making himself Gods, and
consecrating one of his Sons to be his Priest; the Sacrilegious Theft of the
Danites, Judge. 18. 1.
who stole Micha's Gods, and his Priest too; the monstrous wickedness of the
Benjamites of Gibeah toward the traveling Levite and his Concubine; Judge. 19.
1.
the dire effusions of Blood in the Civil War that ensued; the extinction of
the whole Tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 20.
except six hundred Men; the Destruction of forty thousand Men of Israel, and
the allowed Rape of six hundred young Women, against their wills, without the
consent of their Parents, and contrary to a public and solemn Oath. These, and
no better than these, were the unhappy concomitants and consequents of having
no King in Israel, that is to say, of having no Supreme Ruler, who exercised a
Sovereign Power among them, as the Judge, and when there was no Judge, the High
Priest ordinarily did.

The last of their Judges was Samuel, and when he had governed many years, the
Infirmities of his Age, and the Iniquities of his Sons, whom he placed over
them, gave them occasion to desire a King, that they also might be like all the
other Nations, and that their King might go our before them and fight their
Battles. 1 Samuel 8. 6, 19, 20.
Hereupon the Sovereign Power was translated from Judges to Kings, and so it
still was lodged in the Hands of a single Person. Neither had their Kings any
more Power, than their High Priests and Judges had. For Samuel, and his
Predecessors, had as ample Authority as any Sovereign Princes, although they
were not called Kings. But now, like all other Nations, their Governor was not
only a King by the Supremacy of his Power, but had the very Name and Title,
with all the pompous Magnificence and Ensigns of Royalty.

But here in the History of the Jewish State, we meet with a remarkable
Passage, which deserves to be the more considered, because diverse have thought
it a great Objection against Kingly Government. The sum of it is this, That God
was extremely angry with the Israelites for desiring a King, and proclaimed his
Indignation by loud Thunderclaps, and a violent tempestuous Rain in
Wheat-Harvest; 1 Samuel 13. 16, 17.
which made them confess, that they had added to all their Sins this evil in
asking a King. From whence some of our Republicans conclude, That Regal Power
and Authority is so far from being of Divine Appointment, that it is such a
humane Invention as is displeasing unto God.

To this I answer, That although God was angry with them for asking a King, it
was not for this Reason, because he has any dislike of Kingly Government. He
was not offended at the Act it self of desiring a King, See Dr. Sherlocks Case
of Resistance of the Supreme Powers. p. 15.
which is in it self very innocent, and may often be most just and necessary;
but he was displeased at the manner and circumstances of it. In desiring a
King, they asked a good, yea an excellent Thing, and a great Blessing from
Heaven. But God was angry, because they asked this good Thing with an ill mind,
and at a time when they ought not to have desired it. For,

First, It may be conceived, that they asked a King out of the Pride of their
Hearts. They thought it a disparagement to be subject to a Judge, who ^ived
among them without any great Pomp or State. And although his divinely inspired
Wisdom, and immediate direction from Heaven, abundantly com^^ensated all the
defects of External Magnificence, they were unwilling to be under such a
Governor; but being ambitious of worldly Glory, they would have such a
Sovereign Prince, as the other Nations had, they would have a King to go out
and in before them, with all the visible Splendour of Royal Majesty.

Secondly, Their desiring a King was accompanied with Infidelity and Distrust
of Gods Providence and Protection. For it was when they were in fear of an
Invasion by Nahash King of Ammon. 1 Samuel 12. 12.
And that it was this Diffidence of theirs, rather than the Form of Kingly
Government, that God was displeased at, is evident from Samuels Expostulation
with them, in which he briefly recounts Gods constant care for their
Preservation in all their former Dangers; and how by the Hands of Moses and
Aaron, and Jerubbaal, and Jeptha, and Samuel, he had delivered them from all
their Enemies on every side.

Thirdly, They desired a King without any just Cause, or legal Warrant or due
Advice, in a rash Tumultuous and Seditious manner, at such a time when they had
a Supreme Judge (who was a Lawful Sovereign) of Gods own Appointment. Even in
his Life and Reign, they desired a King. They had not the Patience to expect
his natural Exit by Death, but they would have this excellent Governor, who
deserved so well of their Nation, Deposed, and some other Advanced in his
place. God might therefore very justly be angry with them for rejecting so
worthy and eminent a Person, who was not only their rightful Prince, but one
who had Ruled with great Prudence, Justice, and Clemency. But,

Fourthly, He was more especially angry with them for rejecting himself. For
God himself was in a peculiar manner King of Israel, and by asking a King to
go out and in before them, they threw off the Government of God himself. 1 Samuel
8. 7.
They have not rejected thee (says God to Samuel, when he appeared discontented
at their Propositions) but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over
them. This then was their great Sin and Fault, that they asked a King, when
they had already the best of Kings, 1 Samuel 12. 12.
when the Lord their God was their King. They were not culpable because they
chose to be under Monarchical Government; for they were under that before; but
because they preferred the Government of a King, before the immediate
Government of God. For during the Times of Moses, and Joshuah, and the Judges,
they being inspired Persons, who acted by a Divine Impulse, the exercise of
their Authority was under Gods own immediate direction. But when God gave them
a King, though he himself was, in some sense, still their King, and though the
King, which he gave them, was his Minister and Vicegerent, who ruled by and
under him, and received the Laws of Government from him; yet he then in great
measure left the Administration of it to the Will and Pleasure of Princes, and
to the Methods of humane Policy. Now I confess indeed, the Government of an
Earthly King is not so eligible, as the Government of God himself; but it may
notwithstanding be much better than any other Form of humane Government; and it
is manifest, God thought it better; because when he foresaw that the Israelites
would in time be weary of his immediate Government, he gave direction in their
Law for setting up a King, not for erecting a Republic or Popular State; As we
find in Deuteronomy. 17. 14. When thou art come to the Land which the Lord thy God
shall give thee, and shall possess it, and dwell therein, and shall say, I will
set a King over me, like all the Nations that are about me; thou shall in any
wise set him over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. And the Hebrews
observe, that there were three special Precepts given their Fathers, which they
were obliged to obey, after their settled Possession of the Land of Canaan.
First, that they should have a King over them. Secondly, that they should
destroy Amalek. Thirdly, that they should build a Temple. Of which three, the
first was concerning the setting up a King, because the other two were to be
performed by him.

It seems God was so far from being an Enemy to Kings, that he designed a
perfect Regal Government for his own People, as soon as they should be well
settled in the promised Land. They were then to have a King; a King not in any
wise to be set up by the Election of the People, who have no Power to govern
themselves, and can transfer none to another, but a King of Gods own choosing;
and a King, like those of other Nations, with all the external Magnificence of
Royal Majesty. For so Samuel represents the manner of their King, which, though
looked upon by some Learned Men, as a Description of Arbitrary Tyranny, is
supposed by others to be only an account of what is necessary to the due
support of Regal Power, according to the just Grandeur and Dignity thereof. He
tells them, that their King should take their Sons, and appoint them for
himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, etc. and to be Captains over
Thousands, and captains over Fifties, etc. and take their Daughters to be his
Confectionaries and Cooks; and take their Fields, and Vineyards, and
Oliveyards, that is to say, the Tenth of them; for so it is expressed in the
following words; the Tenth of their Seed, and of their Vineyards, and the Tenth
of their Sheep, etc. All which seems to be absolutely requisite to the Royal
State of a Sovereign Prince, who cannot subsist without Servants and Officers
of all sorts, both for his Domestic Affairs, and for the Execution of his
Government; nor maintain his Servants, without a sufficient Revenue, by Public
Taxes, such as the Tenth of their Fields, Vineyards, and Flocks, which was the
usual Tribute paid to the Eastern Kings.

And now it must be acknowledged, that Samuel does upon this account dissuade
the Israelites from desiring a King, because the necessary supports and
expenses of Royal Power would seem oppressive and burdensome to them, who had
been hitherto free from such Charges and Exactions. For while they were
governed by their former Monarchs, by the High Priest or the Judge, the
Government was no charge at all to them. The High Priest had no other
Maintenance, when he was Supreme Governor, than when he was only High Priest.
And the Judge, whom God extraordinarily raised up, was secured and supported in
his Government by the extraordinary Presence of the Divine Power, without the
Aids of Men or Money, without any Mass of Treasure, or numerous Guards and
Trains of Servants. But this is no disparagement at all to the ordinary Kingly
Power, See D. Sherlocks Case of Resistance.
as if that were more expensive and burdensome, than other Forms of humane
Government; because it was like to be a new Charge to a People, whose peculiar
Privilege it was to be free before from all such Services and Tributes.

The Israelites then were at length, by Gods own Wise Institution, placed under
the Conduct and Dominion of complete and perfect Kings, who had not only the
Power and Office, but also the very Name and Title, with all the Magnificent
Appendages of Regal Majesty.

The first of these Kings was Saul, of the Tribe of Benjamin, who, after God
had chosen and exalted him to that high Dignity, was received as a great
Blessing from Heaven, with the most joyful Acclamations of the People. And the
Holy Ghost has thought fit to leave it upon Record, that they were only the
Children of Belial that said, how shall this Man save us, and that such
Miscreants were the only men, who despised him and brought him no Presents. 1 Samuel 10. 24. 27. The People had desired a King, that might go out before them,
and fight their Battles; which desires and expectations Saul at first very well
answered. For when he took the Kingdom over Israel, he fought against all their
Enemies, on every side, against Moab, Ammon, Edom, Zobah, and the Philistines,
and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them. And he gathered an Host and
smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that hated
them. 1 Samuel 14. 47, 48.

And although God was pleased to rend the Kingdom from Saul, for sparing some
of Amalek contrary to the Divine Command, and for invading the Priests Office,
yet he was so far from abolishing Kingly Power, that he carefully appointed a
Successor in it, and sent Samuel to Anoint him. Indeed it was ever his purpose
to settle the Kingdom in Judah; and therefore he took occasion from Readiness
Sins, to bestow the Crown upon David and his Line, who were of that Tribe,
making the Succession to it Hereditary in the Days of Solomon, when it was in
its most flourishing and glorious State And when he had thus fixed the Scepter
of that Kingdom, according to Jacob's Prophecy, he never suffered it to depart
from Judah until Shiloh came. Thus we see the Government of the Jewish Nation
was all along Monarchical, even from the Days of Moses unto the coming of the
Messiah, and it is not to be imagined, but that God, who chose them to be his
peculiar People, would also choose for them the best Form of Government extant
in the World.

If it be said, that the Jewish Kings were not real Sovereigns, but were (as is
affirmed by some of the Rabbis) accountable to the Sanhedrim or Senate of
Seventy one Persons, and (which is more) might be scourged by the Sanhedrim;
only by the great Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, say some, yea, say others, by the
less Sanhedrim of twenty three, which was the Government of every particular
City; This (as the Learned Dr. Falkner has evidently proved) is a mere Fiction
of the Modern Rabbis, Christian Loyalty l. 1. c. 3.
and deserves as much to be believed, as their prodigious Story in the Talmud
of the number of Horses for Solomon's own Stables, which are there summed up to
an hundred and sixty Millions, accounting a thousand thousand to a Million. And
although both Romish Writers, and others of an Antimonarchical strain, in
managing their respective Designs, have frequent recourse to this Plea of the
Jewish Synedrial Power, yet it is not therefore in any degree the more
credible. For those men (as the Dr. observes) who can believe, that the
Apostolical Form of Church Government was by Lay Elders, because diverse late
Authors, but neither Scripture nor Ancient Fathers, do assert it; and those who
can persuade themselves, that our Savior made the Bishop of Rome the Universal
Monarch of the whole World, and gave him a Plenitude of all Temporal and
Spiritual Power; because many Writers of that Communion do now assert this,
while what is inconsistent therewith was declared by Christ and his Apostles,
and the Ancient Christian Church, such men have understandings of a fit size,
and suitable disposition, to receive these Rabbinical Traditions concerning the
Synedrial Authority and Supremacy.

Jewish Monarchy was of the same Nature with the Jewish Priesthood, tht Kingly
Government was a Figure and a Shadow in that Economy, a part of the Legal
Paedagogie, inconsistent with Christian Liberty, and consequently abolished by
the coming of the Messiah, is such a wild and absurd imagination, as our
Enthusiastic Republicans could never have entertained, if they had once
seriously perused either the Gospel of our Blessed Savior, or the Writings of
his Apostles.

He who declared, John 18. 36.
that his Kingdom was not of this World, came not to supplant or unhinge the
Kingdoms he found here. He came not to extinguish the Title, break the
Scepters, and trample upon the Crowns, of Earthly Monarchs, but gave a greater
security and establishment to their just Dominion, than ever it had before. He
never claimed a Power of judging, censuring, and deposing Sovereign Princes,
although some of his professed Servants in Rome, in Geneva, in Scotland, and (I
wish I could not say) in England, have. The Son of God was no Enemy to Caesar,
but acknowledged his Imperial Authority, and commanded men to render to him all
the Rights which belong to Sovereign Majesty. When that ensnaring Interrogation
was proposed by the Pharisees, Mark 12. 14.
Is it lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar? He not only gave a distinct Answer
to their particular Enquiry, convincing them of their Obligation to pay
Tribute, but also laid down this general Rule, That they ought to render to
Caesar all the things that are Caesar's. He plainly proved to them the just
Sovereignty of Caesar by his Prerogative of Coining Money, and gave them an
ocular Demonstration of it, by showing them the Majesty of their Governor in
the Image upon their Coin, and the Characters of his Authority in the
Superscription. And yet Caesar was at this time their Sovereign, not by an
ancient and hereditary Right, but by the more dubious Title of a new and late
Conquest.

Our Savior owned the Power of Governing the World, delegated by God to
Emperors and Monarchs, and confirmed that Delegation by his own Obedience to
it. As he told the Roman President, that he could have no Power at all against
him, John 19. 11.
except it were given him from above; so considering the Divine Original of
that Power, he meekly submitted even to the most cruel and unjust Exercise of
it, not denying the Authority of his Judge, although his Sentence was the most
wicked that was ever pronounced. He, who knew that Kings and Emperors should
hereafter be Nursing Fathers to his Church, would not now take away their
Power, or in the least diminish their Sovereignty, or oppose them with any
forcible Resistance, though no man ever suffered under them such unjust and
inhuman Usage as he met with.

Neither did any of his Apostles take upon them to New-model the Governments of
the World, but were exact Followers of their Lord and Master, in a quiet and
peaceable submission unto, and in a just revering of all Earthly Kings and
Monarchs, as no other than Gods Ministers and Vicegerents. The higher Powers
which St. Paul, in the 13th to the Romans, calls the Ordinance of God, and to
which he exhorts every Soul to be subject upon pain of Damnation, were at that
time Monarchical; and although the Person possessed of those Powers is
generally thought to be Nero, who was one of the worst Monarchs that ever
Reigned; yet he earnestly presses the necessity of Subjection to him, not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake: Because as bad as he was, he was
advanced to the Empire by God, he was Gods Minister, and invested with his
Authority. It seems St. Paul was so great a Friend to Monarchical Government,
that he required a dutiful Subjection to it, as to the Constitution and
Appointment of God, and would not give the least encouragement to attempt its
alteration, by setting up a Popular Sovereignty; although the Emperor, who then
governed, was not only a Heathen, but such a prodigious Tyrant, as no Prince in
the Christian World ever was, or is ever like to be. The same Apostle also
manifestly prefers Monarchs, before all other Governors, when he exhorts that
Prayers and Supplications be made first for Kings, and then for all others in
Authority. 1 Timothy 2. 1. And St. Peter gives an undeniable Approbation of
Monarchy, when he so evidently places the Sovereign Power in a single Person,
and so expressly fixes it there, as any man may see he does, in the first
Epistle of St. Peter, Chap. 2. Verses 13, 14. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. St. Peter here requires
subjection to all humane Power and Authority, which he calls (...) humane
Creature, or Constitution, not as if it were so the Ordinance of Man, as not to
be the Ordinance of God; for then St. Peter would contradict St. Paul, but
because the Power and Authority, which is appointed by God, is managed,
exercised, and executed, by, and among, and over men, and for the good of men.
Although he calls it the Ordinance of man, he exhorts to submit to it, for the
Lords sake, which plainly signifies, that whatever hand men have in the
establishment and the exercise of Civil Government, yet it is appointed by God,
and derived from him. But that which I chiefly observe in this Apostolical
command, is, that St. Peter manifestly asserts the Sovereign Power of Kings and
Monarchs, but not of the Senate or the People. According to his Politics, the
King is the sole Supreme Governor, and all others are commissioned by him, and
ought to live in subjection to him. They were to obey Claudius, the then Roman
Emperor, as their highest Lord and Governor, next and immediately under God,
they were also to submit to Furius Camillus, Scribonianus, and to the other
Roman Procurators in their several Provinces; but these they were to obey under
the Emperor, only as his Officers and Ministers, only so far, and so long as
they derived Authority from him. Thus we see Christ and his Apostles
acknowledged, approved, and confirmed that Monarchical Power, by which they
found the World governed, and gave no encouragement to the novel Opinions of
those State-menders, who are for setting up a popular Sovereignty.



We see there is but one Head over the several Members of the Natural Body, and
it is almost as monstrous to have it otherwise in the Body Politic. There is
but one Mind or Understanding to govern all the humane Passions and executive
Powers, and if any of them command and control in the place of Reason, it is a
Rebellion and Usurpation. By the Ordinance of Heaven, one Sun rules the Day,
and one Moon the Night; but if diverse Suns appear at the same time, or if
Comets give light instead of the Moon, these are looked upon with horror, as
the Prodigies of Nature, and the terrifying Omens of Wars and Plagues, and dire
Calamities coming upon the world. Among the Bees, as Naturalists observe, a
little Monarch governs the whole Swarm. Of the Cranes, one flies before and
leads the company. Among Sheep and other Cattle, one guides the Flock, and is
as it were Herdsman to the rest. Thus there appears some resemblance of
Monarchy through the whole course of Nature. And if it had not been hugely
agreeable to Mankind, it could never have so universally prevailed as it has;
it could never have so long continued the standing Government of all Ages, and
of all Nations, except a very few. For the number of Commonwealths that have
been erected in the world, compared with the Monarchies and Regal Governments,
is as small and inconsiderable, as the number of strange and monstrous Births,
compared with those usual and natural Productions, which daily appear according
to the regular course of Things. And of those few Commonwealths, some have been
forced to return to Monarchy, that they might not be ruined under their new
Models.

No other Government has such a stable Foundation for its own continuance, or
for the firm and durable support of the Peace and Happiness of the People
governed, as Monarchy has. When the different Interests and distracted minds;
the various Inclinations, and the contrary Humors of the many chief
Magistrates of a Republic, are ready to tear the State in pieces; the Monarch
rules and governs all things with an easy, peaceful, and undisturbed
Determination, having none to contend with him, or to control him. Where Many
govern, there will be inevitable Divisions and Dissentions among them; and we
know, that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. But such Discords
and Dangers cannot arise, where the Sovereignty is in a single Person.

The Monarch also may readily and speedily at any Time, or in any Place, Judge
and Decree concerning the public Affairs. But the several Governors in a
Republic must appoint a Time and Place, when and where to meet together; and
after they are assembled, there are frequently many long and tedious debates,
before any thing can be effected, if they do at last agree what to determine.
In short, all those inconveniences of a Popular Government, mentioned in a
former Discourse, are avoided in Monarchy.

If it be said, that the Wisdom, Judgment, Counsel and Conduct of many, may be
much better than of one alone. This is true: But then we should consider, that
there is a great difference between Ruling and Ministering; Ordering and
Assisting; Commanding and Counselling. The Aid and Advice of many Wise men may
be greater and better than of one. Without Counsel, says Solomon, Prove. 15.
22. and 24. 6.
purposes are disappointed, but in the multitude of Counselors they are
established. And again, In multitude of Counselors there is safety. But what
his Opinion was of a Multitude of Princes, my Text has sufficiently
discovered. In weighty Affairs, it is good to hear the several Judgments and
Opinions of many; but the resolving and determining what Counsel is to be
followed, the Decreeing and Commanding what shall be done, is best and soonest
performed by one. He who has compared the various Opinions of diverse wise
Counselors in any Case, shall be able to give a Judgment thereupon, like an
Oracle. He who has considered, and digested all their Arguments, both on the
one side and on the other, may easily and speedily determine the matter, which
many cannot do without great difficulty, and long contention.

As for the common Objection, that Monarchy is apt to degenerate into Tyranny;
and that the Liberties and Properties of the Subject are more secured and
better preserved in a Republic; this has been confuted by our own sad
experience, under the late Usurping Commonwealth of England, when we saw more
Tribunals of Iniquity, more Invasions of Property, more unjust, Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Proceedings against our Lives and Liberties, and all our dearest
Enjoyments, in the space of four or five years, than our Ancestors ever
suffered under any of the preceding Monarchs (perhaps under all of them) in all
the Ages that are past. There is no sort of humane Government, which is not
liable to some miscarriages; and where the Sovereignty is invested in many,
there it is liable unto most. Neither is it possible that there should be so
much Tyranny in a Monarchy, as there may be in a Republic, unless we can
imagine that one Tyrant may be guilty of more Outrages and Cruelties than
thirty or forty, who may have all the same Will and the same Power to do
mischief, that the one has.

In a word, all those good Offices and beneficial Acts of Government, which the
many Chief Magistrates in a Commonwealth can perform by the advantage of their
number, may be done much better and easier, by one Sovereign Prince, with the
Assistance of his Counselors and Ministers. But the abuses of Supreme Power
can never be so great or so many, when it is committed unto one, as they may
be, when it is committed unto many.

There is now only the last Observable his understanding and knowledge. But by
a man of understanding and knowledge the State thereof shall be prolonged.

Niloxenus being asked, what was the best and most useful thing in the world?
Answered, A King, who being the Image of God, is above all, and commands all.
But when the King resembles God not only in his Supreme Power and Authority,
but also in his Divine Wisdom and Goodness, When Light, and Knoweldge, and
Understanding, and an excellent Spirit is found in him, Dan. 5. 11, 12.
He is then certainly the greatest Blessing that Earth can enjoy, or Heaven
bestow. A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil
with his Eyes. Prove. 20. 8. His Wisdom and Circumspection protects his numerous
Subjects, against those injuries which they may receive either from within, by
Disorders among themselves, or from without, by the Assaults and Invasions of a
Foreign Power. And this he does, by opposing and subduing the Authors of such
Mischiefs. For a wise King scatters the Wicked, and draws the Wheel over
them. Prove. 20. 26. That is, He discovers and dissolves the Associations of ill
Men, disperses their Assemblies, breaks their Combinations, and gives them the
due Rewards of their unjust Enterprises. The only Troublers of a State are
wicked and unreasonable Men; these therefore his Prudence suppresseth, that he
may procure and preserve a settled Peace and Tranquillity. Thus the King by
Judgment stablisheth the Land, Prove. 29. 4. Although the common sort of People
be of a perverse Nature, Vain and Ignorant, Proud and Contentious, impatient of
Restraint, desirous of unbounded Liberty, unwilling to be tied to Laws, hard to
be tamed, and apt to run into Confusions; yet the Prince, who is well skilled
in the Mystery of Empire, bridles this Behemoth, puts his hook into the Nose of
this Leviathan, reduces the wild and boisterous Multitude to some Order and
Quietness, and by inflicting exemplary Punishments on some of the worst of
them, keeps the rest in due Bounds.

The Wise Monarch, being well acquainted with the various Humors and Passions
of Mankind, and especially with that diversity of Temper and Manners, which may
be observed in his own Subjects, applies himself properly to them, and so
manages them as to make their contrary Studies, Inclinations, and Affectitions,
jointly conspire to advance the common Good.

He understands the Nature and Circumstances of his Affairs; views things not
only in their present Posture and superficial Appearance, but searches them to
the bottom, enquires into the probable Issues and Events of them, considers
their Causes, Concomitants, Effects, and Consequents, with all their accidents
and relations; and uses not only his own Judgment, but the best advice of the
wisest men within his Dominions; by which means he finds out the fittest
Expedients, for providing for the Safety and Prosperity of his Kingdom, and the
improvement of its Honor and Reputation.

His Laws are excellently contrived for the public benefit; not too gentle,
because such are seldom obeyed; nor too severe, because such are seldom
executed. He will reign in men's Hearts and Affections, as well as over their
Bodies; and that he may be no less loved than feared, he allays the Terror of
Irresistible Majesty, and the Dread of Supreme Power, by gracious Assurances of
his Royal Goodness. He looks upon Justice and Mercy as the great Pillars that
support his Government, and has an equal regard to them both. His Throne shall
be established in righteousness, (Prove. 25. 5.) and upholden by mercy, (Prove.
20. 28.) He is not so rigorous, as to be wholly intent upon Justice; nor so
remiss, as by his mildness to bring his Authority into Contempt.

He distinguishes Times and Seasons; knows when to Pardon, and when to Punish;
when to loosen, and when to straiten the Reins of his Government. He discerns
Persons too; not only who are good Subjects, and who are Enemies or
disaffected; but also, who are able and faithful Friends, whose Reports he may
credit, whose Judgment and Integrity he may trust; and who are dissembling
Flatterers and Sycophants, those Wolves in Sheeps clothing, those sly Traitors
under the Mantle of Loyalty. He knows whom to employ, and whom to reject; whom
to reward, and whom to chastise, Prove. 14. 35. The Kings Favor is toward a
wise Servant: but his Wrath is against him that causes Shame.

The Constancy also of the Prince is a considerable part of his Prudence, and
he preserves the Nation he governs in a long and happy stability, by being
stable in his own Resolutions, agreeable to himself, suiting his Actions to his
Words, and those to his Principles, and all to the Rule of right Reason. For
though he accommodates himself to the various circumstances of Things, Persons,
Times, and Events, like the skilful Pilot, who according to the different State
of the Sea, and the several changes of the Wind, does diversely turn and guide
his Sails; yet in all the Mutations, Revolutions, and Vicissitudes of his
Affairs, he persists unmoveably the same, obviating every Emergency, and
managing every Case, with a steadfast Presence of Mind, and even Temper of Soul,
and a uniform Method of Procedure, either regulated by his own former
Experience, or by the Observations of History.

In short, the Glory and Majesty of a Wise Monarch shines always with the same
bright Rays, casting a fair Luster, and diffusing a benign Influence all about;
so that if any sort of People under his Dominions, be not quickened and warmed
by his kind Beams, it is because their free passage is hindered, by the gross
Mists of Error, Prejudice, and Disaffection, or by the interposition of some
such Obstacles. His prudent Administration makes his good Subjects happy. But
it is no wonder, if those men live somewhat uneasily under the most excellent
Government, who instead of Loyal Obedience to it are continually
misrepresenting, libelling, and opposing it, that by rendering it odious, they
may persuade people to a defection from it, and reduce it to those difficulties
and perplexities, which may give them opportunity either to undermine, or
overturn it. Neither is it fit indeed, that such men should prosper in their
accursed Attempts and Machinations. It Is none of the least Benefits which a
Kingdom receives from the Prudence of the Sovereign, That it is thereby
protected from such a Malevolent Party within it, which, if they were not
curbed and restrained, would quickly ruin the whole. Thus we see the excellent
Effects of Wisdom and Knowledge in a Prince, and how greatly it makes for the
Happiness of a Land.

But yet we are not to think, that every Wise Monarch is always fortunate and
successful, or that he can continually preserve the Peace and Prosperity of his
Subjects. For in the Affairs of this world, the Effect is not always tied to
the Means. The Battle is not to the strong, Eccles. 9. 11.
nor the Race to the swift, but Time and Chance happen to them all. The best of
humane Governments is imperfect, and the best Governor upon Earth cannot
infallibly secure the public Welfare, without the auspicious Superintendency,
and favorable Assistance of Almighty God. Psalm. 127. 1. ^
Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. The most
vigilant and sagacious Prince cannot certainly foresee all those dangerous
Events, and unhappy Accidents, which, if they be not averted, may suddenly
spring up, and prove fatal to the State. Neither is he always furnished with
the Power to prevent the Mischiefs and Calamities that he may probably expect,
and prepare against. Instruments may be wanting to effect many things, which
his Wisdom may tell him are necessary to be done; and those which he employs,
if they be not wise and faithful, may soon mar all his Contrivances, and spoil
his most hopeful Designs. Yea although he has all humane Aids imaginable, the
best and ablest Counselors, the strongest Armies, the richest Treasures, and
all managed with the greatest Prudence, Courage, and Conduct; yet he may be
opposed by some sort of Enemies, which he can never master. All his Wisdom, and
all his Power can make but a weak Resistance against consuming Famines,
destroying Plagues, violent Tempests, raging Inundations, and fearful
Earthquakes. He cannot stop the malignant Influences of the Stars, nor
suppresss the noxious Vapors of the Earth, nor purify the contagious Air, nor
give Laws to the proud swelling Waves, that the Winds and Seas may obey him.
These things he only can do, who has a Supreme Sovereignty over all the World.

And therefore the truly Wise Prince does not confide in his own Policy or
Strength, but humbly implores the Favor and Blessing of the Divine Providence
to protect his Person, guide his Counsels, and prosper all his Endeavors, for
the public Welfare. Which that he may the better obtain, he will employ his
Authority for the Maintenance and Preservation of true Religion. He will rule
over men in the Fear of God, always remembering, that though he has no Superior
upon Earth, he has one in Heaven. His Power shall be the support of Virtue,
the Shield of Innocence, the Fence of Right, the Shelter of injured and
oppressed weakness, the Encouragement of them that do well, and the Terror of
evil Doers; whereby he will answer the ends of his Institution, as it becomes
the Chief Minister of God for the Good of a Nation. Now such a Prince,
notwithstanding all the difficulties of Empire, has no great cause to despair
of a happy success in the management of it. Prosperity commonly waits upon
well-advised Attempts; and the Divine Providence, which is wont to afford its
Concourse to the just and regular Proceedings of private men, is much more
concerned for Sovereign Princes, who are Gods Vicegerents and Representatives.
He by whom Kings Reign, gives great Deliverance unto them, Prove. 8. 15.
and shows Mercy to his Anointed. Psalm. 18. 50.
Where God exalts a man to a Throne, and makes him his great Instrument in the
Government of a Nation, the Person with whom such an Honor and Trust is
placed, especially if he be prudent and good, may reasonably hope, that Heaven
will afford him all needful Protection, and a more than ordinary Assistance, in
the Administration of his high Office, and arduous Affairs.

But if it should so happen, that God should make his Government unfortunate in
this world, and deliver him up into the Hands of his Enemies, thereby to punish
the Transgression of an ungrateful Land, (which was the Case of the Royal
Martyr) while the guilty People owe all their Miseries to their own Sins, the
end of the Wise and Just Prince shall be Peace, everlasting Peace, and Glory in
the Life to come. And the People also, if God be gracious to them, after their
own sad Experience has taught them the difference between the gentle Reign of
a rightful Monarch, and the unbounded Tyranny of various Usurpers, may be made
happy again, by the Re-establishment of the Government, and the Restoration of
a Lawful Sovereign, to Rule over them; which is the great Mercy of Heaven
toward these Kingdoms, that we at this Time solemnly commemorate.

And now if Monarchy be so excellent a Constitution of Government, and if a
Wise Monarch be so great a Blessing to a People; how happy might we be in these
Nations, if we would understand our own Happiness? And what abundant cause have
we to celebrate this Thansgiving-Day with Hearts and Mouths full of Joy, and
full of Praise.

This Day our most Gracious Sovereign was Born, a Prince designed by Providence
to be the Miracle of this Age. A Prince, whose great Sufferings, and great
Wisdom learned by them, whose sad Afflictions, and wonderful Deliverances from
them, whose innumerable Dangers and constant Protections against them, no
History can parallel. A Prince whose Government is such, that nothing in the
World ought to be more desirable to these Nations, than the long and happy
continuance of it.

This Day he had also as it were a second Birth, when after a long Exile, God
was pleased in a stupendous manner to bring him back to the Throne of his
Fathers, and in him and with him to restore the most August Monarchy of Great
Britain: A Thing effected by such admirable Trains of Providence, and such
manifest Declarations of the Kindness and Favor of Heaven, both to this
Imperial Crown, and to the present Possessor of it, that it alone, if thoroughly
considered, were enough for ever to silence all these Factions among us, that
are any way disaffected, either toward the one, or toward the other.

Let us therefore render all possible Thanks to the most High God, for putting
a Period to our Civil War, and all the Calamities of a twelve years
unsettlement and Usurpation, by placing over us again such a Government, and
such a Governor; and for preserving both Him and It, for these twice twelve
years, since their Miraculous Restoration.

And with our Praises, let us join our Prayers, That God who has hitherto so
wonderfully delivered our most Gracious Sovereign from Enemies and Dangers of
all sorts, would still protect his Royal Person, continue his Health and Vigor,
inspire his Mind with Wisdom, and Crown his Endeavors with success, that by
his knowledge and understanding our happy State may be prolonged. Amen.

FINIS.

