



GRACES, To be said at the Table before and after MEAT.

Very necessary for Young People and Children,

With Morning and Evening PRAYER.

1 COR. 10.13. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
praise and glory of God. LONDON, Printed by J. BELL, and are to be sold at the
East End of Christ-Church. 1655.

In the Morning, when you arise, Say, I rise in the name of the father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Our Father which are in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, vouchsafe (he beseech thee) to grant us perfect
continance in thy lively Faith augmenting the same in us daily, till we grow to
the full ^^^esure of our perfection in Christ, whereof he make our conession,
saying,

I Believe in GOD the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and in jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Borne of
the Virgin Marie, suffered under Pon^i^us Pi^^te, was Crucified, dead, and
buried. He descended into Hell. The th^^d day (...) again from the dead. He
ascended in to Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the holy Ghost. The holy C^hrli^^e Church. The Communion of
Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of body. And life
everlsting. Amen.

The ten Commandments of Almighty GOD.
I Am the Lord thy God which has brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage.

i. Thou shall have no other Gods but me

ij. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath or in the water under
the Earth, Thou shall not ^ow down to them nor worship them: For I the Lord
thy God am a Jealous god and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and forth generation, of them that hate me and show mercy unto
thousands, in them that love me and keep my Commandments.

iij. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not ho^d him guilsses that take his name in vain.

iiij. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day: six days thou shall laher and
do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is thf Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy Son and thy Daughter,
thy Manservant, and thy Maid-servand, thy Cattle, and the Stanger that is
within thy gates, for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day, and hollowed it.

v. Honor thy Father and Mo^her, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no Murder.

vij. Thou shall not commit Adultry.

viij. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bare false witness against thy Neighbor.

x Thou shall not couit thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covit thy
neighbors wife nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John
1.17.

The Law was ordained by the Angels in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3.19. Act.
17.53.

LEt thy mighty hand and out stretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense, the
mercy and loving kindness (in Jesus Christ thy dear Son) our salvation thy
true and holy Word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit, our comfort and
consolation, unto the end, and in the end. So be it.

THe Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us and be
merciful unto us: and grant us his peace. Aman.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the most
comfortable fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen.

Sundry Graces to be used before Meats.
Grace before meat.
ALmighty GOD, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we beseech thee to have mercy
upon us: bless (O Lord) these thy good Creatures which thou have provided for
our sustinance; and give us grace to be thankful unto thee for the same, and
all other thy blessings bestowed upon us, through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Amen.

Grace before Meat.
BLessed God, which by thy word have framed the world, and all things contained
therein we humbly beseech thee to have mercy upon us; make us thankful unto
thee for these thy good gifts which we are about to receive at thy bountiful
hands, through the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Graces before Meat.
GOod Lord bless us, and these thy gracious gifts which thou have provided for
us to strengthen and nurish our weak bodies, whereby we may he refreshed and
comforted: and grant that as we grow in strenth by them, so likewise we may
increase in grace (that after this life ended, we may be partakers of thy
heavenly Table, through the mediation of thine only Son one blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Grace before meat.
Glory ho^uar and praise be given to thee, O Lord which have fed us from our
tender age, and give sustenance to evere living thing, replenish our hearts
with joy and gladness that we always having sufficient, may be rich and
plentiful in all good works, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
GReat God, which be thy power in the holy ^rophet (did increase and
multiply the ^^^re of the poor Widow bless, we beseech thee these our meats
and drinks and increase in us the knowledge of thy truth in love and obediede,
that we having a lively Faith in thee, we may ever serve and honor thee, in
all our thoughts and actions, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and blessed
Savior. Amen.

Grace beford Meat.
Immortal and everlasting God, which for us most wretched and sinful men have
cleansed thy Creatures and made them fit for our use and sustenance grant (we
humbly beseech thee) that with moderation and temperance, we may so taste of
these thy benefits here present before us, that we may ever hereafter be made
more willing and able to do thee service, through Jesus Christ our only Lord
and Savior Amen.

Grace before Meat.
LEt us with loving and obedient hearts prepare our selves to give all humble
thanks unto our heavenly Father, who of his most bountiful goodness, has
hear prepared Meat and Drink for our necessity in hungrin to give us an
example of like kindness for his love to our poor neighbors, redeemed by
Christ Jesus, who ever bless us and these his gifts that both our eating, and
drinking, and speakin, may redound to the glory of God, through the merit of
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Almighty and everlasting God, which by thy ^oreknowledg do see the
beginning, midst, and end of all the works of thy holy hand, and did make
Man according to thine own Image, and brethedst into him an immortal foul,
and gave him understanding to know thee to be his God, and Creator of all
things in heaven and earth, and did ordain Man to be Lord over the works
of thy hands, and to receive all things necessary for the sustentation of his
mortal bod^ (of thy goodness) with thanks giving, we most humbly beseech thee,
of thy merciful goodness, to bless and satisfy us with thy holy presence,
that we may be the more moved to be thankful unto thee for all the good gifts
which we rec^ived at thy merciful hand, through Jesus Christ our only
Savior. To whom, with thee (O Father) and the holy Ghost, be all honor,
praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, which have created us for thy
glory, and these ^^y good Creatures for our use: bless and sanctify them (we
beseech thee) that by the moderate rec^ived thereof, our bodies may be
nurished, and thy name ever more and more praised through Jesus Christ our
only Lord and blessed Savior. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Jesus Christ the Son of God, that for our sakes did die, and sheddest
thy most precious blood for the forgivennesse of our sins: bless thou our Meat
and Drink which we purpose to receive in thy name and assist us (O Lord) with
the grace of thy holy spirit, to amend our lives, that according to thy holy
and pure Gospel we may live to thy glory, and profit of our Brethren. And
when the days of this our Pilgrimage shall be ended, grant us to rest in thy
peace, that we may at the day of Judgment h^ve joyful resurrection unto
everlasting life, through thy most precious death, which art the only Son
of God and our everlasting Savior. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost,
be all honor, glory and praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Merciful Lord Jesus Christ, which did ^ake five Loaves and two Fishes and
lifting up thine eyes unto heaven did distribute them unto the people, and
they all did eat and were satisfied being above five thousand men beside women
and children, we beseech thee how to bless these gifts which we are about to
receive at the hands and us also, that they may be to the comfort and health
of our bodies, and we may (for them and all other thy benefits) be evermore
thankful unto thee: To whom with the Fa^er and the holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory for ever. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
THe eyes of all things d^ look up and trust in thee (O Lord) thou give them
meat in dry season, thou o^enest thy hand, and filles with thy blessing every
living thing: good Lord bless us, and all these thy gifts, which we are about
to receive of thy bounteous liberality, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
THe God of all ^ower, who has caled from death the great Pastor of the Sheep
(the Lord) Jesus comfort and defend the Flock which he has redeemed by the
blood of his eternal Testament: Increase the number of true Preachers:
repress the rage of obstinant and cruel ^ira^^s: mitigate and lighten the
hearts of the ignorant: release the pains of such as be afflicted, but
especially those that suffer for the testimony of a good Conscience: And
finally, confound Satan by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
THy Name (O Lord) be praised for all the benifits that thou most graciously
do bestow upon us for feeding our feeble bodies when they are hungry, with
plenty of thy good Creaturs and strengthening the imperfections of our members,
by virtue of thy mighcy power, so that all and every part of us, are hereby
made apt and fit to follow our callings: And like continual thanks be given
unto thee (O Lord) for all thy merciefull blessings thou vouchsafe to bestow
upon us, in preserving us (both body and soul) even from the beginning of the
world to this present, and from all these casualities and temtations which we
are incident unto through the frailt^ of flesh, and imperfection of nature:
which graci^us gifts, we acknowledge to have received of thy merciful goodness,
and for the merit of our Lord and Savior: In whose name we render ^hee all
^o^er, praise, and thanks, from this time forth for ever more. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
WHether ye eat or drink, or whatsoeve^ ye do else, let all be done to the
prais^ of God; whom we beseech to bless us with o^^ meat and drink, through
Christ our Lord Amen

Grace before Meat.
CHrist which at his lest Supper gave him self unto us, promising his body to
be crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sins* bless us and our meat.
Amen.

This prayer may be annexed to the end o^ every Grace, especially those which
be the shortest.
GOd preserve his Church God bless the Nobility and the Commons: God defen^
the favorers of the Gospel,, and make us al^ faithful in the same: God send
the Gospel (...) joyful and free passage throughtout the world, tha^ every
one may live uprightly in their calling, t^ the glory of God, through the
me^its of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Godly GRACES to be said after Meals.
Grace after Meat.
ALL Glory, honor, and immortal praise, be given unto thee (O eternal God)
the which have fed us wretched sinners even from our Creation in our Mothers
womb. We be begotten, conceived and borne in sin O Lord have mercy upon us we
beseech thee, forgive us our sins, illuminate our hearts and assist us with thy
holy spirit, to consider that we receive all things needful both for our
souls and bodies even at thy hand, and to give thee most hearty thanks, and
continual praise for ever, world without end. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
FAther of bounty, and God of our strength, from whose liberal hand we have
received this nourishment of our earthly bodies, grant that the fullness
thereof may not breed in us a dullness of spirit, or neglect of thankfulness,
but that we may be more and more inflamed to serve thee, and bring for^h the
fruits of a lively Faith by our thanksgiving, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Savior. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
GRant (O most merciful Father) that our hunger and thurst being satisfied
with the muderate use of these thy good gifts and Creatures sanctified with thy
holy word, we may both in body and mind be apt and able to do good works, to
the glory of thy most holy name. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
Honor and praise be given to our heavenly Father, by whose liberality our
bodies here are not only refreshed, but also most mercifully has given us his
only Son our Savior Jesus Christ, to feed our wounded souls with his
precious body and blood, shed on the Cross, which is the lively bread, meat
and drink to every true faithful penitent soul: wherefore let us continually
pray for grace, that wi^h his heavenly food we may spiritually be made strong
in all good and godly works, as lively members of Jesus Christ: to whom be all
power, honor and glory, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
O Lord God Almighty and most dear Father, thou have not only given unto us
meat and drink to sustain these our mortal bodies, but thou have likewise
given unto us thy blessed word, which is the only food of our immortal
souls, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom therefore with thee
and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and thanks, for ever and ever. Amen.

Grace after Meat,
O Lord, which art the Creator of all creatures, and have prepared food for
them according to the nature of their Creation: we most heartily thank thee,
for these thy creatures, which at this time we have received in thy name,
beseeching the (O Father) that as our bodies are now by these gifts refreshed:
our souls may be also nourished with the food of everlasting life, in thy most
holy Testament confirmed with the blood and death of Jesus Christ thy sone our
Savior. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost be al honor, glory and praise,
for ever and ever. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
O Most gracious God, and loving Father in Christ Jesus, who by thy mighty
power and marcifull goodness, has created ^s of no thing, and given us a
perfect beaing, and having lost all happiness, have restored us to grace
through thy mercy, and now at this time hy thy mighty providence presently fed
us, for which thy name be blessed and praised both now and for evermore. Amen.

Grace after Meat,
THanks be unto the (O Lord God Almighty, most dear Father of Heaven) for
giving us our food in due season, for opening thy merciful hand, and stlling
us with thy blessing. And we beseech thee for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ, not
only to preserve us always from abusing the same: but also to send us thy
grace; that we may ever be thankful unto thee therefore. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
THanks be unto thee (O Lord God Almighty, most dear Father of Heaven) for
certifying us by thy blessed word, that all kind of meat is clean. And we
beseech thee send us thy grace that we may always thankfully receive the same,
not only without superstition or serupulosity of conscience, but also without
grieving or offending our brethren, and so to walk in the way of Godly live
and charity, that with our meat we never destroy him for whom thy Son Jesus
Chrih died as well as for us.

Grace after Supper.
THanks be unto thee O Lord God Almighty, most dear Father of Heaven for
ordaining thy creaturs to be the food and sustenance unto our bodies, and have
sanctified them by thy blessed Word. We beseech thee make us to increase in
steadfastness of thy Faith in perfect knowledge of thy Truth, and in
continuance of Prayer unto thee, that to us also they may be sanctifiod and
holy, and that we may ever thankfully receive them, to the glory of thy holy
Name. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
THe God of peace and love vouchsafe always to dwell with us and thou Lord
have mercy upon us, who having satisfied our hungry appetites with corporal
food (the nourishment of our weak bodies) wilt be pleased also to feed our
souls with the blessed taste and comfort of thine eternal word, that we being
made members of that body of which Christ Jesus thy son is head, may ^earve
thee in all truth and faithfulness, both to the end, and in the end. Amen.

Grace after meat.
THe God of peace and love, vouchsafe always to dwell with us and thou Lord have
marcy upon us glory honor and praise be given to thee O Lord which have fed us
from our tender age, and give sust^nance to every living thing, replenish our
hearts with joy and gladness that we always having sufficient, may be rich
and plentiful in all good works, through our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

Grace after Meat.
WE thank thee, O most merciful Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for the gifts
wherewith we have refreshed our hungry bodies, and like as thou have now given
us meat needful to the comfort and heaith of our bodies: so we beseech thee al
ways to give us thy word, that it may ever be to the comfort and health of our
souls, which live and rainest with the Father and the holy Ghost world
without end. Amen.

Grace after Meat,
WHatsoever you de in word or deod, do all in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, giving thanks unto God the Father by him, to whom all blessing, glory,
wisdom, thanks, honor, power, and might be rendered, forevermore. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
WE thank thee (O heavenly Father) that of thy abundant goodness have this day
sent us food in due season to nourish these our more all bodies with,
beseeching thee also of thine infinite mercy to pardon and forgive all our
offenses, which we have committed against thy divine Majesty, that we may this
night rest in thee with quiet Conscience, abiding thy holy hand in the morning,
to raise us to do the thing which shall be pleasant in thy sight, to thy glory
and our souls health Grant this (O Father) for thy dearly beloved Sonnos sake
Jesus Christ our ever lasting Savior. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be
all honor glory and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
We render thee all laud and praise (most loving Father) for thy gracious
favor in feeding our bodies at this present with sufficent nurishment, and for
all other thy gracious comforts communicated unto us, whereby we are refreshed
and cherished; so that through thy mercy we are enabled the better to serve
thee, and glorify thy name, and made more apt to follow our callings which
thou have appointed us: for which we return thee all praise and thanks, now at
this time and for evermore. Amen.

This Prayer may be joined to any Grace whatsoever.
GOd save his universal Church God comfort all that are comfortless, and
continue his Gospel amongst us, and send us Peace and Truth in Christ Jesus our
Lord and only blessed Savior, and God forgive us all our sins Amen.

Here follow diverse Fruit-Full GRACES in Meeter.
Grace before Meat.
ALmighty Lord and eternal King,
Which made the Heavens and every thing.
Grant unto us that perfect be,
To taste the food that here we see,
As things ^repar'd for natures need.
For thou (O Lord) have so decreed,
And to be thankful for the same,
Praising for aie thy holy name.
Preserve the universal Church,
our Commonwealth defend:
Grant that thy people may enjoy
thy peace unto the end. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
AL you that hear present be,
and do in tend to eat:
Mark well what gods word says to ye.
of this your feed and meat.
Meat does not (as Saint Paul does say)
to God the near us bring:
Or if we eat nothing, it may
us hinder any thing.
But take you head your liberty
be not offense to other:
Nor ye yet do you that willingly
whereby to hurt your brother.
Therefore pray we to God on high,
that he will give us might,
To do do all things to edify,
and keep his Laws aright,
And qlesse us and our meats also,
and make us all accord:
That we may love both friend and foe,
and braise our God the Lord.
Grace before Meat.
ALL ye that now here present be,
Lift up your he^rts to God with me,
Praise ye his name with heart and mind,
For those his gifts which we here find.
To feed our bodies he has them sent:
Our wicked lives let us repent,
Destring him our souls to feed
With heavenly food whith we do need.
Amen.
Grace before Meat.
ALl things that now be in this world,
are nothing else but vanity:
And very great the number is,
that are oprest with misery.
Be loving unto them therefore,
and mercy to them show:
For when that death approaches you,
your head shall be full low.
Then will it be too late for you,
mercy to ask and have:
If that you turn your ears away,
when that the poor do crave.
Cease not therefore to do them good,
while that ye here remain:
For they are bought with Christ his blood,
and that shall be our gain.
Good Lord bless us, and all that we shall
receive of thy goodness.
Grace before meat.
AS to the sick all pleasant things,
have still unsavery taste,
So shall Gods gifts be unto us,
if vainelie we them waste.
Take heed therefore, says Christ our Lord,
that surfeiting you shun,
Let not your hearts with banquiting
be drownd'd and overcome.
Receive Gods gifts with given thanks,
and natuers weakness feed:
When you have done remember those
which want and stand in need.
So God shall bless and eke increase
your basket and your store,
And give you life in Christ our Lord,
which lives forevermore.
Grace before Meat.
AS Man is made a Sovereign Lord,
and Prince alone to reign:
To whom as subjects, Fish and Foul
are made to him as gain:
Both land and beasts, both herb and tree,
both gold and silver pure.
The wind, the air, both Sun and Moon,
for ever to endure:
And as they serve him at his need.
as Subjects in their kind,
For wealth, for ease, and for food,
to cheer his weary mind,
And none of them deny his will,
as Gods appointment is,
So now that man does them excel,
we may discern by this.
He has a soul which must have reign,
in life when flesh is dead,
Which must with spiritual food of life,
continually be fed,
Nor yet with bread material,
compas'd with corn and grain:
But with the word and flesh of Christ,
it must be fed certain,
For which as for the rest men ought,
most chefly to give praise
To God and Christ, which succor is
to us at all assaies.
Therefore to God for food and strength,
and wealth abundant store,
And for the hope of lossing life,
be praise forevermore. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
GIve thanks to God with one accord,
for that shall be set one this board.
And ve not careful what to eat:
to each thing living the Lord sends meat.
For food he will not see you perish,
but will you feed, foster and cherish.
Take well in worth what he has send,
and at this time be therewith content,
prasing God Amen.
Grace before meat.
Man's life preserved is by food,
as God has well decreed:
But on Gods grace and holy word;
our souls must daily feed:
Through want of food material,
the body soon does pine:
So will the soul if long it lack
her spiritual food divine.
To the be praise then Father dear,
which at this time has sent.
Both for the soul and body food,
thy Children to content.
And we beseech thee Christ, thy Church,
our Nobility and Stale to save:
That by there life in p^ace long time,
the Gospel we may have. Amen.
Grace before Supper.
MAn lives not only (Christ does say)
by his material bread:
But sure by every word of God,
it is wherewith he is fed.
From earth springs food man's body to feed,
but Christ came from one high:
Which is the bred of life, that can
our souls aye nutrifie.
He gave his flesh and shed his blood,
at his last Supper sure:
And who so feed on him by Fath,
shall lastingly endure.
Christ Jesus bless our supper now,
and work in us thy grace:
And save thy Church, our State defend,
and soon thy foes deface. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
OF Dives and Lazarus,
the Scripture tells plain,
How Dives lived in wealth and ease,
and Lazarus in great pain.
The rich man he was clothed well,
and fared of the best:
But Lazarus with hunger great,
could have but little rest.
But full of soreslay crying still,
but some man to relieve him.
With crumbs that fell from Dives Table,
whereof no man did give him.
Thus perished poare Lazarus,
and that for lack of food:
And also that rich glutton died,
for all his worldly good.
Therefore all ye that present be,
remember this thing well:
That how this man unmercifull
is buried now in hell.
From the which fiery torments great,
the Lord us all deliver:
And grant we may be merciful.
while we live hear together,
Then shall we rainge with Lazarus,
with joys that be indurable,
Even by the blood of Jesus Christ,
for health most profitable,
Now therefore Lord we thee beseech,
to make us all consent,
To pity those that have most need,
and eke our sins repent. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
O GOD that art our righteousness,
Lord hear us when we call;
Of thy goodness we pray thee bless
both us and our meats all:
So that we do not use the same,
but only to our need:
Wherefore we praise thy holy name,
in thought, in word, and deed. Amen.
DVst, Earth and Ashes is our strength,
our glory frail and vain:
From Earth we come, to earth at length
we shall return again:
To day we feed on flesh of beasts,
of fouls and diverse fish
To morrow for the crawling worms,
our selves become a dish:
Lo thus we may behold and see
our frailty what it is:
Let Faith and Prayer be the way,
to bring us unto bliss. Amen.
The whole estate of Christ his Church,
our Nobility, of this Land alse
God mightily preserve and keep,
from force of mortal foe:
Grace before Meat.
REceive your Meat without grudging,
Take heed ye never abuse the same:
Give thanks to God, for every thing,
And always praise his holy Name.
Who does not so, is sore to blame;
No evil example see that you give,
Thus does Gods Word teach us to live.
God save his Church unto the end,
God grant we may our lives amend. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
THe Lord, that did all things create,
for Man to serve him at his need,
Bless all that which we drink or eat,
and give it strength our flesh to feed,
For whatsoever shall nourish in deed,
Whether it be good for man or beast,
must by his mighty power be blessed.
And since we have an inward Man,
Which by no means, obtain we can
but by him that is heavenly bread,
And eke of spiritual things the head,
Let us still feed on him in mind,
that gave his flesh to feed mankind:
Thus doing we shall run our race,
with out the want of any food:
And at the last come to that place,
that promised was to Abraham's brood,
And by faith wash in Christ his blood:
where evermore we shall him see,
That is one God in persons three.
O Lord preserve in health and peaee,
the Nobility of this Land:
Thy holy Spirit in them increase,
that they may be a true guide unto this Land.
A Sword to cut off Popery clean,
that they and we may hold that truth,
Which they have loved from there youth.
Grace before meat.
TO eat and drink does small avail,
the World is all but vain:
Except the Lord our hearts do gui^^,
our pleasures are but pain.
Grant us therefore, O Christ, that we
may all with one accord,
Not live to eat, but eat to live,
and live to praise the Lord.
Short Graces for young Children, when they first begin to speak.
Grace before Meat.
O Lord our God, to thee we pray,
to bless our food which thou do send
And make us love thy Laws always,
so that we may our lives amend.
Grace before Meat.
THe Lord of love and God of peace,
Of all good things that gives increas^
So bless us, all and all our food:
As that we eat may to us good. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
HE that is King of Glory,
and Lord over all:
Bring us to the Super
of life eternal. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
THough diet be thin,
and Table but small,
Yet ere you begin,
be thankful for all.
Sundry GRACES in Meeter to be said after Meals
Grace after Meat.
ALl flesh is grass, Man's life is vain,
his pomp is but a flower,
He feeds his corpse and thinks to live,
yet dead within an hour.
It is not flesh of beasts nor foul
that can man's life maintain:
For food of body often we see,
naught else to be but vain.
Then feed our souls, sweet Savior Christ,
with bread of life so pure.
That thought our flesh be earth, yet make
our souls aie to endure,
Yea keep thy Church,
in Christian love and peace:
And let thy Kingdom come with speed.
to all joys increase.
Grace before Meat.
ALl laud and praise be to the Lord,
for these good gifts of thine:
Whereby we now refreshed be,
and for thy word divine.
Which teaches those that able be,
whom thou have blessed with store:
To ease them that have need of help,
when they do ask therefore.
Now as the bread our bodies need,
our souls so need thy word
Which thou do give that we may live,
thanks be to thee O Lord. Amen.
Grace after Meat,
AS thou have fed our bodies Lord,
so feed our souls likewise:
And make us mindful of the poor,
as riches do arise.
Increase thy flock, preserve our Church,
thy grace and peace us send,
That we may lead a godly life,
and make a faithful end. Amen,
Geace after meat.
FOr food and health and all the rest,
the Lord be thanked and always ble^^
Who with his grace so store us still,
that we swerve no way from his will,
Our Nobility God keep, the Nation God (...)
and grant us long true friends to have. Am^^
Grace after Meat.
LIke as thou have (Almighty Lord)
refreshed us unworthy here
With meats made holy by thy Word,
so let thy grace (O Lord) appear,
To make us mindful of the poor,
Which lives in woe and great distress,
And to be thankful evermore,
for these thy gifts,, and all goodness,
Which ^^e confess proceed from thee,
to whom be praised eternally. Amen.
Grace after Meat.
NOw let us pray unto the Lord,
And yield him thanks with one accord
F^r that which we received have,
Though nature no such plenty crave.
Much bound we are to God above,
Who has vouchsafed us to love,
That from among the rest that went,
We take repast where is no scant.
Lord grant us mindful for to be,
Of such that live in poverty.
For we confess it pleased God,
We might with them taste of his rod.
God save the Church and Commons of this Land
God send us peace in Christ. Amen.
Grace after Meat.
O Lord, we thank thee for this food
we have received of thee,
Lord grant us grace our lives to lead,
more thankful for to be. Amen.
God save his Church the Poor defeed:
God send us peace in Christ, Amen
Grace after Supper.
Our days do pass as this day now
is come unto an end:
But Gods good grace shall never fail
his Children to defend,
As thus our Supper Christ has blessed,
in joy to end the same:
Mo we beseech our Father dear,
in Jesus Christ his name,
That we may be participates,
(whom he has bought so dear)
Of his great Supper, where his face
shall shine on us most clear,
When as the Lamb shall make his feast
in Heaven where is such store:
Of which who tasted once no doubt
shall never hunger more.
To thee be praise, oh God and Christ,
thy little flock defend:
Preserve our Land and come with speed,
our troubls to amend. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
THanks be to God in Heaven above,
for he has fed us well:
God grant us grace from heaven above,
to feed our selves as well.
Repentance with the fruit thereof,
that we never forgot:
Tender (O Lord) thy holy Church,
and Rules in it set,
And ever more upon England,
thy grace and truth down send:
That it may be the Word and Grace,
all sinful souls amend.
And finaly all such as be
afflicted for thy Wordr
Comfort them by thy holy Ghost:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Grace after Meat.
O Blessed God through Jesus Christ,
that feedst us ever more:
Give us thy grace, that we always,
may give thee thanks therefore. Amen.
Grace after Meat.
O Lord God the benefits,
whereof we have had store:
We knowledge all to be thy gifts,
to thee be thanks therefore. Amen.
Grace after Meat.
LEt us give thanks to God our Lord,
that feeds us always:
Beseeching him that with his Word,
like wise be fed we may.
Grace after meat.
FOr Meat, Drink and it is,
thanks be given to our Lord Jesus.
Amen.
Who uses not often before meat to pray:
Nor thanks to God after, but so goes his way
He sitting or rising, so letting Grace pass
Does eat like a swine, and departs like an Ass.
Here ends the Book of Graces.
Evening PRAYER.
O GOD of Angels and Men, the founder of all Creatures both visible and
invisible, in whose hand is life and death: I wretched sinner (unworthy of thy
benefits) most humbly beseech thee to bless me, and with thy holy Angel
assist me this night, which have made me of earth and do nourish me by thy
creaturs: pardon me, which have so offened thee, in thought, word and deed: and
grant me grace hereafter to fear thy wrath and heavy displeasure, for thy
blessed Sons sake, our Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
O Lord succor us, show me the light of thy countenance, in thee my soul
trusts, and my heart rejoices.

O give me understanding and I will keep thy Law, yea I will keep it with my
whole heart.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, then shall I praise and magnify thy
blessed name for ever.

According to the greatness of thy mercies, O God forgive me my sins.

Remember not the number of my sins, but according to the multitude of thy
mercies, deliver me from the pains due to them. Grant this O Savior for thy
mercies sake.

Teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart to learn thy wisdom:
and so strengthen me with thy holy spirit, that I swerve not from thy law.

Deal not with me as I have deserved, but call to remembrance thy render
mercies which have been ever of old, and cast me not from thee in thy heavy
displeasure, least I be consumed and brought to naught. Hear me for thy
mercies sake.

Unto thee I wretched sinner do come craving of thee thy mercy: Incline
therefore thine ear unto my casting, and consider the request of my heart.

Lighten me thy servant, with the bright lamp of thy holy Spirit, thereby to
subdue the body of sin with all the lusts thereof, that I may be made obedient
in will and mind to thy holy Law.

Dear Savior, to whom it is most easy to do all things, then for me to think
any one good thought, give power unto thy servant, that I may with a strong
Faith, vanquish and subdue whatsoever may cause me to rebel against thy
blessed will.

Exceeding true it is, that Every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 7.21. Strengthen me therefore thy servant, I
beseech thee, with the Power of thy right hand, against all the maliciousness
of the old wily Serpent. Replenish my heart with thy wisdom, and comfort my
soul with thy sweet, comfortable and healthful promises: and let thy mercies
heal mine infirmities.

Yet once again I call upon the in these my meditations: O let thine ear be
open to hear the Prayers which I thy servant make unto thee this day: and
grant that I may always ask of thee in such sort as thou requirest, to the
honor, praise and glory of thy name, to the furtherance of thy word, the
profit of my nieghbour, and to my consolation and comfort: through the merits
of thy bitter death and passion.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was was in the beginning, is now, etc.

SAve us (O Lord) waking, and keep us sleeping, that we may watch in Christ,
and rest in peace. Amen.

When you are ready to go into your Bed, Say,
I Go to Bed as to my Grave,
God knows when I shall wake:
My trust is, that my Lord and God
will mercy on me take.
When you are lying down in your Bed, Say,
I Lie down, in the name of the Father, and of Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

FINIS.

