THE GRAND IMPOSTURE: OR THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY:

A SATYR.

Tristius haud illis Monstrum, nec saevior ulla Pestis --
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 3. London, Printed Anno 1679.

THE Grand Imposture OR THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY.
ASCEND Alecto from thy Den, and come
Just as thou look in that Infernal Home;
Fell Fury fire my Fancy, for I have
More cause then Poet e're had yet to rave;
Thou art my Muse, thy Snakes my Laurels are,
By me thine own, and Rome's Intrigues declare:
Do it for once, then back to Hell retire,
And pay the Jesuits their Arrears of Fire.
A Jesuit great Satan's Envoy is
Sent to succeed the Snake of Paradise:
For when that fatal stroke of Adam's loss
Was healed by the great Theanthropos,
When that deep Stratagem of the dark Throne
Mysterious Messiah had undone;
And that first Argument of hellish Power
Was quite confuted by a Savior,
Then baffled Lucifer, no Answer had,
Till He a Jesuit his rejoinder made;
By whom he hopes completely to renew
The Battle, and once more mankind undo;
Plotting his old Dominion to make good
By false implicit Faith, or fire and blood;
That catches Fools, and these destroy the Wise,
Thus all mankind, are equally his Prize.
"Shut your Eyes close, believe me, and you will see
"(The Ignatian cries) the way to Eternity;
"Deny all Reason, misbelieve your Sense,
"Church cannot Err, be that your Confidence:
"Pin on our Sleeve your Faith, and tho you are blind
"Take but fast hold, and follow us behind,
"Our open Eyes the way for both will find.
"This Wine and Wafer now are common food,
"But a few words shall make 'em Flesh and Blood,
"And tho they after all the same appear,
"And out of Modesty the old Livery wear,
"Yet is Christ's very Blood and Body here.
Such plain Impostures, such bold Cheats as these
Can surely none, but fools, or mad men please.
The Snake of Paradise played fairer far
With Adam's Wife, and more upon the Square,
He called an Apple, Apple, said 'twas good,
Pleasant to the sight, and delicate for food;
The Jesuits Tricks would never have ta'n with Eve,
She saw what is what, before she did believe,
Besides he pleaded that 'twould make her wise,
But these, the grossest ignorance advise.
And thus we lose our selves, b' a greater Cheat
Then what the Serpent used in Eve's defeat;
Thus we our sense and reason lay aside
To take an old ambitious Fool for Guide,
Thus we turn Stocks and Idiots, and then
Become good Cath'licks, ceasing to be men;
As if the only way to save our Souls,
Were, to be easy Slaves or senceless fools.
To all this fond credulity we are hurled
By slavish fears about the burning world,
So to be sure to feel no torment there,
First strip our selves of all our senses here.
Now, my Alecto, let us advance and view
The Frauds that lurk under Religious show,
For tho to Heaven their fair pretenses swell,
The Root lies deep and dark as is thy Cell.
No Heathen Lawgiver, no Pagan Priest;
Did e're with such mysterious Wiles infest
The superstitious Multitude, for that
Is still most apt to fear they know not what.
No Cabalist of State could e're Trapan
With such firm subtlety as Rome's Divan.
And first, least holy Church should chance to float
(Without a last appeal) in endless doubt,
You must with dumb obedience still repair.
Unto Rome's holy Apostolic Chair,
That, that is infallible and cannot err.
This bold Assumption keeps more in Awe
Then Numa with his feigned Egeria.
And tho it seems at points of Faith to aim,
It Is to be uncontroulably Supreme;
Get universal deference, and create
A close dependence on the Roman Seat.
Branding on all damnable Heresy,
That dare oppose the Apostolic See,
Or Rome's Political Divinity.
Thus it usurps boundless dominion,
Makes Kings their subject's, slaves, and both it is own.
Rome's doctrine is a secular device,
Mere trick of state in reverend disguise,
The ambitious spawn of latter Centuries:
And tho it proudly boast an ancient Line,
From Peter, it is of basest Origin;
It Is the Priest's spurious Issue, gotten on
Ignorance, Fear and Superstition:
These three completely make the triple Crown,
And still support old Rome's imperial Throne.
How slily do the Priests by help of these
Make men believe, and then do what they please?
How solemnly they dazzle Vulgar eyes
With fine misterious holy Vanities?
Whose ceremonious pomp strikes awful dread
In fools, that by their eyes and ears are lead.
But should I here endeavor to declare,
The numerous Gimcracks of the Romish Fair,
Their Mystic Idols, consecrated Bawbles,
Feigned Miracles, and monstrous holy Fables;
How dead Saints relics cure the Gout or Ptisick,
And are, like Egypt's Mummy, kept for Physic;
How they can scare the Devil with a stench,
(Not that Tobias used to get the Wench:
In telling this I might as teedious be
As the return of their next Jubilee.
But these are Petty trifles, tiney toys,
Tricks to catch Women, gaping Fools and Boys;
They have devices of a larger size,
Traps to ensnare the Wary and the Wise:
And if you chance to boggle at the bait,
They curse, and cry, damnation be your fate,
And then you swallow it at any rate.
Oh! what a melancholy dismal story
They roar in dying Ears of Purgatory;
That rather than the affrighted wretch will burn
So long, He Will all his Gold to Masses turn:
Thus Ecclesiastic Chemists (you would admire)
Make real Gold by a fictitious Fire.
Next extreme unction comes, from whence the Priest
Gets the most good, by greasing in the Fist.
But of all cheats that necessary are
Unto salvation, Auricular
Confession bears the bell, and seems to me
Next to infallible Supremacy;
It wears a holy Ueile, but underneath
Is shame and slavery far worse than death.
The Priest may tyrannize without control,
That knows the guilty secret of the soul.
So when the gentle sex confession makes,
That they have often sinned upon their backs,
How easily the Priest coms in for snacks?
And shireves the pretty Penitent A la mode,
No trick like a jure divino Fraud:
Thus are their chiefest Doctrines, plain device,
Pimp to their Pride, their Lust and Avarice
In holy Apostolical disguise.
In short, the whole misterious Cheat does lie
In superstition and Idolatry,
Two spurious Graffts --
Set in the tree of life, Religion,
With whose Luxurious branches it is over grown
To such a monstrous disproportion,
That the first planters would it quite disown.
Religion, like a modest rural maid,
No artificial dress no fucus had
But was in native Innocence clad,
Till in Romes Court she ceased to be such,
Thence, sprang her Infamy and first debauch;
There, laying plain simplicity aside,
She grew to idle wantonness and Pride:
Yet still some modesty confined her Home,
Nor rambled she beyond the Walls of Rome;
Till Proud of her succesful charms, she grew
Ambitious mighty Monarchs to subdue;
So by deceitful arts she enlarged her power,
And made them slaves, that sh' had served before.
At length her lawless Pride gave some mistrust,
And that increased by her insatiate Lust.
She grew imperious, asked more and more,
And would be Tyrant too, as well as Whore.
Then wisely some the Vassalage forsook,
Others repined as weary of the Yoke:
She, Jealous lest her Universal sway
Should lessen, or her former fame decay,
Amongst others, did the Schoolmens Pen employ
To Vindicate her truth and honesty,
(Schoolmen, who ransack sciences and Arts
To prove with pains, that they are Fools of parts;
A knack to Coin unmeaning words they have got,
False words that w'ont endure the test of thought:
Distinction's their last refuge and appeal,
The better, if unintelligible)
So these her honor justified in words,
As Bully Jesuits Plot to do with swords.
But both in vain, for it is concluded on
Their Mistress is the Whore of Babylon.
Shift, shift the Scenes, Alecto, fury Fiend
Wake all thy Snakes, and make this Tragic end;
By Hellish Art raise up in dark Cabal,
The Pope, a Jesuit and Cardinal.
Thy self place in the middle, raving Wood,
With Poisons, Pistols, Daggers, Fire and Blood.
Now let this Scene start into sudden sight
By gloomy Flashes of Sulphurous light;
Then let his Holiness's face appear
Full of deep Counsel, thought and weighty Care.
Whilst each of you in awful silence hears
The sacred Oracle with hungry Ears.
"Was it for this my boundless power was given?
"For this have I the Keys of Hell and Heaven?
"In vain I boast of a Supremacy,
"And call my Chair the Universal See.
"A little Nest of Heretics cut off
"From Europes Earth, at all my Power does laugh.
Turning to the Jesuit.
"Who (tho they kindly could decline to be
"A Bar to Balance Gallick Monarchy,
"Yet) still oppose my holy Tyranny.
"False Agents, heartless, traitorous, have you
"So often sworn by Sacramental Vow
"Or to Convert this Island or undo?
"Was your Commission scant, did I deny
"Plenipotentiary Villainy?
Have not I nulled Divine and Humane Laws,
That without let you might promote the Cause?
"Heavens Laws, tho fixed by an Eternal Seal,
"Stoop, and are liable to my repeal.
" Moses once broke these Tables, often I
"Not to prevent, but fix Idolatry.
"Thus had your large Commission no restraint,
"Nor did you Apostolic Blessing want.
"Nay more, the blackest Crimes in you were merit,
"For which all other endless flames inherit:
"So Treasons, Murders, Perjuries became
"Sure Monuments of your Eternal Fame;
"So nature changed her course, yet nothing's done,
"To Advance the Catholic Religion.
"Be gone Slave, fly; Delude with crafty words,
"If they prove vain, use poison, Fire and Swords:
"Make better work on it, or I swear by the Mass
"And the Divinity of Holy Cross --
These chance unlucky words broke all the Spell,
They vanished, and Alecto sunk to Hell.
FINIS.

