THE COMMUNICANTS GUIDE, Directing The younger Sort, which have never yet
Received, and the Elder, and ignorant sort, which have hitherto Received
unworthily; How they may Receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to their
Souls comfort. Together With a Treatise of DIVINE Truths, Collected out of
Ancient and Modern DIVINES. By R: GOVE, Sometime Preacher of Gods Word, at
Henton, St. George, in Sommerset.

1 CORINTHIANS. 11. 29. He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and
Drinks Damnation to himself. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at
the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

To all those that do desire to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
worthily, and to their Souls comfort.

ESPECIALLY To the younger sort, which have never yet received, and to the
elder, and ignorant sort, which have hitherunto received unworthily.

R: GOVE, Who can do very little, yet desires to do very much for the good of
their Souls,

DEDICATETH These his Sacramental instructions following.

A CATECHISM. Short for Memory, and plain for Capacity, containing the
Grounds, and Principles of the Christian Religion in general. Which every one
should know, that desires to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
worthily, and to his Souls comfort.
QUESTION. OF what Religion are you? 1 Pet. 3. 15.


Ans. Of the Christian Acts 11. 26
Religion.

Q. What Religion is that?

Ans. That which teaches Acts 4. 1^
a Man to look for salvation, only by Jesus Christ.

Q. Where is this Religion taught you?

Ans. In the Holy Scriptures, which are Joh. 5. 39 Hos. 8. 12 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16,
17. Joh. 20. 13
the written Word of God, and contain all things needful for our salvation.

Q What are the principal things, and those most necessary to salvation, which
are taught us in the Scriptures?

A. They are two: the one is, what we Joh. 13. 17
are bound to know; and the other is, what we are bound to practice.

Q. What are we bound to know?

A. God and our selves. Joh. 17. 3 2 Cor. 13. 5


Q. What must we know concerning God?

A. We must know three thngs: 1. that there is a God* 2. What a one this God
is; Heb. 11. 6 Joh. 17. 3 Psalm. 111. 2
and 3. What he has done.

Q. How do you assure your self, there is a God? Joh. 5. 39 Romans 1. 20 1 John
3. 20 and 21. Joh. 4. 24 Ex. 33. 18. and 19. Ex. 34. 5. and 6. 1 John 5. 7 1
Cor. 8. 6 Acts 15. 18 Genesis 1. 1 Acts 17. 24 Heb. 1. 3 Psalm. 119. 91 Psa. 103.
19.


A. 1. Gods Word reveals it; 2. Gods Works confirm it; and 3. mine own
conscience does assure me of it.

Q. What a one is God?

A. God is a Spirit most glorious in Nature, three in Persons, and one in
Essence.

Q. What has God done?

A. He has decreed with himself from all eternity, how all things shall be;
he made all things in the beginning; and he has ever since sustained them,
and disposed of them.

Q. Thus much of that, which we are to know concerning God, tell me now next,
what we are to know concerning our selves?

A. We are to know three things 1. What we were; 2. What we are; and 3. What we
shall be.

Q. What were we?

A. We were all in our first Creation Genesis i. 27 Eccles. 7. 31 Ephesians. 4. 24 Psalm.
51. 5 Ephesians. 2. 3, 4 and 5. Heb. 3. 1 1 Cor. 1. 2
perfect, and happy.

Q. What are we?

A. We are all by nature sinful, and miserable: but by grace in Jesus
Christ, as many as God does call, are made righteous, and happy.

Q. What shall we be?

A. Those amongst us that are good Mat. 25. 46 Dan. 12. 2 John 5. 29 Mat. 5. 16
1 Pet. 2. 12 Tit. 2. 5 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 1 Pet. 3. 1
shall be everlastingly blessed in Heaven; and those that are wicked shall be
everlastingly tormented in Hell.

Q. And thus far touching our knowledge: tell me now next what is required
concerning our practice?

A. There is required in us all a care so to lead our lives, as that thereby,
God, and our Christian profession may have praise, we comfort, and others
profit.

Q. How may we so lead our lives?

A. By ordering them according to the prescript rule of Gods Word, set down
partly in the Law, and partly in the Gosspell. Psa 119. 9 Gal. 6. 16


Q. What does the Lord require?

A. Piety toward God; Charity toward our Neighbors; Sobriety toward Tit. 2.
11. 12 Mat. 22. 36 37, 39. 1 Pet. 5. 8 Pro 12. 10
our selves; and Mercy toward all other living Creatures.

Q. What does the Gospel require?

A. True faith, and unfeigned Repentance, as our only remedy for the breach
Mar. 1. 15
of the Law.

Q. How are these Graces to be begun, continued, and perfected in us? Mar. 9.
24 Luk 22. 23 Luke 11. 13 Jam. 5. 16 Rom 10. 17 Acts 20. 32 Romans 4. 11 Acts 2.
38 41. Mat. 28. 19 1 Cor. 11. 23


A. By faithful, and fervent Prayer; by a due hearing, and reading of the
word; and by worthy receiving of the Sacraments.

Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church, thus to be received
of us?

A. Two only, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is the use of Baptism?

A. By Water washing the body, to assure us that the blood of Christ, being
applied 1 Pet. 3. 21 1 Cor. 6. 11 1 John 1. 7
to the Soul of the believer, cleanses him from all his sins.

Q. What is the use of the Lords Supper?

A. To be a sign, a seal, and pledge unto us, that Christ Jesus is given for
us, and 1 Cor. 11. 24 Mat. 26. 28. John 6. 50, 51, and 54.
to us for the nourishing, and preserving of us unto eternal life.

JOH. 13. 17. If ye know these things, blessed are ye, if ye do them.
THE Communicants Guide, Directing The younger sort, which have never yet
received, and the elder and ignorant sort, which have hitherunto received
unworthily, how they may Receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper worthily,
and to their Souls comfort.
Question. WHat must he do, that would Receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper worthily, and to his Souls comfort?

A. He must do that, which is required of a worthy Receiver, before he comes
to receive; whilst he is Receiving; and after he has Received.

Q. What is required of a worthy Receiver before he comes to receive? 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 19.


A. There is required a serious, and solemn preparation of himself.

Q. Wherein does that serious, and solemn 2 Samuel 16. 5 Psalm. 26. 6 2 Chro. 35
6.
preparation of a Man's self consist?

A. It consists in two things. First, in a solemn sequestring and setting
apart of some convenient time, wherein he may, betwixt God and his own Soul
meditate on that which he is about to do: and secondly in doing that which
may prepare him for it.

Q. What time is fittest to be set apart for this business?

A. The whole time from the warning given of a Communion to the very time Exodus
12. 3. and 6.
of receiving it, should take up some of our thoughts touching the same: but
especially Joh. 19. 14 and 31.
we should spend some part of the day immediately foregoing it in that
business: by retiring our selves from other Zech. 12. 12 Mat. 6. 6 Ge. 24. 63
1 Cor. 7. 5 Genesis 22. 4 and 5. Nehe 6. 3 and 4.
company into some private place (if it may be) to perform the same; and by
withdrawing our minds for that time from all other businesses.

Q. What are the duties which in this time thus set apart, a mam is to perform,
that he may be rightly prepared?

A. They are two. The first is examination; 1. Cor. 11. 28 1 Timothy 4. 5
and the second is Prayer.

Q. Concerning what must a man examine himself?

A. He must examine himself, whether he have in him those things which ought
to be in a worthy Receiver.

Q. What are those things?

A. They are especially five. First, knowledge; Secondly Faith, Thirdly
Repentance; Fourthly Charity, and Lastly, an hungring and thirsting desire
after Christ, and the benefits of his death, and passion.

Q. What knowledge ought there to be in a worthy Receiver?

A. There ought to be in him (besides a competent knowledge of the grounds,
Heb. 8. 10, 11. Heb. 5. 12.
and principles of the Christian Religion in general) a more particular
knowledge, both of himself, who is to receive, and 1 Cor. 13. 5
of the true nature, and use of the Sacrament, which he is to receive. 1 Cor.
11. 29


Q. What must he know concerning himself, who is to receive?

A. He must know, how miserable he is by nature; and how much more miserable
Psalm. 51* 5 Romans 5 12 Ephesians 2, 3. Rom 6. 23 Gal. 3. 10.
he has made himself by his actual transgressions.

Q. What must he know concerning the true nature, and use of the Sacrament
which he is to receive?

A. He must know, first who ordained it; Secondly, for what ends it was
ordained, and thirdly, what are the parts whereof it consists.

Q. Who ordained this Sacrament?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ, and that in Mit. 26. 26 27, 28. 1 Cor. 11. 23 1 Cor.
11. 20
the Night when he was betrayed, and therefore it is called the Lords Supper.

Q. For what ends was it ordained?

A. It was ordained, first to keep in 1 Cor. 11. 24 26. John 6 54, 56 and 57.
1 Cor. 1^. 24, 26 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. 1 Cor, 12, 13.
us a thankful remembrance of the Death, and Passion of our Blessed Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ. Secondly to assure us of our particular part, and
interest in the benefits thereof; and Thirdly, to be a Bond, and Pledge, both
of our Union with Christ, and of our Communion one with another.

Q. What are the parts, whereof this Sacrament consists?

A. They are three. First, the outward Signs signifying. Secondly, the Divine
Word sanctifying, and thirdly, the inward, and spiritual graces signified.

Q. What are the outward signs signifying?

A. Bread, and Wine, with the several actions pertaining to them, as Breaking,
Mar. 26. 26 27. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25.
Giving, Taking, Eating, and Drinking.

Q. What is the Divine Word Sanctifying?

A. The Word of Christ's Institution, Mat. 26. 26 27. 1 Cor. 11. 24 25. 1 Cor.
10. 16. Heb. 5. 4. Mat. 26. 26 27. Mark. 14. 22, 23, 24. Luke 22. 19 20. John
6. 54
pronounced with Prayers, and Blessings, by a lawful Minist^r.

Q. What are the inward, and spiritual graces signified?

A. The Body of Christ Crucified, and his blood shed for the Remission of sins:
exhibited by God to the faith of the worthy Receiver, which receives it, and
feeds on it, for the nourishing of his soul unto life everlasting.

Q. And thus far touching the knowledge which is required in the worthy
Receiver; tell me now next what faith is required in him?

A. There is required, not only a bare Esaias 53. 6. 8. 10. Mat. 26. 28 Jam. 2.
19
knowledge, and persuasion, that the body of Christ was crucified, and his
blood shed for the Remission of sins (for even this the very Devils in Hell
do believe, and yet tremble) but a particular application of the same, and of
all the benefits thereof, unto a man's own Soul, Gal. 2. 20 1 Cor. 5. 7 Job
19. 25 Luke 1. 47 Joh. 20. 28
whereby he believes that Christ's Body was Crucified, and his Blood shed for
the Remission of his Sins in particular.

Q. And thus far also touching the faith, which is required in a worthy
Receiver: tell me now next what Repentance is required in him?

A. There is required in him an hearty, 1 Cor. 7. 9, 10. Luke 15. 21 Psalm. 51.
3. 4 Zech. 12. 10 Hos. 14. 8 Esai. 30. 22 Acts 26. 20 2 Cor. 5. 17
and unfaigned sorrow for all his Sins past: and a full purpOse (with Gods
Grace, and assistance) never to offend God by the like in the time to come, but
to amend his life, and to become a new man.

Q. And thus far also touching the Repentance, which is required in a worthy
Receiver: tell me now next what Charity is required in him?

A. There is required a care to be in 1 Cor. 11. 18 20. 1 Cor. 12 13 Ephesians. 4. 16
Mat. 5. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 5. 8 Colos. 3. 13 Esai. 1. 11. and Luke 17. 4
Love, and Charity with all men, striving to be reconciled to those whom he
has injured, and wronged; and being ready from his heart to forgive those, who
have injured, and wronged him.

Q. And thus far also touching the Charity which is required in a worthy
Receiver: tell me now in the last place, what hungring, and thirsting desire
after Christ, and the benefits of his Death, and passion are required in a
worthy Repentance?

A. There is required in him a sense, and feeling of his want of Christ, and
his righteousness, and of Gods Wrath due unto him for his sins, which showing
him his woeful, and miserable estate without Christ, may make him to hunger,
and thirst after him, and the benefits of his John 7. 37 Rev. 22, 17
Death and Passion, (the only means of Luke 1. 53 Psa. 63. 1. Psalm. 107. 9
Psalm. 42. 1. Rev. 21. 6 Esaias 55. 1 Esaias 4^. 1
pacifying Gods wrath) as much, as an hunger-starved man, and one that is ready
to die for thirst, does after Meat, and drink.

Q. And thus have you showed me, what is the former of those two things, which
must be performed by a worthy Receiver, that would prepare himself aright
before he comes to receive, to wit, examination: tell me now which is the
other of them.

A. It is prayer: wherein if after examination he does find in himself the
former Psalm. 10. 17 1 Timothy 4. 5
Graces in any measure, he is to bless God for it, and to pray for the
continuance, Mark. 9. 24
and increase of them; and if he want them, or have them not in that measure,
which God requires in his Word, he is to humble himself before the Lord in
true contrition, and hearty Psalm. 51. 17 Esaias 57. 15 Esaias 66. 2.
sorrow for his failings, confessing them unto him, and desiring pardon of them
all for Christ's fake; and that his gracious Spirit may help his infirmities in
those Romans 8. 16
Graces he has, and may work in him, those which he wants, that so he may
come as a worthy Receiver to this holy Table of the Lord.

Q. But what if a Man be not thus prepared when he comes to receive, is
there any great danger in it?

A. Yes, for first, he that is not thus prepared, stands guilty before God of
the Body, and Blood of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11. 27


Secondly, instead of Receiving that which might further his Salvation, he
shall Eat, and Drink his own Damnation: 1 Cor. 11. 29
And lastly he shall not only be 1 Cor. 11. 30. Exodus 5. 3 2 Chronicles. 30. 18.
and 20
damned hereafter, but shall be severely punished, also in this life, by
sickness and weakness, yea, and at the end of his life by some fearful
death.

Q. And thus have you showed me what is required of a worthy Receiver before
he comes to Receive: tell me now in the next place, what is required of him
whilst he is Receiving?

A. There is required a reverent gesture Esa* 45. 23 Psalm. 95. 6 Ps. 103. 1.
and 2. Luke 1. 46
of Body; and a Religious disposition of mind.

Q. What gesture of body is fittest in the time of Receiving?

A. There is no certain gesture prescribed in Gods Word to be used in the
Receiving of the Lords Supper, and therefore that is fittest, which is most
decent, and orderly, and most agreeing to the 1 Cor. 14. 40. Mat. 18, 17 1 Cor.
8. 12 13.
Discipline of the Church under which we live: So that it be not contrary to
piety, or charity, and if we be left to our own choice, then that gesture is
to be judged 1 Cor: 10. 32. Psalm 95. 2, 3. Rev. 7. 11, 12. 1 Chronicles. 29 10, 11,
13.
best, which may best set forth the greatness of the Giver, the worth of the
Gift, and the humility, and thankfulness of the Receiver.

Q. What disposition of mind is required in a worthy Receiver, at the time of
his Receiving?

A. There is required, first, that his mind Exodus 3. 5. Colos. 3. 2 Phil. 1. 27
Psa. 104. 33 and 34. 1 Cor. 10. 31 Colos. 3. 17
be taken off from all worldly, and sinful thoughts; and secondly, that it
be wholly taken up with heavenly Meditations, and hearty prayers, and
thanksgivings unto God.

Q. Whereon should a worthy Receiver specially meditate in the time of
Receiving?

A. He should especially meditate on the Death, and Passion of Christ Jesus
his Savior; of the benefits which accrue to him thereby; and of the duties,
which he owes to God and man therefore.

Q. How may he come best to meditate on the death and passion of Christ?

A. By observing carefully what is done by the Minister, that does administer
it; and himself that does receive it.

Q. What does the Minister do?

A. He does consecrate, and set apart the Bread, and Wine, whereby of common
and ordinary Bread and Wine, it is made the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of
Christ. He does also break the Bread, and pour out the Wine; and having so
done, does deliver it to each of the Communicants.

Q. What is he to meditate on when he sees the Minister to consecrate the
Bread, and Wine by the Word of Christ's Institution, and Prayer, to be the
Sacrament of the Blessed Body, and Blood of Christ?

A. He is then to meditate, how that John 3. 16 1 John 4. 9 John 6. 27 Mat. 1.
21 1 Timothy 2. 5 Ephesians. 2. 14 Ephesians. 1. 6 Heb. 9. 15
God the Father, out of his mere love to mankind, did set apart, seal, and
appoint his only begotten Son to be the all-sufficient means, and only
Mediator to Redeem us from sin, and to reconcile us to his grace, and to
bring us to glory.

Q. What is he to meditate on, when he sees the Minister to break the Bread,
and to pour out the Wine?

A. He is then to meditate, that the Body of Christ was as truly crucified,
Gal. 3. 1 Exodus 24. 8 John 1. 29 Esaias 53. 5
and his blood shed for the Remission of his sins, under the sense of Gods
wrath due unto them: as he does now see the Bread in the Sacrament to be
broken, and the wine to be poured out by the Minister.

Q. Lastly, what is he to meditate on, when the Minister comes unto him, and
delivers him the Bread, and Wine, thus Consecrated, broken and poured out?

A. He is then to meditate, that as the Minister does now offer, and deliver
into his hands the Bread, and Wine, and bids him, take it, eat it, and drink
it; So does Christ himself come unto him, and offer, and give unto his Faith,
his very Body, and Blood, with all the benefits of his Death, and Passion.

Q. And thus we see what the worthy Receiver must meditate on in the time of
Receiving, upon his sight of what the Minister does: tell me now next what he
must meditate on, upon the sight, and sense of what he himself does at that
time?

A. When he has received the Bread and Wine at the Ministers hand, and is
Eating of the one, and Drinking of the other, he must then meditate and think
with himself thus: as I have now taken, and do eat this bread, and drink
this Wine for the nourishment of my body, and life temporal; so I do believe,
that the Body, and Blood of Jesus Christ, being Romans 3. 25
apprehended of me by the hand of Faith, and applied by Faith unto my Soul,
shall nourish it up unto life everlasting.

Q. And thus we have seen, how the worthy Receiver is to meditate in the time
of Receiving upon the Death, and Passion of Christ, and the benefits which
accrue to him thereby. Tell me now next, what are the duties, which he is to
perform to God, and man therefore?

A. To God he is to lift up his heart Psalm. 116. 13, 14. Psalm. 63. 5 Mat. 26.
30 1 Cor. 10. 17 1 Cor. 12. 13. Psalm. 16. 2. and 3. Ephesians. 4. 3. 15. and 16. 2
Cor. 8, 9, etc. 2 Cor. 9. 7 Gal. 6. 10 1 Cor. 16. 2 Mat. 12. 7
by way of thanksgiving for the great work of our Redemption by the death of
Christ: and unto man he is to extend his love, by cleaving to his
fellow-communicants in one Spirit, as unto members of the same body; and by
showing mercy to the poor members of Christ's body in contributing to their
necessities according to his ability.

Q. And thus we have also seen, what is to be done by the worthy Receiver at
the time of Receiving. Tell me now in the last place, what is required of him
after he has Received?

A. There is required, Examination, and Resolution.

Q. Wherein stands the Examination, which must be in a worthy Receiver after he
has Received?

A. It stands in this, to try whether he has gotten any good by the
Sacrament, or not.

Q. What if he find little, or no good by his Receiving?

A. He is then first to suspect himself, that some miscarriage has been in
him, either in his preparation to, or in his performance of the Duty; and
having found out what was the fault in either, that hindered the efficacy of the
Sacrament unto him, he must judge himself, and be 1 Cor. 11. 31 Eze. 20 43
seriously humbled for it. And secondly, he must endeavor by after-paines in
prayer, and humiliation to quicken, and awaken the efficacy of the Sacrament
unto his Soul.

Q. But what if he find any good by his Receiving, what is he to do then?

A. He is first to bless God with all Ephesians. 4. 3 etc. 1 Pet. 1. 3 1 Chronicles.
29. 18. 2 Chronicles. 30. 21, 22, 23. Luke 4. 1 1 Cor. 10. 4
his heart therefore; and to acknowledge with all thankfulness Gods gracious
dealing with him therein; and secondly, he is to be careful, and watchful
that he keep up and maintain that holy, and gracious frame of heart in
himself, which he has brought with him from the Sacrament.

Q. And thus have we seen, wherein the examination of a worthy Receiver
consists, after he has Received, Tell me now wherein stands his
Resolution?

A. It stands in this, that he be careful, Hos. 11. 12
and do resolve to keep touch with God, and to express the power, and
efficacy of the Sacrament in making good, and keeping his Vows, and Covenants,
which he made to, and with Psa 116. 14. 18. Eccles. 5. 3. Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
23. Pro. 9. 5. 6 Colos. 1. 10 Ps. 119. 106 Hos. 8. 13 1 Cor. 11. 30 Esaias 1. 11.
13 Genesis 4. 5 1 Cor. 11. 17 Joh. 13. 26, 27. Luke 11. 24
God, of new obedience, and amendment of life, when he came to receive.

Q. Is there any great danger, if we do neglect to do so?

A. Yes, for first without this care, and Christian resolution, we shall incur
Gods heavy displeasure: Secondly we frustrate, and make void, all that we have
formerly done in, and at the Sacrament. And thirdly, we shall hereby bring our
selves into a far worse condition, than we were before we came to receive.

Q. How may we come then by power to do this?

A. By watching carefully over our ways, and courses; by examining them by
Psalm. 39. 1 Job 31. 1 Eccles. 5. 1 Esaias 8. 20 Psalm. 119. 9 Gal. 6. 16. Psalm.
119. 5. 35. 88. 133
the Rule, and Square of Gods Word; and by hearty prayer unto God for his
Grace, to direct, and assist us in all our ways.

CERTAIN Cases of Conscience, About the Receiving of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper cleared, and resolved.
I. Case. WHether a man, who (after examination of himself) finds in
himself much weakness, and many defects, in respect of those things, which
should be in a worthy Receiver, may yet adventure to come to Receive?
Solution. The weakness, and defects, which are in those that come to
Receive, are either Mark. 9. 24 2 Cor. 7. 10
such as are felt, and thereupon are sorrowed for, and striven against: or they
are such, as are not felt, and so can neither be sorrowed for, nor striven
against.

If our weakness, and defects be of the former kind, we need not much to
fear, or doubt of Gods mercy, and favor toward us, if we do come to Receive
with such weakness, and defects in us.

For first we must know that the Sacrament, which we come to receive, is
ordained by Christ, to be as well physic for the Recovery, and strengthening
of the sick, and weak in grace, as food to nourish the strong and healthy.
Secondly, we must Mat. 21. 14 Luke 14. 21 Mat. 11. 28 Esaias 55. 1, 2 2 Chronicles.
30. 18, 19, 20. Pro. 9. 4. etc. Mat. 5. 6
know, that Christ even calls such unto him, and has promised in his word,
not only his gracious acceptance of them, but a full supply of their defects,
and wants.

But if our weakness, and defects be of the latter kind, such as we neither
feel, nor desire to understand, nor have any remorse for them, then ought we
not in any case to come, but rather to forbear, Joh. 6. 37. Mat. 22. 12
until God shall be pleased to give us more Grace.

II. Case. Whether we are bound to come fasting to the Communion?
Solution. NO, it is not absolutely necessary* for Rom 14. 17
neither was the paschall Lamb so eaten; and (we know) Christ himself
administered it to his Disciples after Supper: and besides that, some are (we
know) so weak, and sickly, that they cannot stay so long fasting, without
prejudice to 1 Cor. 11. 34 Mat. 9. 13 Mat. 12. 7 Hos. 6. 6.
their life, or health. And if it were necessary, yet in that case God will
have mercy, rather than Sacrifice.

But though there be no necessity of it, Vide Aug^. Epist. 118.
yet it has been ever held decent, and convenient, where it may stand with
the health of the body, and there is no superstition placed in it, as there is
by some ignorant Papists, and some of our ignorant, and popishly affected
Protestants at this day: who think that they eat the Vid. Aqui. in Mat. ^6.
very Body, and drink the very Blood of Christ in a bodily manner.

III. Case. Whether must that man stay from the Sacrament, who having wronged,
and injured his Neighbor, has sought forgiveness, and Reconciliation at his
hands, but cannot obtain it?
Solution. NO, if so be, that he be sorry for his Mat. 5. 23, 24.
offense, and be willing to make amends for the wrong he has done, and does
earnestly, and heartily desire pardon, and reconciliation at his hands whom he
has wronged; for then the fault is no more his that has done the wrong, but
his that being wronged will not forgive. Mat. 18. 21, etc.


IV. Case. Whether a man be bound to forgive him that has wronged him, if he
seek not for Reconciliation at his hands; and if he do not forgive him,
whether he must for this cause stay from the Sacrament?
Solution. IN forgiving an offender, there be three things to be considered.
First, the leting go of all wrath, malice, and desire of revenge. Secondly, the
testification of forgiveness unto the party offending and Thirdly, the
re-acceptance, and readmission of the offendour into former society,
communion, and friendship. As for the Mat. 6. 14, 15. 1 Timothy 2. 8
first: a man is bound to forgive in that respect, whether the party offending
ask forgiveness, or no: that is, he must bear Esaias 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
no malice, nor nourish in himself any thoughts of Revenge toward him; for if
he do, he sins in coming to the Sacrament; But as for the two latter, a man
Luke 17. 4.
is not bound, either to testify unto the offending party his forgiveness of
him, or to re-admit him into former communion, and fellowship with him, until
he be sorry for his offense, and be desirous (in what he can) to right him whom
he has wronged: neither is his not doing of either of these any bar to keep
him from the Communion.

V. Case. Whether he, whose heart is full of fears, and doubtings, may
adventure to come to the Sacrament?
Solution. YEs, he may; for fears in coming are no bar to comfort: nay he
that comes in fear, may yet go away with much comfort, especially where in
coming his chief aim is to yield obedience to Gods Commandment, which
bids him come, rather than to his own fears, doubts and discouragements,
which might Mark 5. 33, 34.
dishearten him from coming: for obedience yielded to God, out of pure
conscience to his Commandment, against discouragements, and fears, may be no
whit inferior unto, nor less acceptable unto God, than a preparation in a
more exact, and excellent degree. For it is here, as it was with the Children
of Israel. Exodus 14 15. God bad them go forward, and their own distrustful
hearts bid them forbear, because of the Sea that was before them, into which
they could not go, without evident peril of drowning. Yet Gods Commandment
prevailing more with them, than their own fears, forward they go, and instead
of the danger which they feared, see what a blessed deliverance, beyond their
expectation, is by God afforded them: even that very Sea, which they feared
would have been their destruction, proved (through Gods blessing) to be the
way, and means of their delivery.

VI. Case. What is to be done by him, that in the very instant of Receiving,
feels his heart so hard, that he cannot lift it up unto God?
Solution. TO this, these Answers may be given. First, that hardness of heart
is twofold, sensible, or insensible. Felt, or not felt.

Insensible hardness of heart, and which is in a man, and not felt, and
perceived, Zech. 7. 11 Ephesians. 4. 19. Exodus 10. 17.
is a great, and a dangerous judgment, but the sensible, and felt hardness
which is in Gods Children, and which they feel, and bewail in themselves, is
rather a blessing than a curse. Of this the Church complains, saying unto
God, why have thou hardened our hearts against thy fear? Esaias 63. 17. And this
must not dishearten, nor discourage any Communicant, but rather comfort him:
for when the heart feels its hardness, and complains of it, is grieved,
and disliketh it, wishing that it were not so, this is a sure sign of a
gracious estate, and that there is some measure of true softness in that man's
heart, though at this time undiscerned of him. For it is by softness that
hardness of heart is felt, and if there were no grace there, such a corruption
as this, would lie still undiscerned, it being the part of grace, and not of
corruption, to discover such corruptions in us. Secondly, we must know, that
every lumpish, and heavy heart, betiding Gods Children at times, is not a hard
heart: for even the best of Gods children at times may be thus affected,
witness David, Psalm. 42. 6, 7. Heman, Psalm. 88. 14. Jonah, Ion. 3. 4. 7. the
Church of God, Esaias 49. 14. yea, Christ himself was not free from it, Mat. 27.
46. Thirdly, it must be remembered for our comfort, that the benefit of the
Sacrament is not tied to the very instant of Receiving, but if before, and
after, a man have been able, and can lift up his heart unto God, he may find
comfort, though for the present he have not so lively a sense, and feeling
thereof as he desires.

VII. Case. Whether a man may with comfort of Conscience, partake the Sacrament
with those Assemblies; wherein open finners are tolerated to participate, so
that he shall not partake with them in their finnes, nor any way hinder his
own benefit by so doing?
Solution. HE may; and that for these reasons. First, because when we come to
receive, we are by the Apostle commanded to examine our selves in 1 Cor. 11.
28. but no where to examine others: which (if he had thought necessary to
worthy Receiving, or had thought it unlawful to communicate with others, that
are unworthy) he questionless would have given a like strict command for
that, as he had done for the other. Secondly, because the same Apostle in 1
Cor. 11. 29. limits the crime, and penalty of unworthy Receiving, to the person
himself that See Ezech. 18. 20.
thus Receives, and not to others that Receive with him. Thirdly, because
neither the Prophets of old, nor Christ himself, nor his Apostles in the New
Testament, have left us any example, to forbear coming to the Sacrament, and
partaking thereof, or any other part of Gods public worship, and service, for
the known sins of those, that were to partake with us therein: but have
rather taught us by their example to do the contrary; and have showed us by
their practice, that in Assemblies, where the word, and worship of God is kept
pure for substance, there may be a comfortable participating of Sacraments,
yea, though by connivence of governors some inordinate walkers be admitted.

VIII. Case. Whether the wickedness of the Minister, who administers the
Sacrament, may impeach the sufficiency, and efficacy of the Sacrament to a
believing Communicant?
Solution. NO, it cannot: for the virtue, and efficacy of the Sacrament depends
not on the goodness, or evilnesse of the Minister that administers it, but on
Gods blessing accompanying it, And this Divines 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
both Ancient, and modern have many ways illustrated.

As by water that passes through a channel of stone into a garden, though the
channel it self receive no benefit by it, because of his own indisposition,
yet may the Garden be made fruitful by the water that this channel
conveigheth into it.

Secondly, by sowing of seed, wherein the seede-mans hands may be foul, and
dirty, yet as long as the seed is good, the soil fertile, and it have the
heat of the Sun, and the benefit of the rain descending on it, the seed may
grow, and prosper notwithstanding. Many other such illustrations of this point
might be added, but these are sufficient to show, that the Sacrament received
at an evil Ministers hands, may yet have its due effect, in the heart of the
worthy Receiver; and therefore is not to be refused by us, when such do
administer it unto us* For what man, that is in his right wits, if he be in
danger of the Law, would refuse his Princes pardon, though brought unto him by
him, that were never so wicked a man? Or who would think that pardon, the
less forceible, and available, because such a man brings it: let us not then
refuse Gods Ordinance, for the evil life's sake of the Minister, that is to
administer it unto us: always remembering this, that if he be a sinful, and
unworthy man, the sin is his; but if I refuse it at his hands, because he is
such a one, the sin is mine: and I shall not answer for his sin, but for
mine own neglect.

IX. Case. How often is a man bound in Conscience to receive the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper?
Solution. THere is no set time, nor times for this prescribed in the
Scriptures. Neither has the practice of the Church in all ages been one, and
the same.

For we read th^^ in the Primitive times of the Church, they used at first to
receive it every day; afterward every Lords Day; afterward it came to once a
month; afterward to thrice a year; and at last came the Council of Trent
and decreed, that at least once a year it should be received.

And therefore in this variety of See Dr. De^isons Heavenly Banquet, page 165.
practice, we must for our better guidance herein, observe the circumstances of
necessity, convenience, and utility.

For the first, it is true, that we have daily need of the remembrance of
Christ's Death, and consequently of the Sacrament. As our bodies have daily
need of nourishment by our corporal food, so have our Souls by our
spiritual. Yet must not this be the only guide, or ground of our Receiving,
but we must also have respect to convenience.

For seeing there is required a due, and diligent preparation for the Receiving
of this Sacrament, the same must moderate our necessity, so that we should as
well look to our fitness as to our need.

But yet in the third place, the due consideration of the inestimable benefit,
and comfort we obtain by Receiving this Sacrament, must stir us up, so often as
with convenience we may, to be partakers of 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26. See Number. 9. 13.
this blessed banquet, so that (if it were possible) we might every day be fit
to communicate: or at least so often as the Sacrament is administered.

X. Case. What quantity of Bread, and Wine must be taken by him, that Receives?
Solution. SO much of each, as may give both nourishing, and cheering to the
body. And therefore that custom taken up by the younger sort, of only kissing
the Cup, or taking but a drop, or two of Wine into their mouths, is not to be
approved; for Christ's Ordinance is not to sip, but to Mat. 26. 27.
drink at the Communion.

XI. Case. Whether such persons, as are at contention, and go to Law one with
another, may with good conscience come to the Lords Table?
Solution. Questionless they may, so that they go to Law lawfully: for it is a
true Rule in Laws, both divine and humane, which the Apostle sets down in 1 Timothy 1. 8. that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. Now to use the Law
lawfully, there be these conditions required.

1. That it be done not for every little trifle, which will bear an action, but
only for such things, as if they be not remedied, will breed a further
inconvenience, and which nothing but Law can remedy.

2. That it be not done out of a covetous mind, to have from another more than
in conscience he thinks is his due, but only desires to preserve his own
right, which by Gods Law and man's, belongs unto him.

3. That it be not done out of an ambitious mind, more to get the victory of
his adversary, than to gain the truth.

4. That it be not done fraudulently, by any unlawful, and unjust means, as
by bribery, subordination of witnesses to support a bad cause, or the like.

5. That there have been used all lawful means before to compremise it by
reference to Christian Neighbors, and Friends, and by being willing to part
with some of his right for peace and quietness sake, rather than to try
extremity of Law.

6. And lastly above all, that it be not done uncharitably, out of desire to be
revenged on his adversary more, than to have his wrong righted.

And because this last is the maine obstacle of all (because where Charity is
wanting, there can be no fitness to receive this Sacrament) therefore all that
go to Law, should be well advised, and make a narrow search into their hearts
(which are deceitful above all things, and in this more than in any other
things, because of Self-love, and Selfe-seeking ends) whether they can hate
the wrong done without hatred to the person doing it: for they that cannot do
so, (let their pretenses be otherwise what they will) they are not fit Guests
for the Lords Table.

Certain EXCVSES Made, and pretended by Ignorant People for not Receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper so often as they should do, removed.
Many are the Excuses, which are made, and pretended by Ignorant People for not
Receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper so often, as they should do: but
the chiefest of them, and those that are most common in the mouths of the
ignorant, are these that follow.
I. Excuse. They have no leisure.
HAve they leisure to fill their bodies every day, and want they leisure to
feed their souls? Our Savior in Ioh. 6. 27 gives them better counsel.
Labor not (says he) for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that
endures to eternal life.

II. Excuse. They want Clothes.
IT is not outward apparel, but the inward ornaments that make us gracious in
the sight of God. And therefore be 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Mat. 22. 12.
our outward apparel never so mean, if we have on us the wedding garment of
Faith, made of the fleece of that Lamb John 1. 29 1 Pet. 5. 5. Mat. 5. 23. 24.
Acts 2. 46 1 Cor. 5. 8.
of God, which takes away the sins of the World, lined inwardly with
humility, and trimmed outwardly with Charity, God will bid us welcome to his
Table.

III. Excuse. They are not in Charity.
WHat is this but to excuse one sin with another? Our neglect, or contempt of
Gods Ordinance, by our uncharitable affection to our brother, and that is so
far from excusing us in the sight of God, that it does much aggravate our sin.

For why are they not in Charity? What is the cause of it? Is it not their own
rankorous heart, their own malicious, and revengefull will, and nothing else,
that keeps them from it? And because their neighbor has wronged them, will
they, rather than they will forgive their Neighbors wrong more wrong God, and
their own souls?

IV. Excuse. They are not prepared.
ARt thou prepared to pray, and art thou not prepared to receive the Communion?
The same things that make us unfit to receive the Communion, make See B.
Andrews Sermon part. 2. page 36.
us as unfit to pray: for except a man abandon the purpose of sin, Psalm. 66.
18. and except he be in Charity, Mat. 6. 14. he is no more fit to pray, than
to communicate, and therefore should abstain from the one, as well as from the
other.

V. Excuse. Their Wives are sick, or lie in, or their Husbands are from home,
or not well, and therefore they will stay till they be returned, or well
again, and then they will come, and receive together.
INdeed for matter of sickness of the one, or other party, where there is a
necessity of our attendance on them, there may be some excuse, for I make no
question, but in this case God will have mercy, rather than Sacrifice. But
where there is no such necessity, I see not how we can be excused.

And as for the other, viz. the Husbands or Wives being from home, how that can
excuse any from communicating, when God calls them thereunto, I know not. For
our Receiving of the Sacrament, must not depend upon others Receiving of it,
albeit they be never so near, or dear unto us.

VI. Excuse. They use to Receive at Easter every year, and they hope that it
is sufficient.
THis Communicating once a year at Easter, was hatched in Popery, when
ignorance prevailed in the Church: and is by no means to be followed of us, to
whom God has afforded better means of knowledge. And indeed it were a shame,
that Protestants in profession, should be Papists in opinion.

But what is it, that makes them to put off their Receiving to this time?

If it were their respect, and reverence to the Sacrament, as fearing, if they
should receive it oftener, they should not come so well prepared to it, as they
hope to be then: that indeed were some (though but a poor) Excuse. But that is
not it: it is rather, either because they place more holiness in that time
above other, and so think the better the day, the better the work, which is
mere popish superstition, or rather, because it is the custom, and fashion so
to do, which is profane irreligion.

Whereas good Christians look rather to Christ's Command, and their own
necessity, than to any thing else, and because he commands it, they do it; and
their own need, and necessity of it makes them to do it, not once in a year,
but as often as it may be done.

VII. Excuse. They would come, and Receive, but their Ministers will not suffer
them.
IF their Ministers do hinder them without cause, they shall bear their
condemnation: but if for want of Knowledge, Repentance, Charity and the like,
(which their profession, or practice do witness) he do stay them from it, and
be diligent, and willing to teach, and warn them, and they continue still in
their obstinacy, and wickedness, their blood shall be upon their own heads.

VIII. Excuse. That they are conscious to themselves of some great, and crying
sins, which they have committed, and of which they have not yet sufficiently
repented, and therefore they will stay till the next opportunity of receiving,
hoping by that time to have more fully repented of them, and to be better
prepared.
THis Excuse indeed might be the more tolerable, if he that has committed
such sins were sure of these two things. First, that he shall have longer
time to repent in; and Secondly, that he shall have grace to repent having had
such a time. But of neither of these can any man for the present be assured of.
It Is true, God has promised indeed to have mercy upon a Sinner, at what time
soever he shall truly repent, and turn unto him; but he has no where promised
to give him either time, or grace to repent when he will. And therefore if thou
art wise, or desire to be wise for the everlasting good of thy Soul,
dispeede thy Repentance out of hand, and take the present opportunity that God
offers thee, as not knowing whether God will ever offer thee the like
opportunity again: being also assured of this for thy comfort, that God in all
our graces, and so in Repentance too, looks not so much at the measure of
them, as at their sincerity.

Plain EXPRESSIONS OF Sacramental Truths TO Uulgar Capacities.
By the help of which, the younger, and ignorant sort may easily understand,
and remember the most necessary things belonging to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.
EXPRESSION I. Of this, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper does truly, and
really exhibit to the worthy Receiver, the Body and Blood of Christ, with all
the benefits of his Death, and Passion.
FOr it is here, as it is in a Lease A Lord of a Manor makes, seals, and
delivers a Lease of a Farm to a Tenant, containing two, or three hundred Acres
of Land, butting, and bordering thus, and thus, upon condition that the Tenant
shall pay him such a Fine, and so much yearly Rent.

The Tenant^ receives the Lease, and having it in his hand, shows it to his
friend, and tells him that he has for two hundred pounds a year three hundred
Acres of Land.

The Parchment, Ink, and Wax of the Lease, have not the very Acres of Ground,
nor Trees, nor other appurtenances thereunto belonging, being, and growing
therein, and yet by virtue of that Parchment, Ink, and Wax made a Lease and
sealed, and delivered by the Landlord, the Tenant will possess them all.

I demand then how it comes to pass, that this piece of Parchment, and this
Ink, and Wax thus made a Lease, and thus fealed and delivered, has power to
conveigh really, and actually this ground, with his appurtenances to this
Tenant?

To which the Answer is, that the power it has to perform this, comes not
from the Parchment, Ink, and Wax, but from the legal power, and authority of
the Lawgiver, who did decree, and ordain, that a Deed conceived in such, and
such form of words, and thus sealed, and delivered, should be effectual, and
powerful to give a Tenant real possession of such Lands, and all the
appurtenances thereof.

And just so is it in the Sacrament, for by it Christ does give us his very
Body, and Blood, his Merits, and his Righteousness; by it he passes over unto
us a Deed of all the joys of Heaven; he Seals unto us a pardon of all our
sins, and of all the Punishments belonging unto them, but upon this condition
still, that we do truly pay unto him his Rent; to wit, true Repentance for
all our sins, true Charity toward our Neighbors; true Faith in his Blood;
and a new, and sincere obedience to his Commandments.

So that when we receive this Sacrament after this manner, we may say. Here
have I the Body, and Blood of Christ my Savior, here have I Remission of all
my sins; and the Kingdom of Heaven passed over unto me. And yet that bit of
Bread, which I have eaten, has not the Kingdom of Heaven lying in it nor the
Body of Christ molded up in it, or converted into it; neither has the Wine,
which I have drunken, the Blood of Christ within it, or is converted into it.

Whence then have they this power? In their own nature they have it not;
whence then can they convey all this to me?

I answer, the power which they have, comes from the Lawgiver Jesus Christ,
who Decreed, Instituted, and Ordained that those Elements of Bread and Wine
received in his manner, and on his conditions, should be powerful, and
effectual to convey unto me, and make me partaker of his blessed Body, and
Blood, and of all the benefits of his Death, and Passion.

EXPRESSION II. Of this, That a wicked man, and an unworthy Receiver, may at
the Sacrament Receive the outward Elements of Bread, and Wine, without
receiving any benefit by the Body and Blood of Christ.
FOr it is here as in the usance of a conveyance. Now we know, that if a
conveyance made to Peter, lying upon a Table be given to Richard, or to any
other person to whom it does not belong; or which Richard, or any other person
fraudulently takes away; it does them no good at all, by reason the Covenant
was not made with any of them, but with Peter only: So the unworthy Receiver,
being not the party to whom the promise is made of receiving Christ, with the
benefis of his Death, and Passion, receives only the bare outward Elements and
not the things signified thereby.

EXPRESSION III. Of this, That the consecrated Bread and Wine, are not to be
taken as common Bread, and common Wine.
FOr it is with this, as it is with Wax stamped with the great Seal: for as
that in substance differs not from other Wax, but yet in value is far more
excellent, and may not be abused, or unreverently used, without contempt, or
great wrong offered to the King or State whose the Seal is: So the Bread, and
the Wine in the Sacrament, though in substance it differ not from other Bread
and Wine, yet concerning the use to which it is now put, and designed, it is
much more precious than any other Bread or Wine in the World, being now
appointed by, God to be a Sign, and Seal, and an exhibiting instrument of the
Body and Blood of Christ, and therefore cannot be profaned, or abused without
contempt of Christ Jesus, and his holy Ordinance.

EXPRESSION IV. Of this, What a shameful thing it is to come unprepared to the
Lords Table.
IT were a matter of foul shame for a Man to come, and sit down at a great
Man's Table in rags, and in nasty, and filthy clothes; and in such a case, how
apt would every one be that sees him, to take him up, and say, Art thou not
ashamed to come to such a Man's Table in so base a fashion? What an uncivil
fellow art in such a garb and pickle to come into such a presence? And is it
not then a matter of fouler shame to come rudely, unpreparedly, and in so
unbeseeming a manner to the Lords Table?

EXPRESSION V.
Of this, That the receiving of the Lords Supper, without those graces that are
to be in a worthy Receiver, will do us no good.
FOr what is this, but the having of a Seal to a blanke? And what is a Man the
better for that? What is a Man the better for having the Broad Seal to a
piece of Parchment, that has nothing written in it? He has nothing but a
piece of Parchment, and Wax, he has neither Land, nor Living, sealed, and
conveyed unto him thereby. And just so it is in this case.

EXPRESSION VI. Of this, That ignorant persons, though they pretend never so
much their good meanings, and their good minds, cannot be worthy Receivers.
IGnorant persons use to plead for themselves that they have not the knowledge,
and understanding that others have, and cannot answer as others do, yet they
hope they have as good meanings, and come with as good minds as the best.

But alas, how sillily is this spoken? for it is as if one should say; though I
have a blind Eye, yet I have as good an Eye, as he that can see farthest. For
wherein lies the goodness of the Eye, but in the sight, and the goodness of
the mind but in the knowledge of God? Prove. 19. 2.

EXPRESSION VII. Of this, That without Faith we can be no worthy Receivers.
FOr he that will receive Christ's Body and Blood for his Souls Comfort, must
have an Eye to see Christ, and his Worth; must have a foot to come unto him;
must have an hand to receive, and lay hold upon him; and must have a mouth to
feed on him.

Now Faith is all these to a worthy Receiver. It is the Eye of the Soul, John
8. 56. Esaias 17. 7. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. It is the foot, by which we come unto
Christ, John 6. 35. It is the hand by which we receive him, John 1. 12. Yea, it
is the mouth by which we feed on him. John 6. 53.

Now can a man see without an Eye? Come without a foot? Receive without an
Hand? Feed without a mouth? No surely he cannot. No more can we see Christ in
the Sacrament, without the Eye of Faith; come unto him, without the foot of
Faith; receive him without the hand of Faith; or feed on him without the mouth
of Faith.

EXPRESSION VIII. Of this, That impenitent sinners are not fit Guests for the
Lords Table.
FOr it is here as it was at the Passover: there (as we read Exodus 12. 45.
48.) no stranger, no hired servant, no uncircumcised person might eat thereof.

Now an impenitent sinner is all these. 1. He is a stranger to God. Psalm. 58.
3. Ephesians. 4. 18.

2. He is a servant of sin, John 8. 34. hired for the vain pleasures,
profits, and preferments of this World to do the Devil service, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.

And 3. he is an uncircumcised person, Acts 7. 51. Ierem. 6. 10.

And therefore it is no wonder that an impenitent person is so unfit a Guest for
the Lords Table.

EXPRESSION IX. Of this, That impenitent persons coming to the Sacrament in
their sins instead of doing themselves good, do themselves a great deal of
harm.
FOr it is here as it is in an unwholesome, and diseased stomach: now we know
that an unwholesome, and diseased stomach, what ever food it receives, it so
alters it, that it rather nourishes the Disease, than the body, and turns all
the wholesome nourishment it takes to the increasing of that, rather than of any
health, or strength to the body.

So an impenitent Soul coming to Gods Ordinance in its sins, does turn the
wholesome nutriment of the Sacrament to the feeding of its diseases, and the
increasing of its own sorrow and mischief.

EXPRESSION X. Of this, That no Man can grow, thrive, or be nourished by the
use of the Sacrament, that is not in Charity when he comes to Receive.
FOr the whole Church is a body, and every Christian is a Member of that body.
Now a member (we know) that will grow in the body, and thrive, must necessarily
be united to, and conjoined with the body. If a member be separated from the
body, it cannot be nourished, nor grow: an Hand, or an Arm rent, or cut off
from the body, cannot be nourished, nor grow. Nay, though a part of the body be
not separated from the rest, yet if there be but a dislocation of a part, so
that it be only out of joint, it cannot thrive, and prosper till it be set in
joint again. So it is in the body mystical, it is a growing body, every
member thereof grows, and increases, Colos. 2. 19. as long as it is joined to
the rest of the members in love, Ephesians. 4. 16. but being disunited from the rest,
or out of joint, by reason of want of Love, and Charity, it can be neither
nourished, nor thrive, nor increase with the rest of the body, though it
receive this spiritual food of the Sacrament never so often.

EXPRESSION XI. Of this, That they, that would be partakers of the Body, and
Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, must come thereunto with Hungring, and
Thirsting desires after Christ, and the benefits of his Death, and Passion.
FOr it is here as it is at a Feast, or Banquet, let the Feast be replenished
with never so many dainty Dishes, and Cates; and the Banquet with never so many
delicates, yet if the parties (that be to eat of it) have formerly filled
themselves with other Meats, they care not much for the Cates of the one, nor
the Delicates of the other, Proverbs 27. 7.

But let one, that is almost hunger-starved, or is almost ready to die for
thirst, come to such a Feast, or Banquet, because he feels the pains, and
pinches of emptiness in his stomach, you shall not need to persuade him to
fall to it; the very sense of his own wants, and the refreshing which he
hops to find by that repast, will be to him an Argument sufficient to make
him to do it.

So it is in receiving of the Sacrament; if a man come with thoughts of his own
worthiness, and fullness of grace, and goodness in himself, he cannot get
any good by his Receiving, for he feels no want of Christ, nor his Merits; but
let a poor hunger-starved Soul, who feels his want of Christ, and sees in
what a miserable estate he is without him, and knows the Riches,
Excellencies, and All-sufficienices that are in him; let such a one (I say)
come to the Sacrament, and he shall surely be replenished, and find the
benefit, and comfort thereof. See Esaias 55. 1, 2. John 7. 37. Revel. 22. 17.
Math. 5. 6. Luke 1. 53.

EXPRESSION XII. Of this, How that Gods Admeasurements of grace, and spiritual
good in the Sacrament, are suitable to the inlargements of Men's hearts, and
their hearty desires for grace therein.
THere are three things (we know) that fit a vessel to receive a great measure
of liquor. The first is, when it is of large capacity. A small Vessel may be
filled, but yet a small Vessel cannot have so much poured into it, as a
Vessel that is of larger capacity. The larger the Bucket is, that is let down
into the Well, the more Water it brings up.

The second is when it is an open Vessel. For though a Vessel be of never so
great capacity, yet if the Mouth of the Vessel be shut, and closed up, though
it be thrown into the Sea, where there is Water enough, yet it fills not.

Thirdly, when the Vessel is wide open. For though the mouth of a Vessel be
open, yet if it be not wide open, it does not fill so readily. Take a Bottle,
or narrow-mouthed Glass, and dowse it under the Water, yet it may be pulled up
again, with little, or no Water in it, though it be of great capacity, because
the narrowness of the mouth hinders the ready and quick passage of the Water
into it: Whereas a wide-mouthed Vessel, as a Paile, or Bucket, is no sooner
under Water, but it is instantly filled, because the wouth of the Vessel, is
wide, open and broad. And just so it is in the Sacrament, if we desire a
liberal largeness of Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits, we must come thereunto
with hearts enlarged with Hungring, and Thirsting desires after Christ, and his
Righteousness; and the more our hearts are enlarged herewith; and the more
open, and ready they are to receive it, the more shall the Sacrament empty it
self with abundant blessing upon our Souls.

EXPRESSION XIII. Of this, That a worthy Receiver ought to be as careful of
his behavior, and demeanor at the Sacrament, as of his preparation before he
comes to it.
FOr as it is not enough for a Man to to dress, and trim up himself in his
handsomer apparel before he comes to a great Man's Table; but there is a great
care also to be had of that carriage, and behavior, that beseemes such a Man's
Table, and person. For though a Man come handsome, and cleanely apparel'd to a
great Man's Table, yet he may there carry himself so rudely, unmannerly, and
uncivilly, that he may give great offense.

So is it with one that is to Receive the Communion. It Is not enough for him to
get his heart into an holy, and fitting frame before he comes to Receive, but
he must have a care also to have it in a convenient frame during the time of
the whole action. For though a Man have bestowed much pains with his heart
before his coming, yet if there be not a care of due behavior in the action,
all his former pains may be lost. See Prove. 23. 1. second Epist. of John v. 8.
Mat. 22. 11.

EXPRESSION XIIII. Of this, That it is not enough to come to the Sacrament, and
to see what is there done, unless we can by Faith apply them to our selves,
and get the efficacy and virtue of Christ's Death to become ours.
A Conduite (we know) is full of Water, now a Man that would fill his Vessel
with the Water thereof, must bring it to the Conduite, to the Cock, and set it
there; but yet that is not enough; nay if that be all, and he do no more, he
may go home again with an empty Vessel: therefore the Man that would fill
his Vessel, when he has brought it to the Conduite, and set it under the
Cock, does also turn the Cock, and then the Water runs forth, and fills his
Vessel. So it is in the Sacrament. Christ is the Conduite of all grace, and
spiritual good, and he that would be f^lled must come to him. His Ordinances,
the Word, and Sacrament, they are the Cocks of this Conduite: so that a man
that would be filled with grace, must not only go to Christ in his
Ordinances, and bring his Vessel to these Cocks, but when he has so done, he
must turn them too, and let them run into his Vessel; and this only can a
man's faith do, by applying of Christ, and what he has done for man's salvation
to a man's self in particular. See Luke 1. 17. John 20. 28. Gal. 2. 20.

EXPRESSION XV. Of the same,
A Child (we know) may see, and look upon the Mothers Breasts; may handle
them, kiss them, and play with them, but all this while the Child is never the
fuller. Therefore the Child, when it would be satisfied, it lays its mouth to
the Breast, gets the Nipple into his mouth, and then suckes, and draws with
all the strength, and might it has, and so fetches forth the Milk out of the
Mothers Breast. So must it be done in this case of the Sacrament. Men may come
to the Sacrament, and there gaze upon the Elements, and eat, and drink them,
and yet not receive the sweet of the Ordinance, but if they would have the
milk out of this breast, they must fall to sucking, and to drawing with all
their might, and strength. And this do men do, when in the use of it, they
set their faith on work, which sucks virtue out of the Sacrament, and from
Christ in it, mortifying virtue to kill their lusts, healing virtue to cure
their souls, and quickening virtue to enable them to the duties, and actions of
spiritual life.

A Catalogue of certain gross Ignorances touching the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, yet remaining, and reigning in the hearts and minds of the vulgar sort
of Communicants in most places, and Parishes of this Land, Purposely Set down,
that such ignorant Souls may see their Errors, and learn to amend them.
The I. Ignorance. Touching Preparation.
THe Preparation, especially of the younger sort, is to put on their best
dress, their siner apparel, and to be a little braver when they come to the
Sacrament, than at other times. But for a Spiritual preparation of the heart,
to fit it for so holy a duty, and service, that is a thing that is never once
looked after, nor thought upon.

The II. Ignorance.
Touching their demeanor at the time of Receiving.
IT is pitiful to behold the demeanor of the ordinary sort of people at the
Sacrament; they come thither, they know not wherefore; and they do there they
know not what; they know not which way to look, or turn themselves about any
holy Meditations. Many times their minds are like a Clock, that is over-wound
above his ordinary pitch, and so stands still; their thoughts are amazed at the
height of these mysteries, and for the time they are like a block, thinking
nothing at all: or else their thoughts fall flat on the Earth to base* and
bodily things: Yea, some are so wonderfully simple, as to imagine they come
thither for a draught of sweet Wine, and a morsel of finer Bread. Or at the
best, they raise their thoughts no higher than the Communion Table, thinking
that if they have received the outward Elements in a reverent manner, behaved
themselves decently during that action, forborne their worldly business
before, and after, tempered their tongues from all uncivil speech, and
demeaned themselves mannerly for that day, then that they have done a right
acceptable piece of Service to God. The which stupidity of theirs cannot but be
much commiserated of those, unto whom it is given to know any thing concerning
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God.

The III. Ignorance. Touching their coming at certain times to Receive,
though never so unpreparedly.
MAny have a conceit, that if they Cbrysost. ad Epist. Hom. 3.
come at such, and such times, what ever their lives be, yet it skilleth not,
the very coming at such times is a disposition sufficient for the Service they
come about. But* let such men know, that at what time soever they come, if they
come not preparedly, be the time never so solemn, yet shall they instead of a
blessing, meet with Gods curse and heavy indignation. See Job 20. 23. Psalm.
78. 29, 30, 31. Psalm. 69. 22. but especially 1 Cor. 11. 27. 29, 30.

IV. Ignorance. Touching their good meanings, as if that were a sufficient
Preparation.
IGnorant persons use to plead for themselves, that it is true they have not
the knowledge, and understanding that others have, and cannot answer as others
do, yet they hope they have as good meanings, and come with as good minds as
the best.

But poor souls, how miserably do they delude themselves? For ignorant
minds cannot be good minds, neither can such minds have good meanings: for
without knowledge the mind is not good, Pro. 19. 2. And the mind being not
good, how can the receiving of such a one, but be an abomination to God? See
Pro. 21. 27. And therefore let such poor ignorant Souls look to themselves,
and for all their good minds, and meanings, labor to get some competent
measure of the knowledge of God, and Christ, before they offer to meddle with
this holy Ordinance of God. And especially let such look to themselves, that
have the means and may be taught, and instructed, but yet in a wilfulness,
and Rebellion of Spirit, will not be taught, nor instructed that they may be
fitted before they come to the Sacrament, but will continue in their ignorance,
and wilfully come to the Sacrament therein. For what can such expect, but that
God should say to them, as he does to others of the like kind, Psalm. 50. 16.
17. What have thou to do, that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate instruction?

The V. Ignorance. Touching their Repentance.
THey think that if they can say, I cry God mercy for my sins; and if they
can make a show of sorrow for them, and be sad, and demure for the day wherein
they Receive, and for that day leave their uncharitableness, their adultery,
their Drunkennnesse, their Swearing, and their other sins, to which they are
given, though the next day, or as soon as the next occasion is offered, they
fall to them afresh: they think that they have repented sufficiently for them,
and have done as much as God requires at their hands.

They do with their sins when they come to Receive, as Abraham did with his
Servants, when he went to Sacrifice Isaac, Genesis 22. 5. for as he then said to
his young Men, abide you here with the Ass, and I, and the Lad, will go
yonder, and worship, and come to you again: So say these in effect to their
sins, and lusts: stand you awhile aside, for I must go to the Sacrament, and
receive the Communion, do but stand by a while, and when the Sacrament is
over, or at the furthest, when the Sacrament day is over, I will come to you
again. Or they do as the Serpent is said to do; who when he goes to Drink,
first vomits up all his poison, but as soon as he comes back again, he licks,
and sucks it up all again, and is as venomous as ever he was before.

And in particular with their uncharitableness they deal just as
Themistocles, and Aristides are reported to have done Plu^. Reip. Gerend.
Pracept.
with theirs, for when they went Ambassadors, or to lead an Army together,
they used to lay down their mutual hatred in the borders of their Country,
and left their enmity behind them there, till they came home again, but then
they resumed it, and were as deadly Enemies as ever they were before.

So these men, when they go to the Communion, they can be content to leave
their hatred, and malice at home, or perchance at the Church-doore, but when
they come out, or not long after, with the Serpent they resume their poison
again, and with Themistocles, and Aristides, their Hatred Malice, and desire
of revenge.

But this is but mere mockery, and such must know, that God will not be thus
mocked. Gal. 6. 7. For there can be no true Repentance, where there is not at
least an hearty desire, a full purpose, and a sincere, and earnest endeavor to
leave those sins, which, at our, coming to the Communion, we made show to
repent us of. And where such Repentance is wanting, such Receivers (like the
Pharisees Proselite, Mat. 23. 15.) do make themselves twofold more the
Children of Hell, than they were before, as having added both to the guilt of
their impenitency the fresh guilt of the profanation of Gods Ordinance; and
having doubled their hardness* and increased their strength to follow sin with
the more greediness.

The VI. Ignorance. Touching their coming to the Communion without Charity.
MAny that have no great care, nor make any great Conscience of coming to the
Sacrament without knowledge, Faith or Repentance; yet will seem to make some
scruple of coming without Charity. Yea, many though they will not abstain,
for that they be common Swearers, habitual Drunkards, unclean persons, and
the like notorious sinners in many other respects: yet if there be a breach,
and a falling out between them, and others, they will by no means meddle with
the Sacrament, but will abstain from coming to it purposely for that very
reason.

But if these Men out of Conscience Scruple their coming to the Sacrament
without Charity, why then scruple they not their living without it too; and
their want of those other as necessary graces, Knowledge, Faith, and
Repentance? For a good Conscience in one thing, is a good Conscience in all.

The VII. Ignorance. Touching their not Receiving oftener.
WHen they are told of their negligence in not coming oftener to the Communion:
they will answer, that they hope they do well therein; for they bear as good
a Soul to GOD, as the best of them all; they thank GOD they love their
Church, and say their Prayers duly: but indeed they were not wont to receive
their Maker so often, they come at Easter, as their honest Neighbors do, and
they thank God they never missed, and they doubt not but that in so doing they
have sped as well as the best, and therefore that they should be loath now to
change their Custom.

The end.
A Catalogue of some new Books Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in
Ivy-lane.
THe Real Presence and spiritual of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, proved
against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. By Jer. Tailor, D. D. in 8.

Of Schism, A defense of the Church of England, against the exceptions of the
Romanists, of fundamentalls in a notion, referring to practice, by H. Hammond,
D. D. in 12.

The matching of the Magistrates Authority, and the Christians true liberty in
matters of Religion, By Will. Lyford B. D. and late Minister of Sherborn in
Dors. in 4.

The Grand Conspiracy of the Members against the mind, of Jews against their
King, As it has been delivered in four Sermons, By John Allington, B. D. in
12.

The Quakers wild Questions Objected against the Ministers of the Gospel, and
many sacred Acts and Offices of Religion. With brief answers thereunto.
Together with A Discourse of the Holy Spirit, His impressions and workings on
the Souls of Men. By R. Sherlock, B. D. in 8.

Certain Considerations of present concernment, Touching this reformed Church
of England. With a Particular Examination of An. Champny (Doctor of the Sorbon)
his exceptions against the lawful calling and ordination of the Protestant
Bishops and Pastors of this Church. By H. Fern, D. D. in 12.

Englands faithful Reprover, and Monitour. in 12.

FINIS.

