NOPS^OPOPAIKTS

THE Brainbreakers-Breaker: OR, The Apology of Thomas Grantham, for his Method
in teaching; dwelling in Lothbury, London.

Herculea cecidisse manu tot monstra negamus, Quot methodo and calamo jam
pe^i^l^ tuo.

We do deny Herculean arm did ere such monsters slay,
As have thy method and strong pen, already tain away.
Joh. Nisby, Professor of the Greek, Latin, and French Tongues, in Ivle Lane,
London.

(...).

Ingenieida, tenebr^o, fungus, cluniferitor, Impos Granthamo cum fit obesse,
latrat.

Braine-breaker, Lout, Sot, and Bumbeater, you Cannot bite Grantham, only bark
you do.

(...).

Printed at London, 1644.

Encomium DNI. Granthami, Ludimagistri Londinensis extraordinarii.

Granthamum celebrat Trinobantum Augusta Scholarcham,
Promethodo facili, Grammatic aque brevi.
Hellada namque docet Latias resonare Camaenas,
Nectare dum pueros pascit and Ambrosia.
ALIUD Ex tripode Apollinis, loco strenae.

Granthamo calathis Tamesinae applaudite Nymphae, Auspiciis vestrum promovet
ille chorum.

J. S.

The Brainbreakers-Breaker.
WHen I consider the misery that youth groans under, in common Schools, their
pains great, the severity of the Master intolerable, Schools more like
Bridewell then Seminaries of learning, the Master many times whips his Scholars
for making false Latin, when he never taught them clearly and plainly how to
make true, What is this but to expect Brick, where no straw is allowed?

When I consider also, the great expense of time, expense of many yeer^, and
very seldom to any purpose, may be a little smattering of Latin, and less of
Greek: After all these considerations, pity to Youth, and indignation against
these furious whipsters, conspired in me, to redeem those tender years from
this great captivity: Would it not pity any man who had the bowels of
compassion, to see those cheeks, may be such as our Savior kissed, when he
took the little children up in his arms, to see them torn, lug'd, tug'd, pulled,
and cuft, by a rude unhallowed hand? He that has seen this, as I my self have
seen a great part, although nature had denied him the happiness of his pen,
yet indignation it self would make him write.

In this Treatise you may not only see the cruelty of the Master, but the folly
of him. I will undertake to prove by learned Authors and reason, (...)
Free-schooles, and other common Schools, do make their Scholars spend their
prime and choycest time, in that which is to no purpose at all, in that which
is so far from doing good, it does a great deal of (...) Let any man read
Ascham, Tutor to Queen Elizabeth, he shall see how he condemns this
lip-labor, this learning word by word without book, which is the Diana of the
common Schools, O how great is this Diana of the common Schools! he and
others show, it is a heavy and grievous burden, which is imposed merely out of
ignorance, or knavery, to make one go his journey with a great deal of sorrow
and grief, and dis-hearten^ thousands from being Scholars.

Ascham, in his first book, has these words: So as the Grammar Book be
always in the Scholars hand, and also used of him as a Dictionary, for every
present use, this is a lively and perfect way for teaching of Rules, where the
common way used in common Schools, to read the Grammar alone by it self, is
tedious for the Master, hard for the Scholar, cold and uncomfortable for them
both.

Now you see according to Ascham, Grammar must be used as ^ Dictionary, and
he that knows any thing, knows that a Dictionary is not to be learned word by
word without book, therefore not a Grammar; he tells you in this place that it
is tedious to the Scholar, let any man consider, who has not the patience of
an Ass, what a tedious thing it is to have all the Grammar, or most of it,
lapt up in his head word by word, and presently to apply every rule word by
word, or else up he goes, if he were as good as George a Green.

Read Ascham, in his second book these are his words; I remember when I was
young in the North, they went to the Grammar School little Children, they came
from thence great Lubbars, always learning and little profiting, learning
without book every thing, understanding within book little or nothing; their
whole knowledge by learning without the book was tied only to their tongue and
lips, and never ascended up to the brain and head, and therefore was soon
spit out of the mouth again; They were as men always going; but ever out of
the way, and why? for their whole labor or rather great toil without order
was even vain idleness without profit; indeed they took great pains about
learning, but employed small labor in learning, when by this way, prescribed
in this book, being straight, plain and easy, the Scholar is always
laboring with pleasure, and ever going on forward with profit.

Here this Scholar famous all over Christendom, and the glory of his kingdom
for Languages, tells you learning without book was vain idleness without
profit; he tells you they took great pains about learning; but employed small
labor in learning.

Erasinus the restorer of the Fathers, Greek and Latin, the greatest written of
his time, incomparable for wit, learning, and eloquence, has the same words;
Some make it their greatest care to learn the rules word by word without book,
which thing says he, I allow not of, for it is great pains to no purpose nor
profit at all.

Brinsley, a famous Schoolmaster, in his book called A Consolation for our
Grammar Schools, writes of one Mr. Tovey a Schoolmaster equal to the best,
that teaching Aschams way, that is, only the sense of the rules, brought a
Nobleman to a perfection beyond all expectation.

Comenius, a man admired for his quickness in teaching the Languages, has
writ sharply against this dogbolt way. Innumerable are the learned men who
have sought to take away the servitude and slavery that youth has undergone,
some Authors I have quoted in my Animadversions upon Cambdens Greek Grammar,
made for the use of Westminster School, and I have showed, and will show more
hereafter, that it is a false, obscure, imperfect Grammar, abounding with above
twelve gross errors, besides many little ones; and those who are Schoolmasters
of great Schools and make men believe they know much, when alaffe it is very
little they know, they might blush if they had any shame, to let so many errors
go uncorrected in a Grammar which is the foundation ^ Language: If foundations
be false and rotten, what will the build (...)? I need not spend much time upon
this point, because I have represented in a Comedy often acted by my Scholars,
the cruelty, folly and nonsense of common Schoolmasters, which I intend to
print as soon as I can.

Look upon Aschams success in this way in his first book he speaks thus of
Queen Elizabeth; It is your shame, I speak to you all (you young Gentlemen of
England) that one maid should go beyond you all in excellency of learning, and
knowledge of diverse tongues; point forth six of the best given Gentlemen of
this Court, and all they together show not so much good will, spend not so much
time, bestow not so many hours daily orderly, and constantly for the increase
of learning and knowledge, as does the Queens Majesty herself. Yea I believe
that besides her perfect readiness in Latin, Italian, French and Spanish; she
reads here now at Windsor more Greek every day, th^n some Pro^endary of this
Church does read Latin in a whole week. And that which is most praise worthy
of all, within the walls of her privy Chamber she has obtained that
excellency of learning to understand, speak and write both wittily with head,
and fuire with hand, as scarce one or two rare wits in both the Universities
have in many years reached unto. Amongst all the benefits that God has
blessed me withal, next the knowledge of Christ's true Religion, I count this
the greatest, that it pleased God to call me to be one poor Minister in
setting forward these excellent gifts of learning in this most excellent Prince.

Look upon his success, in his second book, amongst many others, one Whitney,
a most accomplished Gentleman; these are his words, I gave him a translation to
turn into Latin, which he did so ob^^sely, so orderly, without any great miss
in the hardest points of Grammar, that some in seven years in Grammar.
Schools, yea and some in the University too cannot do half so well. And this
perfection he obtained from Christmas to Alhollantide, and this Scholar was
altogether Ignorant of the Latin tongue, and the rules before.

Now briefly take some few reasons against this way of saying word by word
without book.

All Arts, as Geometry, Arithmetic, Logic, Navigation, men attain to, and
never learn rule word by word without book, and what offense has Grammar done
that it must be cuft into a boy word by word without book?

If learning without book word by word be necessary for the understanding of a
thing, then it is before a boy understands, or after he understands. Now for a
boy to learn without book like a Parret that he understands not, is very
laborious and ridiculous, and to learn without book after he understands,
that is to no purpose; for the Mr. un derstanding himself the sense of the
rule, neglects saying word by word without book, and whips Scholars for that
he cannot do himself.

If saying without book word by word be profitable to the understanding then
he that says best without book understands best, but this is false; there are
many that can say much scripture without book, but understand not so well as
those that can say none.

I have had boys come from common Schools could say all the Grammar word by
word without book, and yet could not make half a line of true Latin; and that
which is most absurd of all, they teach a boy to make Latin by the Latin rules,
when a boy understands not Latin; Just as if a man should teach one an Art in
French, when he understands not French. Then there are many boys can say
without book to their companions, or by themselves, but the Master strutting
with the rod in his hand, and his imperious look, and threatening, puts a boy
clear out. As for a Master to talk thus to a boy, Sir I Will smoke you, I Will
make your buttocks blush, I Will make you fear me; These words confound a boy,
and fright him out of all; If a boy be to say this rule, Adjectives that
signify fullness, emptiness, plenty, etc. if he misplace a word, although
the sense be the same, presently the Master fels him all along, whereas some
Grammars have the first words last, and the last first, the sense being still
the same.

Observe Doctor Webbes words in his Appeal to Truth; Now if Grammar should be
the best course to languages, and Kings may have their choice of best courses,
I wonder what choice of Grammars was made by Mithridates. And that that makes
me wonder more, we that have no business but a language, spend all our life
and are not perfect in one, and be that had a kingdoms affairs to look
unto, had two and twenty complete languages.

Now if a language cannot be got but by learning word by word without book,
then Mithridates who had a kingdoms affairs to look to, must learn two and
twenty Grammars word by word without book, and to learn a Grammar in this
manner will take up five years, to be complete in a language as he was, will
take up at least five years, more, which reckoned makes up two hundred and
twenty years: Now Mithridates lived not a quarter of the time. Doctor Web in
that learned work quotes above one hundred learned men, who inveigh bitterly
against Grammarians; And he undertakes to prove by learned Authors that a
language may be learned without a Grammar, which needs no proof at all to men
that have common sense; How many are there can speak French and Latin that
never saw a Grammar? many young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen have learned to
speak French in half a year who never knew any Latin.

Doctor Webb names many Noble men who spoke Latin excellent well at five years
of age, having nothing but Latin spoken to them before.

And I have known many who have spoke Latin and French admirable well and
understood Greek very well in a twelve month, and this is easily done by
joining Doctor Webbs way with Aschams.

I have boys that have been but a year at most with me; and in these four
points we will contend with any School in England:

First, who understands the Greek and Latin Grammars best, in Accents and
Dialects and all things necessary.

Secondly, who understands a Greek or Latin Author best.

Thirdly, who can prove a Greek or Latin verse best.

Fourthly, who can make a Greek or Latin Oration, or a Greek and Latin verse
best and soonest: And the highest of my Scholars is but thirteen years of
age, and another in my highest Seat is but Ten.

Some I have, I confess, cannot do a quarter so much, which is no fault of
mine, for I often tell them, if they be careless and will not mind, and will
not learn without cuffing, pulling, lugging, and whipping, they must go to
Masters that delight in this way of teaching, they may be taught in may places
very reasonably this way, as for a Noble or seven shillings a quarter, at some
free Schools they may have it for nothing. Some Schoolemasters think they pay
me home when they say I make Scholars unfit for other Schools; truly I
confess it, I teach without any correction, and they teach with great
correction, and in this we differ.

We teach to understand the Rules first, and they teach to learn without
book first, In this we differ; Our Scholars understanding the rules and often
applying them, the rules come without book whether they will or no. Then we
differ in severity.

Some keep their Scholars so strictly for four or five hours that they allow
them not so much as a mouthfull of fresh air, not so much as to ease nature. I
have read and heard many Scholars speak against this severity; let a boy be
tied three or four hours to that game he likes best, and let him be soundly
cuft and whipped when he does not play his game well, you shall see this boy as
weary of his play as his book, and the reason is because of great severity.

Socrates the wisest man of his time, and many who have writ concerning the
instruction of youth, often say, learning must be taught with love; and some
Scholars I have, being thus taught, seriously profess, they had rather come to
School then go about any pleasure or delight.

What fruits I have here to show in London, any man may come and see, and what
fruits I have showed in other places these subscriptions may testify.

A Letter from Master Foucks belonging to Sir Jervis Clifton in Nottinghamshire.
Good Mr. Grantham,
I Never thought to have been so happy in this world as you have made me in
little Henry; you have created him an Infant-Grecian, which is a miracle at
London, for here they are only known by their long beards. Sir, your Letter
was delivered to Sir Thomas Hut^hinson, and he did promise to examine him, but
his employment at the Parliament diverted the business; I got some others to
do it, and he came off with good applause both to you and himself; I could not
have parted with him so soon, but by reason of a journey to the Bath, and I
durst not trust him in this place of iniquity in my absence. Sir, Mr. Cliffords
going to the Universitie is not yet this three Months, which I hope will not
be the worse for Henry because of his Zachean stature, which by that time may
be increased. Good Sir except of a poor token from him which can be no
otherwise then your most affectionate Servant,

London this 6 of June, 1642. Ralph Foucks.


We whose names are here subscribed, do witness that Thomas Grantham, Curat
of East Neston, has a very ready and credible way of profiting Scholars in
learning; and although we fully conceive not his method in teaching, yet we
highly commend him in this, that his Scholars are able to give a rule out of
the Latin and Greek Grammar for every thing they do.

William Farmar, Knight Baronet. Charles Stafford, Esquire. Ha^^ Farmor,
Esquire* Eusehy Wyrley, Gent. William Buncher, Rector de Tiffield. William
Curlis, Rector de Saxton. Thomas Arundel, Rector de Stoak. Henry Hall, Cler. de
Easton magna. Jo. Barradale, Vicar de East Neston. John Lockwood, Vic de
Towester. E. Johnson, R^ctor de Paul's Perry. Benjamin Austen, Rector de
Bradden. Guliel. Bland, Mag. in A^^ihus. Guliel. Thornton, Art. (...). Tho.
Bayley, Rector de Col^higham. Superiora testor, Joseph Bernard.
FINIS.

