THE Grand Question RESOLVED: viz. A KING Having PROTESTED To Defend to the
uttermost of his POWER, The TRUE Protestant Religion, WITH THE Rights and
Liberties Of all his SUBJECTS:

But if they, fearing that he will Violate this his PROTESTATION, take up Arms
to prevent it, what may be Judged hereof?

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, 1681.

THE Grand Question RESOLVED:
QUEST. A King having Protested to defend to the uttermost of his Power the
true Protestant Religion, with the Rights and Liberties of all his Subjects;
but if they fearing that he will violate this his Protestation, take up Arms to
prevent it, what may be judged of this kind of Proceeding?

THIS Question being very weighty, ought to be managed with much Caution and
Candidness. In order hereto, it will be requisite to propound some Questions or
Doubts, which do naturally issue out of the propounded Question, for rectifying
and settling the Minds of all Christian Subjects.

Quest. I. Is it not better in disputable Mysteries of State, for the Subjects
to commend the whole matter to God, the Righteous Judge, than to take up Arms
against their King, whom we are not to curse in our heart, much less to fight
against him with our hands?

II. God says, The Heart of the King is unsearchable; how then can any man
know, whether or no a King will decline from his Oath? And if so, why should
any Subject oppose him by raising of Arms, because he fears such a Declining?

III. God says, The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of
water, he turns it whithersoever it pleases him; if then a King decline from
his Protestation, God if it please him can again reduce him to it. Is it not
then safer for Subjects to rely upon Gods Word and Providence, than to take up
Arms against their Sovereign?

IV. God gives this counsel, I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment; and
that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. So far then we ought to obey
the King, as obliged by our Oaths, which oblige us, and that with relation to
the fifth Commandment. If then Arms be taken up against the King, is there no
violation of any Promise, Vow, or Oath? and is there no Commandment of God
rejected?

V. We hold this Assertion to be true, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae;
The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church: If then the Subjects
perceive that their King breaks his Oath, were it not better for them to dye
Martyrs, and thus to spend theit Blood in the Cause of Religion, than to spill
it in a Civil War? does he offend that dies a Martyr?

VI. St. Paul teaches us, Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. When therefore
Subjects wage War against their King, those that are Ignorant or misinformed,
have no ground, or Faith, to build this their fighting upon: who then shall
answer for the Blood of these men, if it be shed in such a Civil War? Shall not
they who should inform and do not, or else misinform? And how shall men thus
slain, and that dye in their sin, be able to answer at that great day of
Judgment, whose suddenness of death was hereby occasioned?

VII. Moral honesty teaches Men to keep their Promises, much more their
deliberate solemn Oaths. Christianity requires the same, yea, though it be to
the hurt of him that swears. For these and the like Reasons, every good Man,
who considerably observes his Promise and Oath, may be truly offended against
all those who will not give credence to his promise, nor yet to his Oath. Can a
King be well pleased, when this hard lot befalls him? Will he like to be
accounted a Liar upon a mere surmise without any proof.

VIII. David's Heart smote him after he had cut off the Skirt of Saul 's Robe
privily. If Arms should be raised up against a King, and his Life in danger to
be cut off thereby, would no Man's heart, who had a hand in such a business, be
so tender as to smite him?

IX. Christ commands, Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's; namely,
Toll, Tribute, Custom, etc. if then such things as these be detained from a
King, and withal an attempt made to beat him with his own We apons; how is
Christ's Commandment observed and obeyed? Are the Arms which are Caesar's, to be
rendered to Caesar to his destruction?

X. Christ says, Blessed are they that are persecuted for Righteousness sake.
And thus the Case stands; if a King forget his duty toward God and Man, and
does cruelly persecute his Subjects; are not such Subjects so persecuted for
their firm adherence to a Righteous cause, blessed, in that they patiently
endure it? But where has Christ taught us that they are blessed that persecute
their King at any time.

XI. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him,
What do thou? Eccles. 8.4. May not these Words rightly understood, and wisely
applied to the Conscience, persuade a Man to debate the matter, and to
expostulate with himself, saying, What do thou? before he presume to rectify
a King's Errors with the drawn Sword, except it be with the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God? For the King of Kings says of an Earthly
King, who may say unto him, What do thou?

XII. David asks this Question concerning Saul, who was a very wicked King,
Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be guiltless? If
any Man might, why not David, who was causlesly and violently persecuted by
Saul, and who was also to succeed him in his Throne? yet his Conscience taught
him not to Right his own wrongs, but he waited the good hour, till God should
be pleased either to turn his Heart, or to end his Days. Who believes not,
that David was endued and extraordinarily guided by Gods Spirit, as in other
matters, so in this particular behavior toward Saul? And who then will not
resolve and pray as David did? The Lord forbid (says he) that I should stretch
forth my hand against the Lords Anointed. David prayed thus after Saul had
violated that trust, which his Subjects reposed in him.

XIII. God directs us to two means of pacifying an angered Prince either by
forbearance, or by giving a soft Answer: the Words are plain; By long
forbearing is a Prince persuaded, and a soft Answer breaks the Bone. But when
Arms are taken up, where is forbearing? And when the Sword is drawn, what hope
is there that a soft Answer will persuade?

XIV. The Names which are given to Kings and Queens by God himself, should be
very much regarded by all good Men: for they are called, Nursing Fathers, and
Nursing Mothers, yea, gods. Is it not unnatural to unsheath the Sword against
Father or Mother? Is it not impious to unsheath the Sword against him who is
the Supreme of all Earthen gods? Touch not mine Anointed, says God Almighty;
and will he allow his Subjects to fight against him, who is the Supreme Ruler,
and God's Vicegerent upon Earth?

XV. The wisest King, being taught by the King of Kings teaches thus; The fear
of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; whosoever provokes him to Anger, sins
against his own Soul. If any Subjects take up Arms again their King, are they
not hereby likely to provoke him to great anger? And hereby raise up a great
Fear, whereby to terrify themselves? And is it no sin, thus to provoke a King?

XVI. The King of Israel spoke thus to Benhadad, Let not him that girdeth on
his Harness boast himself, as he that puts it off. When Subjects raise War
against their Prince, it is probable they are confident of Victory; else why
should they take them up? And if they be thus Confident, let them Remember what
Ahab said to Benhadad, and so much the more let them do this, because many wise
and Godly Learned Men affirm that Subjects ought not to take up Arms against
their Sovereign; and why should the Counsel of wise Men be utterly rejected as
not fit to be our Counselors?

XVII. When King David purposed to march forth in Battle against his Rebellious
Son Absalom, his Loyal and Loving Subjects spoke thus to him, Thou shall not go
forth; and why? Because, say they, Thou art worth Ten thousand of us. Would not
David's Subjects willingly permit him to go forth to Battle, and will any
Subjects go to Battle against their King? Was David worth Ten thousand of his
Subjects; and durst any go forth to Battle against him, who if he should be
slain (and it is too probable in such a Case he may) shall not a King's Blood
cry as loud for Vengeance, as the Blood of Thousands of Subjects?

XVIII. Those that dare adventure to wage War against their Sovereign, may be
too ready to censure, and perhaps to condemn all those that be not so forward
in this action as themselves; and if they thus censure and condemn, what Answer
can they frame to those Questions, which God proposes? Who art thou that
judge another Man's Servant (which I conceive may not be unaptly interpreted
the Kings Loyal Subject?) to his own Master he stands or falls. Why do
thou judge thy Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? We shall
all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. And then it will appear, whether
those that take up Arms against their Sovereign, or those that refuse, are in
the right.

XIX. Our Blessed Savior was so desirous to show all due respect unto Caesar,
that for the expressing thereof he wrought a miraculous work, there being, (at
his Command to Peter) a Fish taken out of the Sea, in whose mouth was found a
piece of Money, which he commanded to he given for Tribute. And did our Savior
work so miraculously, because he would not offend against Caesar, and shall not
all good Subjects rather choose to suffer any indignity or loss, than to omit,
or do any thing, which damnifie their King? And when Arms are taken up against
him, is he not damnified and dishonored?

XX. There be three Commandments, which God has joined together, and they are
thus delivered to us: My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not
with them which are given to change. And what is said in Scripture elsewhere? A
threefold Cord is not easily broken. If then the true fear of God, and of the
King, and therewith a settled Resolution not to meddle with them which are
given to Change, be all twisted together, and treasured up in our hearts; and
if in our Lives we express a fruitful practice of them, then is indeed
evidenced our Sonship to God; unto whom he gives these three Commandments;
whereof if one be broken, the other is also violated: for he that fears not
God, how does he fear his King, or abstain from them which are given to change?
He that fears not the King how does he fear God, or take care to keep his
Commandment, namely, to fear the King and not to meddle with them which are
given to change? Or he that is given to change, how like is he to that God,
which changes not, or like to a good King which Rules by his Constant known
Laws? Therefore if Subjects rise up in Arms against their Liege Lord and King,
are they not likely to break one of these Commandments? And if we fail in one
Point of God's Commandments, do we not thereby incur the guilt of breaking all?

XXI. The Holy Ghost does rectify the Hearts and Practice of all Loyal
Subjects toward their Kings, saying, Whosoever resists the power, resists
the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2. And who was Emperor at that time, when this
Direction was given? Was it not Claudius that Profane Infidel, and cruel
Tyrant? much more then should all Christian Subjects forbear to take up Arms
against a Christian King, who, by reason that he is a Christian King, is
therefore much more to be honored and obeyed, than those wicked and profligate
Emperors Claudius, or Nero, or Julian the Apostate; and yet the Christian
Soldiers, who were more than the Heathenish, would not resist him. And why may
we not believe, that they were so temperate and obedient, because they had
learned, and purposed by God's grace, to practice that which follows in the
fifth Verse of the same Chapter, Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath, but for Conscience sake? They would not provoke a wicked Emperor to
wrath, and their own Conscience (being instructed by God's Word) taught them
thus to do.

XXII. By me Kings Reign, says God. God himself not only sets the Good, but
wicked Kings upon their Thrones. It was God, that gave the Scepter to wicked
Saul, and David would by no means molest him in his Government, much less
undertake to War against him, in hope to wrest the Scepter out of his hand. Is
it Christian wisdom to fight against God's Ordinance? For such Warriors, in
effect, fight against God; and if we enter the lists with God, are not we like
to lose the Victory?

XXIII. After that King David had committed those two gross sins of Adultery
and Murder, observe in what manner he makes his Confession before God for
them: Against thee, thee only, have I sinned. Against thee only (says St.
Ambrose) because David was a King, and was bound to no Law: for a King (as the
same Author adds, and with him many Reverend Authors concur) that a King is
not bound over to Punishment by any Law, but is set flee from them by his
Sovereign Authority. Therefore Nathan the Prophet admonishes David to expiate
his Sins before God Almighty by humble Repentance, and lively Faith; but he
denounces not the Law against him, whereby to inflict on him the Legal
punishment of an Adulterer and a Murderer; herein he left the whole Matter to
God's own disposement. Whosoever then presume to fight against their King (and
by this affront do attempt no small punishment both of his Mind and Body) are
they perhaps the more forward to make such an assault, because they take
themselves to be more Wise and Judicious than Ambrose? But who dare compare
himself with the Prophet Nathan?

XXIV. If a wicked King should furiously rage against Christ's Church, yet
should the People of God Solace themselves exceedingly in this, that Christ
has built it upon a Rock; and they ought to believe, that though it may be,
and often is much shaken, yet it cannot be overthrown: and that it may stand
the more firmly, must not the People of God perform their Duty, and attend
Christ's Commandments, and withal firmly establish their Hearts upon the
gracious promises therewith annexed and delivered in these words, Ask, and it
shall be given you; seeek, and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall be opened to
you. Prayer is the Christian Armor; which all distressed Subjects ought to put
on, and if they use it aright, even he Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
them. The devout Jews thus Armed themselves, when King Ahasuerus had granted
forth a Decree for their utter overthrow. They did not Mutiny, much less take
up the Sword, to vindicate their Religion and Liberty: and why should not all
good Subjects in these days, behave themselves as the Jews then did? And so
much the rather, lest Christ's words prevail against them, viz, All they that
take the Sword shall perish with the Sword.

XXV. A Divine Sentence, says Solomon, is in the Lips of the King, his Mouth
transgresses not in Judgment. The Lord affords more than ordinary
assistance, and direction to Kings; and therefore when Saul, a very wicked
King, was by God's appointment to sway the Scepter, we read, God gave him
another Heart, even the Spirit of Government: therefore should not all Loyal
Subjects rather suspect themselves in an Error, than their King. Not but that
a King, is but a Man and so subject to failure; but being a Man in
extraordinary place, and appointment, why may not he also obtain extraordinary
aid and Direction from God? And then why should Subjects take up the Sword to
rectify the Error of their King?

XXVI. The Wrath of a King (as says Gods Word) is as Messengers of Death, but
a wise Man will pacify it. When Arms are taken up against a King, doubtlesly
hereby the Kings wrath is very much incensed; and therefore should not all
Subjects be more ready in showing their wisdom in pacifying, than in
exasperating his wrath? God grant the one, and prevent the other in every
Nation.

XXVII. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion; but his favor is as the
Dew upon the Grass. Who will provoke a Lion to roar, and then come within the
reach of his Chain? Who will provoke their King to wrath by taking up Arms, and
presume they shall not come within the reach of his Verge? If his favor be as
dew upon the Grass, will not his provoked wrath become as Fire among the
Stubble? And does not every Subject rather desire to be refreshed with such a
dew, than to be consumed with a Fire of their own kindling?

XXVIII. There be four things stately, as in Prove. 30.29, 30, 31. and among
them a King is truly Majestical; against whom there is no rising up, says God:
and dare any true servant of God, and true-hearted Subject do the contrary, by
rising up against their King? And is not raising of Arms an arising against
him? If then Arms be thus raised, how can any that are thus forward, promise to
themselves Victory over their King, whom they presume to resist? Or how can
they dispense with their own Consciences, seeing this is the express Word of
God, Against him there is no rising up?

XXIX. Before any War by any People or Nations be attempted, the Counsel which
God gives, is to be accepted and embraced; and God counsels thus, With good
advice make War. But where may such advice be taken? Even where it is plainly
and freely given in the Volumn of God's Book, the Bible; which some have and
others may wrest to their own destruction. Learned Councils have erred, Adam in
Paradise erred, the Angels themselves grossly erred; may not wise Men err? and
if such Men may err, why not in the particular business of the Subjects rising
in Arms against their Prince? Let any that may hold that Position of it is
lawfulness, consider, may not an Iron Rod (if any Subjects take up Arms against
their King) rather bruise, or harden, than mollify and make him better?

XXX. In the Multitude of People is the Kings Honor, but in the want of People
is the Destruction of the Prince. When Arms are raised by the Subjects, to
reduce, or rather to enforce their King to do what they please; is it not
probable, that the Multitude of his People and therewith his Honor shall be
diminished? And is not the want of People the destruction of the Prince? God
says so; experience also proves it to be the destruction both of a King, and
of his Kingdom? If then the Subjects truly love God, their King and themselves,
is it not a matter of great concernment, and worth their deepest consideration,
that by raising of Arms they may Dishonor God, wrong their King, and
themselves to their own ruins?

XXXI. God declares what we may think of the beginning of Strife, and what
also we may judge is likely to be the issue thereof; these words demonstrate
it, The beginning of Strife is as when one lets out Water; therefore leave
off Contention before it be meddled with. At the first appearance strife may be
thought to be very small, and as the Cloud which Elijah's Servant saw arising
out of the Sea, like a Man's hand; yet that in a short time overspread the whole
Heavens, and abundance of Rain did ensue. Abundance of trouble and of
Bloodshed may ensue, if but one, or a few hands be first Actors in the raising
of Arms: and who can tell how far the Waters of Contention may hereupon flow?
Such bitter Waters as these may be called by the Names which Isaac gave to the
Wells which his Servants dug, one he called Esek (contention) another Sitnah
(hatred.) Is it not therefore godly Wisdom to embrace God's Counsel, Leave off
contention before it be meddled with? And if it have been meddled with, should
not all good People pray instantly and heartily, that a Wellspring of Living
Waters may be found out, which may be called Rehoboth (Room?) And that it may
be said of this Nation, now the Lord has made room for us, and we shall be
fruitful in the Land, by no means entering the Lists of Contention and strife,
but in well doing committing our concerns to God, submitting with Patience to
him as the Governor, and disposer of all things.

XXXII. The Apostle Saint James has laid a sure Foundation for all Christian
Soldiers to build upon, if with a clear Conscience before God and Man, they be
able to answer to those Questions propounded, From whence come Wars and
Fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your
Members? There is a Lust, or lusting after Profit, Pleasure, vain Glory, whenas
too many Men are ready to speak as Jehu did; Come with me, and see my Zeal for
the Lord of Hosts. And what is the issue and event of such eager thirsting
desires? Believe God in these Words of his, Ye Lust, and have not; ye kill, and
desire to have, and cannot obtain: Ye fight and War, and yet have not, because
ye ask not; ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume
it upon your Lusts. And whether or no Subjects taking up Arms against their
King be a rectified Zeal, let them consider, and prove for it a Warrant from
Gods Word, which are so persuaded.

Let us but observe the Oath of Allegiance, the Tenor whereof is thus for Word.
I. A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and and
declare in my Conscience before God and the World; that our Sovereign Lord King
Charles the Second is Lawful and Rightful Heir of this Realm, and of all other
his Majesty's Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself,
nor by any Authority by the Church or See of Rome, or by any other man's with
any other, has any power or Authority, to depose the King, or to dispose of
any of his Majesty's Kingdoms, or Dominions; or to Authorize any Foreign
Prince to invade or annoy him, or his Countries; or to discharge any of his
Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesly; or to give License
or Leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence
or hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of his
Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my Heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope, or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience, I
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my Power; against all
Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his, or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence, or
Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose, and make
known to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, all Treason or Traitorous
Conspiracies, which I shall know, or hear of, to be against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my Heart abhor, detest, and abjure as
impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine, and Position, that Princes which
be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed, or Murdered by
their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and am in Conscience resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully
administered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
Contrary: And all these things, do plainly, and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to the express words by me spoken, and according to the plain
and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation
or mental Reservation whatsoever; and I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly upon the true Faith of a
Christian: so help me God.

Thus in conclusion may we end with this Assertion, that Popery is the worst
Enemy to Monarchy, and amongst Protestant Subjects, Papists have most certainly
been the instruments of sowing the seeds of discord, in an unwearied endeavor
to raise in the Mind of the Prince a disaffection to his People, and in the
Mind of the People a prejudice against their Prince, the better to accomplish
their cursed By, and selfish Ends. Therefore let us unanimously pray to God to
instruct the Mind of every King with Wisdom, not to hearken to their cursed
Devices, and also of all Subjects not to be deluded to the dishonor of their
God, hurt of their Prince, and ruin of themselves, to any unnatural Rebellion
against their Natural Lord and King. But, to conclude, if so be any Prince
should command any thing contrary to the Divine will, as revealed to us in the
Scriptures, Which should we obey God or Man, judge ye. But doubtless though
Paul would refuse in that case to yield active obedience, yet not passive, so
as not by force of Arms to resist his Prince. And therefore let us have the
Christian prudence, viz, with a rectified Conscience, and unbyassed
inclination, duly to weigh these propounded Reasons, and Quaeries, and the
Natural and Scriptural inferences thereupon deduced, that we may become Gods
true servants, and the Kings truly Loyal Subjects.

FINIS.

