A GREAT DISCOVERY OF THE QUEENS preparation in Holland, to assist the KING in
England.

Also, how Her Majesty has sent Her Standard, with the rest of her Regiments
over to New Castle.

As it was sent in a Letter from Rotterdam, Dated December. 16. stilo novo, and
directed to M. John Blackston a Member of the House of Commons.

Die Veneris 16 December. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Letter
shall be forthwith printed and published.

I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for J. Wright in the Old-bayly, December. 17. 1642.

In Rotterdam, December. 16. 1642. Stilo novo. Worthy Sir,
MY last unto you was of the twelfth present, which I sent by Ship; and fearing
least that may be long before it come to your hands, I thought fit to write
unto you now by Post; and it is to advise you, that there come hither
frequently good and lusty ships from Newcastle, which are sent hither by the
Merchants of that Town, for the service of the Queen: And there is continual
transportation of great store of Men, Money, and Ammunition, over in them.
There came hither about 14 days since M. Knolls, and that arch K. Capt.
Archibald, who is very diligent and notorious in his service, for the betraying
of his Country, and for that has of late had that honor conferred upon him
to be made a Captain, and is about three days since gone from hence with his
ship laden with Men, Money, and Ammunition for Newcastle. I hear that M.
Knolls brought over Letters from his Majesty, that has been the occasion of
the Queens stay here, which all that be well affected are very sorry for; who
had rather she were elsewhere. Upon the receipt of which Letters from His
Majesty, I hear that the Queen the next day sent M. Jermin to the States
General, to acquaint them therewith, and that His Majesty advised the Queen to
stay here for some time longer; and that, because His Majesty was upon a treaty
of Accommodation, and doubted not but that in short time he should make all
things well; and that therefore the Queen gave the^ thanks for those Ships that
had a long time waited upon her service, and desired that they might now be
discharged, which was done accordingly; yet notwithstanding Her Majesty's
Agents labor here exceedingly in sending away Men, Money, Horse and Ammunition
unto Newcastle for the advancing of Her Majesty's Army in those parts. Upon
thursday last I was at the Hague, and there saw Her Majesty's Standard, which
was just then going away, to be sent for Newcastle; and yesterday was
seven-night, I heard that Colonel Goring and M^ Crofis, and M. Slingsby, and
Capt. Bret, and Capt. Mackworth, and diverse other Cavaliers went to Amsterdam,
to take ship there, to go for England with all speed, and it is thought for
Newcastle; and that Col. Goring is to be Lord General of the Kings Horse. I
hear likewise that there is more going away from thence to Newcastle, 400
Officers and old Soldiers, and 400 Horse, and 1000 more are to follow, which
are Her Majesty's Regiment, and should have been a Guard to Her person if she
had gone on. The Prince of Orange I hear suffers all his Officers to go, that
will, only under this color, that as many as go hence, shall be constrained;
although he can give them greater honor as he pleases, and they expect, for
so good service, if they do return. It is very credibly reported here, that
there is now sending away with all speed to Newcastle 160000 pound sterling,
which I am very credibly informed by some Dutchmen, is by way of loan raised
by the Papists in these parts (which are not few) for the Queen. And that the
Prince of Orange is engaged for the payment of it, which are most horrible
things. Therefore I can do no less in conscience to God and his cause, and in
duty and love unto the Kingdom and Parliament, (hearing and seeing these
things.) then give you notice of it, who are a member of that Honorable House,
which I shall desire you (if you shall think fit) to communicate unto the
House; but shall entreat you to do me the like favor you have done, in
concealing of my name. Thus desiring the Lord to be with you, and to bless and
prosper your proceedings, and the whole House, with the tender of my service,
and best respects unto you, I humbly take my leave, and rest

Yours, to love and serve you in the Lord.
There are two Newcastle Ships here, ready to go with the first fair Wind,
laden as is before mentioned; and also three great Dutch Hoyes laden with
Fieldpieces and carriages, and many Holland Wagons, which are made strong and
large, and covered over head, such as usually attend the leaguer.



To his much Honored friend, John Blackstone Esquire, a Member of the House of
Commons in the honorable House of Parliament, present these.
FINIS.

