Great BRITAIN's Warning-piece; OR, Christ's TEARS over JERUSALEM.

a priest preaches from a pulpit with memento mori, a skull and hourglass, to a
standing congregation

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for W. Thackery at the Angel in Duck lane.

an angel writes with a quill pen, an open book on either side

Great BRITAIN's Warning-piece; OR, Christ's Tears over JERUSALEM.

Being a serious Exhortation to a timely Repentance, thereby to avoid the
Judgments that hang over our Heads. With powerful Motives to forsake our Sins
and turn unto the Lord whilst it is to day, and not put off our Repentance from
time to time.

With serious Considerations and Reflections upon those that have neglected the
Opportunity put into their hands; and the miseries that have befallen Nations
and People, etc.

With cordial Consolations for the penitent Sinner, and a Prayer suitable to the
occasion: worthy the perusal of all those that are desirous to be instructed in
the ways of Truth.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for W. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane near West-smithfield.

Great BRITAIN's WARNING-PIECE; OR, Christ's Tears over Jerusalem.
Luke, 19.42. And Jesus wept over Jerusalem saying, O Jerusalem Jerusalem!
had thou known but in this thy day the things that belonged unto thy peace,
but now they are hidden from thy eyes, etc.


BY this Text we may plainly see, though Sin is abhorred in the Sight of God, how
loath he is to destroy those that Sin against him, but rather spares them in
Mercy, that they may recover their blindness, and see the Error of their way
before it be too late; that so he may be justified in his doings, and that man
may have no excuse he was not timely warned to flee from the wrath to come; he
even in the former Ages of the World left himself not without a Witness, but
all along by holy Men inspired. Let sinful Israel know, from time to time,
that he alone was their Strength and the Rock of their Salvation, promising to
protect and deliver them from all their Enemies, if they would wholly cast
themselves and rely upon him: yet alas! we see how often, notwithstanding the
many benefits that they had received, not only in being delivered from Egyptian
Bondage, and preserved so many years in a barren Wilderness, fed by the hand of
Heaven; and there being Eye and Ear-witness of such Wonders as in the very
Relation amaze Mankind, but brought into a Land that flowed with Milk and
Honey, an earthly Paradise abounding with all things necessary for the use and
benefit of the Sons of Men. They forsook the Fountain of living Water, and
hewed out to themselves Cisterns that would hold no water; even forsaking that
God, who alone was their Rock and their Strength, to follow the vain
Imaginations of their own Hearts, till by often provoking him to anger, they
tired his patience and long suffering; till they in a manner constrained him to
let loose his fury against them; to give the mercyless Enemy advantage over
them, and the Spoiler a Power to spoil and oppress them; to make them wander in
strange Lands under severe Captivities, whilst others possessed the Fruits of
their Labor: yet when they humbled themselves and cried to him he heard them,
and became their Deliverer by such unexpected and miraculous means, that even
themselves stood amazed at them. When again, like Jessurun, they no sooner
waxed fat, but they forgot their Deliverer, and kicked against their Maker; and
by hardening their Hearts in Sin became not only so rash and unadvised to kill
the Servants sent to them by the Lord of the Vineyard, but in the end proceeded
to kill the Heir even the Lord of Life, thinking themselves then secure: but
alas, mistaken and wretched Men! they mainly failed in their expectation, as
in the 11th. of Mark and the 1. you may find it, viz. What shall therefore the
Lord of the Vineyard do? he will come and destroy the Husbandmen, and will
give the Vineyard unto others. These Considerations made our Blessed Savior
weep and mourn over Jerusalem, declaring his often willingness to have gathered
them together but they would not; meaning by the City the People that were its
Inhabitants: grieved that those upon whom the Light of his Countenance had so
often shined, should fall away or obstinately refuse to hear his voice, or
Reverence him the Son of their Lord and undoubted Heir of the Vineyard: and
sure it must be no small grief that could draw tears from the Son of God, whose
Eyes were dry: under an Agony whose pain was even beyond the expression of
Angels: and when the rich Redeeming Blood flowed from his precious Wounds: not
all the mocks and scorns, the scourging and the thorny Crown, which made as
many Wounds as it had sharpness could do what the Sins of ungrateful Man did.

And ah! how many Christians, or such as profess themselves to be so, are there
that exceed the stony-hearted Jews? who by their Sins crucify the Son of God
afresh; and put him to an open shame; refusing in this their day when the Light
of the Gospel shines amongst them bright as the morning Star, to lay hold of
the acceptable time of returning to do their first Works, though they know the
dreadful threatening that ends it if they refuse, viz. Remember from whence
thou art fallen and repent, and do the first works or else I will come unto you
quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of its place. Rev. 2.5. Where alas!
are now the seven once flourishing Churches of Asia planted by the very
Apostles themselves, under the immediate Revelation of the Divine Spirit?
Alas! their Beauty is faded like the Grass that withers before a scorching
Sun, and now for Beauty they have ashes, and what but lukewarmness and neglect
of holy Duties, Animosities and Contentions brought them thus low, and shrouded
their luster with a Mantle of Darkness. O consider this all you that would be
accounted wise, and lay it to heart whilst it is yet to day, and think with
your selves though God's Patience and Long-suffering, forbear to strike the
Blow; yet without Repentance we cannot expect for ever to escape the effects of
his Anger, which the longer delayed the heavier it falls in the end. We see
that when the cry of Sodom's Sins had reached up to Heaven, yet God delayed his
Vengeance, and kept back the flaming Cattaracts of Heaven till he came down to
see whether it was altogether so or not, as you may find it in Genesis 19. yet
this delay turned not away his Anger for ever, dread Event, though his mercy
extended to an infinite degree to the saving of those wicked Nations for the
sake of ten Righteous: but when they were not to be found, nor any sign of
Repentance or Remorse appeared, the flood gates of Fire were set open till they
were consumed with streams of burning Sulphur. Nor is there any thing can
disarm his Vengeance but a hearty and unfeigned sorrow for Sin, a serious
Repentance, and a turning away from our Iniquities even in this the day that he
has given us to make our peace and reconciliation with him. O then let us not
put off our Repentance day by day, but being forewarned by a greater than
Jonah: let us at least be wise as the Ninnevites to turn whilst we have space
from our Sins, that we may find mercy; for God resists the proud and exalts
the lowly and meek, and indeed humiliation and a godly sorrow for sin turns the
very edge of his Anger: for when the Children of Israel had committed that
great Sin of forsaking their living strength, and made to themselves a golden
Calf in Horeb like to the Gods of Egypt: they mourned and no Man put on his
Ornament, for the Lord had said unto Moses, say unto the Children of Israel, ye
are a stiff-necked People; I will come up unto thee in a moment and consume
thee, therefore now put off thy Ornaments from thee that I may know what to do
unto thee. Exodus 33.4.5. And this alone could move compassion in the heavenly
mind, when so sensibly provoked by so great an affront so quickly offered the
Divine Majesty, who had wrought such Wonders for their sake in Egypt, and
brought them out of a Bondage they long had groaned and labored under with so
strong a hand as made the World amazed; for which Moses upraids them with the
worst of Ingratitude in the 32 of Exodus ver. 18. Of the Rock says he, that
begat thee, thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God that formed thee: and
in verse 13. But Jessurun waxed fat and kicked, thou art grown thick, thou art
covered with fatness; and then he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. This indeed was the case of the Jews, for
when they had long peace and plenty, they too frequently forgot God, and
followed the foolish Imaginations of their own Hearts: and this is too sadly
the case of many professing Christianity who seldom look up to Heaven in their
prosperous day, but busy themselves in the affairs of the lower World till the
Evil day overtake them at unawares, and then perhaps, the words of the Prophet
Hosea, may be verified in them, viz. they (says the Lord) howl and roar upon
their Beds and do not call upon me in their heart. Hos. 7.14. or if they did,
only in the time when distress and anguish comes upon them, how justly might
they expect to hear the words of the Prophet sounding in their ears? viz. What
have I to do with thee, O Joram? get thee to the Prophets of thy Father and
Mother, 2. Kings. 3. to pleasure and advantages that in your prosperous days
you pursued, and require them if they are able to help you; for true it is as
the Prophet expresses, When Gods Judgments are abroad the Nations will learn
Righteousness; yet far better and more acceptable it is, to take the Counsel of
the Wise Man, viz. Provide thee of a Medicine before the fear come, and examine
thy self before Judgment, and so shall thou find propitiation (or Acceptance)
in the sight of God. Eccles. 8.18. taking care that your Hearts be not made
heavy with eating and drinking, and the cares of this Life, and that day come
suddenly upon you; the day of trouble and of trial, a day of tribulation and
anguish: least you faint in the way, and find your Confidence but vain. Labor
then whilst it is day, least the night come on wherein no Man can work: labor
to work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, and to run with
cheerfulness the Race that is set before you; be sober and vigilant, and ever
be pressing forwards toward the mark of your high Calling, least another step
in and take your Crown. Remember at all times what Christ has done and
suffered for you, and how in return for such transcendent goodness he expects
all your Service, and will not value the price of his precious Blood at so low
a rate as to have you divide its merits with the intrest of the World: for he
that will be his Disciple must deny himself and take up his Cross and follow
him, he must crucify himself to worldly Lusts and Affections, and wholly
devote himself to his Service, who is the best Master, and altogether able to
reward those that truly serve him, not with corruptible things a Silver and
Gold, but with Eternal Life and endless Joys: and although Bo^^^ and
Afflictions should await you in every City, be not thou ashamed of the
Testimony of our Lord, but consider and comfort your self with the promise he
makes to those that shall suffer affliction for his sake, viz. Blessed are they
that are persecuted for my names sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Mat. 5.10.

And in this case, as St. Augustine truly says, Though we labor in a
boisterous Sea, yet thou, Lord, art our Pilot and steerest our course between
Scylla and Caribdis, so that both dangers escaped, we shall at length arrive at
our Port secure. And St. Hierome affirms, That miserable is his felicity who
was never thought worthy to wrestle with misery, by which contention honor is
obtained: for we cannot be true Soldiers under his Banner who suffered so much
for us when we lay in darkness and the shadow of death, naked and helpless in
our selves; that he might raise us to a state of happiness, and become the
victorious Captain of our Salvation, and make us Coheirs with himself of the
Kingdom; for he ( viz. God) has delivered us from the power of D^rkness; and
translated into the Kingdom of his Son, etc. Col. 1.13. and again, I appoint
you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed me, Luke, 22.29. is a Kingdom then,
and one more valuable than all the Kingdoms upon Earth, or ten thousand Worlds,
not worth our utmost regard? when for a small corner of the Earth, or for a
little possession, Men use such diligence and industry; and rather than forgo
it, will leave no ways untried, spare no pains nor cost, but solicit all
their friends to aid them in the aquirement, take painful Journeys, and pass
over restless nights; and yet for Heaven how little regard most have! where
they may, if they truly endeavor for it, be sure to have an endless Kingdom,
furnished to their hands with Glories unspeakable; wherein is the holy and
heavenly Jerusalem, which shines with Glory: the glorious Church Triumphant,
made up of Saints, Martyrs and Confessors, united in eternal and unseparable
Union under their Head Christ Jesus, God blessed for evermore, who wipes all
tears away from their Eyes, and they banish thence the voice of Mourning, with
Songs and Hallelujahs of Praises and Thanks.

O that Men would be wise and consider this, and not like Jerusalem, shut the
Ears of their understanding, not to know the things that belong to their peace
till a blindness of Ignorance and Error hide them from them; for Sin even in
others, to all good men is grievous and grieves them at the heart, it was that
which destroyed the happiness of our first Parents in Paradise, and defaced the
Image of Heaven stamped lively on them. 'Twas Sin that made God repent that he
had mad. Man, and to grieve him at the very heart, to a degree of destroying
all but Noah and his Family, by bringing a universal Deluge on the Face of the
Earth: 'twas Sin that made him drive out the Canaanites from the Land: 'twas
Sin that made the Prophet Jeremiah cry out, O that my head was water and my
eyes a Fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night for the Sins of his
People; and it was the Sins of the Jews and their blinded Obstinacy which made
our blessed Savior mourn over Jerusalem in the words of the Text, and for
which they were soon after rooted out and scattered to the four Winds of
Heaven. Nor have these Nations been insensible of the Divine displeasure in the
many Judgments that have fallen heavy upon it, even in our days, brought down
from Heaven by the cry of those Sins that have pierced the Clouds and enter the
Ears of the Almighty; and yet that Monster which has caused so much Mischief in
the World, is still courted, embraced and continued under gilded and disguised
names of momentary Pleasure and Profit.

What then remains, but that if we continue in Sin and go on in the ways of
Iniquity, but we may justly expect the wrath of an Angry God to fall heavy on
us, before whose Anger all the Sons of Men are but a stubble before the
devouring flame.

Take heed then to your selves, that your Hearts be not made heavy with eating
and drinking, and the cares of this Life, and that day come upon you unawares;
but whilst it is to day hear his voice that calls upon you, wooes and invites
you to repent and turn from the evil of your ways, and think it time with the
Prodigal Son to return from your wanderings in the paths of wickedness, and by
an unfeigned Repentance move your Heavenly Father to take compassion on you,
who is easy to be entreated; and has sworn by himself, saying, I will not the
death of a Sinner, but I desire he be converted and live. Yield then to the
good motions of his holy Spirit, and grieve him not by sinning till the day of
Grace be over-past, by saying it is not yet easy, not yet convenient to leave
your Sins, your darling Lusts, but you will do it hereafter; when you know not
that your Life may be prolonged another day, and then as Death leaves you
Judgment will find you; for look, what a Man sows that shall he reap, he that
sows in the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; he that sows of the
Spirit shall of the Spirit reap everlasting Life, Gal. 6.8. and as the wise Man
says, Though the way of Sinners is paved with stones, at the end thereof is
Hell, Darkness and Pains, Eccl. 12.10. and holy David affirms that God
rewards every Man according to hi^ Works. Psalm. 61.12. and if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, where then shall the Sinner and ungodly appear!

Oh that Men would then be wise and consider their latter end, and not with the
foolish Virgins want Oil in their Lamps when the Bridegroom is entering into
his Chamber, but always be provided least they be everlastingly shut out from
Bliss, and from beholding the Face of him in whose presence is fullness of Joy
and Pleasures for evermore. Oh take the wise man's Counsel while it is to day,
viz. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day,
for suddenly shall his wrath break forth, and in thy security shall thou be
destroyed, Eccl. 5.7.

Let us then take hold of the acceptable day, and turn to him before it be too
late, that he may turn away the fierceness of his Anger and shine upon us with
the light of his Countenance, and be merciful to us in turning our hearts from
the power of Satan, to him the living God, that however we are afflicted in
this World, we may be happy in that which is to come, through the Merits of
Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE PRAYER.
O Lord God, most Holy, Glorious, Righteous and Everlasting King, who show
Mercy unto thousands; and though thou have declared thou will by no means spare
the Guilty, yet the broken and contrite Heart thou will not despise; nor in any
wise cast out poor Sinners that fly to thee for Succor and Relief. Pardon us
and have mercy upon us, that with shame and confusion of Face prostrate our
Souls and Bodies before thee, imploring thy divine assistance to enable and
enlighten us, that having a true sight and thorough sense of our Sins that we
may abhor and detest them; making it our endeavor to walk in the Paths of
Truth and Uprightness, that we may turn away thy anger, and escape the heavy
Judgments that we have most justly deserved for all the Sins which we have
committed against thy divine Majesty. O spare this sinful Nation and People
for thy mercies sake, that we may ever have cause to adore and magnify thy
Goodness World without end, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane near
West-smithfield.
These three are Three pence a piece.
CHristian 's Comfort. Dives and Lazarus. Danger of deferring Repentance.
These are Two pence a piece.
Godly Man 's Gain. Great Assize. Short and Sure way. Sinners Sobs. Swearers
and Drunkards Doom. A Serious Call to the Unconverted. The Touchstone of a
Christian. The ready way to get Riches. Every man 's Duty, and the Godly man's
Practice. A Posey of Prayers. The Young man's Alarm. Englands Golden
Watch-bell. Great Britain's Warning-piece.
These are very good and useful Books of Divinity for these licentious Times,
and may be all had at the aforesaid Place.

FINIS.
portrait of a crowned king, with scepter in his right hand


