THE GREAT ADVOCA^ AND ORATOR for WOMEN

Or The Arraignment, Trial (...) Conviction of all such wicked H^^bands (or
Monsters) who hold (...) lawful to beat their Wives or to demean themselves
severely and Tyrannically toward them.

where: Their crafty pleas are fully heard a^^ their Objections plainly
answered an^ Confuted: And the (...) Condemnation passed (...) the Law of
Nature: the Law (...) Policy (or Morallity:) the Civil and Canon Law: and the
Law of God.

Coloss. 3. 19. Husbands Love your wives and be not bitter (...) them. Prove 16.
27 An ungodly man diggeth up (...) and in (...) there is as burnin^ (...)
froward (...) man sows (...). A. D. 1682.

The Contents.
CHAPTER 1. The Introduction. CHAPTER 2. That it is not lawful for husbands to beat
their wives prooved from the law of Nature. CHAPTER 3. The same confirmed by the
Laws of Morallity or of civil Policy. CHAPTER 4. The same argued and cleared up,
from the Civil and Canon Law^ CHAPTER 5. The same evinced from the Law of God. CHAPTER
5. The Conclusion.
To all married Women whose ^usbands rule over them with rigor and severity;
(And likewise a word to all such irrational husbands)
Ladies and Gentlewomen.
THE wiseman tells us that a word spoken (...) like apples of Go^^^ (...)
pictures of Silver; (...) to your selves to judge how oppo^^^ ^^ely this
Treatise comes unto your hands, whose tendernicks are galled by your wearysome
uneasy yoakes. ^ hope these few sheets may some what revive your drooping
Spirits, ^t being no small comfort when you have a friend at hand, whose
tender compassion toward your tender Sex makes him deplore your sad case and
Plead your cause with such affection, as if it were his own.

Me thinks I see how strangely your (heartbreaking) husbands, are hurried by
the violent Whirlewind of unbridled Passion: me thinks I hear their loud
murmurings their angry voice, together with the ecchoing sound of servile
blows, wounding my sorrwfull ears more then the dreadful noise of the
disquieted seas, more dangerouse then their forming rage, more amazing the^
Aetna's wrath whose wide throat ^^^gorgeth smoaks, flames, and ^under at one
breath: methinks (...) see their shadow swiftly drawing on you, like the black
terrifying Hierricane, that makes the tende^ Reeds (whose nature yields to
every gentle gale) lie prostrate, croud^ together and whisper in trembling
fear. I am sensible how their austere demeanure and tyrannica^ behavior have
plunged diverse (...) you into a deep and dangerous Gulf of sorrow, and
disparation, who not finding peace and content at home, are in an exorbitant
manner seeking it else where; and like persons (disarmed of sense and reason by
this Paroxisme of fear) are Acting directly contrary to your own genuine and
inclinations etc. Now alltho I dare not justify such enormities of yours, (but
as a faithful frind exhort your speedy Repentance, and Amendment,) yet I lay
the guilt (tho not sufficient to excuse your fact.) in a more peculier manner
to your husbands Charge, and (as the wicked Isntrumental cause of sins in you)
I Summon him (without a deeper Repentance) to prepare to Answer before the
Great Tribunal judge, both for himself and you.

Others there are (more virtuosly inclined) who are desponding in solitary
corners, and whose best remedy is to seek out some melancholy cave or desert
place, that may entertain^ their pensive minds, whilst their distracted
thoughts are feeding o^ soliscitude, and care; who instead o^ teaching their
eyes to weep, are endeavoring how to wiipe off their Crystal tears (as
pure and clear as is their Innocence) without the discovery of their grief. On
whose pale ey^ lids sits a sad messinger of woe, more unwell come then the
harbinger of death it self.

For such, this book was chiefly designed, and to every such desponding wife, I
now address my self, advising you to try (once more) what influence the
violent cords of your laborious Love may have upon your misguided husband; Take
him by the hand, and fall about his neck with sweet embraces hold him fast, and
compel him (alltho against his will) by all the retorick you have, and by all
the charming Eloquence of your loyal and constant Love, etc. ^f this prevail
not with him, then con^ure him by all that's dearest unto ^imselfe, that he
would please to ^ondescend to walk along with you unto this Temple of Eroto (or
the Muse of Love) which is erected for your sakes alone. Perhaps it may proeve
(and who knows but it may? O would to God it might,) such as was the Temple of
the Goddess Viri placa in Rome of whom Livie writes, that whatever man and
wife came to sacrifice Therein, alltho never so much at strife and variance
before, yet they allways returned home again in Love and unity.

And that I may help one lift forward I desire now to speak a word or two to
your contentious husbands, whose words are fire brands, arrows, and death, (or
that which is much worse) my advise to such shall be no other then that wise
man's council. Prove. 25: 8. 9. Go not forth hastily to strive least thou know
not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame:
debate thy cause: By long forbearing is a Prince persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaks bone it self. Suppose thy wife to be (what thou would have all men
think she is) wilful froward and perverse; consider whither thou has not
made her so? does her affections fit loose to thee, examine well the grounds,
debate the matter with thy self; Go nots forth hastily to trive with any
person: no not thy adversary, much less with thy friend and least of all with
her who lies in thy bosom, and should be dearest to thy heart, nay who should
be as dear unto thee as thy Life, for as much as she is thy very self. If a
King (with whom is commanding Majesty and power,) will be persuaded by a wise
deportement, how much more then will thy lowing wife, whose tender Sex does
naturally dispose her to such sweetness, softness, Gentleness such melting
and relenting tears such heart winning demeanure, etc. that the mollifying
hand of Love may mould her into any stamp that virtue forms; and who recoyles
at nothing more then raggid usage, because it is so directly contrary to her
soul whose essence is compacted of ardent Love, stronger then death it self,
and which many waters cannot quench.

From this time forward therefore go thy ways, and reconcile thy self to thy
offended self, then let hand join in hand, and haste, both of you to pay your
Sacrifices to this Temple of unfeigned Love, that when you return from thence,
Heart may then join in Heart, and both of you may be willing to live no longer,
then you live united in One soul; which will redound to both your peace and
tranquillity here on earth, and your future happiness in the world to come,
and crown your names to there present, honor, and my cordial wishess with
that palm of victorious and triumphant Success, which is the earnest desire of

your assured Friend.

CHAP. I. An Introduction to the following discourse.
ALltho we all know that unto women the world owes half of its life and man is
indebted the greatest part of [his love next unto God] yet now a days it is
grown a custom so common to undervalue the worth of that sex (because of the
lewd and almost unparrald lives and examples of some) that every rymer has a
several libell to impeach their name; and every person a poem to accuse them
of unfaithfullnes etc: The Courtier, tho he weavs his Mistress favor, yet
upon slight occasions (nay sometimes none at all) Sticks not to sing her shame;
And the cobbler (tho in himself deserving greater disgrace, yet) wants not a
ballade to reproach their name; And as this course is usual with most men, so
the cause here of is manifect unto all: The Seneca. 5. 13. ep. 89.
fairest Mark (you know) is most often aimed at, and the goodliest starr is
mostly gazed upon, so Woman the beauty fullest creature of all the visible
creation is most of all Observed, and Tacit. hist. 3. lib. ad princip.
Observation as it is sometimes the guide unto honor, so often also is it the
mother of disgrace. Particular reasons hereof, may be collected out of the
several humors of such who stand out in disloyalty with them; for some men
will dispraise that woman whom before they adored, because her modesty has
repelled their un chaste desires. Some will turn their amorous terms of
wooing into a barbarous style of railing, because for want of desert they
obtain not how to love them, and the greater part of men, being evil
themselves, love but few things that are good, and so perchance hate women
also. Some likewise pretend a real dislike of women (unto whom themselves are
all the while real stranger (to make Ostentation of their wit, before the
public stage of the world, few upon good show of reason. and fewer yet upon
just grounds, and these sort of persons have filled the world with Pamphlets,
things most idle in themselves, and most disgraceful unto women: But O
unmanlike men and slaves of your sex! Is this a point of your man hood, or any
ornament of your valor, to buisy your selves for the disgrace of women, whom
nature has disarmed of corporal strenth, and education disenabled of mental
courage for revenge? Is this the thankful tribute you repaye unto the author
of your beeings? Is this the best embraces you bestow on the papps that gave
you suck? Is this the grateful allowance you afforde them for their sorrow,
pains at your birth, for their care and diligence in your youth? And for that
labor of love which they have bestowed upon you, throughout the several
periods of your life? All such Ausoni 9. de great. action: ad Augst.
courtesies (methinks) should not be forgotten in such an ungrateful manner,
much less injuriously remembered. But why talk I with these men of gratitude
(the greatest of virtues) who never were acquainted with any virtue at all? And
therefore, had it been the highest of women's misfortune to have been traduced
by this in famous crew. they might easily have smiled it out, counting it no
dishonor to be evil spoken of by such, who never learned to speak well of any:
But now this bad cause has gotten better Patrones, especially when in the
universities, their names are mentioned in their D. G. in his Act at Oxf. 1608.
Acts and public disputations, their capacities thought unfitt for learning
or ever attaining to the speculative knowledge of the liberal Arts and
sciences. Nay if this were all, their blind ignorance might be passed over in
judicious silence, but when they shall adjudg them worthy of blows, what more
strange and prodigious Paradox then this? What opinion more unnatural and
uncivil then that of theirs, that it is lawful for a husband to beat his
wife?

Most impure heart, which did first Chrysostom: homil. 57. on Genesis 29.
conceive, and move the most barbarous tongue which did afterward bring forth
such a Cyclopes furiunt isti ut quidem Doctiss. virj conj^ciunt ex. Homer. l.
9. Odi^si:
Monster of opinion! Had I but one word to Speak, unto mankind before I
yielded up my breath, and but one only line to write, I would both Speak and
write in Defiance thereof.

CHAP. II. That it is not Lawful for a husband to beat his wife prooved by
reasons drawn from Nature.
ANd to begin first, whence we all began, from Nature self; Her eternal Laws
stamped from the worlds beginning in all her creatures, witnesses such a
sovereign Union of male and female that in all kinds between them there is
found no unkindnesse No Lions rage against the Lioness
The Tygre to the Tygresse is not fierce
No eagles do their fellow birds oppress. Transt. ex Strozio Laur. post.

The Hawke does not the Hawke with talents pierce
All couples live in love by Natures love
Why should not man and wife do thus, and more?


Man, the great Creators greatest creature, endued with Remembrance, a Register
to recount former events, with wisdom, a Glass to behold the present state of
things, with Providence an Oracle to conjecture of future accidents, and above
all with Reason, a Balance to weigh out all his actions, must now become more
cruel and tyrannous, nay more savage and barbarous then very beasts, who
neither have remembrance of things past, wisdom in things present, nor
providence of things to come, nor reason in any thing at all. Plin. nature.
hist. l. 10. c. 24. and 29.
The Doves are observed to be most exquisite in their love, and at the fatal
departure of one the other pines to death with sorrow. The Nightingall makes
pleasant melody in his loves welfare, but in her distress he mourns in
sadder tunes. The Swanne is of a nature suitable to his feathers, white and
fair, and all his fear is to keep his mate from fear, Go therefore into the
fields, and the Doves will teach thee a lecture, of Love, return into the
woods, and the Nightingalles will sing thee madrigals of love: walk by the
water, and the Swanns will school thee the art of love; Every where such
loving couples of brutish beasts will shame the disagreeing matches of
reasonable creatures. For, shall the bare instinct of a sensible nature work so
powerfully in this case with beasts and shall the help of a purer essence work
a contrary effect in man and shall not such men be adjudged worse then beasts
by many degrees? The Lion that barbarous Creature, Plin. hist. not. l. 1.
who spares no shape, is said to tremble at a woman, and hardly proffereth her
that violence, which usually he does to man, as though Nature had taught him a
more gentle behavior toward so fair a Personage, or his own heroic Spirit
the shame of so base a victory.

For never gotten was immortal fame Transt. ^ Virgil.

By working of the weaker Sexes shame
The Viper, S. Ambrosius tom. 1. l. 5. c. 7.
a beast more vile then the vilest, poisonous by nature, and spiteful, Hex. m.
and Arist. de hist, animal.
odious to be seen and hateful, yet when the time of his breeding approaches,
withdraws himself unto the sea, or river side, and by the Gentle murmr of his
known hiss calls forth the Lamprey with whom his nature is to engender: the
Lamprey being so kindly invited, does as kindly repair unto him, whom when he
perceives coming to accept of his love, vomiteth forth all his poison, doing
reverence (as it were) unto his nuptial rights, and casting away his natural
corruption, meets his spouse in his cleanest perfection. Man would scorn to
be thought worse than a Viper, and why then scorneth he not to cast out of his
heart all his cancred poison of anger, of strife, variance, quarrelling and
contentions, when he comes into his Mistres presence, and especially
whilest-he is lying in his Nuptial bed? A dog will not so much as snap at his
mate, and cease to bite her, and will not every sober person esteem of that
monster in Man's shape to be worse then a savage beast, who shall snarle and
snap at his wife, and most especially if he shall attempt such an unnatural
act as to beat her, tho never so much provokd?

It may well be the worlds motto, All things have Nature for their guide, and
amongst these All, man the worlds commander surely ought to be accounted one;
which we may observe as in the common course of Life: in ordering his diet, in
his apparel, in taking his rest, so likewise in the perfect habit of
Sciences, in his smoothing Rhetoric in his solid disputations, in his
profound Philosophy, in all which the greatest pre-eminence Art can challenge,
is to add perfection where Nature has laid a foundation. The law then being
an artificial collection of natural precepts, how can it dispense with so
unnatural an action. as for a husband to beat his wife, the one part of
himself, or his better half? No man did ever willingly hurt himself, or if any
man has, certainly he may justly beheld a madd man, of all men living; and
therefore what mutual blows can lawfully pass between man and wife, who are
one and the self same? Their minds inseparably One in their choice, their
houses individually the same, in their children and posterity. Indeed some
ancient ages of barbarism (before either civility was fully embraced, or
Christianity firmly establissed) seemd to draw from Nature the practice of some
such Tyranny, so a lib. pol. cap. 1.
Aristotele reports of the Sythians, 6. Tacit. lib. de mor. Germ.
Tacitus of the Germans, lib. 10. c. 2. de Romans Antic.
Gellius of the Romans Caesar, of the French, with who it was a received
custom to dispose of their wives, Comment de bello Gallit.
life and liberty according to their pleasure, and hence it was that a Doctor
seemd to allege his history of Stobaeus ex quorecitat Patr. lib. 4. in 3. and
Bodin. de rep. 1.
Publius sempronius who devorced his wife for seeing a play; of Plin. l. 14
cap. 13.
Egnatius Mecennius who beat his wife for being found in his Cellar: Arnobius
lib. 5. contragentes.
of Faunus who killd his wife for drinking a cup of wine; fit proofs for
confirmation of his argument (forsooth) that a man may beat his wife, are they
not? Recount the time when these things were done, I pry, it was in paganism,
and barbarism; observe likewise the persons, they lived as mirrog of rigor
and cruelty, and are registerd as monuments of murder and tyranny; Weigh the
reasons that moved them thereunto, they willsooner make you laugh, then
persuade imitation; Lastly judge of all, and it is but as tho a Physician should
go into an Apothecaries shop, where is variety of wholesome medecines, yet
prescribes he some poison or drugge to strengthen his patient, even so, they
who having travailed over diverse histories, and read diversity of good
examples, yet are posessed with such a Diabolical opinon, have picked out the
worst and most poisonous druggs, that they can find to cure the rage and
violence of their burning Phrenzie, of which contagion, their diseased souls
are sick.

But how much better and with greater safety might these Phanaticks be cured
of their epidemicall distemper, if they applied to themselves the famous
examples of loving husbands toward there wives, and of loving wives toward
their husbands, or of both, loving toward one another? How great and precious
an Antidote would the very name of Hector have been to all such Infected-soules
as these? who in the destruction of Troy did bewail the death of Priamus, the
sacking of so great a city, the spoil of so many dear and valiant brethren,
the funerals of so fair and large an Empire, but exceeded all excess in
lamenting Andromache his wife, Hom. illd. 5.
and desired (says Homer) to forsake heaven, (being already seated amongst
the Gods) to defend Andromache distressed here on earth. How pleasant had been
the rehersall of Zeno ph: in Cyrosuo.
Tigranus love, who with his beloved Queen being taken prisoner by Cyrus, made
a free and liberal promise of his life, to purchase her ransom? What good
entertainment had the story of Martrialls Epigr.
Calenus (think ye) by those sort of men who have musterd up those few
execrable examples before mentioned? He thought he lived no longer then when he
looked on his beloved wife: what would Tit. Live. in diverse. historicis ab urb.
cond.
Livie have said of such a monstrous opinion, who makes mention of Augustus, of
Antonius, of Scaevola, of Aruntius of Scipio, of Marius, with great reverence,
as well for their endeared affections to their wives, as for other heroical
virtues; I might also instance other Frontinus in 4. lib. strat. de P. sew.
suet. in Tiberi^ de C. Altili^.
histories of infinite number who in like manner sound forth their worthy
praises upon this same account, and whom for this cause posterity has advanced
above men, if not honored as Gods.

And tho the woman's sex is accounted the weaker, yet not their love, for that
exceeds the man's; witness Lucan:
Cornelia who so dearly affected her Pompey, that she would not suffer him to
go into the wars (tho he were the worlds terror) unless her self in presence
might wait upon him: witness also D. Hieromus.
Demotia, who having lost her Leosthenes, could not find her self, and
therefore through solitariness made a speedy voyage after him. Witness Plin.
l. 10. c. 3.
Sulpitia likewise, who being adjudged to stay, and watched that, she should
stay at Rome, when her husband Lentulus was banishd from Rome, yet
(notwithstanding the Senates command, her princely fathers charge, the love of
her city and country, the loss of friends and family) she alone exposed her
self unto the danger of the night, beguiled the watchful eyes of her strickt
guarde, brake forth of the city, and traced along the fields to seek him,
until she became the joyful companion of his woeful banishment; so little she
esteemd all the worlds felicity in regard of one Lentulus, so willingly she
incurred whatsoever misery. Witnesseb Panthea also, Rhodogune, Laodemia,
Martia, Valeria, Portia, Lucretia, De qua D. Hieron. to. 2; l. 1. contra
Iovicanum Ovid. in Ep. pen. ad ulis.
Penelope, Ov. Metum. l ^1. fab. 10.
Alcinoe, and Millions of like whose singular fame herein, is has caused
an-tiquity to invest them in the eternal shrines of honor, so might likewise
their rehearsal enforce posterity to receive them as the fruitful Patterns of
imitation.

But to return to the barbarouse Histories before alleged by some, (whose
Characters my ink cannot sufficiently Blacken, unless I hazard putting my self
and reader into a Paroxisme of trembling horror, and pale fear, like such
inconsiderate brains who raise Ghostly features which they themselves do
dread to converse withal, or indeed so much as to behold:) Is not that a weak
structure whose very foundation needs such under proppings as Those? and they
also, so feeble by the gnawings of chankring, Obloquie, as well as mouldring
time, that the building shakes at every blast; Grant those incredible stories
to be true, yet how can any person in his right wits prove from their
inhumane Actions that such deeds are Lawful? Since all was done unadvisedly,
without discussing of the matter, and wrongfully themselves alone (and in the
hight of passion too) being does their wives Accusers, their Jury, their
Judge, and their cruel Executionners likewise; O horrendum nefas. Let this not
onces more be mentioned amongst us, who bear the name of Christians, these
being savage and heathenish murders both against Nature, and the Law of God,
o^ Reason. of Religion, and of Nations. Let me demand who ever stained their
Names, their Relation, their City, Country, Age, or Generation with greater
shame and Ignomie, [leaving such an indelible Stigma of their just disgrace to
all posterity that nothing can wipe out] except such inhumans monsters of
humane kind as shall adventure to vindicate their Acts, or from this day
forward walk in their untrodden stepps? Who received the greater foil, those
tyrannous husbands, who in their excess of rage and madness did so rashly abuse
their own flesh and blood, or those modest wives, who with such patience did
endure? If any yet dare vindicate the former, I le remoove the case into the
Court of Morallity, or civil P^llicie, where if the Jury pass on their side,
such shall have cause still to embrace their diabolical suggestions, but if
They find them Guilty nothing more remains then to lopp off such Gangreend
members of an unhappy state or Kingdom, least they infect the whole Body with
such a fatal Distemper, as will prove mortal and destructive to all humane
societies, with whom they shall converse.

CHAP. III. The same confirmed by the Rules of Morallity or Civil Policy.
MArriage of all humane actions is the one and only weightiest: It is the
present disposal of the whole life of man: it is a Boindus de Repub. l. 1.
Gordian knott, that may not be loosed but by the sword of Death: it is the
Ring of union whose Poesy is Pure and endless; In a word it is that state
which either imparadiced man in the Eden of felicity, or else exposes him unto
a world of misery. D. Casus observat* ex vet^rib. in com. in Oecon.
Hence it is that so mature deliberation is required, before such an eternal
Bond be made. The mutual affection of each party, Arist. lib. 2.
the consent of parents, the approbation of friends, the trial of
acquaintance, besides the especial observation of disposition, kindred of
education, of behavior; Now then, if a man solemnize marriage upon these due
respects he can hardly make his choice amiss, because he is guided by virtue,
which never fails her followers. But if not, he may well be styled a fool,
because he is carried away by passion, which easily imprisoneth the best
designs. The man therefore who is truly wise cannot but choose a virtuous
wife, and so by consequence live quietly and comfortably with her; And if any
take a vicious woman, it argues his own ^olly, and so by good reason may
patiently endure her; for now he has but what before he desired, and he
desired that which then he fancied; tho indeed not from the informace of a true
judgment, but by the inducement of a giddie affection.

And yet in this unfortunate case, it is the greatest folly of all follies, for
a man to aggravate and multiply his own misfortunes, by quarrelling with his
own choice, for that dissension takes away the very end and use of marriage,
debarreth from all comfort and enjoyment thereof, banisheth its joy and
felicity: no man is so ignorant but he may well know, none so obstinate but he
must needs acknowledge the truth of what I say; What wife is there so absolutely
void of all passionate spleen, who will so lovingly perform her
marriags-rites, so carefully bring up her children, so providently order her
house, so diligently direct her servants, for a preevish and waspish husband,
as for a sweet and loving one? Plautus in Pleudolo
Who will buy blows so dear as she will pay for Love? Or what husband is
there so clear from all, that will so intentively augment his patrimony, so
warily employ his stock, so diligently follow his affairs, so well in all
things use his uttmost diligence for a wife whom he loutheth, as for her whom
he entirely loves? Tacit. annal. l. 2.
Who will be as devout a B^adsman to the saint he fancyeth not, as to Him whom
he chiefly adoreth? So that indeed, neither (as they should) caring for the
other, both receive an unparndled damage to themselves, and for their
posterity leave it most unfortunate. Unfortunate in their birth, for fear
their dissentious parents derived to them their dissentious spirits; in
fortunate in their education, for fear their Back ward parents hinderd their
instruction; unfortunate in their estate for fear their careless parents
diminish their Portions; unfortunate in their credit, unfortunate in all, for
fear least all their parents faults redound unto the childrens grief. When as
in agreeing matches, where man and wife make up the sweet harmony of mutual
Love, in a reciprocal consent and union, you may observe a heaven like
government, the husband intent on his business; the wife employed in her house,
their children brought up religiously, their attendants their servants and
every one (as Virgils common wealth of Bees busyed in their proper place, Virg.
Aenead lib. 1.
and work, whence toward the Autumn of their years they gather in the
fruitful harvest of true friendship, of competent riches, of good estimation,
and (what excells all) of sweet self content, and satisfaction.

But let us turn our eyes away from beholding these blessed fruits and
advantages (for some time at least) and suppose every married woman, not as a
wife but as one of the female sex; Tell me then (I pray) since Arist. l. 3 eth.
cap. 1
every action of man must be tutored by some virtue or other what appearance of
virtue can it be for a man to demean himself in a Lordly or Surly manner
toward a woman, in a sour stern romose way, and behavior? But especially
what ease or pleasure can it be to a soul that is endued with the least spark of
reason or morallity, to beat a woman, or offer her any violent injury at all?
It is not Cicero in offic. lib. 10. de fortitud: ^
valor, because that demands equality of Combatants it is not idem. ib. 2.
Offic. ad princip.
Wisdom, because that depends on a stayde carriage; It is not idem lib. 1.
Offic. circa medium.
Justice, because that requires a serious deliberation It is not idem. l. 2.
Temperance, because that wants unsettled passion, and if none of these then
no virtue at all; for all other idem. l. 1. tract. de fortitudine.
virtues are comprised under them, as some lesser dignity under a more ample
style; Tell me likewise to what end should men attempt such violence? If a
woman be perverse she thereby amendeth not, if gentle she deserves it not; if
any seek praise thereby, they will certainly merit laughter; if reward, they
shall besure of shame. And whereas such are guided by no virtue, nor directed
unto any end; who but fortish persons, and stony hearts will lay their violent
hands on a woman, the Pattern of Innocence, the Queen of Love, the Picture of
Beauty, the Mistress of Delights? who could with blows deface those rich
ornaments of nature? Who could quarrel with her cheeks so purely mixed with
lillies and roses? who could violate those eyes the spheres of light, and love
stones of affection? who could wrong those lips, the two folding gates of
precious Rubies? who would not imagine those ivorie arms fitter for embracing
then buffeting? And who but would think those snowie hands and fingers of
theirs more fit to embroyder the outward fonnes of those admirable Ideas
within their ravishing fancies and sparkling souls rather then to handle a
fencers cudgel to secure their lives, and those Liberties which God, Nature,
and their own choice merits, (by the consent of all men's Reason in its due
exercise) has by so many pledges and signalls confirmed on them from time to
time, as Their true and undoubted Right?

Beauty must not acquaint her self with wars Translat.e Petron:

And therefore hates such men as love such Jarrs
And tho all women are not beautyfull, neither has nature bestowed all
perfeactions every wife, yet a true loving husband must imagine them. All
centering in his truly beloved wife for Love esteems not a thing beloved, S.
ph. Sydneys Arcadia. l. 2.
as in it self it is but as it appears in the lovers eye and therefore a woman
that is not fair may make a fair wife, to that husband in whose thought she
is fair for he sees her with his own not with another eyes, loves her only
with his own heart, and not another, and enjoys her only to his own content;
in her then whom need he please besides himself? So that if thy wife be not
fairer to thy self, then other women are, thou love her not truly; and if
thou love her not, why did thou make choice of of such a companion whom
thou love not? why did thou dissemble with God before whom thou did
profess a love? why did thou lie unto Man, in whose presence thou promisedst
Love? Or if she be (as indeed she ought to be) fairer in thy own eye, because
dearer to thy own heart, with what countenance, with what arts with what vain
pretensions can thou turn rebel unto love? and presently hate her whom but
now thou lovedst? Or with what face can thou look upon thy beloved spouse and
instantly beat her? No: no: heaven may as soon sink into hell, as perfect
Love turn into hatred, and whole rivers of water may as well spring out of
flames of fires, as rigid behavior, or violent blows proceed from fervent
Love. In a word, therefore, if thou love not thy wife, thou have played the
hypocrite, and so can not beat her but thy actions must needs aloud
proclaim thy guilt and shame, thy perpetual disgrace and Infamy. But if thou
love her, thou have only performed thy vow and solemn marriage Covenant, and
so with due respect than must honor her all the days of thy life.

Neither may it be thought a small reason to deterr all husbands from such
unworthy demeanure, and brutish violence to forecast the dangers that may
ensue thereof; for diverse women being of a diverse Stature, strength,
complexion, and disposition, there must needs fall out a diverse event of such
an action. If such men schould chance to marry with as stout and valiant women
as Virg. Aene^d.
Panthiselca was amongst the Amazones, or the Lady Cip. hill Sydneys Arcti. lib.
3.
Pathenia of Greece, or the Empress, Aerodius verum jud* catarum l. 8. c. 8.
Livia in Rome, or some other of far less valor and after a while from Cupids
wars fall unto Martial arms, I question whither their Pigwigg in valor,
would save them from Myrmidon like blows. If I should marry a weak and feeble
wife, such a one whose courage is daunted with a word, whose Innocence is her
defense, those yielding her resistance, and ^et play the Tyrant still, and so
make ^er feeld a 1000 deaths in life, and at (...) satisfy her long lingering
hopes ^^ith the well come approaches of be^^ved death, I am certain my own ^ad
humor and obstinate will, cannot ^^ee me from the great Tribunal of ^eavens
sacred Law; and though I ^ight skinn over the deep wounds ^f an exulcerated
conscience, with ^ome pity: full inconsiderable, and ^ivolous Excuses, yet all
would not ^roove a sufficient plaster to remoove ^^at indelible Stygma which
God and ^an the Laws of reason and huma^ity would most undoubtedly im^rint
with Capital Letters on my ^^re head; and Let all such Catne-like ^ispositions
look to it, for certainly ^engeance must and will pursue such ^^en, and
overtake them, tho they ^ay per chance escape man's Scourge. ^uppose I should
marry a modest and virtuous wife, whose speech, those gate, whose carriage,
and behavior are as clear as Crystal, (...) without blemish, and yet all
pleas^^ me not without some civil uncivi^ wars, how should I live Offensiv^
to my friends, by some of them upon braided, by others of them scorne^ and
contemned, by my enemies reproached and reviled, hated of mo^^ men, and be
loved of none? And I should light on a light huswife wh^^ yet being And yet no
contented Cuckold all this while.
civily treated and might civilly demean^ her self, but being trodde^ upon (as
every worm (...) will turn again, how justly how deservedly-might (...) wear
Vid. Herodit. in M^lpomene.
Vulcans night cap^ on my paperskull, (...) T Livius lib. 45. histor. ab urbe
cond. ad finem.
fools holydays, and in (...) devotion (peel-garlick like) do perpetual
hommag^ (whither with devout zeal^ or not, that matters nothing) unto v. Ovid.
Amorum. 2.
Cynthias budding Homes? Now therefore ^ far safer course it is for us to lay
aside ^ur learned weapons and rest in terms (...) and arms) of Love, then to
venture our selves on this double Jeopardie, the event whereof at the very best
will be but base, and dishonorable; And let our wives be what they be, it is
our wisdom now to love them, since it was our Lot to have them, and that our
marriage was made in heavens Court, (whither we have many friends in that place
or not, yet) it is no less our wisdom then it is our duty, to rest contented
in the declared mind and will of God; If we have good wives, lets bless god,
and study to walk answerable to so Choice a mercy (one of the greatest comforts
^onder heaven,) and if we have bad ^ones, lets endeavor with meeknes, and
Christian Charity to cover their multitude of Sins, with the Azure
(victorious) Mantle of true Love, ^or if that cannot be, yet at least let us
endeavor to make the best improovement of that sore Affliction, and pray to
god for faith and pacienc^ quietly to bear that Cross; remembering all this
wile, that whatsoever moates we spy in them, yet tha^ many beams remain
still in ou^ eyes.

And as the private event of these unnatural variances and discourse must
needs be inconvenient to our selves, so the public Example thereof is no^
less pernicious to the Common and Public good, for whatsoever in this kind is
committed within our own family, is acted (as is were) upon an open Theater
where we have many sorts of spectators, (and each severally affected to us) our
Children, servants, neighborhood sometimes our nearest kindred, and often
times our dearest friends. Who perchance (as most men are) being ready to
follow the ill example of others may prove by little the very abstracte of
impiety. Especially in this case when we have experience of so many cruel and
execrable murders. Some through open Tyranny, as of Juven. Satyr. 13. Velocius
and citius nos corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domesticae etc. Plut. in lib. connub.
Pompeja, by Nero, some through secret Villainy, as of Vives ita re citat in lib.
de off. man. ex Staba.
Apronia by Sylvanus: some through strangling, some through false accusing, too too
many by languishing away of their husbands monstrous unkindnesses. With all
which kinds I could wish that this our white Albion had never been bespotted.
Now in those hainouse-Crimes, though diverse perchance abhor to be Actors yet
not unlike but there are some, who secretly hold the principles, which breed
these sad conclusions, and are Abettors of These Crimson colored crimes and
secret encouragers of those Tyrannical husbands who are thus presumptuously
bold to disturb the common peace of humane life, and turn (what in the^ lies)
the very course of Nature into a Confused Chaos of contention and disorder; Let
all such persons know^ that even they themselves who are the Secret contrivers
how to dissolve^ this Oeconomicall Harmony between man and wife and thereby to
Crack^ the Axeltrees of our Microcosme (...) under, with whose ponderous weigh^
the burdend Earth beginns to Sink^ into the Gulf of dark Confusion etc.) as
well as the notorious Actors of this sad Trigaicall Dissension, are both
equally and a like guilty in the sight of God, as well as man, and in due time
will receive the reward of their Unrighteous Actions;

Besides, suppose all such persons real Atheists in principle as well as in
life and conversation, and expected neither a heaven to reward the good, nor
yet a hell to punish their black deeds, and let us take our arguments to
convince their reason (if they ^ave any left, for to be sure their Conscience
is wasted every inch) ^^om that which respects the ad^antages and benefits of
this life; What great hindrance must this needs (...) to any public
Preferment? for ^ow can he be thought fit to manage the affairs of a
Kingdom, in any place of eminent trust, who is not able to keep order in his
own house? how can the Magistrate safely confide in that man's integrity, who
deals so treacherously which the wife of his Covenant? nay more, with his own
Conscience, and his Sacred Vows unto Almighty God? How can he well preserve
peace amongst the multitude (of various humors and inclinations) who is at
daily strife in his own family, and with the wife of his bosom? Her who
ought to be his dearrest and most entirely beloved? S. Hieron. l. 1. tom. 2.
cont. Julianum.
Gordias the Rhetorician made an Oration to the Greeks who were at that time
in some disorde^ amongst themselves to persuade the^ unto Concord, and having
genera^^ly wonn the hearts of both sides Melanthius his adversary replye^ O
ye foolish Greecians, is this fellow fit to persuade you to agreement, who
lives himself in perpetual di^sention? Can he rule the whol^ City (think you
in peace, where are so many diverse minds as ther^ are diverse men, and yet was
never able to govern his house in quiet (...) where are none but himself and
hi^ wife? Which speech of his to this effect, so possessed the people, that
what before they were fully persuaded of, they now but faintly believed, and so
by degrees falling into perfect relapse of discord, and whereas at the
beginning they entertaine^ him with good applause, in the end they hisd him
from the bar, with this acclamation, Gordias rule thy self first at Rome, then
after rule us at Olympia. Neither was this Gordias fortune only, but is a
common brand of infamy to all his followers, who allways by their evil carriage
in private draw unto them suspicion of their like public government.

Wherefore antiquity has been very provident heerin, Heroditus in Clio.
when as the chief quests at their marriage feasts, used to offer sacrifice
for those who were married: But before they come unto the Altar, they purifyed
their Oblation from its gall and spiced it with fragrant odours A Custom in my
opinion not so ceremonious as judicious whose moral is given by the Plutarch.
in Connubial.
best morallist to prevent a duty of man and wife, that in them should be no
gall or bitterness, but the sweet relich of pleasing love. They themselves
should bear Virg. Elog: 6.
Virgils vine and Elm, the tend ernes of the one supported by the others
strenth; Their hearts as Ovid. met. lib. 6.
Ledas twins both interchangably embracing each other: Their house as a Plato
in lib. 1. de rep. sive de justo.
Platos city, wherein nothing must be called mine or thine but all things
common unto themselves, nothing peculiar to the husband, nothing proper to the
wife, which upon eithers occasion is not to be imparted to the other. And if
those singular parts, and parabels of friends (whose fame with golden wings
flies throughout the world) had nothing that was singular, but all things
mutual In prosperity mutual Joy, in adversity mutual sorrow, in adventures
mutual aid in victories mutual Triumph, in all things mutual Love, the
mother of this mutuality, how much more may we rationally expect should be in
marriage? If possible a stronger bond of friendship, where besides the present
fruition of a mate ordained by God to be a real and meet help at need, is
added the hopeful expectation of future issue. Now we never read or heard that
any of those inseparable friends (fittly compared to Aeneas and Achates etc.)
who gave a blow unto each other, nor so much as stirred up to attempt such a
thing by the wirlwinde of tempestuouse Passion, or otherwise induced thereunto
by any occasion whatsoever, and why then should husbands sue for a tolleration
to beat their wives, to whom as they are in Society more early linkd, so in
love more dearly engaged then to their dearest friend? their wifes being one
individual person with themselves. Many are the friendly offices of thy
friend, but many more of thy wife, the friend of thy bosom, who sitts at thy
table, and lies nearest to thy heart; She it is who shares with thee in all thy
grievances, and lessens thy burden, she partakes of thy joy and augments thy
chiefest pleasures; in matters of doubt she is thy Counselor in distresses
thy Comforter, she is a Co-partner with thee in all the Accidents of life.
Neither is there any sweeter taste of friendship, then the coupling of souls
in this mutuallity either of condoling or comforting, where the opressed mind
finds it self not all together miserable, since it is sure of one who is
feelingly sorry for his misery. And the joyful spends not his joy either
alone, or there where it may be envyed, but freely sends it to such a well
grounded object from whence he shall be sure to receive a sweet reflection of
the same joy, and as in a clear mirror of sincere good will, see a lively
picture of his own gladness. For which cause especially (as I conceive Isocrates
in Symm.
Isocrates condemned him for a person most lewdly disposed, who by his fair
speech and Proteus like behavior, has wooed a virgin, and in pomp and
Joviality married her his wife, and yet will in his folly, through anger and
variance live discontentedly with her; Seneca l. 11. ad Gallicum de remediis
fort.
Seneca terms brawles in marriage worse then divorce from marriage; Pu. in
vita Censorry Cat.
Cato plainly calls it Sacrilege for a husband to beat his wife; Such as the
soul (says Plutarch. in preceptis connub.
Plutarch.) in regard of the body, such is the husband in respect of his wife,
both do live in union, in disunion both do perish. Lods. Vives in lib. de
off. mar.
True love is the best amatorie, or chiefest medicine to breed true love; Sen.
Epist. 9. ad Lucillum.
And therefore if thou look truly to be loved of thy wife, first love her
truly, for else how can thou require that from her for thy self, which thou
affordest not from thy self to her? She may in this case answer thee as Valor.
l. 6. cap. 2.
L. Crassius the Senator replied to L. Philippus the Consul, how should I show
my self a Senator unto you whereas you behave your self not as a Consul unto
me? How should a wife prove loving unto her husband, when as a husband prooves
not loving unto her? for both in Love and friendship the demand of Martial unto
his Marcus stands with good reason.

Mart. Epig. l. 6.
If Phylades thou will me have,
Then ( Mark) I Will thee Orestes crave
And not in words thou must it prove
Wilt be belovd? then thou must love.
Love is a relation and must have two Subjects for its residence as well the
husband as the wife: if it find not good intertainment with one, it departs
from both: Both therefore must be like Crateres and Hyparchia, Lud. Vives de
offic. mar.
who where said to see with double eyes because in mutual love they acquainted
one the other with all passages and events that concerned themselves: So that
as the Prophets in Israel were sacredly entitled Sam. 9. 6.
Seers, because they had a double sight, from nature and from God; so was
Crateres in Athens jestingly termed a Seer, because he used a double fight, his
wives and his own.

And how soever we exclaim against women, that they are unworthy of such
respect, by reason of the multiplicity of their supposed infirmities; such
words often flash forth indeed, but from the pregnancie of wit, not from the
soundnes of judgment, spoken either from a prejudicate opinion, which ever
miscarrieth, or from particular Example, which never concludes. For instance,
we may hold them unconstant in their resolutions, shallow in their judgment
lavish of their tongue, and with so many weaknesses beweaken this weak Sex,
as that we may revive that old Theorem hissed long ago from of the stage of
virtue Of women kind found good there is none
And if perchance there be found one
I know not how it comes to pass
The thing's made good that evil was.


As likewise this following.

Men have many faults, Women have but Two,
There Is nothing good they Say,
There Is nothing good they do: etc.
A flat impiety against the all Creators all sufficiency, who when he had built
this worlds fair house, lookd in every corner thereof, and saw that All was
good, yet they in the fairest room of all, have found that all is naught* And
if you fly from their first unspotted Creation, unto their now corrupted
disposition, what p^iviledge have men beyond women they are both made of one
metal, cast both in the same mould: all are not good, nor the most the best,
but if any might challenge pre-eminence it should seem the woman might, whose
complexion is purer, which argues a richer Contrary to that Proverb. fair and
foolish,
wit, whose passions are stronger (viz of Fear, Joy, Greef, and so by
consequence of Love it self, pure innocent and strong as death, that many
waters cannot quench,) which proclaims a much better disposition, then is in
man, and is the Topp Gemm (of the largest size) and appears more beautyfull
then any of the rest in the Crown of Virtue. In short, dislike them we cannot
whom Nature has so curiously composed, and has sh'ewn (as we may say) the
Perfection of his glorious Workmanship, that so their Illustrious Souls, in
which so great a Spark of the Divinity has lodgdit self, might have a Choice
cabbinet or Receptacle, whose out side Splendour and beauty might be such as
bears some proportionable shadow and resemblance of that Heavenly-Ghuest
within; Dislike women now who can? since in disliikning them (if any such there
are) they more dislike themselves, for Nature has every way much more
curiously framed them then us, (poor men) who are the moments of her rougher
Workmanship.

Yet for your pleasures sake, suppose women to be as bad as some would make
them, say they are past all virtuous modesty, swear they are beyond all
hopeful recovery, etc. be it so, I demand, wherefore should they be beaten? S.
Aug. l. 19. de Civitat. Dei.
None but final puishment in such cases should be inflicted, where the person
punished cannot be amended Women (say some) are past amendment, and therefore
they are past punishment; It is an Arist. in lib. 1. Phys.
axiom in Philosophy that where the Cause is taken away the effect cease,
Senec. l. 1. de clementia Gell. noct. Attic. l. 6. c. 4.
and it is again as firm a position in humanity that amendment is the Chief (if
not sole) cause of every such punishment. There being then no hope of the one,
there ought likewise to be exaction of the other. Now that women will never be
amended it is as common a phrase (in some persons mouths) as what lack ye, in
the Exchange, so that it was grown long since to a proverb They wach a jeat,
Transt. prove.

and make it white as snow
Who women beat,
To make them vice forgo.


Aristotle in Oecon. lib. 1. c. 3. and 4 (whose words are maxims in Philosophy,
and his Ipse dixit an authentic proof) seems heerin to soar above himself,
and leaving his wonted School of humanity to speak from out of the sacred
Chair of Divinity when he said, The divine Providence, so framed man and
woman, that of necessity they must be of one Society, otherwise how could they
perpetuate the world by their offsprings succession, since neither without
woman, nor woman without man can have any Issue? wherefore they were made both
alike, and yet dislike, alike in specificall nature, and alike in the features
and liniaments of their bodies, and their souls of the same Essence: Dislike
in the Individual, the one hotter and drier, the other colder and moyster, that
out of this disagreeing concord of a diverse temper should proceed the sweet
Harmony of Agreeing of Love; The one valiant and laborious in the fields the
other mild and diligent within the doors, that what the one had painfully
gotten abroad, the other might carefully preserve at home. The one fairer, and
as a delightsome Picture of beauty, the other more steme, and as a mirror of
manhood: The one more deeply wise the other of a more quick and pregnant wit:
Both which being by the sacred power of marriage made but one, the first
condition of their Union is, Arist. in Oe con. c. 4. ubi leges mariti erga
uxorem constituit.
that no wrong should be done by either to the other. For, by the Pythagorian
Law of hospitality it was decreed, that none who enters into another house
should for the time of his abode there suffer any injury upon any occasion or
pretense whatsoever (Plat. in Gorgia, and Arist. hoc in loco. A husband takes
his wife from her friends estrangeth her from her relations, and former
acquaintance, de barreth her from her parents sight, and alienateth her from
whatsoever was dearest unto her, he takes her into his own hospitality,
receives her into his own protection, and himself becomes her sole Guardian,
wherefore now to beat and abuse her, to carry himself unkind, and stern to
her, is certainly the greatest injury that can be against the Law of
Hospitality. This Law we read was so religiously observed by Antiquity, that
had any one come under their roof (tho he were their mortal enemy) yet dared
they do no other but entertain him with fair language and send him away with
safe Conduct. And hence it was that Aristot. ibid.
Themistocles being banished from Athens, and pursued by the Athenians, was
forced to fly for rescue to the house of that Citizen, who had ever been his
mortal enemy, and at that time the present cause of his banishment, where
into nevertheless being enterd, he was courteously received, and delivered in
a friendly manner from his immediate danger etc. Should then a Christian deal
more roughly with his wife, then the heathen would with their Enemy? Surely the
world would condemn us for men of little wisdom, or else it would never have
commended them for their laudable custom.

Let me further add to Aristotle, a follower of his, a worthy Philosopher, and
famous Doctor, whose opinion is, that wives are to be persuaded by reason, and
not compelld by violence, and authority, led on by persuasion, not screwd by
compulsion, induced by lenity, not constrained by Severity, for they are one
flesh, and one mind together with us, and alltho this mind be full of
perturbations, and this flesh be wounded with affections, yet should we seek
some Cordial to heal that, not a Corrosive to afflict them, for by afflicting
them we afflict our selves;

CHAP. IV. The same discusd by Civil and Canon Law.
AS the Law in general is held by all to be the ground work and foundation of
a common wealth in whose bosom Justice is Seated, the sole preserver of
government, so the Canon and Civil, of all other Species are by most approoved
(yet how justly I cannot tell) the Chiefest forms thereof. Wheter it be for
its largenes and universality, because observed in all most all our Christian
world, or for its plainnes and perspicuity, because it is applied all most to
each particular case, and suits every state and condition of man Nevertheless
in these (according to my apprehension) ^ have found a certain kind of
^^riktness and Obduritie against no ^ondition more then against mar^ed women;
As for instance, (...) decrees, a Auth. Constable. Noop. lib. 3. rubrica 46. Item
Auth. qu. 32. n. 2.
wife shall ^ose her dowry for giving (...) lascivious kiss: Jason in l. de
Art. ff. Idem Dracon in tit. soluto matrimon.
That (...) wife is legally bound to ^llow her husband wan^^ing at his pleasure
from ^itty to City, Patr. de Anchasuper decret. in c. n. 16.
be it ^^om one land into another region, Alcit. c. a.
be it ^om her own country into ^^nishment it self. D. Alcisius de le. in li.
ad L. Jul. 5. l. 4.
Especi^ly if it be in pilgrimage unto the Holyland: Com. Op. li. 5. ut de nup.
2.
That ^^e wife is only dignified ^y the husband, and not any ways the husband
graced ^y the wife: De^. V^vii li. 2. deci. 241. n. 4.
That the ^usbands mere suspicion of ^is wifes lightness, may be ^ufficient
ground for her expulsion from his company* and lastly Bald. and Aug. Aret. in
L. Imp. ff. de sta^u homin.
if a wife pla^ the Adulteress (a fault in^ deed deserving no excuse^ her
husband may then brin^ her forth to public Judg^^ment, and Condemnation
deprive her of her promise^ dowry, and expose her (...) perpetual
divorcement. Cod. lib. 9. Co. 7. ad le. de adult.
Bu^ if the husband committ the like offense, tho it were as open as the su^
and as odious as hatred it self, ye^ the wife may not in public (...) much as
open her mouth against it and (...) and very many such like, which (...) my
opinion are very hard imposition^ for so weak a Sex, and such as have long
since deplored by Syra in the Comedian.

Transt. ex Plauto in com. Mer.
Alas we women live (...) Servile awe
But men enjoy a freedom o^ the Law.
For if a husband Serve in Venus pay
Apparently the wife must nothing say
Yet if a wife by chance steal wantonness
The Law is open for the man's redress.
But were the Laws equal to both the same,
We Soon should see who most deserves blame.
If the adultery of the wife be a wrong to the husband, why not the ^dultery of
an husband an injury to the wife? Or if Suspicion only may discharge a man of
his wife, who is more happy then the jealouse husband (according as the world
now adays account of happynes) who as often as his mind changes, may
therewithal change his wife? Or if all the luster and glory of wedlock descend
only from the husband to the wife and none reflecteth again from the wife upon
the husband, it then hard to be conceived how the^ can be a true society, or at
least fit and equal match? The like man be said of the rest. But all are
^palpably against reason, that there^ no rational man, who will seem (...)
reason for them.

Now the rigor and Severity (...) these and the like laws against wo^ men,
are supposed by Vid. Tyraquillum de legibus connub.
some to have proceeded from the Law givers ignorance, no^ hatred; Who for the
most part (call together the Canonists) being single and unmarried men^ knew
not so well the State and mystery of marriage, and so conceiving perchance no
better of a wife, then a^ a man's best servant, rank them in (...) degree of two
low Servility. Neither is their reason unprobable, for wh^^ can discern the
Suns brightness tha^ never saw the light? who can judg^ (...) a pure lilly
white, or Scarlet etc. ^ho never was acquainted with the ^^fference of colors?
who can give true censure in Scholar Ship, who ^as never so much as baptized
at the ^uses font, even so, who can rightly ^^timate the Sacred Rites of
Marriage, ^ho never knew the happiness there^^?

But I Accuse not the Law for these ^^rmer positions are (for the most ^art but
deduction from thence. neither do I take upon me to repre^end these Law
givers, for they ^ere ancient Trophies of yet living ^ory, yet for all I cannot
choose ^ut find fault with some of the Inter^reters of their Laws, who fit
the ^quare unto the timber, not the timber (...) the Square; working the Law
^^ther and thither as a nose of wax, and according as the tide and tempest ^f
their brainesick fancy drives them, ^^hich is no were more apparently ^een,
then in the case we have in hand; for in the whole body of Can^ or Civil Law, I
have not yet foun^ nor do I think any man has (...) down in these, or
equivalent term or otherwise passed by any positiv^ Sentence or verdict, that
it is lawf^ for a man to beat his wife. B^ whatsoever is cited thence, are
eith^^ far fetchd conclusions, or unfriend^ Sequels, which hang as well
togeth^^ when touched by a judicious Tryal^ as the joints of a rotten carcass
gib^beted together, when tossed with (...) violent wind.

There being nothing then directl^ against us in the substance of the Law^ let
us see what the Shadows thereon (I mean the Interpreters thereof) please to
determine: whose opinion^ I find as various, as they make the Subject of their
opinion unconstant^ and therefore I must place them i^ their several ranks.

In the first rank are such who yet peremptorily ^old it lawful. Glost. in l.
and si quemeunque parag. ul. in fi. ff. ad ad L. st qu. Alb. grand. in tract.
malef. de pae. reo in col. uls. Lucas Pen. in lib. quicunque Col. 2. and 3. C.
de Mil.l. 12. Jo. Andr. in d, c, lit. Ille col. 2. in u, in certis: hic col.
penul, verse. Actureae qu. l. 3. quaest. 18. n. 9. and 10. Alexand. Cons. 123.
col. 1. 2. v. 3. Bald. Cons. 176. Bonti. sup Dec. 2. de jnrejurando.
But find^ng themselves oppressd with contrary reasons; as ^en all together
desperate use such turnings and wind^ngs, such sorry evasions and
contradictions, such ^oor shifts and trivial So^hisms as the learned may ^wel
laugh at, the ignorant and maliciouse admire. If you have seen a mill horse
^pacing his circle, or a Spannel turning round after his tail, you may justly
conceive how those men tread the mare of their uncertain opininion. Some of
them, (and amongst these bad, the best,) hold it lawful but not convenient.
Some a little more hardy and bold then the first, think it both lawful
convenient, but it must be but a little (f^ sooth) slightly, and but seldom,
having indeed fo^^gotten, or else having never learned that circumstance^ can
but lessen a fault, never of a^ action absolutely evil convert it into good.
Some other there are the overgrowne Monsters of Tyranni^ who proclaim it with
their open mouth (for fools proclaim their own folly, etc.) that a husband
may beat his wife much or little according to his own pleasure, and as he sees
occasion; nay that he may publicly shame her, and if he like imprison her
too, but these are such men who seem to have banished all humanity, of an
iron heart, of a brazen brouw, and so cankerd with vice (and the dangerous rust
of Passion) that virtue can take no impression in them. For, what is that
letheth loose the raines of fury, and gives madness its full Scope? what is it
that violates the holy rites of marriage? what is it that infringeth the sacred
bonds of Love? what is it that breeds horried and domestical massacres? what
is it that abolisheth all virtuous and matrimonall Society, if this does not?

In the Second rank are those, Donellus de Jure Civili 13. c. 21. Decianus
leg. 9. c. 11. number. 17. Tyraquillus de leg. connub. aureum opus. Anchar. Cons.
408. n. 3. Jason. Luppus Angelus
who out of a staid judgment and upright mind, hold it not only unlawful, but
an Odiouse, Unmanly, and Unseemly thing. Odious in respect of the breach of
their faith given in wedlock: Unmanly in regard of the woman's weakness and
imbecility; Unseembly for examples Sake, and therefore upon all these
considerations that it is all together unlawful. Aretinius Tur. vid. gl. de
leg. co^^.


Transt. e Sta. ubi incipit Quorum Sacra tenat Sacris rodimita etc.
Whose praise the sacred boddesse of Eternity
Keeps hallowed in the Eternal Shrine of fame
Virtue does build Them Trophies: Dignity
Crowns their desert and waits upon their Name
And worthy are they of a marble Stone
Made blessed by an Homers pen, or none,
In the third rank are such, Bursaius seq. aur. imperialis aulae Com. Com.
Palestin. in magn. op. Guido a Bayso Valfost. Barbat. Bo lognet. D. de Rota
Decius, and maxima sane pars in utreque Jure periti.
who tho they have written whole Tracts and large Volumes concerning the Estate
of wives, of their dowries, of their inheritance, of their portions, of their
vows, of their divorcements, and many other circumstances, yet have not a word
of this question, nor do they vouchsafe to grace it with a graceful term;
Perchance because they thought it so heinous and ugly a paradoxe as unfitt to
be matchd with so many honest and goodly precepts of the Law, or else so vile a
position, as unworthy to be affirmed by a Lawyer.

These are the Opinions, so disagreeing (you see) and all together contrary,
that whosoever weighs that in the true scales of an upright judgment, cannot
rest satisfied: for where truth seems to have taken up her Habitation, Their
Authority has disguised her, and where she cannot be found there fancy must
needs attempt to describe her; Every man making an Idol of his own conceit, and
partially impairing another man's judgment. Not finding (therefore in them the
certainty we seek for, let us therefore compare reason unto reason, and Oppose
Lawyer unto Lawyer, conferr Opinion with opinion: And drawing from the law it
self certain grounds and foundations in this point, by a full and free
discussing of the matter we shall give the reader a clear and fair Light, by
which every one that runns may read the truth of what we are maintaining.

My first grounds shall be the Cod. lib. 6. tit. 46. leg. 5. etc.
superiority of husbands over their wives, where unto answers the Ibid.
subseq. verbis.
reverence of wives toward their husbands; This Supperitie appears first in
the manner of their wedlok, wherein the woman was made Genesis 2. 22.
out of man, and Chapter 2. 20.
for man, and v. 23.
given in Tuition by God unto man. Secondly in the difference of their sex,
because Nature, and the God of Nature in every kind has given pre-eminence
unto the male. Thirdly in man's universal soveraintie which he received over
all creatures, c. 1. 28.
when God enstalled him his Viceroy over all the visible Creation. And yet for
all it was not so absolute a prerogative of his fellow-woman, as it was in
respect of others, because she was joynd in commission with him, S. Chrysostom.
hom. 9. in Genesis Rupertus l. 2. de Trinitate.
yet such it was as might well be are the title of Superiority for the man,
and require of the woman a duty of reverence. But neither is the one so
predominant, nor the other so servile, as that from them should proceed any
other fruits but of a royal Protection, and legal Subjection.

My second ground shall be the Digest. l. 38. tit. 1. leg. 48. Cod. loco
superius citato, and Inst. 2.
power and command of husbands over their wives. Whereunto answers the
Obedience of wives toward their husbands. Ibidem ut jure etiam Bald. in C. 1.
tit. An mariti suc. uxor. Aug Aretin.
And here I need not weary out my pen, in deciding the controversies touching
the authority of husbands concerning their wifes goods possessions, lands,
dowries etc. Only pertaining to my purpose is the command over their persons.
Justt de SC. Bar. in d, li. 1. parag. (...) ff. de injur.
Which the Law determines to consist, partly in imposing on them convenient
labors for the supportance of their Estate, Chiefly in exacting the rights of
marriage for the procreation of Children and avoidance of lust. To the former,
as much as in her lies, the wife must yield obedience, To the latter (unless
or some restrictions which my modesty forbears to mention) she is legally bound
to give contentment. Nevertheless in both, hard it is to be judged whither the
husband should command with greater Obeisance, or the wife obey with greater
command, so both entirely strive to express the lively effects of so perfect
an Union, and so both interchangeably labor for the building up of the Temple
of Love.

My third ground shall be, the correction lawfully used by the husbands against
their wives, where unto answers the submission required of wives unto their
husbands. This correction being a punishment, must (according to the rule of
law) be proportioned unto the fault punished. The faults of wives toward their
husbands are all comprised under three several Degrees, and therefore the
punishments must likewise be of three several sorts.

In the first and highest degree, are faults all together inexcusable, never
committed by any virtuous or modest wife: never to be endured by any loving or
honest husband, such are defiling of his marriage bed, or any treacherouse
exploits against his life and person; Now for these the Law setts down direct
punishments. For the former, divorce from the bond of marriage for the Second
expulsion from the Community of wedlock: And in neither case are the husbands
engaged for the payment of their dowry, or any ways bound for the relief of
their poverty. Mistake me not I only intend that the prosecution heerof lies
in the husbands power, not the execution; for that must be consumate in lawful
manner, the fact prooved by lawful witness: the verdict given by a lawful
Judge; So that the Jealousy of husbands touching their wives incontinencie, or
suspicion otherwise concerning their disloyaltye, etc. before they are actually
prooved, are not to be accounted actual faults of the wife, but to be adjudged
as the brain sick fancies of their husbands. Be the suspicion of the one
vehement, it bears indeed the better color and deserves the sharper trial;
But for the jealousy of the other, it is a common ill humor, and therefore in
wisdom nothing at all to be esteemed. Jealousy is a Child conceived of self
unworthiness, and of another worth, at whose birth fear made it an abortive
in nature, and a monster in love: for the jealouse man unworthily loving a
worthily beloved Object, stands in fear of communicating his good unto another
more worthy; So that neither is his love perfect because mixed with fear,
(which love abhors) nor his fear medicinable, because conjoynd with love,
which fear impoisoneth. But of both arises this mungrell kind of Jealousy, a
loving fear or a fearful love; where in (contrary to all other actions of
man) we bend all our diligence, and carefullnes to obtain the full sight and
perfect assurance of our own misery: we would needs (for soth) know our selves
to be Such Homed Rationalls, as we fear our selves to be, for of prevention
there is no hope, as our English worthy can tell us.

S^ Ph. Sydneys Arcad. lib 3.
Sure to is no jealousy can that prevent
Wherein two persons one be full content.
Seeing then that these imaginations of husbands are not in law the fault of a
wife, and when it appears by evidence that they are guilty of such hainouse
crimes, the Law determines their proper Punishment whatsoever is added beyond
that, is Illegal, and more then the Law requires.

In the second degree are faults of another nature, far inferior to the
former, and it of real moment too, such as may be their backwardness in the
religious service of God, Carelessness in managing their house hold affairs;
Ill behavior, toward their neighbors and friends misdemeanure of themselves
toward their husbands, etc. These, I conceive to be as so many roots of
weeds planted in the fair garden, plott of a woman's mind, spreading it self
into many Crooked branches, and bearing much bitter fruit. Tex. in parag.
necesse est 47. did. and facit C. indignantur in fine, 32. q. 6. Gloss in l.
si quacunque parag. ult. in f, ff. ad l. Aquil. Tiraq. l. 1. P. con. 9. l. 1.
Par. 2.
In such cases therefore the Law allows husbands to use reprehension either
sharper or milder according to the nature and quality of the offense, and as
their own modest discretion finds convenient. Yet nevertheless these faults
are not so absolutely evil, but that they might admit some kind of excuse,
according to the several circumstances, that may happen between loving
husbands and their loving wives, only serving thereby some what to extenuate
these faults, tho not peremptorily to defend them, and thereby to vindicate
their spottless Innocence.

For the first, there is no man so irreligious, but commends a religious
especially a religious wife, in whom religion is especially needful, both for
instruction of her maids, and the education of her children. But if in such,
an imagination of religion fall into some peevish zeal through ignorance, or
through some small measure of knowledge amount unto womannish resolution, it had
been better they had been less studious in those points, where the best
fruits of their labors is a plentiful Sheafe of Errors. Wherefore for my
own part; I could never yet bring my self to approove thoose too too holy
women-gospellers, who wear their testament at their apronstringes (insteade of
Scissers) and will weekly Catechize their husbands, citing places, clearing
difficulties, preaching holy sermons etc. when the spirit of their devotion
mooves them. For, sure I am the Scripture (and the examples of antiquity who
observed that Rule) held silence to be a woman's Chiefest Eloquence, and thought
it their part to hear more then to speak, and to learn rather then to teach.
As well then too much curiosity of Religion, as too much neglect is a fault in
women; So that if their frailty lead them into either extremes, the husband
has the power of reprehension to keep them in the golden mean.

Again, if a wife be over frugall, it may be supposed it is for the augmenting
of her husbands estate, and the benefit of his children: If she be very
bountiful, it may be thought she intends her husbands credit, and supportance
of his estimation Likewise if others mislike her carriage, it may be her
modesty seems proud unto them, or her familiarity otherwise breeds
contempt. Lastly, if through infirmity she fall into any inconvenience, some thing
is to be imputed to the weakness of her sex, some matter of excuse there is in
the reveness of such an offense. In all, or either of these aggrievances the
husband has allways the privilege of reproove, which yet ought to be given at
all times (and in the circumstances and occasions under present consideration)
with such a spirit of wisdom, meeknes, tenderness, and discretion, as that one
soft word may sooner persuade and work upon her mind then a frowning
Countenance, and a frown of his sooner then a sour and austere demeanure; and
then what more Sovereign Balsome can there be in this world, then the tender
reprehension of a loving husband? this must needs be so far from wounding that
it softens, cleanses, heales, and strengthens, and yet the very wounds of a
real constant and long approved friend, (we read) are more to be preserved
then the kisses of an enemy, and if this be true (as most undoutedly it is,)
how highly is the Precious Oil of soft reproof to be prized when dropping so
sweetly (like that honney) from those life breathing lips of a dear and
tender Spouse, studying with greatest diligence what may make for the real
prosperity of his wifes outward and inward man, with all present and future
hppynes that can attend her wish, in whose felicity the welfare of his own
Soul and life is so much bound up; Certainly there can not be found any woman
so devoid of reason and judgment, but that she will embrace such inestimable
Tokens of truest and noblest Love, with greater fondnes and affection, that the
long and Sikly seafareing Mariner, wellcomes the heart-reviving Odours of the
Arabian Spices, that send forth their fragrant breath, whilst they are sailing
through the Indian Seas.

In the least and lowest degree are some small and trivial faults; Indeed
virtues in their own nature, but in their practice perchance are tainted with
some savor of vice; Such may be the nimbleness of women's tongues, which
allthough may sometimes be employed to their husbands disturbance, yet for the
most part are husbands good: In merchandising for their profit, and in
refreshing their wearied Spirits, often ^times in entertaining their friends
with the courtesy of compliments, whilst she is performing many offices that
belong to her sphere, or that capacity wherein she is called to act. Of this
sort likewise, are women's affected curiosity of apparel, their over nice
standing on place and pre-eminence, their womanish dislikings, and their fond
longings with other such inconsiderable and trivial errors. Oblequies of
nature, rather then faults in manners. All which a husband might easily
reform either by his wisdom in not stooping so low as to take notice of them,
or from out of his love, but mildely to touch them. How ever, all that can or
ought to be allowed the husband for redressing these small inconveniences (not
worth disturbing a wise man's thoughts,) is only Iuristonf. ff. in l. ult. ff.
Si quis aliq. test. prohib. S. Bernard. in op. ad Rayn. und. de re fam. Vide
Tyraq. il. Connub. gl. 1. par. 1:
Admonition [and that alone too for most odiouse is that reproof, that's given
before others, and especially before their servants) who thereby take occasion
to despise both their reprooving master, and their reprooved mistress.] And as
this is the softest and fairest kind of correction, so it takes the best
effect in any good nature. You know that many sorts of soft waters, will pierce
deeper then the edg of hardest steel, and many things by mildenes have been
accomplished, which through violence could never; the hardest flints are sooner
broke upon a bed of down then if laid upon a rock: Policy goes beyond force
in martial actions, wisdom beyond rigor in domestical affairs, and Plut. in
praeconnubialibus.
far safer is the obedience yielded upon fair terms, then that which is
constrained on foul conditions, for the one proceeds from love, and is even
fidiall, the other comes of fear and is only servile.

Now that there cannot be thought any misdemeanure of a wife toward her
husband, not comprised under these Three, is (by what has been already said)
most plainly manifest; And that there ought not to be used by a husbands
toward his wife any other Correction besides these Three, shall evidently be
prooved;

Concerning the former, our women haters have indeed well imitated the old
Tragoedians whose Use it was, when they were setting forth any odious Scene, to
pluck down the ears of their auditors into hell, to ^nvocate the furies, to
muster up ^ursed spirits, and whatever was most ugly to the ey of their
understanding, to the end they might ^ender their expressions more vehement,
and leave a deeper impression behind them. They likewise are well skilld in
this excellent Art of ^ailing They conjure up whole catalogues of vices, they
number out numberless obliquities, and rake together as many Sins as the whole
world is guilty off, fastening all on women as if they were the authors and
actors of them all. Myogenes quidam cujus totam spurcam and impuram
delamationem recitat Tiraq. 2. l. congl. par. 1.
Pride (say they) and greater then a common pride, the pride of selfe-worth in
unworthiness: Avarice, anger, luxury, gluttony, stothfullness, envy, etc.
are the u^uall inhabitants of a woman's mind; It much offends not^ that they
are ungrateful to their friends, impatient in their choler, babler^ of their
tongue, witty in their deceipts* wilful in their resolutions, ambitious*
flattering, Lustful, dissembling: bu^ that they will also prove the
cut-throates of friendship, and yet seem to be our friends: A punishment for
man, and yet an inevitable punishment, a tempetation to man, and yet a natural
temptation: a calamity to man, and yet a desired calamity: an absolute and yet
a necessary evil. etc. Infinite are their reproaches, in so much that if I
speak any farther in their foul language I should forgett my Office of
pleading in behalf of women, who have undertaken to become their Advocate.

First then, let me give These Cynickes to understand that their trade is now
so good as they could with it were, for their sourrilous detraction from the
real worth of women (who ^eserve their and our good esteem) (...) held but
for childrens rhetoric; And Invectives are counted the ^orest and meanest
part in learning. They are the froth not of wit, but of ^pish invention, the
purge of an idle and impostumated head, and addled ^raine, the falling sickness
of a giddy ^itt, flat Heresies in true Schollers^^ip; For when they have spoken
all that malice can invent against women, what yet have they spoken that may
^ot be applied to men? Sir you may ^emember is of the Neuter Gender, and
therefore neither hatheth the one ^exe, nor cleaves to the other, but (...)
too familiarly acquainted with both ^asculine and femine. Was Lais a ^hore? she
was but one, many men (...) Athens were her minions, but I ^raine not the
comparison.

All women you (say some) are all together evil, but of men some are ^ood (say
they.) And are all women evil? then how came it to pass O grav^ Plut. de clar.
faemin.
Plutarch that thy wisdom so faild thee? O Hesiod. de mulier heroid.
Hesio^ who corrupted thy matu^ Judgment? Caelius li. lection antiquar.
Caelius, wh^ beguiled thy wit? Chancer li. saem. encom. 1. Et alterum, de
Cland. bon. faemin.
Chause^ how chance thy golden pe^ so miscarryed? And yo^ holy and learned
Saint^ e St. Hieron. St. Greg. Syntagm. de musis. St. Cypria. de singularitate
faem.
St. Gregory,g St* Cyprian, St. Chrysostom. in hom. de collat. 10. baptista.
St. Chrysostome^ who deceived you all? for deceived you all are if thi^
position be received, wh^ have severally written diverse Treatises in honor o^
honorable and deserving women, what are they (...) evil? How came the whol^
world to be so besotted (...) to record a famous memory of so many thousands
o^ them? Of, Cannonized Saints, of constant Martyrs, of grav^ matrons, of
chaste Virgins, of mos^ virtuous and unspotted wives? Neither are such as I
speak of Phoenices rare and but seldom found; Search all histories, travail
with the Sunn round about the earth, recall the former days, even from the
worlds minority, and compare them with the latter times unto this present age,
(we shall find that the number of virtuous women may well equalice (if not
exceed) the number of men that have been virtuous. And how be it I cannot say
there is any woman such a perfect Paragon of Virtue, who is void of all vice,
[Venus had her mole, the brightest Sunn and Moon have their dark sports, and
both suffer an Eclipse, the purest Gold is not without some dross, nor the best
of women free from all reproofe] yet, to collect what vices soever have been in
all the worst sort of women in the world, and to apply them to every women in
particular (tho never so virtuous and deserving) is most injurious, and indeed
ridiculouse, to humane reason, and contradictorie to the experience of the
wiser and more learned sorts of men in diverse ages of the world. Were such a
Conclusion of any force, I would thus dispute, Catline was a Traitor, Verres a
Thief, Nero a murderer, Aegistus an adulterer. Machivell atheistical,
Jovianus heretical, Battus a fool etc. Theife all were men: Mysogenes was a
man: therefore Mysogenes is a traitor, a thief, a murderer, an adulterer,
atheistical, heretical a fool etc. would not the meanest swain, conclude I
was out of my senses to argue thus? and laugh me to scorn for a dunce in
Logic? The argument now is the same with theirs, which if they shall dislike,
then they themselves clear women of whatsoever is here spoken against them, if
they (notwithstanding all that has been said) shall approove of the argument,
they have all this while travailed with the Pellicane, and the birth of their
own Child, will be their own destruction, and if not their absolute ruin, yet
at least their perpetual disgrace and infamy.

By this time perchance their heat is allayed, and they who before this were
apt to think all women absolute evils; yet now (blushing for shame) they may
recant their error, and refining their phrase, may term them at best but Quod
vetus apud Graecos proverb. (...).
necessary evils. This indeed is a too common speech, and most men think they
have judiciously spoken, when they have thus defined the matter; That they are
necessary I will readily grant, since He that made man saw it was not good
that man should be without such meet helps as these; That they are evils (in
that abstract) I utterly deny, since he that made the woman saw that all he
made was good, and besides his general blessing given unto all his works, he
gave Adam a peculiar blessing and distinct from all, which was in that
fruitfulnes of procreation which could not be without that woman's help; Is
woman Good then, in the jugdment of God, and in your opinion necessary? then
once again you must alter your style, and henceforth denounce her a Necessary
Good, For these very terms Necessary and Evil are inconsistent one with an
other, and imply a contradiction in terminis, both being repugnant to each
other; All things that are necessary for man are Good, food is necessary,
aparrell is necessary, the fire, air, earth, water, etc. are all necessary,
therefore food, raiment fire etc. and women also being necessary, tho the
real being, and well being of man's life, are also good Otherwise we must
suppose God has tied man to most rigid terms and conditions, that some things
are made necessary to his very being, and yet that thing should in it self be
evil; in this we highly impair that wisdom^ of God, and detract from his
Holiness, and goodness; But to satisfy some Chief authors of this receivid
opinion I will acknowledge that some women are less Good then others, and
thence they incurr the name of evil, and nature requiring a necessity of them,
thence they receive that title of necessary: and from both they are branded
with the infamy of Necessary Evils. An attribute yet not appropriated unto
them alone, but usually also applied unto men. Lex de eo narrat Aelius Lampid.
Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor called his Councillors (who surely were
or ought to be men of the greatest abilities,) Necessary Evils: The Officers
in his court Necessary Evils: Stra. lib. 14.
Hybicus likewise called Euthidamus his friend, his Necessary Evil: Varro.
Varro his testie brother, his necessary evil. Martial de se ipsis narravit.
Martial his angry brother his necessary evil, with whom (says he) I can
neither, live well, nor yet live without him.

But to break off this idle cavile, whith has too long detaind me from my
purpose, Let Mysagenes steep his quill in the of Invection, let him speak
with as open mouth as ever Satyr did, yet all that can be alleged, as
offenses of wives against their husbands, are only such as are either expressly
mentioned, or else directly may be reduced unto my three former heads.

Secondly then, that the corrections lawfully used by a husband unto his wife,
ought to be no other then I have prescribed, remains yet to be more amply
prooved. For the first, that Divorcement in cases prefixed are the sole and only
lawful punishment, the Law it self affords such fair testimonies, and the
practice of all lawyers hithertoo have given such full confirmation, that now
it is too late either to be denied or gainsayed. For the two other M. Aurelius
a Consul Sometimes, and counselor shall speak for me. A wife (says he) is
often to be admonished, to be reprehended but seldom, but never to be dealt'
withal with violent hands. Where you see not only a flat denial of any
rigorous sort of correcting wives, but withal a plain assertion of my
prescribed punishments, admonition and reprehension.

Admonition is that which with a soft and tender hand binds up the bruises of
a friend, and therefore most needful in marriage, the nearest of any
friendships Hence the Juris cens. in l. ult. ff. Siquis. aliq. test prob.
Law injoyns us to deal with our wives in mild terms, in sweet words,
affectionate and patheticall persuasions, powerful and attractive arguments,
and exhibit to them such winning examples of our kind demeanure, etc. That
whereas by nature women are mild, loving, gentle and fair there might not be
the least inclination in them to refuse a firm complyall unto That meek spirit
which is so like their own good Genius, especially when so powerfully invited
thereunto, (and constrained, if that word can be proper in this place) by the
golden twist of heart uniting Love. Mercury (says Plutarch) was seated the
next God unto Venus, Plut. l. de prae^onnub.
because in marriage, there is allways need of settled reason, and a fair
language. Mars was then ushering of Jupiter in a place remote, because wars
are only fit for kings and States.

Reprehension we have added in the second place, that whereas Admonition, with
its smooth carriage prevails not, the rereprehension with sharper entreaty
might take effect. Hence the v. Tyraquil. d. li. connub. gl. part. 1. and.
Greg. M* Moral. lib. 20. par. 20. par. 4. c. 11.
Law councelleth, that overmuch lenity is to be mixed with some few grains of
Severity (not rigor etc.) and of them both to be made a third temperature, or
golden compound called Mediocritie: By which in all our reprooves we shall be
so guided, as neither using too much exasperation or indulgence, we may soon
reform whatsoever Offense we seek to redress. God commanded that in the Arc
of the Tabernacle directly over his two Statute Tables Manna should be
preserved, but, together with Moses rod Livi^ l. 8. hist. ab urb. cond.
Papyrius set up before the Sen^te house in Rome the image of Mercy, but also
placed the image of Justice by.

In both which kinds of Correction the success will be far more effectual if
we lead the way before by our example, which by our words we persuade our
wives to follow; for the abbreviarie of a husbands words and actions is as if
it were the Chamber-glasse by which the wife should take direction to Dress her
self, from top to toe; At his tongue she should learn to speak, by his
carriage she should compose her behavior. And a 1000 times safer way it is (as
in a Case not much different. c v. Trag. loco Supr. citato.
Pucatus told Theodosius) to govern by example, then by Soverity. Every good
example is a most pleasing invitation unto virtue, where the eye is guided unto
present action, not the ear fed with fained speculation. And heerupon was
Petrarch. lib. de rem. adv. fom.
Petrarch his opinion grounded, that a mimicall husband will make a lascivious
wife, a riotous husband avoluptuous wife, a proud husband a proud wife, a
modest and honest husband, a modest and honest wife. Wherefore it is St. St.
Aug. in C. Si dictur 23. q. G.
Augustines council, that such as we would have our wives appear unto us, the
same we should first approove our selves unto them. Would we have them chaste,
Civil in Carriage, courteous, and obliging, pure and unspotted in the world?
we then must walk before them as the patterns of Chastity, of Civilitie, of
Obsequiousnes, and of irreprehension. For what reason have we to expect more of
them, then we can perform our selves? It is a silly master that offends in
those faults for which he is offended with his pupil. So is it an impudent and
impious fellow (says Sen. ad Lucil. Ep. 94.
Seneca) who of his wife requires an undefiled bed, and yet he himself defiles
it. By our virtuous demeanure then, we must direct them in the way of virtue,
for there are none of them so vicious who will stick to tell us we are their
masters, and ought to lead them an example. It is reported by Guil. de Monte
laud in Cl. cum ex eo Cardinal. Florm. 1. appo desener com.
esteemed authors, that in some places the husbands only are punished, for the
faults of their wives. In Catalonia whosoever is Cuckoled pays a Sum of
money: in Parrice he rides in disgrace through the City, the crier
proclaiming these words before him, So do, so have. In some parts of England I
have seen a custom not much different. All which though they are well near
worn out of date, yet their primarie intent was virtuous, being to restrain
husbands that they may love none but their own wives, and dwell with them, so
that neither should need any other company, but by their mutual example one
should be a president to the other of true Chastity, and Affection.

Thus then (to draw to wards my end) and only thus, may a husband lawfully
correct his wife. Admonition is his first degree for smallest faults, and this
must proceed from a pacient love, or a loving patience* The next is
Reprehension, in greater offenses, which must aim at the amendment of the
faults, not offending of the faulty. And both of these must be seconded by
our good example that the world may see us do those things which we would have
done by others. Lastly in the last and highest degree is Divorce in Such cases
as are before alleged. Now for further satisfaction to prove that the Laws
allow not any verberall Correction, I have added these few reasons.

First, if a husband may lawfully beat his wife, then is the wife legally
bound to endure his beating: for the Law gives not authority to the punisher,
but there with injoynes Obedience on the punished, But the Law binds not the
wife to such blockish patience; for in such a case it Aegid. in Cura Par. Praes
v. 2. q 195. 117.
allows her to depart from her husband, Vincent de Franc. decis. 144. n. 4.
and to obtain sufficient maintenance of her husband in the time of her
absence; Petr. de Ferrar. in aur. pr. p. 124. n. 4.
Neither does it limitt her any time to return, if she fear his Tyranny: nor
yet Durandus in Spec. Juris l. 1. de off. judge. par. 2. n. 8.
constraines her to live again with him, unless for her good usage good
security be given her. In answer whereof that shift will not serve, to say the
Law authorize the man to beat his wife but slightly, and not with such
cruelty as may cause her to depart; This is too course a salve for such a
sore, for a little beating to same women, is more then much unto others, and
therefore it will breed the same or worse effects: and how little soever it is,
they are not bound to take it.

Secondly,a St. Bon. l. 4. did. 38. art. 2. q. 2.
The Law decrees that he Less grievously offends who kills his mother, then
he who kills his wife, though both be most haynouse and execrable sins. He
by rule of disputation, I conclude, therefore also he less grievously offends
that beats his mother then he who beats his wife. But what a horrid and
barbarouse Crime is it for a man to beat his mother (judge you) and then also
judge what the other is which is worse then that.

And whatsoever is said by Lawyers of the first proposition, some plainly
affirming it, others mincing it which distinction, avails nothing, for if (as
many do) you hold the offense greater in respect of the greater punishment
alloted it by Law, but less in it self, and of his own nature: I would demand
of you, whither the Law does not proportionate every punishment to the quality
of every offense? To small offense* light punishments to greater, punishments
of a greater nature, and to those that are most heinous, punishments of the
Severest kind? Which if you grant, you must necessarely acknowledge the truth
of the first proposition, if you deny this, you accuse the law, of Injustice;
Or otherwise if your reply be (as most men's is) that heerin the Law was most
especially mindful, and because men are more prone to injure their wives then
their parents (as very sad accidents do most usually testify) therefore for
greater terror to such offenders, and more Evident Examples to other
spectators, the law more severely punished the one then the other. If thus you
plead, I then join hands with you, and in the present case give the same
sentence. Because men are more prone to beat their wives then their parents,
therefore in law the act shall be held more hay nouse, because by law the
punishment must be more grievouse.

Thirdly the name of a wife is a name of dignity; The Law styles her thy
familiar friend, thy equal, thy associate, the Mistress of thy house; to speack
all in one word the same person and Inviduum (as it were) together with thy
self. If therefore she bear the name of dignity she is to be respected: If thy
familiar friend, she is to be embraced: If thy equal associate she is to be
equally regarded If thy Mistress she is to be honored: if thy very self, she
is as entirely and dearly to be beloved as thy self. All which duties of an
husband are necessarily intended by the law, and are as contrary to the rough
and unkind usage of a wife, as fire unto water, heaven unto earth.

And for the mittigation which is here by some men interposed in way of answer
unto this Objection (which is, that in the stricktnes of law it is lawful for
a husband to beat his wife but it is very inconvenient and undecent etc.) it
is a plain and peevish contradiction, and injuriously robs the law, of the
great end, wherefore it was instituted. For the end of the law is the happy
government of a Nation, and families, (of which a State or Kingdom is
constituted) which happynes is in nothing more eminently Seen, then in the
decent conformity of manners, and orderly behavior in all estates. And hence
it is that the Lawyer as a laborious travellour goes through all estates to
bring al unto decency. He orders the estate of Monarchs and Princes, of
Peers and Nobles, of Magistrates and Subjects, of parents and children, of
husbands and wives, of masters and servants. And in the whole body of a
Kingdom or Commonwealth, whatsoever is out of its due temperature, must by the
Plat. Li. de justo. Finem legis dicit convenientem Seware Ordinem, odisse malum*
Law be ordered, as a sick part is cured by physic in a natural body. So that
then an absolute indeorum in manners (as they confess the beating of a wife to
be) is an absolute breach and violation of the Law, this being one of the
greatest disturbances to man's peace and quiet that can be offered, nothing more
disordering every faculty of a man's soul, nothing more afflictive to each
Passion, and nothing more injurious to every Sense, then when a man shall be
taken in Such a raving Fit of tearing, rending, beating and devouring his own
flesh and blood, that none are found guilty of, but those who are posessed
with the foul tormenting Spirit of the evil Angels taking up their habitation
in their Souls.

Lastly, Correction by way of beating is merely Servile, say the best of it
that any can, and in many men's judgments so in human as that a wise man (whose
actions flow from discreet premeditation,) will not exercise it upon his very
slaves or Swains. But Servilitie is only to be imposed on Such as be Servile,
and therefore not on wives, who are in the Law free burgesses of the same City
where of their husbands are free: both participating the same Rightes, both
enjoying the same Liberties.

But here again rises a cavil touching the precepts of the Law and
permissions of the Law; They say that though indeed the Law comandeth not a
man, yet it permits him to beat his wife. Their reason is because it setts
down no precise penalty in such a case, and whatsoever the law does tolerate
it not unlawful and therefore this action also is lawful, though not by
precept yet by permission of the Law. Whereun^o I reply, first to say that the
law setts down no precice punishment in this case is a proposition not simply
true, for the grounds before in my-first reason alleged: Again I hold (...) ^o
be a position absolutely false to affirm that whatsoever the law does tolerate
is lawful: The Law heerin shall be judge of the law, which does say, that
those things are not without vice (therefore unlawful) which are permitted or
pardoned by the law and not commanded. The law omitteth some things in some
good respects, and those things which we omit (says S. Chrysostom) we
unwillingly permit, and what we unwillingly permit we by no means would have
committed, but this only do we because we cannot (as we would) restrain the
unbridled affections of the many. Many things therefore are permitted by the
law upon necessity, many things pardoned by the law upon indulgencie, which yet
are directly against good manners, an^ simply sins in themselves: I will
instance a case; A widow that marr^^eth within her year of mourning, is by the
law free from infamy, bu^ by the law also adjudged unworthy of matrimonial
dignity. A Virgin that espouseth her self without her parents consent, is by
the law, lawfully, yet by the law also unhonestly espoused. A husband taking
his wife in adultery might lawfully kill her, yet not without the guilt of
heinous offense. The Jews might lawfully crave a bill of divorce, and put away
their wives upon any mislike: but Christ tells that it was granted by Moses
for the hardness of their heart, being yet a thing most unlawful, and
therefore not to be practiced from the beginning; And lastly we have a notable
instance Once for all in Math. 1. 19. Joseph being a just man, and not willing
to make her a public etc. a Strange expression.
Joseph, who when he thought his wife had committed adultery (and therefore
according to the law of God was to be brought forth and stoned to death for a
public example according to the Law of God) yet that Joseph was willing to
put her a way privately, and not expose her for a public Spectacle of Justice
(as the law severely commanded) is recorded in Sacred writ, as a commendable
act, and praise worthy in him, nay as a piece of Justice too. In which, and all
other cases of like nature, though an evil custom or peculiar permission may
save a person from the punishment of the Law, yet it can never clear them from
any Unlawful Act;

And here I purposly omit many eminent and pregnant proofs that might be
added, for what need I light so many torches to the noone day? or propose such
multiplicity of reasons too prove a truth so ma^nifest? If any person yet
remaine^ unsatisfied (as I would hope ther^ is none) I will remoove my plea ou^
of this court into the Highest Cour^ of all (because they shall have all the
fairest Trial that can be, and all the advantage ground to make the be^^
defense they can, in Such a weak and unrighteouse Cause which the^ attempt to
vindicate,) hoping tha^ when they are really convinced o^ their stong delusion,
[or if that will not be, yet at least that their mouths are constrainned to
Close in shameful silence] Our Nation will never more be so unhappy as to
shelter any persons of such monstrous shape and features as these, who not
only declare it lawful for husbands to demean themselves rigorously and
severely (even unto buffetings and blows) toward their wives, but upon every
impetuous gale of head strong lust and drunken passion of theirs, put their
detestable principles into practice. Reader, whoever thou art, observe that in
THIS HIGH TRIBUNAL SEAT, God sits the Judge: his Word the Law, his Saints and
Angels the VVitnesses, thy own conscience shall be the Jurie, and eternal
Truth (which never did deceive, nor can be deceived attends upon the Sentence.

CHAP. V. The same evinced by the Law of God.
NOw I must crave leave to rest my self a while, and entertain my reader with
historical discourse: to sit me down in the bloomy shade of Paradise, and
contemplate the monuments both of woman's first Creation, and first instetution
of her marriage; For in the infancy of all things, when God had framed the
worlds compass and bespringled it which glittering Stars, when he had fastend
the Center of the earth, and girt it about with Crystal floods, when he had
finished his glorious work, and Gn. 1. 28.
deputed Man his last creature, to be the Commander of all the visible Creation,
at lentgh he took a general surview of his labors, and found them all the fit
remainders of so perfect a workman; Only man was excepted, who was yet but
alone Creature, Ruper in li. de Trinit* ej. 9. openb. 9.
without any companion to whom he might communicate his joys, or impart his
mind, or S. Tertul. li. 2. advers. Marcion.
of whom he could either hope for comfort in his life, or expect continuance of
his posterity. v Sequenti pagina.
So that man seemed not more happy in his ample dominion, then unfortunate in
his solitary eslate; For what could the Josephus Antiq. l. c. 2.
Subjection of all things unto himself profit him? where in could pleasures of
Paradise delight him? what joy could he take in his angelical perfection, when
he had none to converse withal? but with beasts, trees, Stones, or such like
who could neither understand his reports, or return him contented answers?
Wherefore He who before saw all his works good, saw now that it was not good
for man (whose soul was fitted for communion) to be alone, but said, S. Bafil.
Romans 11. in Genes.
letus make him a helper like unto himself. Where the All-eternall Creator who
created all other things as he spoke the word (for he but Genesis 2. 18.
spoke and they were forth with made) does now in this particular take Genesis 1.
deliberation (as it were) and calls to council the whole Trinity, S. Greg.
mor. l. 9. c. 27.
denothing that He had in hand a more divine work, and was to frame a creature
of dignity. He takes i S. Basil. hom. 9. in Genesis
reason to his assistance, and wisdom, to manifest that now he was laboring
most curiously to frame a Microcosme, or such an Epitomie of his own divine
Excellency and perfection as should startle all the visible creation, and
render its self the Object of its own admiration; in short, to Create Such a
Miror of humanity, with such excellent qualifications (or faculties of a
Rational Souls) as might sewe for the ELOHIM to behold the shadow or Image of
himself Therein. Now Observe, after what glorious manner God created the man,
in the same manner God proceeds in the creation of the woman, whom he made as
an equal associate and fellow helper for man: Orig. hom. 1. in Genesis
For so God is pleased to call her name, who best knew her nature.

Poor Adam, let the world now judge whither then thou need not a Helper, when
heeing the worlds sole heir unto the worlds Diadem, thou hadest not so much as
any friend to speak a word unto, or a servant to obey thy rational and wise
commands.

Translat. ex prud.
No bended knee did to thee homage then
Nor creeping courtier fawn upon thy State
Beasts were thy Savage Guard instead of men
Whose senssless Sense could neither love nor hate.
Yet-again, most blessed fortunate Adam, for God out of thy own dear self,
created a meet helper for thee, more dutiful then any Servant, more dear then
any friend Hugo de. S. V. ingen 2.
That whatsoever was deficient to the perfection of thy felicity, might in this
new and last addition be fully accomplished. That instead of Solitarines thou
might enjoy a joyful companion, and in Stead of barrenness thou might be
eternally honored for the worlds Grandsire. This was thy last but thy greatest
of any mortal indowment. St. Chrysos. hom 8. in geu. Damascen in l. 2. de Genesis
12.
Neither was it without cause that she was last of all made, for as Princess
preparing to come unto her imperial city, has her harbingers sent before,
her house adorned and beautifyed, her court replenished, her attendants ready,
and all things for her due entertainment prepared, so it was convenient, that
before the Queen of the great world was created, the world (her receptacle)
should first be perfected Joseph. 1. antiq.c. 2. Tertul. l. 2. adv. Marcion.
Paradise the Metropolitan city of her residence finished, and all things
else ready furnishd to her hands.

Thus God vouchsafed to honor the first birth of his fairest creature, nothing
at all less then that of man's, and in some things also far beyond him. Genesis 2.
7.
Adam was molded out of the dust and clay of the earth, Chapter 2. 22.
the womam was framed out of the purifyed body of man: Petr. Lomb. 2. dise. 18.
Neither was she made of the lowest part, that so she might not seem inferior
to him, nor yet out of the highest part, that so she might not challenge
Superiority, but out of the middle of his body, of a ribh taken out of his left
side, that thereby she might appear not only his equal, but be most dearly
esteemed as the great Guardian of his Heart, and vital parts, Supplying the
office of that left ribb, (in whose place and stead she was created) which
defends the heart who in that S. August. 12. de Civ. Dei c. 21. and 26.
privy chamber rests it self, and which the arm as his beloved darling
naturally embraces: To teach obdurate man that woman is the Goddess, to whom
(of all creatures) he ought to Sacrifice his own heart love; that she is the
Chiefest Object on whom he should bestow the chaste imbracements of his arms;
or thus much else to intimate, S. Basil. hom. 12. in genesis
that as it is woman only, whose love (of all creatures) should inherit the
heart of man, so it is especially woman whose defense should merit the arm of
man.

Woman therefore by the divine power of creation was made of man: Gil. ant.
incerp. in Genesis cap. 1.
and man by a strange kind of Metamorphosis converted into woman. For when that
death had ceized on Adam, and God had taken forth his ribb, Idem ib. and Brunus
in Genesis 1.
he closed up the breach with tender flech insteede of the hard bone, to the
end that as his heart had now a more soft pillow to rely it self upon, so his
mind should now become more mollyfied, and instead of its natural fierceness
bebegin now to assume a natural mildness; Which speedly took effect, for as
soon as he was awaked, he aknowled head himself divided and turning unto this
now beature perclived himself imparted unto her. Wherefore his first words and
moming song were words of amity, and a fong of love, Genesis 2. 23.
this nowis bone of my bone and flech of my flech.

Transt. ex Bart. Per. 1. Sil^. ^n opere di^^ 6.
For God so lihe^ly graved on this bone
All Adams beauties that but hardly one
Could have the liver from his love descryd
Or known the bridegroom from his gentle bride
Saving that she had a more Soaring Eye.
A Smoother Chin, a Cheek of purer die.
A fainter voice, a more enticeing face
A deeper tress, a more delightful grace,
And in her bosom more then lilly white
Two swelling mounts of jvory panting ligh
Spring of all joys Sweet He she coupled One
Thy Sacred birth I never think upon
But (ravishd) I admire how God did then
Make two of one, and One of Two again.
For no sooner were these of One divided into Two and made distinct and
personal, but straitways again they were of two, contracted into One, and made
the same and individual: Their creation was presently accompanied with
institution of their marriage, where in Adam received his own again with rich
advantage. He lost Genesis 2. 21.
(as far as we read) but a bare bone, S. Damas ceng. in li. 2. ad Genesis
he received it again branched into many bones, wrapped up in tender flesh,
twisted on curious joints, full of lively Spirits flowing with youthful blood,
characterized with azure veins, in proportion absolute, beautiful in color,
lovely to the eye, delightful to be talkd withal, In a word his very like.
Peretius in hunc locum and Erunus ibid.
He lost his bone without any Sense of pain, he received it again with an
ecstasy of joy. In regard of which blessed and happy surprizal, he is
established for himself and all Succeding ages, an eternal Law, Genesis 2. 24.
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave unto his
wife and they two, shall be One flesh. This was his Hyminall Song, this was the
first Stature of Adam made here in Paradise, when he was pure (as the Angels
themselves) in perfection. Damascen. in lib. 2. ad Genesis
Then was not his reason over cast with any clouds of Sensuality, his judgment
not tainted with error, his Affections not disturbed or diverted by sinful
temptations, and there by allured to sin on other Objects, of delight and
pleasure, his Conscience not stained with Sin, the eye of his understanding
Clear, like the Sunn in its strentgh and beauty, the propension of his will
free: and then we may assure our selves his was most exquisite, and his words
the true Oracles of Wisdom.

In this so absolute and Angelical an estate (which now the nature of man can
no ways pretend unto) see how the Proper state and first venture or marriage,
ratifyeth and Confirms the amiable Bond, and indi^soluble knot, the firm
conjunction, and perfect Union of Man and Wife. Man shall leave his father and
mother and cleave unto his wife. Exodus 20.
Parents (there is no man doubts) are to be regarded with all filial and
reverentiall duty: they should be the Second in our honor, as they are the
Second causes of our being. Yet as though there were a Nescio quid in
marriage, some higher mystery, and a relation more essential, we are
authorized to relinquish them, (and therefore much more all other friends and
acquaintance or whatsoever love, the love of God only excepted) and to live
with our companion who is our Second self. An absolute Law (we see) for Adam,
and for all his, posterity of men (therefore shall a man, etc.) not enjoining
this condition to Eve, or to the after posterity of women kind, that they
should leave their father and mother and cleave unto their husbands, no: (but
for this cause shall a man leave, etc.) It may be that his prophetical soul
saw the future obdurity of man would prove to be so stony, as it might stand
in need of Laws to mollify it: but woman's nature to be so gentle, so affable,
so Obsequious, so compact of Love, that her choice affections would easily
prevent any law for the increase or continuance of her, Sympathizing Love,
stronger then death it self, and which many waters could not quench.

And in this nearest of all near affinities, if Se Chrysostom. c. 1. hom. 38. in
Genes.
Concord be our protector, though we live not in the glory of the world though
we be as poor as imagination can conceive though prosperity shines not in at
our windows, and pleasures, honors, riches and vanities, attend not at our
gates; Notwithstanding all we have an Asylum at home, or Refuge, whereunto when
we retire our selves, we are sure to find sincerity of Love standing on the
treshold of our door, ready to welcome us and true Contentment within to
entertain us.

The councell-house may prove distastefull to us, the city may perchance
deride us, the court peradventure not smile upon us: the fields through
Solitarines may possibly feed and nourish our melancholy, the streets-trough
popularitie may displease us, all things abroad may not relish with us, nay
gold and silver (if we had abundance of it) might distract our minds yet after
all, our comfort lies in this, that at our sweet home, we have Sovereign
Physic, a choice Cordial, a most admirable Antidote (viz the Quintesence and
highest Elixir of pure and spottles Love) to recover our diseased minds, and
to revive our drooping Spirits a present Restorative for every malady we mun
withal in this Cretd, dust and infectious air where in we live^,

But where discontent, and Discord swayes, though our posessions knew no other
limitts then the Artick and Antartick Poles of Earth, our attendants as
numberles as Xerxes Army, our fate as costly and luxurious as Heliogabalus, our
house and furniture as glorious as Salomons Temple, etc. yet all this is but
poor and beggarly riches, or a rich beggarie. Where as our mind (which is the
seat of true peace and content) is all this while inhabited by the outrageous
Spirit of strife and contention, and is a fit habitation for no other Objects
then such who devour and prey upon each other, with the ravenous appetite of
hatred, envy, malice, murders and revenge. Suppose flattering Prosperity were
thy conse^nt Minion, and gave thee the whole world at thy command, let the rich
Indies overlay thy floores and every thing thou have with purest gold, The
Choicest Gemms and Oriental pearls of richest worth, prostrate themselves
before thy feet, and Cohabite in thy arms, and the sweet Arabia perfume thee
with its costly odours, let the Sea, the air, the land, bring their rarest
offerings to the honor of thy exalted name, and let Ivory beds (nay massy
beds) of gold or silver inshrine thee from the dismal night, yet when thou
returnest home unto thy own bosom, thou shall then find a hell of Torments,
and that bitter root of the Colliquintida of strife and emulation, which
impoysons all the rest.

Far from the example of the first institution was any such enormitie. It was
here decreed They two shall bee-one flesh. Here was an Union proclaimed, their
bodies are one flesh, their Souls one Spirit, themselves no more destinctly
two, but perfectly united into One. And if we may be so bold to draw the
comparison from God himself, I would affirm (with reverence) that man and wife
are real shadows or Pictures of the most Sacred Trinity, where there is a
distinction of Persons, but an Unity of Essence, even so man and wife all tho
two Several persons, yet ought they to abide as one Individuum, or one entire
Soul, Spirit, and Affection; One and the self same great end (each others
mutual good, and furtherance of their outward and inward happynes.) and one
and the self same Means in order to that sole end (viz. in being and
continuing a mutual de light and Satisfaction unto each others mind centring
both in Unity of Love)

On this bargain, our first parents agreed, and the terms and conditions they
truly performed in their first state of Innocence, when as the Soul of man was
enameled only with the flowers of virtue, no thistles were then grouwing, no
thorns or briars were then planted: Passions of Anger fear, guilt and shame
were not yet borne, nor Vice her daughter then begotten. This was once the Age
whereof we have read.

Descriptio aurei Seculi translata ex Ovid. and aliis:
The first, and best of times were pure: a golden age
Next to the Gods, and farthest from tempestuous rage
Of vice. No other Empress of the world was known
As yet, but Sacred Virtue: she ruled then alone.
Then was eternal Spring; the earth with richest flowers
Was allways richly clad: which (when the Crystal showers
Performed their morning Sacrifices) gave such breath
As tho the Gods had daily new perfumed the Earth.
The Sister air a virgin for the piercing gunn
The mother earth, not yet was wounded by her son
The iron instrument. The rugged Oceans back
Not Sadled with tbe pine, to bear the Merchants pack
Yet then the Earth, the Sea, the air, untouched did yield
More fruits then labored now, does air, or sea, or field etc.
Bellona had not yet in sanguine field displaide,
Her sable arms; nor Vulcan on his anvile played
Music unto the Gods, whiles forged was the sword
Which now with sharp revenge Seconds each hasty word
No trumpets then to stir up wars were heard; no strif:
But in this Golden Age they livd a golden life.
And parallel also to the purity of this golden age was the perfection of man
and woman's soul, For when their bodies were first framed, God created there in
a lively soul, which he styled the breath of life, Aristot. li. dranima. cap.
6.
and that Spirit being of an Angelical Essence diffused it self into each
part, giving motion, sense and reason to the whole. Now in this natural
marriage of Souls and body the Soul acts the body, and the body supports the
soul. The Soul brought with her a rich dowry for the body, quick
apprehension, deep understanding, and a treasury fraught with memory. The
body brought a fair posession for the soul, and received her within his
habitation, and Seated her with in the warlike castle of his heart, fortifyed
her with the thick bullwark of his breast, attended her with waiting faculties
as a family of so many servants, made his eyes her watchmen, his tongue her
Orator, his ear her sentinel, his hands her Champions, his feet her lackies his
common parts her common vassals:

Now whosoever we please to take a review of woman's first Creation* equal unto
man's, having the same maker the same manner of making, better then man's,
because framd of a better Substance, in a place more Excellent, and at a more
remarkable time; and of the Original of marriage equal to both, in as much as
both were one flesh and one nature: more expressly binding the man unto the
royal Law of Love, Lastly, of the purity of that age, from whence all these
testimonies are drawn, he will easily Conclude, what I have been endeavoring
to confirm; That man and wife here lived a peaceable life, they enjoyed a
loving union, they lived in purest Love; if ever there was made an absolute
Law, if ever Statute of such perfection, as neither error could corrupt it,
nor vice deprave it, we are sure This was it, where God in the first Creation
was the Law giver, and man in his first perfection the Law receiver, and
Obedient Conformist Thereunto. Now whereas our imitation is to be drawn from
the best patterns, Here may we rest our selves, as at the mouth of God, and
draw sweet waters from the very Fountain head of truth it self; And that we may
not waver and fructurate as at uncertainties, God has pleased farther to
confirm us in the due esteem of this Sacred Bond of Love, by the Testimony of
his spirit speaking likewise by the mouth of his great Apostle Paul, who tells
us that Marriage is a Type of that Mystical Union that is between Christ (our
great Husband,) and his Church (the Spouse) being indeed the stricktest
Injunction of mutual Love where was not to be so much as a secret thought, or
word touching rigorous Predomination (our Lord Christ himself, al tho the head
of dear Spouse, yet became a Servant to her in the highest and most eminent
offices of Love) nor of unkind pre-eminence, (for he endowes his church with
the same privileges of Adoption, as Himself received in being his fathers
first born and beloved child, in giving unto her likewise the same glorious
Inheritance, which his father invested Him withal;) It was (says St. August.
l. de cont. 14.
Augustine) a Mystery of Union, a Sacrament of Love, a Bond of fidelity, a
heavenly Paradise of peace for term of this present life, and the way unto
perfection in that better life to come.

But man (you will say) by occasion of the woman fall from this integritue, and
therefore women are not now to exspect from men such duties of amity. True it
is, the Serpent by long persuasions induced her to a delightful sin of eating
the forbidden fruit, yet she showed a stout resistance before she yielded; She
made a short and sharp ^nswer to the Serpents cunning demand, ( Genesis v. 1.
has God forbidden you to eat of the fruit of the garden? Implying a plain
falsification in his close assertion,) v. 2. 3.
we may eat of the fruits of the garden, but of the fruit of the tree in the
midst of Paradise God commanded us not to eat we may not eat least we die.
From hence she drove the old cunning Serpent to his natural shift, and open
traode down right lying, v. 4.
you shall not die the death etc. Adding there with all' a vain hope of her
knowing some thing which being discovered to her would much add to the beauty
and perfection of her State, and made as if God for that reason had withheld it
from her, v. 4.
for God does know that in the day you eat thereon ye shall be as Gods (viz as
the Elo him, (...) knowing good and evil. Thus in (...) fair combat, for a
fair time she stood out at staffs end with him, til^ by his stratagemes at
lenth got the glory of the day.

But Adam, as soon as the fruit was proffered unto him did not make any
demurr at all, not so much as once questioned the matter, but strait way v. 6.
tasted the sweetness thereof, whose bitter relish remains in us to this day. I
see no reason then but that man (all tho he was not first in the trangression)
should have an equal blame with the woman and perhaps more, for the woman was
drawn on, and deceived with much greater difficulty, then the man who suddenly
and with less deliberation yielded unto Sin.

Especially when that general Prohibition of eating this forbidden fruit, was
not given unto the woman, but to the man, Genesis 2. 19.
THOU shall not eat of the Tree etc. And howsoever Greg. l. 39. Moral. c. 16.
St. Gregory, has it, you shall not eat thereof (as if it were spoken to
both man and woman) yet the original reads it in the singular number: And St.
Austine tells us, Aug. li. 8. Genesis ad lit. c. 17.
that by tradition the woman received this commandment from the man, and not
immediately from the mouth of GOD, as Adam did; This I willingly do grant, and
thence also conclude that for this reason (which has weight in it) the woman
might Chance, more easily to break this Law, then the man, Since the
Allglorious Majesty of God Commanding, can not but have a stronger influence on
Adam, then Adams command (who was but a fellow creature, and One with her
self) could have upon Eve his wife; Now the woman was indeed the Occasion of
man's sin, but not the real cause, and if Adam had but observed the command of
God (To whom it was in a distinct and particular manner enjoined,) though his
wife had broken it ten thousand times, yet we had not tasted death, and as this
is the Common received Opinion of the learned School men, and other
Interpreters, so the Apostle Paul makes the matter (I think) beyond dispute,
where he says, that by Romans 5. v. 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. it is 8 or 9.
eims repeated* that the Original Cause of the worlds sin was by One. and that
was Adam sin.
One man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and in Adam (as our
first Root and common head) we all Sinned etc. not mentioning Eve as the Cause
all tho she was first caught in the transgression;

However the case stood between Adam and Eve, I verily persuade my self, that
the same Serpent who was both their Tempter, was likewise the first sower of
dissension between man and wife: Doubtless it never proceeded from God, who
bound them in so strong a bond of love. It never proceeded from man, who so
strongly, established his love: If neither from God nor from man, from whom
then I pray you but from the Devil Who is that grand hater of Love and lover of
hatred? Neither is this position a child of my own fancy, Hoc enim acutissime
Observavit generosissima and. doctiss. foeminae jo dovena in Oratione sua
apologetica profoeminis.
or the conceit only of some other far more learned wit, St. Chrysos. hom. 57.
in Genesis 29.
St. Chrysostom is the author, Satan (says he) cunningly insinuated himself
into the company of man and wife, and craftily and wickedly disjoined their
hearts whom God before had joined, where by strife and contention do do now
often times reign with them in Stead of love and contentment. May it please you
therefore who are rigorous husbands to your wives, or such as are maintainers
of this strife engendering Opinion to take notice of the Author thereof. A
worthy patron (believe it) for unworthy a practice, a famous founder of such
impious and inhumane acts. Heaven abhors it, the earth, was not so base to
invent it, Hell must be sought, and the Devil found out for the first broacher
thereof. I think then is no man so shameless, but would blush. (or at least
might be ashamed) to take his practice a notorious wicked man who is abominable
to God and all sober men, and will there be fonnd (afterall all that's said) any
monsters who will be Apprentices to the Devil, to learn a Trade from Him? Were
there no other reason in the world to deterr (if not persuade) men from this
hateful Impiety but only this, that it hate. THE DEVIL for its Author,
methinks this might be Sufficient motive, to raise up a real indignation and
abhorrencie thereof especially when it is so detestable to God, and to his
sacred Laws, so opposite to the Law of Nature (and that instinct planted in
brute beast so Contrary to the being, life and wellfar^ of mankind, so
destractive to Reason, such a professed Enemy to true Religion; In a word the
public shame and disgrace o^ such wicked men and the grief and lamentation of
all that are good.

CHAP. VI. The Conclusion.
MY conclusion shall therefore be, an earnest request unto all married persons,
that as they are bound by the Laws of Reason and humanity, by the laws of God,
and man, and as they have most solemnly given their plighted faith one to an
other in the Church of God, and before his all seeing ey, so that they would
both conscienciously make it their care and study how to Honor God in this
honorable Estate of theirs, and if contention must arise, let it be a godly
and zealous emulation who shall exceed each other in all the duties of Love,
according to that mutuall' obligation one toward the other in that Sacred Bond
of Mystical Union where in they stand; Husbands love your wives, as Christ
loves his Church; count not that all you can do or suffer for their good can
be too much, Christ loves his Church with the dearest of all loves, he thinks
nothing too good, too choice, too dear for them provided they do but all
their endeavor to walk answerable to this Love; Resolve your selves what due
authority God has given you over your wives, and in extraordinary and
difficult circumstances etc. try that utmost of your lawful bound but never
Stepp into that thorny field of rigor, Severity, sullen morosity, or cruel
Tyranny, which all sober ingenious and godly men have shunnd, and fixed a
brand of perpetual shame and ignominy on every persons forehead, who shall be
found walking in that Aceldama (or field of blood) and unto whom God has
denounced a certain curse; Wives Love, honor, and obey your husbands in the
lord, (as the church Loves Christ) and learn how to rule and reign [for so
Christ promises his Church shall Revel 5. 10.
Reign with him] by a dutiful, a humble meek and wise subjection unto his
golden Scepter of purest love; And as undefiled love is the Churches greatest
glory, so should it be the greatest honor and dignity to every wife to fix an
Imperial and sparkling Diadem of Flaming love upon her husbands head, which
as this Crounes his sovereign brow with victorious laurel, so likewise does
it blazen forth her worth, and by so much the more exalts her praises; Both
husbands and wives, live together as One, in that Unity of Soul, as you are
pronounced to be One in the unity of body and flesh; husbands condescend to
please your wives in all that with Deciency you may, and be not bitter or rigid
to them, and you wives submitt unto your husbands in whatsoever lawful
commands, and so the God of Love and peace will delight to take up his
habitation in your houses (when you lie down he will defend you, when you
sleep, he will command his Angels to protect you, when you awake he will meet
you and converse with you he will teach and instruct you in all his ways, and
choose the path he would have you walk in, and hold up all your steps in those
his paths and open fountains of his refreshing Love to your thirsty souls,
when (...) wearyed in you pilgrimage thro^^^ this (...) solitary and desolate
wilderness and will never leave you, nor forsake you, but build you up as
living and precious stones, in his Spiritual building, to your own mutual
confort and peace, the good of your friends and acquaintance, the usefullness
and benefit of the Church of CHRIST, and of your generation, the everlasting
hapines and welfare of your preciouss and immortal souls, both in this life,
and in the life to come. Which has no*

FINIS.

