Great and Good News FOR THE Church of England, If they Please to Accept
thereof: OR THE Latitudinarian Christians Most Humble Address and Advice To all
the Imposing Clergy Men Of the said CHURCH, BY What Names or Titles soever
Dignified or Distinguished.

With Allowance,

May the 28th 1688.


Printed for H. L. and I. K.

A PLEADER TO THE NEEDER WHEN A READER.
AS all, my friend, through wily knaves, full often suffer wrongs,
Forget not, pray, when it you have read, to whom this book belongs.
Than one Charles Clark, of Totham Hall, none to it a right has better,
A wight, that same, more read than some in the lore of old black-letter.
And as C. C. in Esser dwells a shire at which all laugh.
His books must, sure, less tit seem dressed, if they are not bound in calf!
Care take, my friend, this book you never with grease or dirt besmear it;
While none but awkward puppies will continue to "dog's-ear" it!
And over my books when book- worms "grub," I Would have them understand,
No marks the margins must de- face from any busy "hand!"
Marks, as re-marks, in books of Clark's, when ever some eritie spy leaves,
It always him so wasp-ish makes, though they are but on the fly-leaves!
Yes, if so they are used, he would not de- for to deal a fate most meet
He Would have the soiler of his quires do penance in a sheet!
The Ettrick Hogg never deemed a bore-his candid mind revealing,
Declares, to beg "a copy" now is a mere pre- teat for stealing!
So, as some knave to grant the loan of this my book may wish me,
I thus my book- plate here display, lest some such "fry" should dish me!
But hold, though I again declare Withholding I Will not brook,
And "a sea of trouble" still shall take to bring book-worms "to book!"
Great and good News FOR THE Church of England, If they Please to Accept
thereof: OR THE Latitudinarian Christians Most Humble Address and Advice, etc.
YOU Topping Clergy of the English Church,
Who still would leave Dissenters in the Lurch,
And by your Laws have always them Perplexed,
And with your Pinfolds have them sorely Vexed;
Whom you have Prosecuted unto Death,
And so will do (we fear) while you have Breath:
We pray that you will take this in good Part,
Which we present both from our Hands and Heart,
Wherein You Will find no Plots, nor no Designs,
But only such to mend the present Times,
The which if you (with patience) will Peruse,
You Will see we shall not in the least Abuse
Your Gravities with any frothy Story,
But what shall tend unto your future Glory;
We wish with all our Hearts your Church to see,
A true Reformed one to set us Free
From Penal Statutes, likewise from all Such
Who will compel all Men to come to Church,
Before they are convinced which Church is true,
And such (to our great Grief) were most of You,
Who would us force beyond that Gospel Light,
Which bids first Prove, and then to take the Right:
That Light's our Rule, our Reason is the Judge,
And for that Topic you did us so Grudge;
We must except those Masters of great Sense,
Which to Dissenters never gave Offense,
But have true Love and Charity for All,
Who through Christ upon the Lord do Call;
And no distinction now among us Make,
Bearing good will to all for Christ his Sake;
Such Men we will own so long as we have Breath,
A sweet Perfume they leave here after Death:
These are the Men which in your Church are Best,
(A thing too serious to be made a Jest)
Though often traduced for this Christian Frame,
By your own selves, wherein you are to Blame
For to relate that they will tack About
To any side before they will turn Out:
Trimmers you call them, Men of Latitude,
And so expose them to the Multitude,
Who cannot distinguish between Doves and Crows,
Between a Jehu Race of Men and Those
Who are the Grace of all your English Church,
We pray to God that you may all be such.
Draw out these Worthy Men but from your Line,
Your Churches will appear like Pharoahs Kine.
The Reverend Whitchcot, your own Churches Son,
Taught this great Truth, (and now to Heaven is Gone)
That every Man here for himself judge must,
And not to take our Faith on Humane Trust;
But search and try until we plainly See,
What Men propose with Gods Word do Agree
(Like the Berean Saints who did the Same,
And by it got an everlasting Name,
For noble Minds, upon Divine Record,
For their strict search into his Sacred Word)
Write by his Copy, and let all Men See,
You love not Force, but equal Liberty.
This thing alone advance your Church will More,
Then all those Lash-whips used Heretofore
In this our Land, to scourge Dissenters In,
(Though first contrived by the Man of Sin)
Our Gracious Prince has now led us the Way,
Pray do not you too long behind him Stay;
Advance betimes (next Year may be to Late,)
Before your Church receive a bruised Pate,
You do postpone our Happiness Herein,
And make your Church Obnoxious to the King,
Who has you promised fairly to Protect;
But if his Favors you so much Neglect,
And will stand out; yet if his Bowls run True,
It will be done, and then no thanks to You;
Active Obedience to his just Command,
Is now adays, only a Rope of Sand.
The Non-resistance formerly you Taught,
Is at this time esteemed good for Naught;
Your Eagle Eyes, in this bright Age sees More,
Then all your Predecessor Heretofore:
Passive Obedience now is gone Astray;
Prayers and Tears, which was the only Way
In former times unto a future Glory,
Is now become a Complimental Story.
The Royal Word, it was a sacred Text
In the last Reign; but now you are so Vexed,
When this great Prince does offer you so Fare,
Which shows to him what sort of Men you Are;
Let Coesar hugg you, then you will all Sing
Vive le Roy, God bless our gracious King;
But if he touch your Laws but in the Least,
Though unjust, then to the searlet Beast,
He is of kin, that nothing will go Down
With your fat Church, that will advance his Crown;
Unless your selves shall Partners be with Him,
You Will wear the Scepter, him the Diadem.
(Unhappy Prince, whose Priests do him Bestride.
Not to advance Gods Truth, but their own Pride)
This is the very temper of all Such
Who are true Tories in your English Church;
Though you pretend to be so truly Loyal,
Yet when from Court you have the least Denial
In what you do expect, oh then you Huff,
And Heaven, and Bounce, and presently take Snuff;
And so as Malcontents you all Agree,
To sound Defiance to his Majesty,
In what he does so Christian like Propose
To all his Subjects whether Friends or Foes,
With so much Reason, Equity and Right,
That all good Men in him their Souls Delight:
And pray so heartily for him that He
From Antichristian Yokes may make us Free;
And in due time may he his Subjects Bring
To their right wits, and then we all shall Sing,
This is the Prince of all the Norman Race,
Who came so near to the true Christian Pace;
And sure will be when Men have spent their Darts,
Not King of Clubs, but King of all our Hearts,
Which God Almighty grant in his good Time,
That all may, say, he is a Prince Divine.
Now for the Test, Let not your English Church
Be so concerned, but leave that unto such,
Which shall our. Trustees be, who doubtless Will
Act that Affair with Prudence and with Skill:
If they propose therein something in Stead,
What Is that to us, so they can please the Head:
(All would be Statesmen in this present Age,
Most of them over wise, few truly Sage)
To join with him in that which is so Meet,
Most Men will say therein you will be Discreet:
But by refusing of your free Consent,
What do you mean, or what is your Intent,
In this affair, except it be, to Show
You will be cross, unless your Church shall Crow,
And drive all others from their present Station,
Which is once more, to beggar half the Nation.
(This we insert here only for your Sake,
Because the right way, we would have you Take)
Our Valiant Prince for us has led the Van,
Lets take his Rear with all the speed we Can;
This plain Address may serve to mend us All,
Don't then reject; what is offered from White Hall;
Should you withstand this equal Liberty,
Most men would say, your Church loves Popery
More then all them, who now do it Profess,
How you will come off herein we cannot Guess:
And those who shall now bear it for their Crest,
Will be a Faction sure to all the Rest;
Who will combine together to pull Down,
All topping Tories, that shall wear that Crown;
Join then with us, and you shall quickly See,
We shall be in that Year of Jubilee,
Which is to come to pass in this our Isle,
By Northren Race, to make this Nation smile;
Our Christian Star, has brought us near that Point,
Which will Cement us all in every Joint,
Unless you shall it stubbornly Prevent,
By throwing Bones into next Parliament;
Which if you should, you may repent too Late,
When Truth shall rise with splendour and in State;
And make you all, when with her you shall Meet,
Fall down and prostrate at her Sacred Feet:
So Heavens protect you, and your English Church,
So far as truly Christian, without Burch,
Which are the wishes of your faithful Friends,
When Truth prevails, 'twill make us all amends;
Then to advance her, we will spare no Pains,
For by her progress, we shall reap the Gains;
Though for a while, she may yet wear a Vail,
Doubtless ere long, Gods Truth will here Prevail.
FINIS

