THE Mystery of FAITH Opened up: Or some SERMONS concerning Faith (two whereof
were not formerly Printed) Wherein the Nature, Excellency, and Usefulness of
that noble Grace is much cleared, and the practice thereof most powerfully
pressed.

Whereunto are added other three Sermons, two concerning the Great Salvation,
(one of these not formerly Printed) and a third concerning Death.

By Mr. ANDREW GRAY, late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow.

All these Sermons being now carefully Revised, and much Corrected.

Joh. 3. 18. He that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.

Edinburgh, Printed by George Swinton and James Glen, Anno 1669.

Mr. GRAY'S Mystery of Faith.

Christian Reader.
AMong many weighty and soul pierceing Sentences that you will find in these
following Sermons, this is one^; That the Professors of this ^ge, whether they
go to heaven or hell, they will be the greatest debtors that shall be in ^ither
place^: the (...) to the free grace of God, and the other to his Justice: And
certainly, if we speak of those in this time, whose ^lessed lot it shall be to
inherit the Kingdom, ^hey cannot but acknowledge themselves in^ebted to his
love, above all that have gone before them* for w^shing them from such ugly
^^llutions, ^^ this generation has been defiled ^ith; for bringing them
through so great tri^^ilations, preserving them in the midst of so ^^eat
ten^ations, and dangerous s^ares as have ^compassed them; yea, and still
keeping in the ^^ght before them, notwithstanding of so many ^asts (if we may
so speak) from all the four ^inds of, hell to blow it out. And on the other
and, if we speak of these whom in this ge^^ration shall perish* assuredly their
debt unto ^ivine Justice must be exceeding great, above ^^l who are gone down
to the pit before them; ^^cause the Roll of their mercies will be found have
been many ^^bits longer* and many cu^s broader, than theirs who lived in the
pre^ding ages; and the great things that the ^^rd has wrought in our days,
have born a greater testimony against the wickedness, hardness and atheism of
this time, then of many former. But above all, the great measure of
Gospel Light that he has no less plentifully offered, then wonderfully
preserved to this generation, beyond all our Ancestors; has undoubtedly made
the sin of these who shall utterly reject their own mercy, so out of measure
sinful, and their unbelief so exceedingly inexcusable, that their guilt must
needs justify Corazin and Bethsaida, or Sodom and Gommorrah in that day when
every man shall give account of himself to God: And amongst the many preaching
witnesses that (al as we are afraid) shall compear in that day against many yet
living in their pleasures, and dead while they live: This now glorified Author
cannot but be one, whose testimony must be very condemning, especially to the
vain, loose, negligent and time-wasting youth in this age: For when h^ was
first drawn to the Ministry, he was but youth indeed, scarce twenty years
complete; f^^ within that age, that by the constitutions o^ this Church (except
in case of more then common abilities which indeed he had) is required for
entering to that great and holy Calling. And for the space of two years after
(which was all the time that the Church enjoyed his Labor, he was helped to
press the Truths an^ Threatenings of God so home upon the Conscience of his
hearers, that as it was observed of him, b^ one of his most Learned and pious
Colleagu^ Master Durham, who is now in glory with him he did many times cause
the hair of their head stand up: The Lord not only hereby verifying his Word,
that he can take the weak things of the world to confound the strong, and out
of the mouth of Babes can perfect his own praise, but designing also (as would
seem of purpose) to send a Boy out of the School for a reprover of the
sluggishnesse of his People, that thereby the aged might be the more ashamed,
and the younger more afraid: Neither do we think that this was all; but truly
when we consider what measure of Graces, Gifts and Experiences the Lord did
bestow upon so young a person, and then with what humility, self-denial,
gravity, prudence, diligence, authority and moderation he was helped to manage
these Talents during that short time of his Ministry; It may be justly
conceived that the Lord brought him forth to be a great conviction even to many
of us in the Ministry who came into our Masters vineyard long before him, and
will go out behind him: And indeed to us it looks somewhat like the Lords
taking up of the little Child and setting him amongst the midst of his
contending Disciples in these times, that even they who would be greatest
amongst us, might be least, and see somewhat of their own weakness.

As to this little Piece, whatever ye shall find in it: It has this to say
for its self, that whereas many Writings in the world, do intrude themselves
upon the Press, yet this the Press has violently thrust into the world: For
some young Student, from his good affection to the edification of the Lords
People, and (no doubt) from his high esteem of the precious Author his memory,
having given in to the Press a Copy of some of these Sermons, being only
Notes taken from his mouth when he preached them, no sooner were they seen
abroad, but all the Presses in the Nation fell a laboring about them, so that*
(if we mistake not) in less no^ two or three Months time, three or four
Impressions were cast off, yet all of them so imperfect and maimed, that
howbeit the excellency of the matter, and the fresh remembrance of the worthy
Author his name, made them very sweet to many (especially those who had heard
him Preach) yet the unsuitable dress wherein they appeared and their mistakes
of the first Writers (they being hardly able to take up every thing as it was
spoken) occasioning diverse material failings in the sense, besides lesser
faults, could not but be a trouble to those who were acquainted not only with
the singular graces, but parts also of that eminent Youth. This gave occasion
to some friends to speak a little what way these prejudices which both the
Truth and the Authors name might ^ly under, by these uncorrect Impressions
might be taken off. And finding that the Copy* which by providence the worthy
young Gentlewoman who was his wife, had lying by her though it was but Notes
taken from his mouth, yet was the most correct that could be found: And that it
also did contain the whole purposes that he had preached upon these Texts; yea,
the whole purposes concerning Faith, that he had preached according to that
method, proposed in the first of the Sermons formerly published. This was
undertaken to be revised by some, who albeit none of the fittest for these
employments, yet rather or nothing should be done in the business, were
con^tent to bestow some hours upon it, according a^ other necessary employments
would permit. And now having sought out all the Notes of these Sermons which we
could find from other hands, and compared them with the Copy abovementioned,
we do again present them unto the Lords People, not with any confidence that
our pains has put any new luster upon them; only we have some hopes that the
whole subject being now before them, and these things in the way of expression
helped, which either might seem to be somewhat unpleasant, or liable to
mistakes, they shall not n^w be less edifying, nor less acceptable then
formerly they were. We did not think fit to make any considerable alterations
^^ ^o the method, or other things of that kind, lost ^aply by straining his
excellent purposes too much, to shape them to the ordinary Rules, or to reduce
them to that order which might best have pleased our selves we should have
wronged the matter it self, at least, have put these to a loss who did hear
him Preach, and it may be ^ow upon their reading things in that same order as
they heard them, will be the more readily brought under the impressions of that
liveliness, power and weight which (it may be) formerly they felt upon their
hearts when he was speaking.

If the method do not altogether satisfy some spirits, or the explication seem
not so fult, or ^f they find some introductions which possibly ^ead not in so
close, or seem not so sib to the subject of the Sermon, or happly now and then,
there be some little digressions from the main purpose, we shall desire that
this may not at all be constructed to be the Authors ignorance of Rules and
Method, or his want of abilities in humane Learning: it being known to these
who were best acquaint with him, that he had indeed a Scholastic spirit, and
was in reading far beyond his age and opportunities for Studying. But as to all
these, we shall entreat you rather to consider, 1. His age, and that his gift
was but in the very moulding and breaking (as we speak) in the point of order
and method, when the Lord was pleased to call him home from his work. 2. That
every man has his proper gift of God, wh^ in his great wisdom (and certainly
for the good of His Church) does so order, that there is somewhat singular and
peculiar almost in every man's way, as to these things. 3. For any thing we
know, he had never that high esteem of this or any other of his labors, as to
design an^ of them for public view: and these are bu^ Notes taken from his
mouth. 4. We are persuaded he studied more his hearers than himself. Ye will
easily perceive, when ye have bu^ read a little, that he has been a man of a
ver^ zealous temper; that the great ^ensil of hi^ spirit, and that which he
did wholly spend himself about, was to make people know their dangerous
condition by nature, and by all means t^ persuade them to believe, and lay hold
upon the Great salvation: And truly that a man in such a frame should less
attend to these less things is not to be wondered at. And indeed, though these
things be good in themselves, and worthy to be looked to in their own place,
yet for a Minister of the Gospel, in all Auditories, and upon all occasions, to
pin up every purpose to such a method, and insist into such a measure of
Explications and Criticismes upon words, it is but to ^etter himself, and to
starve his people. 5. Consider the dullness of the most part of hearers in this
age, and how hard a thing it is to awake a sleeping world, and to get them but
to think that it does concern them to hear in earnest; And possibly it was not
a small piece of spiritual wisdom in him, (and it may be not unfit to be
imitated by others) to begin or end all his Sermons with an awakening word
concerning Heaven, or Hell, or Judgment, and the danger of choising the evil,
and refusing the good. 6. For digressions, the truth is, that his soul was so
filled with such longings after Heaven, and Glory, and so inflamed with the
love of Christ, (especially toward the latter end of his race) that when he
fell upon these subjects, upon which (ye will see) most of these digressions
are, he could not well contain himself, nor easily bring off his own spirit! A
thing not unusual to the Saints in Scripture. And howbeit such things might
seem somewhat singular (in the time) and not so coherent; yet now we have
grounds to apprehend that they were often strong influences of the Lords
Spirit, stirring up a lamp (as it were) into a sudden blaze, that was not to
burn long in his Church. But now we shall detain you no longer, only this we
may assure you of, That although these Sermons are neither so exact, nor so
full as doubtless they would have been, if they had come from the Authors own
pen, yet as we dare say, they were studied with Prayer, Preached with Power,
and backed with Success; so also, if ye shall read them with consideration,
meditate with Prayer, and Practice with diligence, ye shall neither find your
time nor pains ill bestowed, but shall have cause to bless the Lord for this
amongst other helps that he has given, for making you meet for the inheritance
of the Saints in light. That it may be blessed to this end, is the earnest desire
and prayer of your servants in the work of the Lord,

To. Trail.
Jo. Stirling.

The Mystery of Faith Opened up.
SERMON I.
1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that ye should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.
THis everlasting Gospel (in which there are drawn so many precious draughts
and divine lineaments of the transcendent beauty of a crucified Savior, and of
the riches of his unsearchable grace) is a most precious and excellent thing,
not only because it does contain most absolute and sublime precepts and
commands, in the exercise and obedience of which, we do not only attain unto
the highest pitch in holiness, but likewise, because it contains most rich
and precious promises, in the possession and fruition of which we are advanced
to the highest pinnacle of eternal blessedness, this is clear in the grace of
Faith; for what does more purify the heart and stamp it with the Image of the
invisible God then this grace of Faith? And what richer promises are annexed to
any duty then to this duty of believing, to wit, everlasting life, and fruition
of God. So that if we have dwelt forty days at the foot of Mount Sinai, and
had been under the greatest discovering and condemning power of the Law, we may
yet come with boldness to mount Sion, and there embrace Jesus Christ, who is
the end of the Law for righteousness to such as believe; Upon which Mount he
stands holding forth the golden Scepter of his peace, desiring us to embrace
him, and is crying out that word in Isa. 65. 1. Behold me, behold me. O may we
not summond Angels, and these twenty four Elders about the Throne, to help us
to wonder, that ever such a command as this came forth, that we should believe
on the Name of the Son of God, after that we had broken that first and
primitive command, That we should not eat of the forbidden tree: Was not this
indeed to make mercy rejoice over judgment? And O may we not wonder at the
precious oath of the everlasting Covenant, whereby he has sworn, That he
delights not in the death of sinners? What (suppose ye) were poor Adams
thoughts when at first the Doctrine of Free Grace, and of a crucified Christ
Jesus a Savior, was preached unto him in Paradise? What a divine surprisal was
this, that heaven should have preached peace to earth, after that earth had
proclaimed war against heaven? Was not this a low step of condescendency? to
behold an offended God preaching peace and good will to a guilty sinner; What
could self-destroying Adam think of these morning and first discoveries of this
everlasting Covenant? Christ, as it were, in the morning of time giving vent to
that infinite love, which was resting in his bosom and precious heart, before
the foundation of the world was laid. We know not whether the infiniteness of
his love, the eternity of his love, or the freedom of it, makes up the
greatest wonder; But sure, these three joined together, make up a matchless
and everlasting wonder. Would any of you ask the Question, What is Christ
worth? We could give no answer so suitable as this, it is above all the
Arithmetic of all the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth, to calculate
his worth, all men here must be put to a divine non plus; This was Jobs
divinity, Job 28. 13. Man knows not the price of wisdom. And must not Jesus
Christ who is the precious object of Faith, and wisdom of the Father, be a
supereminent and excellent One, who has that Name of King of kings, and Lord
of lords, not only engraven on his vesture, (which points out the
conspicuousnesse of his Majesty) but even also upon his thigh, to point out
that in all his goings and motions, he proves himself to be higher then the
Kings of the earth? And howbeit the naked proposing of the object does not
convert, yet if once our souls were admitted to behold such a sight as Christ
in his Beauty and Majesty, and to be satisfied with the divine rays of his
transcendent glory, then certainly we should find a blessed necessity laid
upon us, of closing with him; for Christ has a sword proceeding out of his
precious mo^^h, by which he does subject and subjugate his own to himself, as
well as he has a sword girded upon his thigh, by which he judges and makes
war with his enemies. We confess it is not only hard, but simply impossible
to commit a Hyperbole in commending of him; His worth being always so far
above our expressions, and our expressions always so far beneath his worth,
therefore we may be put to propose that desire unto him, Exalt thy self, O
Lord, above the Heavens.

But now to our purpose, being at this time to begin our discourse upon that
radical and precious grace of Faith, we intend to speak of it under this
twofold notion and consideration: First, We shall speak of it as it is
justifying, or as it does lay hold upon the righteousness of a crucified
Savior, making application of the precious promises in the Covenant of free
grace, which we call justifying Faith. And in the second place, we shall speak
a little-unto Faith, as it does lay hold upon Christ's strength, for advancing
the work of mortification, and does discover the personal excellencies of Jesus
Christ, by which we advance in the work of holiness and divine consormity
with God, which we call sanctifying Faith. However, it is not to be supposed,
that these are different habits of Faith, but different acts flowing from the
same saving habit, laying hold and exercising themselves upon Christ in
different respects, and for diverse ends. Now to speak upon the first, we have
made choice of these words. The Apostle John, in the former verse, has been
pointing out the precious advantages of the grace of obedience, and of keeping
of his commands; that such a one has, as it were, an arbitrary power with God,
and does receive many precious returns of prayer: As likewise, that one who is
exercised in the grace of repentance, is Gods delight: which is included in
this, that he does these things that are well pleasing in his sight. And now in
these words he does, as it were, answer an objection that might be proposed,
about the impossibility of attaining these precious advantages, seeing his
commands were so large, and that hardly could they be remembered. This he
does sweetly answer, by setting down in this one verse a short compend or
breviary both of Law and Gospel, viz. That we should love one another, which
is the compend of the Law: and, The we should believe on the Name of His Son;
which is the compend of the Gospel; And by this he shows the Christian, that
there are not many things required of him, for attaining these excellent
advantages; but if he exercise himself in the obedience of these two
comprehensive commandments, he shall find favor both with God and man. And as
concerning this precious grace of Faith, We have, 1. the advantages of it
implied in the words, and clear also from the scope, as (no doubt) all the
commands have infinite advantages infolded in their bosom, which redounds to a
Believer, by his practicing of them. And, 2. the excellency of it holden forth
in the words, in that it is called, His command, as if he had no other command
but this. (And the Greek particle is here prefixed, which has a great deal of
emphasis and force in it, (...)) But, 3. There is this also, the absolute
necessity of this grace, holden forth here in this word, His Commandment: as if
he would have said, by proposing of this command, I do set life and death
before you, and that ye would not conceive that it is an arbitrary and
indifferent thing for you to believe, or not: But be persuaded of this, that as
an infinite advantage may constrain you to the obedience of it, so absolute
necessity must persuade you to act that which is of your everlasting
concernment. And lastly, Ye have the precious Object* upon which Faith (which
is justifying) does exercise it self, and that is upon the Name of the Son of
God; And (no doubt) Faith is that excellent grace, which does elevate the soul
unto a sweet and inseparable union with Christ* and is that golden and precious
knot, that does eternally knit the hearts of these precious friends together.
Faith is that grace that draws the first draughts of Christ's precious Image
on our hearts, and by love does accomplish and perfire them. Now Faith takes
hold not only on the faithfulness of God, that he is a God of truth, and
that in him there is no lie: but likewise it takes hold on the omnipotency of
God, that he is one to whom nothing is too hard: and on the infinite mercy and
love of God, that he is one who does delight to magnify this Attribute above
all his works: And these are the three great pillars of justifying Faith. From
the first, it answers all these objections of sense, which do ordinarily cry
forth, Does his promise fail for evermore? And that with this one word, If he
has once purposed it, he will also do it, and if he has once spoken it, he
will also make it come to pass. From the second, it answers all these
objections that may arise from carnal reason and probability, which tend to the
weakening of his confidence; And these do oftemtimes cry out, How can these
things be? But Faith laying hold upon the omnipotency of God, it staggers not
at the promise, but is strong in the Faith, giving glory to God. And it is the
noble and divine exercise of this Heroic grace of Faith, that these objections
of reason and probability, which it cannot answer, it will lay them aside, and
yet close with the promise. Which was the practice of believing Abraham, who
considered not his own body being weak, nor the barrenness of Sarahs womb. As
likewise, it was the commendable practice of that woman, Matthew. 15. who not
being able to answer the second trial of her faith from reason, yet
notwithstanding, Faith made her cry out, Have mercy upon me, O Son of David.
And from the last, a Christian does answer all the arguments of misbelief,
which do arise from the convictions of our unworthiness and sinfulness, which
makes us oftentimes embrace that divinity of Peter's, Luke 5* 8. Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man. But Faith taking hold on the infinite mercy and love of
Christ, it answers all with this, He walks not with us according to that rule
of merit, but according to that precious and golden rule of love and boundless
compassion.

But before we shall speak any thing unto you of these things, we would a
little point out some few things to be known as previous to these: we shall not
dwell long in pointing out the nature of justifying Faith, it is that grace
whereby a Christian being convinced of his lost estate, and of an utter
impossibility to save himself, he does flee to the righteousness of Jesus
Christ; and unto him who is that precious City of refuge, and there does abide
till our High Priest shall die, which shall not be for ever. Or if ye will, it
is a sweet traveling of the immortal soul, betwixt infinite misery, and
infinite mercy, betwixt an utter impossibility to save our selves, and a
complete ability in him to save to the uttermost, betwixt abounding sin, and
superabounding mercy. Hence Faith is often holden forth to us in Scripture,
under that notion of coming, Isa. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts come ye to
the waters. Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely,
Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
to God by him. And we may say by the way, that if once a sinner could be
brought to this, to count all his own righteousness but filthy rags, and to
belive that a man is as really justified before God, by imputed righteousness,
as if it were by inherent holiness; surely such an one were not far from the
Kingdom of God. Neither shall we stand long to point out this unto you, that it
is your duty to believe, for it is clear, not only from this place, but
likewise from Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the
earth. Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Joh. 14. 1. Ye believe in God, belive also in me. Isa.
55. 1. Ho, every* one that thirsts, come ye to the waters* and he that has
no money, Come, buy without money and without price. But Oh! it is a great
misery of many (and that which may be a subject of perpetual lamentation) that
we can neither be subject to the Law, as commanding, to obey it, or as
threatening, to believe it; Nor, to the Gospel as promising, to embrace it, and
sweetly to receive it. O but that primitive temptation and delusion whereby
Satan did deceive our first father, is that whereby he yet seeks to catch and
delude many souls, viz. That though we eat of the forbidden fruit, and walk in
the vain imaginations of our own hearts, yet he does suggest this to us, that
we shall not die, but shall once be as God. This is Satan's great and de^^ding
divinity; And therefore, to enforce his great and precious Command a little
further, we shall propose these considerations,

First, That the Gospel has laid no obstruction in our way of closing with
Christ* and partaking of the effects of the Gospel* but on the contrary,
shows that the great impediment is our want of willingness, which we lay in
our own way: as is clear from* Ioh. 5. 40. Ye will not come to me that ye
may get life: as likewise from Rev. 22. 17. where the gates of the Gospel are
cast open, and whosoever will, are commanded to enter* in: So that, although
you may father your misbelief upon your inability, or that your spot is not the
spot of his people, yet know, that the rise and original of it is, the want of
willingness. But, to make this more clear, we would have you knowing this,
that all the qualifications annexed to this Commandment of Faith as that in
Matthew. 11. 28. speaks out the qualifications rather of these that will come
than of all these that ought to come; O^ he inviteth these, that through the
spirit of discouragement and misbelief, have the greatest reluctance to come.
And may no^ that* cardinal and soul-refreshing promise Ioh. 6. 37. stop the
mouth of misbelief so that it should have nothing to say? H^ that comes unto
me, I will in no ways cas^ out. Ye may reduce your misbelief rather to the
sinfulness of your will, than to the sinfulness of your walk; And if once ye
could come the length of willingness to embrace Jesus Christ, all other
objectio^ and knots should be sweetly loosed and dissolved.

Secondly, Consider, that though we should pray the on half of our time, and
weep the other, yet if we want this noble grace of Faith, the wrath of God
shall abide on us. What are all the works of these hypocrites, and these
g^^string acts of Law-sanctification, but a plunging of our selves in the
ditch, until our own clothes abhor us; Therefore it is, that after the
Prophet Zachary* has made mention, in the 12. Chapter of his Prophecy, of
making bitter lamentation for him whom we have pierced, as for an only Son;
Yet in the beginning of the 13. Chapter, he makes mention of a Fountain opened
to the house of David, for sin and for uncleanness: Which may intimate unto
us, that, although we have washed our selves with our own tears, yet there is
use of the blood of Christ, and that we must be washed in that fountain, even
from our own righteousnesses, which are but as filthy rags.

Thirdly, Consider that great and monstrous sinfulness that is in this sin of
unbeleif, we will strain at a g^at, but many will easily swallow down this
Camel: we will tith Mint and Anise, and fast twice in the week, but neglect
faith and love, and judgment, which are the weightier things of the Law. And
indeed, there are these things which speak out the sinfulness of unbelief. 1.
That when the holy Ghost is sent to convince the world of sin, Ioh. 16. 9. he
pitched upon this sin, as though there were no other sin of which the world had
need to be convinced; He will convince the world of sin, because they believe
not on the Son of God: and (no doubt) there is more sinfulness in that sin,
than in many breaches of the Moral Law, it being a sin against matchless
love, and against that which is the remedy of sin. 2. That it is called by way
of eminency, disobedience, as is clear from Heb. 4. 11. Lest any of you fall
after the same example of unbelief: or as the word may be rendered, Lest any of
you fall after that example of disobedience, Ephesians. 2* 2. 3. That among all these
that shall be eternally excommunicate from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, these that are guilty* of this sin of unbelief, they
are put in the first place, Rev. 21. 8. And, 4. that unbelief does contradict
and deny these three precious and cardinal Attributes of God. 1. Does not
unbelief contradict his faithfulness, and make him a liar* 1 Ioh. 5. 10* 2.
Does it not contradict the infiniteness of his power. And, 3* the
infiniteness of his love: and supposes that there is something too hard for
him, which his power cannot reach, nor his infinite love overcome. We may
reduce many of our questions, and disputings of his good will, to this
original, viz. to the disputing of his power. No doubt, if we belong to him, we
shall once sing that note of lamentation over* our unbelief, This is our
infirmity, for changes are from the right hand of the most High.

And lastly, to enforce this precious command of Faith, consider that it is His
Command which speaks forth this, that we must not take an indulgence or
dispensation to our selves, to believe, or not to believe at our pleasure. And
is it not a strange thing, that Christians are less convinced of the breaches
of the Commandments of Faith, then of other commands? They think misbelief to
be but a Zoar, a little sin. And it proceeds either from this, that the
convictions of other sins (as the neglect of prayer, or the sin of swearing, or
committing adultery) do arise from a natural conscience: (for there is somewhat
of natures light to make us abominate and hate them, when yet the light of
nature will not lead us to the convictions of the sinfulness of misbelief, it
being a Gospel and more spiritual sin) Or it proceeds from this, that
unbelief does ordinarily pass veiled under the vizard of some refined virtue,
as humility and tenderness, though that rather it may be said, that it is
pride and ignorance, clothed with the garments of humility. And no doubt,
Christ does account it obedience to this Commandment of Faith, the greatest
act of humility, as is clear from Romans 10. 3. where it is called submission,
they submitted not to the righteousness of God, Or else it proceeds from
this, that we conceive that the commandment of Faith, is not of so large extent
as other commands, and so does not bind us to the obedience of ^t. But know
this, that it shall be the condemnation of the world, that they have not
believed on the Name of the Son of God: And no doubt, but it is Satan's great
design and cardinal project, to keep us back from obedience to the
commandment of Faith, and that we should not listen to the precious promises
of this everlasting Gospel, but should reject the counsel of God against our
selves, and refuse his precious and divine call.

The second previous consideration that we would give, shall be to show you
what are the causes that there is so much disputing of our interest, and so
little beleiving, that we are unstable as water, marring our own excellency,
spending so much of our time in walking under a cloud and are so seldom
admitted to read our names i^ these precious and eternal records of heaven? No
doubt, these things have influence upon it* viz. 1. That we are more judging of
God by his dispensations, then by Hi^ word, supposing ever the change of his
dispensations to speak forth the change of ou^ state* This is misbeliefs
divinity, that when sense cannot read love in his face, but he appears to
frown, and to cast a cloud ove^ it, then it is presumption (says sense) t^
read love in his heart, or in his word. Bu^ know it was a self denying practice
of, Believing Job, to cry out, Though he should kill me, I will believe in him.
Therefore make not dispensations your Bible, other* wise ye will stumble at the
noon-ride of the day, and shall halt in your way. Knew y^ never what such a
thing as this meaned, to ascend in overcoming thoughts of his love,
notwithstanding any thing that his dispensations might preach? We conceive,
that if the eyes of our faith were opened, we might see infinite love engraven
on the darkest acts and most dismal-like dispensations of his to us, though it
be oftentimes written in dark and ^im characters of sense.

2* There is this likewise which has in^^uence upon our so much disputing and
misbelieving, viz. a guilty conscience, and the ^ntertainment of some
predominant lust, which oftentimes occasioneth our walking in darkness, and
having no light: This is ^lear from 1 Timothy 1. 19. where that precious ^ewel of
Faith can be holden in no other place but in a pure conscience, that is that
^oyal palace wherein it must dwell; And ^o doubt, if once we make shipwreck of
a ^ood conscience, we will err concerning our ^aith. A bosom idol, when it
is entertained ^oth exceedingly mar the vigorous exercise ^f these graces,
which are evidences of our faith. And certainly, grace rather in its ^egrees,
than in its sincerity or simple being only, is that which gives the clear
evidence of Faith. Therefore when we find not love ^^ its high and eminent
actings, we hardly win to make it any clearly concluding demonstration of our
Faith.

3. As likewise, a bosom idol, when it is ^ntertained, makes use to lose much
of our ^igh esteem and reputation of Jesus Christ; which does exceedingly
interrupt the sweet and precious actings of Faith. For it is certain, that if
once the immortal soul be united to Jesus Christ by the bond of love and
respect, then our Faith will increase with the increase of God. Our
intertainment of a bosom idol is ordinarily punished with the want of the
sensible intimations of his peace, and of our interest in him; So that
sometimes his own are constrained to cry out, God has departed from me, and
he answers me not, neither by dreams nor visions.

4. There is that likewise that has influence upon it, our not closing
absolutely with Jesus Christ, but upon conditions and suppositions. We make not
an absolute and blank resignation of our selves over unto Christ, to hold fast
the Covenant, notwith* standing he should dispense both bitter and sad things
to us; But we conceive that Christ's Covenant with believers, is like tha^
Covenant that God made with Noah, tha^ there should be summer and winter,
seed^ time and harvest, night and day, unto Christian. A Christian must have
his nigh^ as well as his day: he must once sow i^^ tears, before he reap in
joy; and he mus^ once go forth, bearing his precious seed, before he can
return bearing his sheaves in hi^ bosom: and that this has influence upon our
instability, may be seen from this, Th^^ often a Christian, after his first
closing wit^ Christ, he meets with desertion in poi^^ of tenderness, in
point of joy, and in poi^^ of strength, so that his corruptions see^ now to be
awaked more then formerly, the he wants those seeming enjoyments of him which
formerly he had: And that much of ^is softness of heart has now evanished,
which is clear somewhat from Heb. 10. 32. That after they were enlightened,
they ondured great fight of afflictions, For the word that ^^ there rendered
afflictions, signifies inward ^roubles through the motions of sin, as well
as outward afflictions, Gal. 5. 24. And God uses to dispense this way to his
own, ^ot only to take trial of the sincerity of our ^losing with him, but to
make our faith ^ore steadfast and sure. And no doubt, if we ^ose not absolutely
with Christ (when under these* temptations and trials) we will ^eject our
confidence as a delusion, and sup^ose it to be but a morning dream; therefor
it were a noble and divine practice of a ^hristian to close with Christ without
re^ervation, seeing he does dispense nothing ^^t that which may tend to our
advantage. and we would say to such as are under these ^emptations, that if ye
endeavor to resist ^^em, it is the most compendious and excel^^nt way to make
your hearts, which now ^^e dying as a stone, to be as a watered Gar^^n, and as
springs of water, whose waters fail ^^t, and to make you strong as a Lion, so
that (...) temptation can rouse you up, but you all be enabled to tread upon
the high places the earth, and to sing songs of triumph over ^^ur Idols.

5. There is this likewise which has in^^ence on it, or building of our faith
more ^^on sense then upon Christ or his Word; and therefore it is, that Faith
is so unconstant and changeable as the Moon, we not knowing what such a thing
means, To hope against hope, and to be strong in faith, giving glory to God:
And we would only say unto you, that erect your confidence upon so sandy a
foundation, that when the storm and wind of tentation shall blow, That house
shall fall to the ground. As likewise, building of your faith upon sense, does
abate much of your joy, and much of your precious esteem of Jesus Christ, it
being faith exercising it self upon an invisible object, that makes the
Christian, to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pe^. 1. 8.

6. There is this last that has influence upon it, even our sloathfulnesse in
the exercise of our spiritual duties, by which Faith should be entertained.
Faith is a tender grace and a plant that must not be ruffled, bu^ nourished
through the sap of other precious graces; but we grow remiss in ou^ spiritual
duties, and do turn our selves upon the bed of security, as the door upon the
hinges. And does not our drowsinesse cloth us with rags, and make us fall into
a deep sleep; while as, if we were diligent, O^ souls should be made fat and
rich? Yea slothfulness does not only impede assuranc^ in this, that it
hinders the divine communications of his love and respect, by which assurance
may be kept in life, Cant. 5. 2* But also, it makes our poverty come on us
an armed man, and our want as one that travelleth. And withal, it lets
loose the chain by which our corruptions are tied, and makes them to lift up
their head, by which our assurance is much darkened and impared, and our hope is
much converted into diffidence and despair: And we would only say this, it is
the diligent Christian that is the believing Christian; and it is the believing
Christian, that is the diligent Christian; there being such a sweet
reciprocation betwixt these two precious graces, that they die and live
together.

Now thirdly, we shall shut up our discourse with this, in pointing out a
little what are those things that do obstruct a Christians closing with Christ,
and believing in his precious Name.

I. We conceive that this woeful evil does ^pring and rise from that
fundamental igno^ance of this truth, that there is a God: as ^^ clear from
Heb. 11. 6. where that is re^uired as a qualification of a Comet, That he
should believe that God is: And assuredly* ^ill once this precious truth be
imprinted upon our souls, as with a pen of iron, and ^oint of a diamond, we
will look upon the ^ospel as an U^opian fancy, and a deluding ^otion, to teach
unstable souls, who know ^ot the way to attain unto real blessedness. and
truly it is a fault in many, that they ^egin to dispute their being in Christ,
before ^hey know there is a Christ: and to dispute their interest in him before
they believe his ^eing, and that there is such a one as is cal^^d Christ.

II. Our coming unto Christ is obstructed from the want of the real and
spiritual convictions of our desperate and lost estate without Jesus Christ,
and that our unspeakable misery is the want of him; which is clear from Ier. 2.
31. We are Lords, we will come no more to thee: And it is evident from Rev. 3.
16, 18. That such a delusion as this does overtake many, that they can reign as
Kings without Jesus Christ, and that they can build their happiness, and
establish their eternal felicity upon another foundation. But, O that we could
once win to this, to believe what we are without Christ, and to believe what we
shall be in the enjoyment of him; with the one eye to descend and look upon
these deep draughts, that the mystery of iniquity has imprinted upon your
immortal souls, and withal to reflect upon the wages of sin, which is death;
and be constrained to cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone: And with the other
eye to ascend and look to that help that is laid upon One that i^ mighty, and
to make use of the righteousness of a crucified Savior, that so what we want
in our selves, we may get it abundantly made up in him.

III. There is this likewise that obstructeth our closing with Christ, our too
much addictednesse to the pleasures and carnal delights of a passing world;
which is clea^ from Luke 14. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Matthew. 22 5, 6. where these
that were invited to com^ to the feast of this Gospel, they do mak^ their
apology, and with one consent do refuse it: some pretending an impossibility
t^ come, and some pretending an unavoidable inconveniency in coming: And O!
What a rediculous thing is that poor complement, that these deluded sinners
used to Christ, I pray you have us excused? And is it not the world the great
plea and argoment, that they make use of, When they will not come and make use
of Christ?

IV. There is this lastly, which does obstruct ones coming to Christ, their
unwillingness to be denied to their own righteousness: Which is clear from Romans
10. 23. And we conceive if once these two were believed (which are the great
Tropicks, out of which all these arguments may be brought to persuade you to
embrace Christ) to wit, the infinite excellency of His person on whom we are to
believe, and the infinite loss that these do sustain, who shall be eternally
rejected of him. We might be persuaded to entertain a divine abstractednesse
and holy retirement from all things that are here below, and to pitch our
desires alone upon him, who is the everlasting wonder of Angels, and the glory
of the higher House. O did we once suppose the unspeakable happiness of these
whose Faith is now advanced unto everlasting felicity and fruition, and has
entered into that eternal possession of the promises: might we not he
constrained to cry out, It is good for us once to be there? Christ weepeth to
us in the Law, but we do not lament: and he pypeth to us in the Gospel, but we
do not dance: He is willing to draw us with the cords of men, and with the
bonds of love, and yet we will not have him to reign over us. May not Angels
laugh at our folly, that we should so undervalue this Prince of love, and
should contemn him who is holden in so high esteem and reverence in these two
great Assemblies that are above, of Angels, and of the spirits of just men made
perfect? Christ has now given us the first and second Summonds, the day is
approaching when the sad and woeful summonds shall be sent against us, of
departing from him, into these everlasting flames, out of which there is no
redemption: and this shall be the capestone of our misery, that we had once
life in offer, but did refuse it; And though there were four gates standing
open toward the north, by which we might have entered into that everlasting
rest, yet we choosed rather to walk in the paths that lead down to death* and
take hold of the chambers of hell. O but there are many that think the Gospel
cunningly devised fables and foolishness, (they being unwilling to believe
that which sense cannot comprehend, nor reason reach) and this is the reason
why the Gospel is not embraced, but is rejected as a humane invention* and as a
morning dream, etc.

SERMON II.
1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that ye should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.
THere are three great and cardinal mysteries, in the unfolding of which, all
a Christians time ought to be spent. First, There is that precious and
everlasting mystery of Christ's love and condiscendency, which those
intellectual spirits, the Angels, are not able fully to comprehend. Secondly,
There is that woeful mystery of the desperate deceitfulness and wickedness
of the heart, which no man was ever yet able fully to fathom and comprehend.
And, thirdly, there is that precious mystery of that eternal felicity and
blessedness that is purchased unto the Saints, that once they shall reign with
Christ, not a thousand years only, but throughout all the ages of everlasting
and endless eternity: so that there is this difference betwixt the Garden of
everlasting delights, that Christ has purchased to the Saints, and that first
Paradise and Eden wherein man was placed: There was a secret gate in the first,
through which a man that had once entered in, might go out again; But in this
second and precious Eden, there is no access for going out. And all that is to
be known of these three mysteries, is much comprehended in this, to know that
they cannot fully be known; Paul was a blessed proficient in the study of the
first mystery, and had almost attained to the highest Class of knowledge, and
yet he is constrained to profess himself to be ignorant of this: Hence is
that word, Ephesians. 3. 19. That ye may know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge. And is it not a mysterious command, to desire people to know that
which cannot be known? The meaning whereof we conceive to be this in part, that
Paul pressed this upon them, that they should study to know that this mystery
of Christ's love could not be known. Jeremiah was a blessed proficient in the
knowledge and study of the second mystery, he had some morning and twilight
discoveries of that, and yet though in some measure he had fat homed that deep;
yet he is constrained to cry out, chap. 17. verse. 9. The heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And indeed, that
which Solomon says of Kings, Prove. 25. 3. may well be said of all men in this
respect, The heavens for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of man
is unsearchable. The Apostle Paul also was a blessed proficient in the study of
the third mystery, having some morning and twilight discoveries of that
promised rest, and was once caught up to the third heavens, and yet when he is
beginning to speak of it, 1 Cor. 2. 9. he declares all men to be ignorant of
the knowledge of this profound mystery of man's blessedness, and cries out,
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. And if there be any
thing further to be known of these mysteries, the grace of Faith is found
worthy among all the graces of the Spirit, To open the seven seals of these
great deeps of God. Is not the grace of Faith that whereby a Christian does
take up the invisible excellency and virtue of a dying Christ? Is not Faith
that precious grace by which a Christian must take up the sports and blemishes
that are within himself? And is not the grace of Faith, that precious grace
that places a Christian upon the top of mount Pisga, and there lets him see
a sight of the promised Land? And does open a door in Heaven, through which a
Christian is admitted to see Christ sitting upon His Throne? And Faith has not
only a kind of Omnipotency; as is clear, That all things are possible to them
that believe: but it has a kind of Omnisciency, and all knowledge that it can
take up and comprehend the greatest mysteries of heaven, according to that
word, Prove. 28. 5. He that seeks the Lord shall understand all things, As if
he said, there is nothing dark to a believing Christian, as there is nothing
impossible to ^ believing Christian. As likewise, Faith ^s that grace that must
take aside the vail that is spread over the face of a crucified Christ. And
Faith is that precious spy that goes forth, and takes up these wonderful
excellencies, that are in him. The grace of love, as it were, is born blind,
and it has nothing wherewith to solace it self, but that which is presented
unto it by this noble and excellent grace of Faith.

Now before we shall speak any thing to these things that we did propose to
speak of it at the last occasion: we shall yet speak a little unto some things
which are necessary to be known, for the distinct up taking of the nature of
justifying Faith; which is the great commandment of this everlasting Gospel:
and that which we would first speak to shall be this. What is the reason and
ground that the Gospel conveyance of righteousness and life, (and of the
excellent things of this everlasting Covenant) should be through the exercise
of the grace of Faith? For it is not said in the Scripture that repentance
justifies, that love justifies, or that mortification justifies; but it is
Faith only that justifies, and it is Faith by which a Christian inheriteth the
promises, so that is clear, that Faith is that Conduit-pype, through which are
conveyed to us the great blessings of this everlasting Covenant.

I. And the first ground of it is this, it is through Faith, that all our
blessings may be known to be by love, and by free and unsearchable grace; as is
clear, Romans 4. 16. While the Apostle is giving a reason why the inheritance is
conveyed to a Christian through Faith; It is of faith (says he) that it might
be of grace: for if the inheritance were conveyed to a Christian through a
Covenant of Works, then these spotless draughts of infinite love, and of
unsearchable grace, should not be written on our inheritance, as is clear, Romans
4. 25. And it is that great design of Christ, to make his grace conspicuous in
conveying salvation to us through Faith.

II. There is this second ground likewise of it, that all the promises and
blessings of this everlasting Covenant might be sure and steadfast to us,
therefore they are conveyed to us through the exercise of the grace of Faith;
as is clear, Romans 4. 16. They are of Faith (says he) that they might be sure:
or as the word is, that they might be settled, when the promises of life and of
eternal salvation were conveyed to us through man's obedience, were they not
then most uncertain and unstable? But is not heaven your everlasting crown now,
steadfast unto you, seeing you have that golden pillar of Christ's everlasting
righteousness to be the foundation of your Faith, and the strength of your
confidence in the day of need?

III. There is this third ground why the promises and excellent things of this
Gospel are conveyed to a Christian through the exercise of Faith, that all
boasting and gloriation might be excluded, according to that word, Romans 3. 27.
By what law is boasting excluded? Not by the law of works, but by the law of
Faith. And certainly, seeing Christians have all the great things of heaven
conveyed to them through the exercise of Faith; think ye not, that this shall
be your first song when ye shall be within the gates of that new Jerusalem?
Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thee does belong the glory of our salvation.
O what a precious dignity were it, but for one half hour to be admitted to hear
these spotless songs that are sung by these thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands of holy Angels, that are round about His Throne! Does
not David that sweet singer of Israel, now sing more sweetly no^ he did while
he was here below? Does not deserted Heman now chaunt forth the praises and
everlasting song of him that sits upon the Throne? And does not afflicted
Job now sing sweetly after his captivity is reduced, and he entered within that
land, where the voice of joy and gladness is continually heard? Would ye have
a description of Heaven? I could give it no term so suitable as this, Heaven
is a rest, without a rest, for though there remain a rest for the righteous,
yet Rev. 4. 8. These four beasts that stand before the Throne, they rest not
night nor day, crying, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty; yet there is
much divine quietness in that holy unquietness that is above.

IV. There is this last ground why the blessings of the Gospel, and life and
righteousness are conveyed to us through the exercise of Faith, that the way to
attain to these things might be pleasant and easy; we are certainly persuaded,
that the way of winning to Heaven by a Covenant of Works was much more
unpleasant and difficult. But is it not an easy way of entering into the holy
of Holies, to win unto it through the exercise of Faith? Are not all wisdoms
ways pleasantness, and are not all her paths peace? Was not that just
self-denial in one, that said, he would not take up a Crown though it were
lying at his foot. But oh that cursed self-denial does possess the breasts of
many; so that though that Crown of immortal Glory and eternal blessedness be
lying at your feet, yet ye will not embrace it, nor take it up. Is not the
hatred of many to Christ covered with deceit, and therefore, Your iniquity
shall be declared before the Congregation.

Now that what we have spoken upon this, might be more clear, and that the
nature of ^ustifying Faith be not mistaken, We would have you taking notice of
these things.

1. That the grace of Faith does not justify Christian, as it is a work; or
because of any inherent excellency and dignity that is in this grace, above any
other graces of the Spirit; ^ut Faith does alone justify a Christian
instrumentally and objectively; that is, it is that by which a Christian is
just, by laying hold ^n the precious object of it, the righteousness of Christ.
And to clear this, we would only have you knowing this, That Faith does juifie,
as it closes with Christ; but not because (...) closes with Christ, which some
vainly are ^old to assert; because there is not any dig^ity or worth in the act
of Faith, in closing with Christ that can be the foundation of our
^ustification, else it were to confound that precious decree of free grace.

2. There is this that we would have you all knowing; That Faith is not the
instrument of Justification, (as Justification is taken in an active sense,)
though it is the instrument of Justification, as it is taken in a passive
sense: and the ground of this conclusion is this, because it is impossible that
any action in man can be an instrument of any action in God: And therefore that
phrase that you have so ordinarily spoken of, That Faith justifies, it is thus
to be resolved, That we are justified by Faith.

3. There is this that we would have you knowing, that betwixt a Christians
closing by Faith with the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the justification
of a sinner, I say, there is no natural and indispensible connection betwixt
these two: but only there is a connection of divine appointment, and of free
grace, though we conceive there is a natural aptitude in the grace of Faith, to
lay hold on the righteousness of Christ, more then there is in any other grace
of the Spirit, as ye may see there is a more natural aptitude and fitness in
the hand to receive then in any other organ of the body.

4. There is this also that we would have you knowing, that a Christian in his
first closing with Christ, Christ (considered as crucified) is the immediate
object of his Faith, and not Christ considered in his personal excellencies.
Hence it is often in Scripture, that Christ as crucified, is holden forth as
the immediate object of justifying Faith; as is clear, Romans 3. 5, 24, 25. And
the ground of this assertion is this, because that it is the formal object of
justifying Faith, which does formally justify the sinne^; and on which Faith
does immediately lay hold as a ransom to satisfy justice, and as a
righteousness in which the soul dare venture to be found when it shall stand
before the Judgment seat of God; And certainly, this is Christ as obedient to
the death of the cross. And it is likewise clear, that the thing which does
engage the soul to Christ, is not only because he is good in himself, but
because he is good to us.

5. And there is this lastly, that we would have you knowing, That though faith
does alone justify, yet Faith does not justify being alone: Hence is that
which we have so often in Schools, Fides justificat solum, licet non
solitary, that Faith justifies alone, though not being alone; as James does
speak, Faith without works is dead, and is of no effect.

Now that which secondly we shall speak to, shall be this; To point out to you
some differences betwixt justifying Faith, which is in a real Believer, and
temporary Faith which is in an Hypocrite, and one that is destitute of that
everlasting hope, though he do pretend to have it.

And first, That there is such a thing as temporary Faith, is clear from Luke
8. 13. It is said there of some* That they believed for a season, yea, in Acts
8. 13. It is said of Simon Magus (who was in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity) he believed. And these in Ioh 2. 23. When they did behold
the miracles, they believed on Jesus Christ: and yet we conceive, that their
faith was not sincere, and so this was not saving Faith. And indeed ye may see
a difference betwixt these two in the very name temporary; for this is such a
Faith as does not continue long with him that has it, but does evanish and
pass away; for as this is certain, that an hypocrite will not always call upon
God, Job 27. 10. So that is also certain, that a hypocrite will not always
believe in God. I tell you, that the longest time a hypocrite does keep his
Faith, Job has set down in his 18. Chap. verse. 14. Their hope (says he) shall
bring them to the king of terrors, and then it shall be rooted out of them and
their tabernacle; their faith will bring them no further then the gates of
death, and then their faith will flee away as a dream, and evanish as a vision
of the night.

II. There is this difference likewise betwixt them, That temporary Faith, it
closes with Christ as a Savior, and for righteousness, but it closes not
with Christ as a Prince, and for Sanctification; but justifying Faith takes
Christ as well for a Prince, as it takes him for a Savior: and if Solomon did
discern who was the true Mother of the child by that, that she who would have
the child divided, was not the mother of the child; so we may say* that they
who would divide Christ in his Offices, it is an evidence that they are not
among these who are actually made partakers of the Adoption of children; there
is somewhat of this pointed at in Ioh. 6. 66. where that which made many who
were his disciples (and did once believe) desert him, was because of the
hardness of his command, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? And it is
certain that it is a greater difficulty for a Christian to take Christ as a
Prince, then as a Savior: for by that he must make an absolute resignation of
himself over to Chrrst, never to be reduced. O when saw you such a sight of
Christ, that ye were constrained to cry our (without a complement) to him;
Truly I am thy servant* I am thy servant? O were ye never ravished with one of
his eyes, nor overtaken with one chain of his neck? Believe me, they who see
him thus, do believe that His commands are not grievous.

III. There is this difference, that temporary Faith is attained unto, without
the exercise of the Law, but justifying Faith is not attained to without some
measure of the exercise of the Law: this is clear, Mark 4. 5. where speaking of
these temporary believers, it is said of them, that the fruit did immediately
spring up, etc. Are there not some (it may be here) who think they do believe,
and yet were never in any measure trembling under the discovering and
condemning power of the Law? Is not that a mystery, that one should bring forth
without traveling? And is not this a mystery in Christianity, that one should
believe before he has found the pa^gs of the New*birth. I am afraid of this,
that many of us have taken up our Religion at our foot: for there are many who
take up Religion before Religion take them up. But would ye know the properties
of a Christians Faith? It is a begotten Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 2. and not a Faith
that is taken up at our pleasure: And I would only say these two things to you,
be persuaded of this, that hypocrisy may be spun with a ve^p small thread: so
that the most discerning Christian cannot take up that desperate enmity that is
in them. How long did Judas lu^k under the name of a Saint, even with these
that were most discerning? And there is this that we would say, that among all
these that shall be eternally excommunicate from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power, Hypocrites in Sion shall have the bitterest cup of
Divine indignation presented unto them. Hence it is, that Christ, when he would
tell the worst company that one shall have in hell, it is always this: ye
shall go to that place where hypocrites and sinners are: and so it would be of
your concernment, that by the candle of the Lord ye would search the inward
parts of the belly, before ye go down to the grave with a lie in your right
hand; a deceiving heart having turned you aside. We confess it is sad to
consider these anxious disappointments that many in those days shall once meet
with.

IV. But there is this last difference betwixt justifying Faith, and temporary
Faith, That there are three precious effects of justifying Faith, which a
temporary believer cannot win to.

1. To be denied to all his enjoyments and seize, and walk humbly under
them, for we may say, that it is impossible for an hypocrite to be denied to
his enjoyments, he makes such a deity of them, and worships them, or rather he
worshippeth himself in them. There are three great graces that a hypocrite does
pursue after, (though he rather seeks them as gifts than as graces:)
Knowledge, Prayer, and Humility: And though it be but little that he can attain
of any of the three, (or rather nothing in a saving way) yet least of all can
he attain to the last, yea, we may judge that there is always within his
bosom a standing conviction, that he could never win unto that gracious grace
of humility. O could ye never win to this, to count your own righteousness as
filthy rags, and to rejoice alone in the righteousness of a crucified Savior?
I would press this upon you by the way (O Christians of this generation) forget
your perfections; and remember your imperfections; have a holy oblivion of your
seize, but have a Divine remembrance of your short comings, look more to
what is before unperfected, nor to what is behind, and thus shall you evidence
true justifying Faith.

2. It is an effect of justifying Faith to be under some constant and Divine
impression of the preciousnesse of Jesus Christ, according to that word, 1 Pet.
2. 7. To you who believe, Christ is precious; It is not said, that Christ was
precious, or shall be precious, but it is said, He is precious, which does
import, (as we use to speak) a continued act; Did ye never know what it was to
dwell twenty four hours under the impression of the matchless excellency and
precious worth of a crucified Savior? I will pose you with this. Are there not
some here (and elsewhere) that pass under the notion of Saints, that never
knew what it was to dwell half an hour under these high and elevaring thoughts
of the preciousnesse of Jesus Christ? So that we profess we cannot tell
whether we shall call him precious or undervalued: but we may conjoyn these
two names together; that he is precious (and yet) undervalued Christ.

3* By true justifying Faith, a Christian wins to mortification of his
invisible and predominant lusts, which is impossible for a temporary Believer
to win to. And is there not a great difference betwixt an Idol when it is cast
out, and an Idol when it goes out? I will tell you the great mortification of
hypocrites, the devil was living in them as one that was a black one, and now
he comes again and transformeth himself into an Angel of light: He was living
in them before by his spirit of prosanity, and now he lives in them by the
spirit of hypocrisy, and counterfeiting of these things that were never clear
seize, while it is the noble dignity of Faith, Act. 15. 9. To purify the
heart. But are there not many here who never knew what it was to mortify one
lust for Christ? Can such a delusion overtake you O^athiests* That ye shall
reign with Christ, if ye die not with him? There is an opinion vented in these
days, that there may be repentance in heaven, and I think it would seem that
the Christians of this age have much of that opinion, we are so little in
repentance while we are here below: but know that Faith and Sanctification are
two inseparable companions: And let me tell you, if ye would know the compend
of the precious exercise of Faith? It is this, Faith has three great things,
that it perpetually contemplates and views. 1. Faith looks to the promise,
and there it does rejoice and rest upon it. 2. Faith looks to the duties that
are commanded, and there it cries out, Here am I, I will obey and hearken unto
the voice of the word. And, 3. Faith looks to the crown, and there it does
exult and sweetly rejoice in divine expectation. And O what a sight is that, to
behold that everlasting Prince standing at the end of our race, having a crown
in his right hand, with this Motto engraven on it, He that persevereth to the
end shall be saved? And what a Faith suppose ye shall it be thought when we
shall get on that immortal Crown of blessedness? What think ye is the exercise
of these that are above? O heaven, heaven, if we did know it, would we not be
in a holy ecstasy of desire, till we were there! And blessed be he eternally,
that has purchased that precious felicity to us.

Now we shall at this time shut up our discourse, by speaking a little to these
things, in which a Christian does ordinarily meet with assurance of his
interest in God, and is put to the divine actings of the grace of Faith, for
there are some sealing times to a Christian.

I. The first time of the sealing is, after the mortification of some
predominante lust and idol, then they are admitted to read their names in these
precious and ancient records of heaven, and to see (in these Books) their
unworthy names written by the hand of that everlasting Prince. This is clear,
Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give a white stone, and in the stone
a new name written, that no man knows, saving he that receives it. And from
that 2 Timothy 4. 8. Believe me, more mortification would make more believing,
but would ye know the original of misbelief? It is the want of exercise of
spiritual mortification of our lusts. I know not where the most part of us
intends to lodge at night, but this is certain, that we live with much
contentment with our lusts, and these predominant idols that does so much
possess us.

II. It is readily a sealing time to a Christian, when he is admitted to the
divine enjoyment of these satisfying delights that are to be found in Christ:
When was it that the Spouse cried out so often, My beloved is mine, and I am
his? Was it not when she was brought to the banqueting house, and his banner
over her was love? Believe me, more communion with an absent Christ, would
make more intimation (in a divine manner) of our peace with him: we desire to
bless these that are above the reach of all these disputings, and questionings
that we are so much subject unto.

III. This is a sealing time to a Christian, when he is much in the exercise
(...) secret Prayer, and of much conversing, and corresponding with God in that
duty, as is clear from that word in Dan. 9. 21. when Daniel was praying at the
evening oblation, in the ^3. verse he meets with a divine intimation of his
peace with God, O man greatly beloved of God; as the Original has it, O man of
great desires; for he was desirable indeed, and precious to him who holds the
Saints in his ^ight hand.

IV. This is also a sealing-time to a Christian, when he is called to the
exercise of some great work, and is to be put upon some eminent holy
employment, this is clear, Ier. ^ 5. Where Jeremiah being called to preach the
Gospel unto such a rebellious people, ^hen he has this eternal election
declared unto him: Before thou wast formed in the womb, I knew thee; Christ, as
it were, gives them that, to be meat to them for forty days, and that in the
strength of it, they may go many a days journey.

V. There is also another sealing time: When ^ Christian is first begotten to a
precious and everlasting hope: for when at first Christians begin to be
acquaint with Christ, even then sometimes he declares to them his boundless
and everlasting love: And that is the ground why some of those who are but
babes in Christ, ^re so much in the exercise of diligence, so much in the
exercise of the grace of love, and ^o much in the exercise of the grace of
tenderness, it is even because of the solemn impression of their interest in
Christ, that, as it ^ere, they are daily taken in to read their own names in
legible letters, in the Lambs book of life.

VI. And there is this last time, that is ^ sealing time to a Christian, and
that is, when he is put under some sad and afflicting dispensation: When the
furnace is hot seven times more then ordinary, Then does God condescen^ ^o
manifest himself to his own: When was it that John met with most of the
revelation^ of Heaven? Was it not when he was in the Isle of Patmos, for the
testimony of Jesus Christ^ Kingdom, and patience of our blessed Lord? Rev. 1.
9. And in that place, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Though our outward man decay, yet our
inward man is renewed day by day.

Now we would press you to be more serious in the exercise of this precious
grace* And I shall tell you the compend of Christianity in these few words. 1.
By faith to solace your selves in Christ's invisible virtues and excellencies.
And, 2. by hope, to be^ viewing that precious Crown, and these everlasting
dignities that are to be given to the Saitns. And, 3* by mortification, to be
crucifying your idols. And, 4. by patience* to be possessing your souls,
until once ye^ shall pass through that dark land, to tha^ valley of
everlasting delight. And as for those that contemn, and undervalue the blood
of this everlasting Covenant (and (...) would have all these that delight not
in closing with Christ, and these who have no^ misbelief as their cross, to
consider this) The wrath of the living and eternal God do^^ abide upon them who
do not believe, according ^^ that word, Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes ^^ot, the
wrath of God abides on him. It is a remarkable phrase; because of this the
wrath of God will not be a Pilgrim to a mishbe^ever, that will turn aside to
tarry but for (...) night, but the wrath of God (to them who will not believe)
shall be their household ^ompanion, and shall dwell with them; and ^o, woe to
them eternally, who have this sad and everlasting companion to abide with them,
the wrath of a living God. There is ^ne thing we would have these knowing, that
among all these who are eternally to be dearted from Jesus Christ,
misbelievers are put ^^ the foremost rank, Rev. 21. 8. There he is to ^ut away
the fearful and unbelieving. And ^om 2 Thessalonians 1. 18. When Christ shall come from
heaven with ten thousand of his Saints, (What ^o do) It is even to execute
vengeance on th^se that obey not the truth of the Gospel* that is, who do not
believe. And I pose your own hearts with this, whether or not your names ^ee
written there in that ^oll, among these sho shall be cut off? And that word, 2
These. ^. 12. That they might be damned who believed ^ot, but took pleasure in
unrighteousness. O but ^he wrath of a dying Christ, and of a crucifi^d Savior
is dreadful! It is more sad and ter^ible then the wrath of God should have been
(...) Christ had not died. I will tell you (O ^ypocrites in Sion) the worst
news that ever were published in your e^^s, and it is this, Christ died and
rose again, (and to those that ^re begotten to a lively hope, they are glad
^^dings of great joy, and therein they may comfort themselves) but ye may wear a
rough garment to deceive, and go to heaven in your own apprehension: But, O the
sad disappointment that is waiting on many such* And to close with this, we
would obtest you* as ye would answer to your terrible and dreadful Judge, that
shall stand one day upon his Throne, which he shall fix in the clouds, we
obtest you by all the joys of heaven, and we obtest you by all the everlasting
pains of hell* and we obtest you by all the curses that are written within the
volume of this Book, and by all the sweet and comfortable promises that are in
this everlasting Gospel, and by the love that ye owe to your immortal souls,
and as ye would not crucify Christ afresh, believe, and embrace the offers
which are presented now unto you. Know ye whether or not this shall be the last
summonds that ye shall get to believe? That so, if ye do reject it, Christ
shall come from heaven, and pronounce that sad and lamentable sentence to you,
Depart from me (...) cursed, I know you not. Now, to him that ca^ bless these
things to you, we desire to give praise.

SERMON III.
1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that ye should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.
IT was a command that Solomon gave unto his Son, Prove. 22. 26. That he should
not be surety for debt, nor should be one of those that stricketh hands; But,
O! what spotless breaches of that Command has our blessed Lord Jesus
committed, when he did condescend to be surely for our debt, and to pay that,
that was impossible for us to satisfy? Has not Christ made a precious
exchange with sinners? He wreathed about his own precious neck, that bond and
yoke of our iniquities, and has given to us that unweariable, easy, and
portable yoke of his Commandments; among which this is ^ne, That we should
believe on him. Spotless Christ was made sin for us* that sinful we might be
made the righteousness of God in him: And is not this the condemnation of the
world, that we will not believe in him? that we will not delight ourselves in
loving of Him (And I would say this to you, that though you should weep the one
half of your days, and pray the other half, yet, if ye want this noble grace
of Faith* Your righte^usnesse shall be but like a menstruous cloth and filthy
rags before him: for what is pray^ng without believing, but a taking of His
^lessed Name in vain? What is our confer^ing upon the most divine and precious
Truths of God, without believing? Is it not ^ lying to the holy Ghost, and a
flattering of God with our mouth? And we would have you knowing this, that
there is a sweet harmony that is now madeup betwixt Moses and Christ, betwixt
the Law and the Gospel. The Law brings us to Christ as a Savior, and Christ
brings us back again ^o the Law to be a rule of our walk, to which we must
subject our selves. So then, would ye know the compend of a Christian^ walk? It
is a sweet traveling betwixt mount Sinai and mount Sion, betwixt Moses and
Christ, betwixt the Law and the Gospel. And we conceive that the more deep that
the exercise of the Law be in a Christians conscience, before his closing with
Christ, there is so much the more precious and excellent advantages waiting for
him.

I. There is this advantage that waits on the deep exercise of the Law: that
it is the way to win to much establishment in the Faith, when once we begin to
close with Christ. O Christians, would ye know that which makes the
superstructure and building of grace to be within you, as a bowing wall and as
a tottering fence? (So that oftentimes y^ are in hazard to raze the foundation)
it is this, Ye were not under the exercise of the Law before your believing in
Jesus Christ. There are some who do not abide three days at mount Sinai, and
these shall not dwel^ many days at mount Sion.

II. There is this advantage that waits on the deep exercise of the Law, it
makes Christ precious to a man's soul. What is that which fills the soul of a
Christian^ with many high and excellent thoughts of Christ? Is it not this, to
have the Law registrating our Band, and putting us (as we use to speak) to the
horn? that is, to have the Law cursing us, and using the sentence of
condemnation against us. That which makes us have such low and undervaluing
thoughts of precious Christ, is, because the most part of us are not acquainted
with the deep and serious exercise of the Law: that is a mystery to the most
part of Christians practice. Ye know that there were four streams which went
out from the Paradise of God, into which man was first placed: And so we may
say, that there are four golden streams, by which lost and destroyed man is
brought back again to this Eden and Paradise of everlasting delights. First,
there is the precious stream of Christ's righteousness, by which we must be
justified. And secondly, There is that stream of his Sanctification, by which
we must be purified. Thirdly, There is that stream of the Wisdom of Christ, by
which we must be conducted through this wilderness wherein we have lost our
way. And fourthly, There is that stream of Christ's Redemption, by which we must
be delivered from the power of our enemies, and must turn the Battle in the
gate. It is by the Redemption of Christ that we shall once sing that triumphant
song, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? O but all
these streams will be sweat and refreshing to a soul that is hotly pursued by
the Law. So long as we see not the ugliness of our leprosy in the glass of
the Law, we have our own Abana and Parphar, that we think may do our turn: but
when once our case is truly laid open to us, then will we be content to wash
our selves in Jordan seven times.

III. There is this advantage that waits on the deep exercise of the Law,
that it makes a Christian live constantly under the impression of the
sinfulness of sin. What is it that makes sin exceeding sinful to a
Christian? Is it not this, He has been forty days in Moses School? And we
conceive that the ground why such fools as we make a mock of sin, is, because
we know not what it is to be under the power of his wrath and the apprehensions
of the indignation of God.

But now to come to that which we intend to speak of: We told you, at the first
occasion that we spoke upon these words, that there were many excellent things
concerning the grace of Faith, holden forth in them. The first thing (which was
holden forth concerning this radical grace of Faith) was the infinite
advantage that redoundeth to a Christian through the exercise of Faith, and
giving obedience to this command: which we cleared to be holden forth, not
only from the scope, but also from the nature of this command. And now to
speak a little to the point, we shall propose these considerations, that may
abundantly show how advantageous ^ thing this excellent grace of Faith is.

I. The first Consideration, that speaks it, is this, That Faith makes
Christ precious to a soul, according to that word, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you that
believe, Christ is precious. And we would have you knowing this, that Faith
makes Christ more precious to a soul, nor sense, or any other thing can make
him. And first, Faith makes Christ more precious nor sense, because the
estimation which the grace of Faith has of Christ, it is builded upon the
excellency of his Person: but the estimation of sense it is builded upon the
excellency of his actings: so that, because he is such to them, therefore they
love and esteem him. But that Heroic grace of Faith, it takes up the
excellency of Christ's person, and that makes him precious to them. Secondly,
Faith makes Christ more precious then sense, because sense looks to that love
which Christ manifests in his Face, and in his Hands, and in his Feet: but
Faith looks to that love which is in his heart. Sense will cry forth, Who is
like to thee? whose countenance is like Lebanon, excellent as the Cedar: whose
hands are as gold rings, set with Beryl, and whose legs are like pillars of
Marble set in sokets of Gold. Sense will look to the smylings of Christ, and
will wonder; it will look to his dispensations and actings, and will be
constrained to cry out, Who is like unto thee* But the grace of Faith solaceth
it self in the Fountain from whence all these springs and sweet inundations of
love do flow. Thirdly, Faith makes Christ more precious then Sense; because
Faith looks not only to what Christ is presently, but unto what Christ is
from eternity before time, and what Christ shall be unto eternity after time;
But sense only does look to what Christ is presently. And ye must conceive,
that the sweet traveling of Faith betwixt infinite love from eternity before,
and infinite love unto eternity after, must make Faith to fall in a sea of
wondering, and raises the thoughts to the highest pito^ of desire and
estimation. Fourthly, We may likewise add, that the impression of the
preciousnesse of Christ, which sense makes upon the soul, it is not so
constant, not so single, as that which faith does make. O but the grace of
Faith gives the Christian a broad look of Christ, and lets him see Christ
clothed with ornaments of Glory, and divine Majesty. Sense follows Christ
rather that it might see his Miracles; and Love, that it may be fed with
Loaves; but Faith follows Christ for himself above all.

II. The second consideration to speak the advantage of it, is, that the grace
of Faith, it has, as it were, an arbitrary power with God; so that whatsoever
a Christian shall seek in Faith, he shall receive it. It is the noble gift
that was once given to Faith, that it should never seek any thing and be
denied, according to that word in Matthew. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever ye
shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive it: And that word in Joh. 15.
7. Abide in me, that is, believe, and the promise is annexed to this,
whatsoever ye shall ask, ye shall receive: And it is clear likewise from the
preceding verse to our Text, that if we obey this command of Faith, Whatsoever
we shall ask of God, we shall receive it. And I would speak these two things to
you from this. First, That oftentimes Christ puts a blank in a Christians
hand, who is much in the exercise of Faith, according to that in Matthew. 20. 32.
Is there not an ample blank put into that man's hand, What will thou that I
should do unto thee? Christ desires him to fill up that blank with what he
would; And secondly, There is this which is one of the greatest steps of
Christ's matchless condescendency, that oftentimes when his own have sought in
their presumption a blank to be put in their hand, Christ condescendeth to give
it, according to that strange passage in Mark 10. 35, 36. The two disciples who
present this desire to Christ, We desire, say they, That whatsoever we ask,
thou shall give it unto us, and presently that is answered, What will ye that I
should do for you? Christ has an infinite good will to satisfy the desires of
his own: and that which yet more speaks out Christ's boundless good will, to
satisfy the desires of all that belong to him; It may be cleared in that word,
Ioh. 16. 24. Where he charge his Disciples with this, Hitherto (says he)
have ye asked me nothing; ye must not suppose that Peter, James and John never
sought a sui^ of Christ, but the meaning of that expression is this, ye sought
nothing in comparison of that, which I was willing to give, and which your
necessity did call for at my hands, which ye should have sought.

III. There is this third consideration to point out the advantage of Faith, It
is that grace, that keeps all the graces of the spirit in life and exercise;
Faith is that higher wheel, at the motion of which, all the lower wheels do
move; If so we may speak, Faith is that Primum mobile, that first moves and
turns about all these lower graces of the Spirit, according to that, 2 Pet. 1.
5. Add to your faith, virtue, and to your virtue, patience, and to your
patience, brotherly kindness. First, The grace of Faith keeps in exercise
the grace of Love, as is clear, Ephesians. 3 17. where these two Graces are
conjoined: As likewise from Romans 5. 1. compared with verse 5. Being justified
by faith. Then this effect follows upon it, The love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts: And so it is certain, that Faith keeps Love in Life. Faith (being
the Spy of the soul, and that Intelligencer, and precious Messenger) it goes
out, and brings in objects unto Love, Faith draws aside the vail, and love
sits down and solaceth it self in the discoveries of Faith. Secondly, The
grace of Faith likewise, it keeps the grace of Mortification in exercise: as
is clear not only from Ephesians. 6. 6. but from 1 Ioh. 5. 4. This is our victory
whereby we overcome the world, even our faith; And it is certain, that Faith
keeps mortification in exercise, and advances holiness, not only because of
this, that Faith is that grace that presents to a Christian the absolute
purity and spotless holiness of Jesus Christ: but also because it makes them
esteem their idols tastlesse as the white of an egg, and they become unto them
as their sorrowful meat. The best principle of mortification is this, the
discoveries of the invisible virtues of Jesus Christ. That mortification which
a^iseth from the lovely discoveries of the excellency of Jesus Christ, is most
real and abiding, as these waters which rises from the highest springs are not
only constant, but likewise most deep and excellent. Thirdly, Faith likewise
has influence upon mortification, as it does take hold of that infinite
strength that is to Christ, by which a Christian is enabled to mo^^ifie his
corruptions. Fourthly* Faith likewise makes application of the blood of
sprinkling, by which we are purified from dead works. Fifthly, Likewise the
grace of Faith keeps in exercise the grace of Humility, as is clear* Romans 3.
27. By what Law, says he, is boasting excluded? It is not by the Law of Works,
but by the Law of Faith. Sixthly, Faith keeps in exercise the grace of joy,
as is clear, Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy, and peace
in believing: So that ye see the proper fruit of Faith is, joy in the Holy
Ghost. And certainly, did we believe more, we should rejoice more. Seventhly,
and lastly, Faith keeps in exercise the grace of hope: for it is impossible
for hope to be in lively exercises, except Faith once be exercised: which may
be a shame unto you; For how can we hope to attain the thing that is
promised, except our faith first close with the promise? So there is this
difference betwixt the grace of Faith, and the grace of Hope: the grace of
Faith closes with the promises, but the grace of Hope, it closes with the
thing that is promised.

IV. There is this fourth Consideration, that may speak out the excellency of
the grace of Faith; It is that grace, by which a Christian does attain to most
divine fellowship, and constant correspondency with Heaven. Would ye have that
question resolved and determined, What is the best way, Not to stir up our
beloved, nor awake him until he please? It is this, be much in the grace of
Faith: this is clear from Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith: By the exercise of all other graces, Christ is but a sojourner, That
turns aside to tarry but for a night; but by the exercise of this grace, he
comes to take up house with us. I will tell you what faith is, It is a ladder
that reaches betwixt heaven and earth: by the steps of which, a Christian does
daily go up to heaven, and converse with the higher House. Faith is that grace,
(as the Apostle speaks) by which we have access to the Throne of his grace.
Faith ushers in the Believer to the Throne: and without it he cannot have
access there, nor joy when he is there.

V. Here is this advantage that attends the exercise of Faith; A believing
Christian is a praying Christian: according to that word in Mark 9. 24. where
these two are conjoined together, Lord, I believe: and then he falls to his
prayer presently after that confession, Help thou my unbelief. And it is clear
from Psalm. 63. 1. O God* thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts for thee. And sometimes Faith is a most impatient grace: but we may
always say of it, that it is a most diligent grace. Oh is it not the neglect
of this precious exercise of faith and of the duty of secret Prayer, that makes
our leanness testisie to our Face, and makes our souls as a barren
wilderness? I am persuaded of this, (that since Christ had any followers, and
since ever this everlasting Go^pel was preached in Paradise) the exercise of
secret prayer was never so much neglected. We have turned over all our prayers
into complements with God. We know not what ^t is to rise at midnight and call
upon God, and to inquire after our Maker under the silent watches of the night.
O but it is a sweet di^ersion from sleep, to retire our selves (in the ^ilent
seasons of the night) from all thoughts about* worldly matters, and to converse
with that invisible Majesty.

VI. There is this sixth consideration to ^oint out the advantage of Faith:
That Faith ^s that grace that does facilitate a Christians obedience, and
makes it most pleasant and ^asie; This is clear from Heb. 11. 8. By faith
Abraham, when commanded to go to a strange land, obeyed, and went out, not
knowing whether ^e went: The word may be rendered, He did ^hearfully obey. And
ver. 17. By faith he of^ered up his only Son. Would ye know the reason why his
commands are your burden, and why his precepts are your crosses? It is because
of this, Ye do not believe: And so it is most certain, that it is impossible
for a Chri^tian to attain to a pleasant way of obedience, without the exercise
of Faith. Faith holds ^p the Crown to a Christian, and this crown ^aketh him
to obey. Faith gathers strength from Christ, and that strength makes
obe^ience very easy. Faith ^aketh up the excellency of Christ, and this makes
a Christian to look upon his duty, more as his dignity, then his duty. And we
are persuaded of this, that our chariot wheel should move more swiftly, (like
the chariots of Aminadab) if we were more in the exercise of the grace of
Faith. Would ye know an answer to that question. What is the first most
requisite for a Christian while here below? Faith; And what secondly is most
requisite? Faith; And what thirdly is most requisite for a Christian? even Faith.
Faith above all things, and above all things, Faith.

VII. There is another advantage of it, that by Faith our service and prayers
are accepted of God. Would ye know what is the prayer of a Christian that is
not in Faith? I^ is a smoke in his nostrils, and a fire that burns all the
day. The unbelievers sacrifice is an abomination to the Lord. This is clear
from Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered up unto God a more acceptable sacrifice
then Cain; and we conceive that there are many unanswered prayers which we do
put up, because we want that noble exercise of Faith.

VIII. And lastly, we shall likewise add^ this, that Faith is the gra^e by
which a Christian has that perfect and immediate sight (as it were) of great
things that are promised to him; Faith brings a Christian within sight of
Heaven, and Faith brings a Christian within sight of God; according to tha^
word, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the evidence ^ things not seen, and that noble
pa^adox, th^^ is said of Faith, Heb. 11. 27* By faith Mos^^ saw him that is
invisible. Is it not an impossible thing, to see that, which cannot be seen?
But the meaning of it is this, That Faiths discoveries of God, are as certain
and sure, as the discoveries of our bodily eyes are: Faith is an intelligent
grace, yea, it is a most sure and infallible grace; What will Faith not do? And
what can ye do who want Faith?

Now to enforce the advantages and excellencies of Faith a little more, we
shall propose to you the disadvantages of that woeful sin of unbelief.

I. There is this disadvantage of the sin of unbelief, that all the actions
that proceed from an unbeliever, they are impure and defiled, according to that
in Tit. 1. 15. But unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure;
but even their mind and conscience is defiled. Their prayer is unclean: yea,
(as Solomon speaks) their plowing is sin: yea their going about the most
excellent duties (for matter) is an abomination to God, according to that word,
Romans 14. 23. What ever is not of faith, is sin. So the want of Faith is the
great polluter of all our actions and of all our performances.

II. There is this second disadvantage of misbelief, that it is impossible for
one in the exercise of unbelief, to mo^tifie a lust or idol: and we may allude
unto these words in Matthew. 17. 20. When his disciples came to him and asked
this question, Why could we not cast out this devil? That was given as an
answer, because of your unbelief: Unbelief is that, which takes up arms for
our idols; and does most strongly defend them: for there is nothing that will
kill corruption so much, as the exercise of faith: and when that is laid aside,
we have laid by our weapons, and have in a manner concluded ^ treaty of peace
with our idols, that we shall not offend them, if they offend not us.

III. There is this disadvantage that waits upon the sin of unbelief, that
such an one cannot win nor attain to the grace of establishment, but is always
as the waves of the sea, tossed to and fro, until once he win to the exercise
of Faith, as is clear from Isa. 7. 9* Except ye believe, ye shall not be
established.

IV. There is this disadvantage that waits on it; it is the mother of
hardness and stupidity of heart, according to that word in Mark 16. 14. Where
he upbraideth then because of their unbelief, and then that danger follows,
to wit, hardness of heart, this is clear also from Act. 19. 9. Where these two
sister* devils are conjoined and locked together, unbelief and hardness of
heart, because it is unbelief indeed, that hinders all the graces, by which
the grace of tenderness must be maintained.

V. There is this disadvantage in the sin of unbelief, that it is big with
child of apostasy from God, and of defection from him, according to that word,
Heb. 3. 12. Beware lest there be in any of you, an evil heart of unbelief (and
there the fruit of it) to depart from the living God. And certainly it is no
wonder, that unbelief travel in birth, till that cursed child of Apostasy be
brought forth; not only because of this, that an unbelieve^ loses the
thoughts of the excellency of Christ, but also because he increases in his
thoughts of love toward his idols; for Christ does decrease in those who
misbelieve, and their idols do increase in their love, and in their desires,
and in their estimation.

VI. There is this sixth disadvantage in the sin of unbelief, it hinders the
communication of many signal workings and tokens of the love and favor of the
most High, according to that sad word that is in Mat. 13. 58. at the close, He
could not do many mighty works there because of their unbelief. Unbelief, as it
were, laid a restraint on Christ, that he could not effectua^e these things
which he was willing to perform. And (to shut up our discourse at this time) I
would only add these two aggravations, which may somewhat enforce what we have
spoken; (I say) there are these two aggravations in the sin of unbelief, even
in his own who have a right (and also his call) to believe: 1. That after
Christ has given most sensible discoveries of himself, Wherein ye have seen
him, as it were, face to face, yet we will not believe: this is clear from
Ioh. 6. 36. Though ye have seen me, says Christ, yet ye do not believe in me.
There is not a manifestation of Christ's presence, but it is a witness against
you, because of your unbelief. Would ye heat the voice of sense, that is
rectified? It is this, believe on the Son of God. Secondly, That
notwithstanding of the signal demonstrations of the power of Christ, yet,
though it were the mortifying of some lust and idol within them, yet they will
not believe, but upon new temptations will doubt of his love to them. Christ
preaches faith by his Word, He preaches faith by His fufferings, He preaches
faith by his dispensations, He preaches faith by his promises, he preaches
faith by his rods, and if these five instruments will not engage your hearts to
believe, what can move them? Do not his two wounds in his precious hands,
preach out this point of Faith, believe him* Does not that hole opened in his
side, preach this Doctrine, That we should believe in him. And these two
wounds, that he received in his precious feet, do they not preach this, That we
should believe on a crucified Savior? And we would only say this, that
sometime it is the case of his own, that after the convictions of this, that it
is their duty to believe, and also after some desires to close with Christ, yet
they find inability to close with him. Is it not certain that to will (to
believe) is sometime present with you: but how to perform ye know not? And I
would have a Christian making this foursold use of such a dispensation as that,
(which is most ordinarily) when convictions of our duty to believe, and some
desires to close with Christ, is not followed with actual performances.

1. To study to have your convictions more deeply rooted within you; for it
does sometimes follow, that resolutions and min^s to believe, are not blessed
with actual believing; because the conviction of our duty to believe, is not
deeply imprinted upon your conscience.

2. Be convinced of that desperate enimity ( and that mystery of iniquity) that
is within you, that ye can have some will to do, without ability to perform.
We confess, it is not an ordinary disease in these days, to have such a
contrariety betwixt a Christians will and his practice, our will for the most
part being no better then our practice; But sometime it is, which may make you
cry forth, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death.

3. That ye would be much in the employing of Christ, that as he has given
you to will, so also he might make you to do. Christ is about to convince his
own in such a dispensation as that, That faith is the gift of God: Faith is so
noble a grace, that it cannot be spinned out from our resolutions, nor from our
endeavors; Faith is such a divine plant, as the Fathers right hand must plant
in our souls.

4. Let it convince you of the excellency of the grace of Faith (for the
difficulty of attaining to any thing may speak out the excellency of that
thing) there is no sin but it may be easily win at; There is an easiness and
facility to overtake the paths of our idols: but the graces of the Spirit are
so excellent things, that we must fight before we attain them. And you who are
strangers to Christ Jesus (and have never known what ^t is to close with him)
we would request you in Christ's Name to be reconciled to him. What know ye, O
men, (or rather Atheists) but this shall be the last summonds that ye shall
get to believe? And that because ye disobey this precious summonds, there
shall be one presented to you that ye cannot sit. I remember of one man, who
looking upon many thousands that were under his command, weeped over them, when
he considered how that within a few years all these should be laid in their
graves, and should be in eternity. O but it were much of our concernment, to
be trying our selves how it is with us. We are not afraid that it is a breach
of charity, to wish that but one of each ten that are within these doors, were
heirs of the grace of life, and had the solid and spiritual expectation of
heaven. I think, if Christ were to come presently to speak to us; he might not
only say to each twelve that are here, One of you shall betray me: but we are
afraid, that he would say to each twelve that are here, Eleven of you shall
betray me, and but one only shall pass free. O does it not concern you, to
enquire where ye shall rest at night, when the long shadows of the everlasting
evening shall be stretched out upon you? I think there are some, that are so
settled upon their lies, that if they were one day in hell, and saw all the
torments that are there, and were brought from it the next day to live on
earth, they would not repent. And more, there are some, that take them up one
day to see the joys of heaven, and bring them back again, they would ^ot
pursue after these blessed and everlasting ^njoyments. O is not Christ much
underva^ued by us? But I must tell you this, One woe ^ past, but behold another
woe is fast coming. O ^he s^reighing of these spirits that are enter^d into
their everlasting prisonhouse, out of which there is no redemption. What shall
^e your choice, when Christ shall come in the ^louds? I am persuaded, there are
many, ^o whom, at that day, this Doctrine would be ^avishing, viz. That there
were not a death, that there were not a God, and that there were ^ot an
eternity. Oh! will ye believe, That ^he sword of the Justice of God is bathed
in heaven, and shall come down to make a sacrifice, ^ot* in the land of Idumea,
nor in the land of Bozra; but he is to make a sacrifice among his people, who
seemed to make a Covenant with ^im by sacrifice. Ah, ah, shall we say that? ^f
that argument were used to many*, that within forty days they should be at
their ^ong and everlasting home, they would yet ^pend thirty nine of these days
in taking plea^ure upon their lusts* I am persuaded of ^his, that there are
many who think that the ^ay betwixt heaven and earth is but one days ^ourney;
they think they can believe in one day, and triumph at night: But O! it shall
^e a short triumphing that such believers as ^hese shall have. Therefore, O
study to close with a crucified Savior, rest on him by faith, delight your
selves in him with love, and let your souls be longing for the day when your
^oice shall be heard in heaven (and O how ^weet shall it be sung) Arise,
arise, arise, my love, my dove, my fair one, and come away: for behold your
winter is past, your everlasting summer is come, and the time of the singing of
birds is near: When Christ shall come over these mountains of Bether, he shall
cry, Behold I come: and the soul shall sweetly answer, Come Blessed Lord Jesus,
Come. O what a life shall it be! that with these two arms ye should eternally
incircle Christ, and hold him in your arms, or rather be incircled by him? Wait
f^^ him, for he shall come, and his reward is with him, and he shall once take
home the wearied travelers of hope.

SERMON IV.
1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that ye should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.
THere are two great and excellent gifts, which God in the depth of his
boundless love has bestowed on his own. First, There is that infinite gift and
royal donation, his own beloved Son, Jesus Christ, which is called, The gift of
God, Ioh. 4 10. And secondly, There is that excellent gift of the grace of
Faith, which God has bestowed upon his own, which is also called* The gift of
God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Faith is the gift of God. And is it not certain, that these
two gracious gifts ought to engage ou^ souls and hearts much unto him? Infini^e
Majesty could give no gift greater nor his S^^, and infinite poverty could
receive, no ^^her gift so suitable as Christ; It was the most noble gift that
heaven could give, and it is the greatest advantage for earth to receive it.
And we could wish that the most part of the study and practice of men (that is
spent in pursuit after these low and transient vanities) might be once taken
up in that precious pursuit after Christ. We could wish that all the questions
and debates of the time were turned over into that soul concerning question,
What shall we do to be saved? And that all the questions, controversies, and
contentions of the time were turned over into that divine contention and
heavenly debate* Who should be most for Christ, who should be most for exalting
of the noble and excellent plant of ^enown; and that all our judgings and
searchings of other men's practices and estate might ^e turned over into that
useful search, ^ro ^rove and examine our selves whether we be in ^he faith or
not. And I would ask you this question, what are your thoughts concern^ng
precious Christ, seeing he is that noble ^bject of Faith? We would only have
you ^aking along these things, by which Christ may be much commended to your
hearts: First, There was never any that with the ^yes of Faith did behold the
ma^ehlesse beau^y and transcendent worth of that crucified ^aviour, that
returned his enemy. There is ^oul conquering virtue in the face of Christ, and
there is a heart captivating and over^oming power in the beau^y of Jesus
Christ. ^his first sight that ever persecuting Saul got of Christ, it brought
him unto an endless^ captivity of love. Secondly, There is the that we would
say of precious Christ, which may engage our souls unto Him, that for al^ the
wrongs Believers do to Christ, yet hat^ He never an evil word of them to His
Fatthe^ but commends them: which is clear from that of Ioh. 17. 6. where Christ
does con^mend the Disciples to the Father for the grace of obedience, They have
kept the Word: and for the grace of Faith, verse 8* They have believed that
thou did send me and yet were not the Disciples most defecti^^ in obedience,
both in this, That they did no^^ take up their cross and follow Christ: and
al^^ in that, they did not adhere to Him in the day that He was brought to
Cajaphas hall and were they not most defective in the gra^^ of Faith? as is
clear from Matthew. 17. 17. a^^ likewise from Ioh. 14. 1. He is pressing the^ to
believe in Him, and yet He does comme^^ them to the Father, as most perfect in
the things. Thirdly, There is this that w^ would lastly say of Him who is the
noble o^ ject of Faith, look to the eminent depth^ Christ's condescendency, and
then ye will provoked to love Him. Was it not infi^^^^ love that made Christ to
ly three days in t^^ grave, that we might be through all the ag^ of Eternity
with Him? Was it not in f^^^^ condescendency that made His precious he wear a
crown of thorns, that we mig^^ eternally wear a crown of Glory? Was not
infinite condescendency that made Chr^^^ wear a purple robe, that so we might
w^^ that precious robe of the righteousness of ^he Saints? And was it not
matchless condescendency, that Christ, who knew no sin, was made sin for us,
and like unto us, that so we might become like unto him, and be made the
righteousness of God in Him.

But to come to that which we intend main^y to speak upon at this time, which
is that ^econd thing that we proposed to speak of from these words: and that is
concerning the excellency of this grace of Faith, which we cleared was holden
out in that, that faith was called his commandment, which is so ^alled by way
of eminency and excellency. There are many things in Scripture, which may
sweetly point out the precious excel^ency of this grace of Faith, and we shall
only ^peak to these things.

I. The first thing that speaks out the ^xcellency of Faith is this, it
exercises it ^elf upon a most noble Object (to wit) Jesus Christ: Faith and
love being the two arms ^f the immortal soul, by which we do im^race a
crucified Savior, which is often ^ointed at in Scripture: and we shall point
^t these three principal acts of Faith, which ^t exercises on Jesus Christ as
the Object fit.

1. The first is, to make up an Union be^wixt Christ and the Believer (Faith
being ^ndeed an uniting grace, and that which ^nitteth the members to the head)
and to ^ake this more fully appear, we would point ^ut a little what sweet
harmony and cor^espondency there is betwixt these two sister graces, (to wit)
faith and love. Faith i^ that nail, which fasteneth the soul to Christ and love
is that grace which drives that nai^ to the head; Faith at first takes but a
tender grip of Christ, and then love comes i^ and makes the soul take a more
sure grip o^ him. Secondly, Ye may see that harmon^ in this; Faith is that
grace which taken hold (as it were) of the garments of Christ and of his words:
but love (that ambitio^^ grace) it takes hold of the heart of Christ and, as
it were, his heart does melt in the hand of love. Thirdly, It may be seen i^
this, Faith is that grace, which draws the first draught of the likeness and
image Christ upon a soul, but that (accomplishin^ grace of love, it does
complete these fi^ draughts and these imperfect lineaments (...) Christ's Image,
which were first drawn on the soul. Fourthly, By faith and love the hea^^ of
Christ and of the Believer are so unite^ that they are no more two, but one
Spirit.

2. There is this second act that Faith (...) exciseth on Christ, and it is in
discovering t^^ matchless excellencies, and the transce^dent properties of
Jesus Christ, O wh^^ large and precious commentaries does fai^^ make upon
Christ? It is indeed that faith ^^spy, which does always bring up a go^^
report of him. Hence it is, that faith is c^^led understanding, Colos. 2. 2.
Because it ^^ that grace, which reveals much of the pr^cious truth of that
noble Object.

3. And there is this third noble act (...) Faith, exercising it self upon
Christ, (...) makes Christ precious to the soul, accor^ing to that word, 1
Pet. 2. 7. Unto you which ^elieve, he is precious. And if there were ^o other
thing to speak forth its worth, but ^^at, it is more then sufficient: for no
doubt ^^is is the exercise of the higher House, to be ^welling on the
contemplation of Christ's ^eauty, and to have their ^ouls transported ^ith love
toward him; and with joy in ^im. Reason and amazement are seldom ^ompanions,
but here they do sweetly join together; First, a Christian loves Christ,
because of Christ's actings, and then he lo^eth all these actings because they
come from Christ.

II. Now secondly, this points out the ^recious excellency of the grace of
Faith, it ^^ that grace which is most mysterious and ^ublime in its actings, it
has a more divine and sublime way of acting then any other ^race; Hence it
called, The mystery of faith. which speaks this, that the actings of ^aith
are mysteries to the most part of the world, and I shall only point at these
things which may speak out the mysterious actings ^f the grace of Faith.

1. Faith can believe, and fix it self on a word of promise, although sense,
reason and ^robability, seem to contradict the accom^lishment of that promise*
Faith it walks ^ot by the low dictates of sense and reason; ^ut by a higher
rule, (to wit) The sure word ^f prophecy, which is clear from Romans 4. 19.
^here Abraham believed the promise, notwith^anding that sense and reason seemed
to contradict it: He considered not the deadness of his own body, neither the
barrenness of Sarahs womb, but was strong in the faith, giving glory to God:
As it is clear from Heb. 11. 29, 34. Where Faith believed their passing through
the red sea, as through dry ground, which wa^ most contrary to sense and
reason: Faith believed the falling down of the walls of Jericho, by the blowing
of rams horns. Which things are most impossible to sense and reason; for sense
will oftentimes cry out, All men are ^iars; And reason will say, How can such a
thing be? And yet that Heroic grace of Faith cries out, Has he spoken it: He
will also do it, Has he said it? Then it shall come to pass.

2. Faith can believe a word of promise, notwithstanding that the dispensations
of God seem to contradict it; as was clear in Job, who professed, He would
trust in God, though he should kill him. And no doubt, but this was the
practice of believing Jacob, he trusted that that promise should be
accomplished, That the elder should serve the younger; though all the
dispensations of God, (which he did meet with) seemed to say, that promise
should not be accomplished.

3. Faith can believe a word of promise, even when the Commands of God seem to
contradict the accomplishment of that promise: This is clear in that singular
instance of Abraham's faith, that notwithstanding he was commanded to kill his
promised seed, (upon whom he did depend the accomplishment of the promises) yet
he believed that ^e promises should be performed. And ^^ough there were
indeed extraordinary and ^range trials of his faith, as he had natural
^ffections to wrestle with; yet over the bel^ of all these, believing Abraham,
he gives ^aith to the promise, and brings his Isaac ^o the Altar (though he
did receive him ^ack again) this is clear from Heb. 11. 17, ^8, 19.

4. Faith can exercise it self upon the promise, notwithstanding that
challenges and convictions of worthiness and guilt do wait on the Christian;
This is clear, 2 Samuel 23. 5. That although his house was not so with God as did
become, yet he believed the promise: As ^ikewise it is clear from Psalm. 65. 3.
Iniqui^ies prevail against me: and yet that does not interupt his Faith, but
he says, As for our ^^^^gressions thou shall purge them away. And ^ertainly,
i^ were a noble and precious act of Faith to believe, notwithstanding of
un^nswerable challenges of guilt; the best way ^oth to crucify our Idols, and
to answer ^hese challenges, is believing And hoping against hope, and closing
with Christ: This is most clear from Isa. 64. 6, 7. compared with ^ers. 8.
where after strange challenges, the prophet has a strange word, But now, O
Lord, ^hou art our Father. There is an Emphasis in ^he word (now) for all this,
Yet thou art (now) our Father.

5. And lastly, this points out the mysterious acting of the grace of Faith,
that it exercises it self upon an invisible object, even upon Christ not yet
seen, according to that word, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Whom having not seen, yet ye love,
in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, etc. I pose the greater part
of you who are here, whether or not these be two of the greatest Paradoxes and
mysteries unto you? For, is not this a mystery, to love him whom we never saw?
Whom having not seen, yet ye love: To love an absent and unseen Christ, is a
mystery to the most part of the world: and is not this a mystery, to believe on
him whom we never saw? In whom, though ye see him not, yet believing. And I
shall add this, that Faith can hold fast its interest with God,
notwithstanding the most precious Christian should call us hypocrites, and not
acknowledge us, this is clear in the practice of Job; And most clear from that
word, Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant
of us, and Israel acknowledge us not.

III. Thirdly, this points out the excellency of the grace of Faith, that
Faith, (when it is in exercise) is that grace by which a Christian does at^ain
unto most sensible enjoyments. There is a great question that is much debated
among Christians, what is the way to win this happy length, to be always
under the sweet and refreshing influence of heaven, and to have his dew always
coming down upon our branches? I can give no answer to it, but this, be much in
the exercise of Faith: This is clear from that notion and name put upon Faith,
Isa. 45. 22. It is called a look to Christ, which is a most sensible act. If
ye would know a description of Faith, It is this, The divine contemplation of
the immortal soul, upon that divine, excellent, and precious object, Jesus
Christ. For God never made Faith a liar, and therefore its eve is never off him
that is the noble object of Faith, Jesus Christ manifested in the Gospel: as it
is clear, Ephesians. 1. 13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit
of promise, which preaches out the excellent enjoyments these had after their
closing with Christ who is invisible. Our Faith is called a seeing, which
speaks out this, that Faiths sight of God, is as certain as if we did behold
him with our eyes, as is clear, Heb. 11. 27. Moses saw him by Faith who is
invisible. And we conceive that the ground which makes the most part of us
have such complaints, How long will thou forget us for ever? It is this; the
want of the Spiritual exercise of Faith: and are there not some here who may
cry out, It is more then thirty days since I did behold the King; Yea, there
are some who may go a greater length, and cry out, I have lived these two years
at Jerusalem, and yet I have not seen the Kings face? Yea, there are some here
whose complaint may go a little higher, and cry forth, These three years and
six months it has not rained on me, but the clouds have been restrained and
bound up, and the heavens have become brass. And would you know the rise of
these complaints, it is this, ye are not much in the Spiritual exercise of
Faith. And to you, I would only say these two words, First, It is easier to
persuade a reprobate that he is defective in the fear of God, and in his love
to God, then to persuade some such, that they are wanting to God in their
Faith; for they hold fast that piece of desperate iniquity till they die,
Secondly, We would say to these of you who have the valley of Achor for a door
of hope, and have tasted of the sweetness of Christ, some of you will be less
convinced; for the neglect of the duty of Faith, then for neglect of the duty
of Prayer, or of the duty of keeping the Sabbath day. But I am persuaded of
this, that if the noble worth of that transcendant object were known, we would
have a holy impatience, until once we did believe.

IV. Fourthly, This also points out the excellency of the grace of Faith, It
is that grace by which a Christian is advanced to the highest and most
inconceivable pitch of dignity, and that is, To be the child of the living God:
As is clear, Ioh. 1. 12. To as many as received (or believed in him) he gave
power or prerogative to become the sons of God. And certainly that noble
prerogative of Adoption is much undervalued by many: And I will tell you two
grounds whereon the most part of men undervalue that excellent gift of
Adoption: First, They do not take up the infinite highness of God (and what a
one He is) otherwise they would cry out with David, Seems it a small thing in
your eyes to be a son to the King of Kings? Secondly, We do not take up, nor
understand these matchless Privileges which are given to them who are once in
this estate, I am persuaded, if this were believed, that he who is a servant
does not abide in the house for ever, (though he that is a Son does) it would
stir us up to more divine zeal in our persuit after faith.

V. Fifthly, This likewise points out the excellency of the grace of Faith,
It is that grace, by which all other actions are pleasant to God, and are taken
off our hand, as is clear, Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain, which must be understood even of all other
duties. And that word, verse. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God,
speaks this also, That by faith we do exceedingly please him. And this is a
most sad and lamentable repoof unto many who are here, that their actions do
not please God, because they are not in Faith. Would ye know a description of
your prayers? (ye who are hypocrites, and destitute of the knowledge of God) It
is this, Your prayers are the breach of the third Command, In taking the name
of the Lord in vain; for which he will not hold you guiltless. And would ye
know what is your hearing of Sermon? It is an abomination to the Lord,
according to that word in Tit. 1. 15. To the unbelieving and impure, nothing is
clean. And as Solomon does speak, The plowing of the wicked is sin: So that all
your actions that ye go about, are but an offense to the Majesty of the Lord.

Now we would speak to these two things before we proceed to the evidences of
faith: (to wit) First, That there is a difference betwixt the direct act of
Faith, and the reflecting act of Faith. For there may be a direct act of faith
in a Christian, when he is not persuaded that he does believe; but the
reflecting acts of faith are these which a Christian has, when he is persuaded
in his conscience that he does believe. And we would secondly say, that there
are many that go down to there grave under that soul destroying delusion, that
they are in faith, and yet never did know what faith is: I am persuaded, there
are many whom all the preachings in the world will never persuade, that they
did never believe, their faith being born with them, and it will die with them,
without any fruit. But faith being such an excellent grace, and so
advantageous, (whereof we have spoken a few things) we shall speak a little
further of it, First, in pointing out some evidences, by which a Christian may
know, whether or not he be indeed in the Faith. Secondly, I shall give you some
helps whereby Faith may be kept in exercise.

I. Now there is this first evidence of faith, that a Christian who does
believe, he accounts absence and want of fellowship with Christ, and
communion with him, one of the greatest and most lamentable crosses that ever
he had: as is clear, Psalm 13. 3. Lighten mine eyes, says David, that is, Let
me behold, and be satisfied with thy face; and the mo^ive that he backeth it
with, is this, Lest I sleep the sleep of death. David thought himself a dead
man, if Christ did withdraw his presence from him. Also it is clear, Cant. 3,
1. (compared with the following verses) where absence from Christ, and want of
communion with him, was the greatest cross the Spouse had: and it is clear
from Ioh. 20. 11, 12, 13. where Mary had a holy disdain of all things in
respect and comparison of Christ. But I will tell you what a hypocrite does
most lament, and that is, the want of reputation among the Saints: that is the
great god, and idol among hypocrites, and that which (when not enjoyed)
hypocrites and ^theists lament most, the world, and the lust of their eyes:
when they want these, ^hen they cry out, They have taken away my gods, and what
have I more? They think heaven can never make up the loss of earth. And
certainly, if many of us would examine our selves by this, we would find our
selves most defective. I would pose all you who are here, who have taken on a
name to be followers of Christ, whether or not ye have been content to walk
thirty days in absence from Christ, and yet never to lament it? Has not
Christ been thirty days and more in heaven, without a visit from you? And yet
for all this, ye have not clothed your selves with sackcloath. I will not say,
that ^his is an undeniable evidence of the total ^a^t of the grace of Faith;
but it does eminently prove this, that the person who has ^ome this length,
has losed much of his primitive love, and much of that high esteem which he
ought to have of matchless Christ: what can you find in this world, that
makes you converse so little with heaven? I think that it is the noble
encouragement of a Christian, when he is going down to his grave, that he has
this wherewith to comfort himself, I am to change my place, but not my company:
death to the believing Christian being a blessed transition and transportation
to a more immediate, constant and uninterrupted enjoyment of God. But I
believe, that if all who have the name of Believers in this generation, should
go to heaven, they might have this to say, I am now not only to change my
place, but also my company; For these seventy years I have been conversant with
my idols, but now I am to converse with more blessed, divine, and excellent
company. O that ye might be persuaded to pursue much after an absent Christ.
Were it not a sweet period of our life, to breath out our last breath in his
arms, and to be living in the faith of being eternally with him, which might
be founded upon his Word.

II. There is this second evidence of one that is in the Faith: They do
endeavor to advance that necessary work of the mortification of their idols,
according to that word, 1 Ioh. 3. 4. Every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, Act. 15. 9. Faith it purifieth the heart.
And concerning this evidence (lest any should mistake it) I would say these
things to you. First, The mortification of a Christian, as long as he is here
below, it does more consist in resolutions then seize. It is certain,
that there are high seize of a Christian, in the mortification of his
idols, but his resolutions go far above his performances. Secondly, We would
say this, That those Christians who never came this length in Christianity, to
make that an universal conclusion, and full resolution, What have I to do any
more with idols? They may suspect themselves, that they are not in the Faith:
for a Christian that is in Christ, he is universal in resolutions, though he be
not so in practice, but defective in performances. A Christian may have big
resolutions with weak performances; for resolution will be at the gate of
heaven, before practice come from the borders of hell; there being a long
distance betwixt resolution and practice; and the one much swifter then the
other. And thirdly, We would likewise say, That ye who never did know what it
was to endeavor (by prayer and the exercise of other duties) the mortification
of your lusts and idols; ye may be afraid, that ye have not yet the hope of
seeing him as he is, And I would say this to many, who are settled upon their
lies, and who never did know what it was to spend one hour in secret prayer for
mortifying an idol, that they would beware lest that curse be past in heaven
against them; I would have purged you, and ye would not be purged, therefore
ye shall not be purged any more till you die; that iniquity of refusing to
commune with Christ in the work of secret mortification, I say, that iniquity
shall not be purged away. And we would once seriously desire you, by that
dreadful sentence that Christ shall pass against you, and by the love ye have
to your immortal souls, and by the pains of these everlasting torments of hell,
that ye would seriously set about the work of spiritual mortification; that so
ye may evidence that ye have believed, and that ye have the soulcomforting hope
of eternal life. I would only speak this one word to you, (and desire you
seriously to ponder it,) What if within twelve hours hereafter a summonds were
given to you (without continuation of days) to compear before the solemn and
dreadful Tribunal of that impartial Judge, Jesus Christ: What suppose ye,
would be your thoughts? Will ye examine your own conscience, what ye think
would be your thoughts, if such summonds were given unto you. I am persuaded of
this, That your knees would smite one against another, and your face should
gather palenesse, seeing your conscience would condemn you, That ye had been
weighed in the balance and found light: O think ye that ye can both fight and
triumph in one day? Think ye that ye can fight and overcome in one day? Think
ye your lusts and unmortified corruptions so weak and faint hearted an enemy,
that upon the first appearance of such imaginary champions (as most part of us
are in our own eyes) that your idols would lay down arms and let you trample on
them? Believe me, mortification is not a work of one day, or one year, but it
is a work will serve you all your time, begin as soon as ye will: And therefore
seeing you have spent your days in the works of the flesh, it is time that now
ye would begin and pursue after him, whose works is with him, and whose reward
shall come before him.

III. Now there is this third evidence, by which a Christian may know whether
he be in the Faith or not, and it is, that Christ is matchless and
incomparable unto such an one, according to that word, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you that
believe Christ is precious, and that word that Luke has in his 7. Chap. at the
close, That she to whom much was forgiven, loved much. Now lest this likewise
should prove a discouragement to any, I would only have you taking notice of
this, that a Christian may be a Believer, and yet want the sensible
discoveries of this, that Christ is matchlesly precious to him: but this is
certain, that they which are in the lively exercise of Faith, it is impossible
then for them not to esteem Christ matchless, and I would speak this likewise
to many who are here; Have ye not been living these ten years in Faith, and I
would pose you with this, Esteem ye not your idols more matchless then
Christ, and more of worth then he? It is impossible that there can be any
lively exercise of Faith, and not esteem CHRIST matchless, It is not to say it
with your mouth, and contradict it with your heart will do the business: For
if your hearts could speak^, it would say, I would sell Christ for thirty
pieces of silver: But my idols would I sell at no rate* Are there not many of
you who love the world and its pleasures, better nor the eternity of joy? Oh,
know ye not that word (O ye desperately ignorant of the Truths of God,) That
he who loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him: And yet
notwithstanding of the light of the word, ye would sell your immortal souls
(with Esau) For a mess of po^tage: O but it is a poor bargain when ye have
sold the eternity of joy for a passing world, and for its transitory delights!
I would earnestly know what shall be your thoughts in that day, when ye shall
be standing upon the utmost line betwixt time and eternity. O what will be
your thoughts at that day? but you are to follow on to an endless pain, (by
appearance) and then ye are to leave your idols. I shall only desire, that ye
may read the word, Isa. 10. 3. What will ye do in the day of visitation, and in
the desolation which shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for help? and
where will ye leave your glory? Ye shall then preach mortification to the life,
though all the time of mortification shall be then cut off. O but to hear a
worldly minded man, when eternity of pain is looking him in the face, (preach
out concerning the vanity of this world) might it not persuade you that the
world is a fancy and a dream that shall flee away, and shall leave you in the
day of your greatest strait.

IV. And there is the fourth evidence of Faith, That a Christian, who does
truly believe, he is that Christian who intertaineth a divine jealousy and a
holy suspicion of himself, whether or not he does believe; I love not that
faith which is void of fear, this was clear in the practice of believing Noah,
that though by faith he built the Ark, yet he had fear mixed with his Faith. I
know that there are some who are ignorant concerning this, what it is to doubt
concerning eternal peace; and more, it is not every one that doubts, that
certainly shall get heaven; for I think an hypocrite may doubt concerning his
eternal salvation; however I think the exercise of a hypocrite under his
doubtings, it is more the exercise of his judgment, then the exercise of his
conscience: And I may say, That if all the exercise of the Law which is
preached in these days were narrowly searched, it would be more the exercise
of light, then the exercise of conscience, We speak these things as our doubt,
which never was our exercise; and we make these things our public exercise
which was never our private and chamber exercise. And I think that if all that
a Christian did speak to God in prayer, were his exercise, he would speak
less, and wonder more. We would be speechless when we go to God; for often
if we did speak nothing but our exercise, we would have nothing to say. And
certainly it is true, that often we fall into that woeful sin, of desperate
lying against the holy Ghost, by ^lattering God with our mouth, and lying unto
him with our tongue. And I shall only say these two words; There are some who
have this for their great design, viz. they would be at peace with their
conscience, and also they would be at peace with their idols, they would
gladly reconcile conscience and their idols together, that is their great
design. And there are some whose design is a little more refined, they study
rather to be reconciled with their conscience, then to be reconciled with God;
Their great aim they shoot at, is this, to get their conscience quieted, though
they know not what it is, to have the soul comforting peace of God to quiet
them.

V. Now, There is this last evidence of Faith, That justifying Faith is a Faith
which puts the Christian to be much in the exercise of these duties, by
which it may be maintained, for we must keep Faith as the apple of our eye:
Aod for that end, I would only give you these three things, by which Faith must
be kept in exercise; and a real Christian will be endeavoring in some
measure to attain unto these.

I. It keeps Faith much in exercise, to be much in marking and taking notice
of the divine exercise and proofs of the love of God, wherewith a Christian
does meet, as is clear from that word in Romans 5. 4. Experience works hope. I
durst be bold to charge the most part that are indeed in Christ with this, that
they are too little in remarking and taking notice of the experiences of his
love. Ye should mark the place of your experience, and much more ye should
mark the experience it self: as is clear from Scripture, that the very place
where Christians did meet with experience, in such ane enjoyment of God, they
marked it, Ezekiel. 1. 1. By the rivers of Chebar the heavens were opened, and I
saw the visions of God: And Genesis 32. 30. Jacob called the place Peniel, the
place of living, after seeing of the face of God: it was so remarkable unto
him. And we conceive, that ye would mark these two things mainly in your
practice. First, Ye would mark (if ye can possibly) the first day of your
closing with Christ, and of your coming out of Egypt: and we may allude unto
that command (if not more then allude unto it) in. Dent. 16. 1. Observe the
month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the Lord thy God: For in the month
of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee out of the land of Egypt. And secondly,
We would have you much in marking these experiences which have increased your
Faith, and which have strengthened your love, and which have made you mortify
your idols. These are experiences especially to be marked.

2. Faith is kept in exercise, and we win to the lively assurance of our
interest in God: which we would press upon you, by being much in the exercise
of secret prayer. O but many loves much to pray when abroad, who never loved
to pray when alone. And that is a desperate sign of hypocrisy, according to
that, Matthew. 6. 5. It is said of hypocrites, They love to pray, standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corner of the street*s, that they might be seen of men:
But it is never said of these persons, that they love to pray alone, only they
loved to pray in Synagogues: but it is secret, and retired prayer, by which
Faith must be kept in exercise.

3. And there is this likewise that we would press, upon you, that ye would be
much in* studying communion and fellowship with God, that so your Faith may be
kept in life. And O what a blessed life were it, each day to be taken up to
the top of the mount Pisga, and there to behold that promised land, to get a
refreshfull sight of the Crown every morning, which might make us walk with joy
all alongs that day! The heart o^ a Christian ought to be in heaven, his
conversation ought to be there, his eyes ought to be there: And I know not what
of a Christian ought to be out of heaven (even before his going there) save his
lumpish ^abernacle of clay, which cannot inherit incorruption till he be made
incorruptible. And I shall say no more but this, many of us are readi^^ to
betray him with a kiss, and crucify him afresh, then to keep communion with
him: but woe eternally be to him by whom the Son o^ man is betrayed: and that
does crucify Christ afresh: it were better that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and he were cast into the depth of the sea. I remember an expressio^
of a man, not two days ago, who (upon his death bed) being asked by one what
h^ was doing: did most stupidly, though mos^ truly reply, That he was fighting
with Christ and I think that the most part of us (if he prevent us not) shall
die fighting with Christ. But know, and be persuaded, that he is too sore a
party for us to fight with: He will once tread you in the wine press of his
fury, and he shall return with dyed garments from treading such of you as would
not embrace him: He shall destroy you with all his heart. Therefore be
instructed, lest his soul be disjoynted from you (as that word in Ier. 6. 8.)
And lest your soul eternally be separted from him: Be instructed, I say, to
close with him by ^aith. Now to him who can make you to do so, we desire to
give praise.

In the two Sermons next following, you have the rest of these sweet Purposes,
which the worthy Author Preached upon the same Text; Never before Printed.
SERMON V.
1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that ye should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.
THere are two great rocks, upon which a Christian does ordinarily dash i^ his
way and motion toward his rest 1. The rock of presumption and carnal
confidence; so that when Christ dandleth them upon his knees, and satisfies
them with the breasts of his consolations, and makes their cup to overflow,
then they cry out, My mountain stands strong, I shall never be moved And, 2.
The rock of misbelief and discouragement; So that, when he hides his face and
turns back the face of his Throne, the^ they cry out, Our hope and our
strength is perished from the Lord: we know not what i^ is to bear our
enjoyments by humility, no^ our crosses by patience and submission. ^^ but
misbelief and jealousy are bad interpre*ters of dark dispensations: they know
no^ what it is to read these mysterious character of divine Providence, except
they be writ^^^ in the legible characters of sense; misbelie^^ is big with
child of twins, and is travelli^^ till it bring forth apostasy and security;
an^ no doubt, he is a blessed Christian that ha^^ overcome that woeful idol of
mi^belief, an^ does walk by that Royal Law of the Wor^ and not by that
changeable rule of dispensat^*ons. We conceive that there are three gre^^ Idols
and Dagons of a Christian, that hindere^^ him from putting a blank in Christ's
hand concerning his guiding to heaven, there is pride, self-indulgence, and
security. Do we not covet to be more excellent then our neighbor? Do we not
love to travel to heaven through a valley of Roses? And do we not ambitiously
desire to walk toward Sion, sleeping (rather then weeping) as we go? Are there
not some words that we would have taken out of the Bible? That is sad divinity
to flesh and blood, Through many tribulations must we enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven: we love not to be changed from vessel to vessel, that so our scent
may be taken from us.

There are three great enemies of Christ: Misbelief, Hypocrisy, and Profanity.
Misbelief is a bloody sin, hypocrisy is a silent sin, profanity is a crying
sin. Those are mother evils, and I shall give you these differences betwixt
them: Misbelief crucifieth Christ under the vail of humility, hypocrisy
crucifieth Christ under the vail of love, and profanity puts him to open
shame. Misbelief denies the love and power of God, hypocrisy denies the
omnisciency of God, and profanity denies the justice of God. Misbelief is a
sin that looks after inherent ^ighteousnesse, hypocrisy is a sin that
look^th after external holiness only, and pro^anity is a sin that looks
after heaven without holiness: making connection between ^hese things that God
has always sepa^ate, and separating these things which he ^ath always put
together; So that their faith shall once prove a delusion, and fly away as a
dream in the night. But let us study this excellent grace of true and saving
Faith, which shall be a precious remedy against all those Christ-destroying and
souldestroying evils.

But now to come to that which we did propose thirdly to be spoken of from the
words, which was the sweetness of this grace of Faith; no doubt, it is a
pleasant command, and it makes all commands pleasant, it is that which casts
a divine luster upon the most hard sayings of Christ, and makes the Christian
to cry forth, God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice. We need not
stand long to clear that Faith is a sweet and refreshing command; for it is
oftentimes recorded in Scripture to the advantage of this grace, and
unspeakable joy and heavenly delight are the handmaids that wait upon it. But
more particularly to make it out, we shall speak to these things. The first is,
That this grace gives a Christian a broad and comprehensive sight of Christ,
and makes him to behold not only the beauty of his actings, but the beauty of
his person: and there are these three precious sights that Faith gives to ^
Christian of Christ. First, It lets the Christian see Christ in his absolute
and personal^ excellency, taking him up as the eternal So^ of God, as the
Ancient of Days, as the Father of Eternity, as the express Image of Hi^
Fathers person, and the brightness of his glory* and this fills the so^l
with divine fear an^ admiration* Hence is that word, Heb. 11. 27* That we see
by Faith him that is invisible. As if he had said, Faith is that grace that
makes things that are invisible, visible unto us. Secondly, It lets the
soul see Christ in his relative excellencies, that is, what he is to us; Faith
takes up Christ as a Husband, and from thence we are provoked to much
boldness and divine confidence, and withal, to see these rich possessions
that are provided for us by our elder Brother, who was born for adversity:
Faith takes up Christ as a blessed Days man that did lay his hand upon us
both: And from thence it is constrained to wonder at the condescendency of
Christ, it takes him up as dying, and as redeeming us from the power of the
grave, and from the hands of our enemies; and this provokes Christians to make
a total and absolute resignation of themselves over unto Christ, To serve him
all the days of our life in righteousness and holiness. And, thirdly, Faith
makes the soul behold these mysterious draughts of spotless love, those
divine emanations of love that have flowed from his ancient and everlasting
love since the world began. Would you know the great ground why we are so
ignorant of him, who is the study of Angels, and of all that are about the
Throne, it is this, we are not much in the exercise of faith. And if we would
ask that question, What is the way to attain to the saving knowledge of God in
Christ? We could give no answer to it but this, Believe, and again believe, and
again believe: Faith opens these mysterious seals of his boundless
perfection, and in some way teaches the Christian to answer that unanswerable
question, What is His Name, and what is his Sons Name.

There is this secondly that points out the sweetness of Faith, that it
gives an excellent relish unto the promises, and makes them food to our soul.
What are all the promises without faith (as to our use) but as a dead letter
that has no life: But faith exercised upon the promises, makes a Christian
cry out, The words of his mouth are sweeter unto me then the honey and the
honey comb: as is clear from Heb. 11. 12, 13. It is by Faith that we embrace
the promises, and do receive them.

Thirdly, The sweetness of Faith may appear by this, that it enableth a
Christian to rejoice under the most anxious and afflicting dispensations that
he meets with while he is here below; as is clear from Romans 5. 1, 5. where
his being justified by Faith has this fruit attending it, to joy in
^ribulation; And likewise from Heb. 10. 34, 35. Does not Faith hold the crown
in its right hand, and lets a Christian behold these infinite dignities that
are provided unto them, after they have, as a strong man, run their race; And
when a Christian is put into a furnace, hot seven times more then ordinary, it
brings down the Son of man Jesus Christ, to walk with them in the furnace: So
that they walk safely, and with joy through fire and water, and (in a manner)
they can have no cross in his company. For would ye know what is the
description of a cross? It is to want Christ in any estate, And would ye know
what is the description of prosperity? It is to have Christ in any condition or
estate of life; What can ye want that have him, and what can he have that want
him? He is that All; so that all things besides him are bu^ vanity. But beside
this, Faith does discover unto a Christian, that there is a sweet period of all
his trials and afflictions that he can be exposed unto: so that he can never
say that of faith which Ahab spoke of Micajah, He never prophesies good things
to me; But rather he may say always the contrary, Faith never prophesies evil
unto me* it being a grace that prophesies excellent things in the da^kest
night, and sweetly declares, that though weeping do endure for the evening yet
joy comes in the morning; And that, though now they ^o forth weeping bearing
precious seed, yet at last they shall return rejoicing, having sheaves in their
bosom.

And this may bring in the fourth consideration to point out the sweetness of
Faith, That it gives a Christian a refreshing sight of that ^and that is a far
off, and makes him to behold that inheritance that is provided for the Saints
in light: it goes forth to the brook Eshcol, and there does pluck down those
grapes that grow in Emanuels land, to bring up a good report upon that noble
Country we are sojourning toward, and the City the streets whereof are paved
with transparent gold. And howbeit it may be a perplexing deba^e between many
and their own souls, whether or not these eyes that have been the windows
through which so much uncleanness has entered, and these species of lust have
been conveyed into the heart, shall once be like the eyes of a dove washed with
milk and fitly set, and be admitted to see that glorious object, the Lamb that
sits upon the Throne: Or whether ever these tongues that have been set on
fire of hell, and these polluted lips that have spoke so much against God, and
Heaven, and all his People, and Interests, shall ever be admitted to sing these
heavenly Halelujahs amongst that spotless queer of Angels, and that assembly
of the first born; or if these hands or feet that have been so active to commit
iniquity, and so swift to run after vanity, shall even be admitted hereafter
to carry these Palm Branches, and to follow the Lamb where ever he goes; and
whether ever these hearts that have been indeed a Bethaven, and house of idols,
may yet notwithstanding, be a dwelling for the Holy Ghost: Though these things
(we say) and such like may be the subject of many sad debates to some weary
souls, and cause many tossings to and fro till the morning: yet faith can bring
all these mysteries to light, and looking within the vail, can let us see
thousands of thousands who were once as ugly as our selves, yet now having
washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, are admitted
to stand before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night.

Now there is that fourthly, which we^ promised to speak of concerning this
grace of Faith from these words, and it is the absolute necessity that is of
the exercise of this grace, which is holden forth in that word, his
Commandment; which does import these three things. 1. That all the Commands
that we can obey without this Commandment of Faith, it is but a polluting of
our selves, and a plunging of our selves in the ditch till our own cloa^hs
abhor us. 2. That God takes greater delight in the exercise of that grace of
Faith, then in the exercise of any other. And lastly, that as to the many
imperfections which we have in our obedience, there is a sweet act of oblivion
past of them all; if we make conscience seriously to obey this command of
Faith, which is indeed, the sweet compend of the Gospel, all these things do
most clearly appear, in that believing, here is called, His Commandment, by
way of excellency, as if this were his only Commandment.

But that we may yet a little more particularly point out the absolute
necessity of Faith; there are these things that speaks it forth to the full.
1. That though rivers of tears should run down our eyes, because we keep not
his Law, though we should never rise off our knees from prayer, and should all
our life time speak to God with the tongue of Angels; and though we should
constantly obey his Commands* yet without Faith we should never escape that
eternal sentence of excommunication from the presence of the Lord; there being
no action that does proceed from us which can please the majesty of the Lord,
unless it has its rise from this principle of Faith: as is clear from Heb.
11. 6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. And though we should offer
unto him ten thousand rivers of oil, and thousands of rams, and should offer up
in a burnt sacrifice all the beasts that are upon the mountains, and the trees
that are upon hills, this should be the answer that God should return to us,
Who has required these things at your hands? I take no pleasure in these
solemn sacrifices; Because there is no way of attaining peace with God, but
through the exercise of Faith, making use of the spotless righteousness of
jesus Christ. 2. Let us do ou^ outmost, by all the inventions we can, to bring
down our body, and let us separate our selves from all the pleasures of the
flesh: yet all our idols shall reign without much contradiction, except once we
do attain unto this grace of Faith, which is that victory whereby we must
overcome the world, and the hand that makes use of infinite strength for
subduing of corruption, making the Christian sweetly to take up that song,
Stronger is he that is with us, than he that is in the world.

From all this that we have said, both of the sweetness of Faith, and the
necessity thereof, we would propose these few considerations, to two or three
sorts of persons. 1. There are some who live in that vain imaginary delusion of
attaining heaven through a Covenant of Works, and do neglect to seek salvation
by Faith in the righteousness of Christ. And to these who build upon this
sandy foundation, I shall say but these two words. First, How long shall ye
labor in the fire of very vanity, do ye ever think to put on the capestone,
know ye not that the day is approaching, when your house shall fall about your
ears, your confidence shall be rejected, and your hope shall evanish as a
dream, and flee away as a vision of the night. Secondly, What a monstrous
blindness, and what an unspeakable act of folly must it ^e^^ to say, that
Christ was crucified in vain, which yet ye do practically assert, when ye go
about to purchase a righteousness through the works of the Law.

2. There are some who are secure in their own thoughts concerning their ^aith:
they never questioned the realty of it, they never examined it. O ye whose
faith is as old as your selves, ye say ye never knew what it was to dispute:
and I may say, ye never knew what it was to believe. Thou profane hypocrite,
let me tell thee, a strong faith, and ye^ strong idols, must needs be ^ strong
delusion; Thou will not obey the Lord, thou will not pray, thou will not
believe a threatening in all the Word, thou will count all Religion madness and
foolishness, and yet thou will persuade thy self, thou Believe in Christ. O
be not deceived, God is not mocked, and why will ye mock your selves? Shall I
tell you that reprobates have a sa^ Religion, one day they must believe, and
obey, and pray, and give a testimony to Godliness: but alas too late, and
little to their advantage. Shall not he whom all the Ministers on earth could
scarce ever persuade to believe so much, as a heaven o^ hell, or one threatening
in all the Book o^ God, at last be forced to believe their ow^ sense, when they
shall see the Ancient of Days upon the Throne, and shall hear the cries of so
many thousand living witnesses, come ou^ both from heaven and hell, bearing
testimony to the truth of threatenings and promises, that not one jot of them is
fallen to the ground, and he who would never be persuaded to bow a knee to God
in earnest all his life, shall he not then pray with greatest fervency, that
hills and mountains might fall upon him, to cover him from the face of the
Lamb: And h^ that would never submit to a Command of God, must he not at last
obey that dreadful Command, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting torment,
etc. Yea, he who was the greatest mocker in the world, shall then confess,
that they are blessed who put their trust in the Lord, as they are excellently
brought in, though in an Apocriphal Book, Wisd. c. 5. 4* Crying out with great
terror, while they behold that unexpected sight of the glorious condition of
the Godly. O here is the me^ say they, whom we mocked, whose life w^ accounted
madness, and their end dishonorable: Be wise therefore in time, and do that
willingly, which ye must do by constrain^, and do that with sweetness and
advantage that ye must do at length with loss and sorrow.

Thirdly, There are some who certainly have some hope of eternal life, but
contenteth themselves with a small measure of assurance, and these I would
beseech, that ye would be more endeavoring to make your calling and election
sure, and would be endeavoring to see your names written in the ancient
Records of Heaven: And this we shall press upon you by several Arguments. 1.
Those strong and subtle, and soul destroying delusions that are amongst many,
who conceive they do believe (as we were saying) and are pure in their own
eyes, who yet are not purged from their iniquities. O^ are there not many of us
that are in a golden dream, that suppose we are eating but when we awake our
soul is empty, whose faith is a metaphysick notion, that has no foundation,
but man's apprehension; and this shall never bear us through the gates of death,
nor convey us in into eternity of joy. 2. May not this press you to follow
after assurance, that it is the compendious way to sweeten all your crosses: As
is clear from Hab. 3. 17, 18. where the convictions of this made Habbakuk to
rejoice in the God of his salvation; Though the fig tree did not bear fruit,
and the labor of the olive did fail, and there were no sweetness to be found
in the vine, and from Heb. 10. 34. where they took joy^ully the spoiling of
their goods, knowing within themselves that they had a better and an enduring
substance: This is indeed that tree which if we cast into the waters of Marah,
they will presently become sweet: for it is not below the child of hope to be
much anxious about these things that he meets with here, when he sincerely
knows that Commandment shall come forth, Lift up your head, for the day of
your eternal redemption draws near, even the day when all the rivers of his
sorrow shall sweetly run into the ocean of everlasting deligh^s. 3. A Christian
that is much in assurance, he is much in communion and fellowship with God, as
is clear from the Song 1. 13, 14. and Song. 2. 3. where, when once she comes
to that, to be persuaded that Christ was her beloved, then she sat down under
his shadow, and his fruit was pleasant unto her taste; for the assured
Christian does taste of these crumbs that ^all from that higher Table, and no
doubt, these that have tasted of that old wine will not straight way desire the
new, because the old is better. And then 4. It is the way to keep you from
Apostasy, and making defection from God: Faith is that grace that will make you
continue with Christ in all his tentations, as is clear from 2 Pet. 1. 10.
where this is set down as a fruit of making our calling and election sure, that
if we no these things we shall never fail: Faith makes a Christian to live a
dependent life* for would you know the motto of a Christian? It is this, self
diffidence, and Christ dependence, as is clear from that word in the Song 8. 5.
that while we are walking through this wilderness, we are leaning upon our
welbeloved* 5. This assurance will help a Christian to overcome many
tentations. There are four sorts of tentations that ass^ult the Christian;
there are temptations of desire, temptations of love, temptations of hope, and
temptations of anxiety, all which a Christian through this noble grace of
Assurance, may sweetly overcome: he that has once made Christ his own, what
can he desire but him? As Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord:
What can he love more then Christ, or love beside Christ, all his love being
drowned (as it were) in that O^ean of his excellencies, and a sweet complacency
found in the enjoyment of him? And as to hope; will not assurance make a
Christian (...) forth, Now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee? And when
the heart is anxious, does not assurance make a Christian content to bear the
indignation of the Lord, and patiently submit unto the cross, since there is a
sweet connection betwixt his cross and his Crown, Romans 8. 35, 36. If he suffer
with him, he shall also reign with him. And lastly, There is this argument to
press you to assurance, that it sweemeth the thoughts of death; it makes
death unto a Christian, not the king of terrors, but the king of desires: and
it is upon these grounds that assurance makes death refreshfull unto a
Christian. 1. He knows that it is the funeral of all his miseries, and the
birthday of all his blessed and eternal enjoyments. 2. That it is the
Coronation day of a Christian, and-the day when he shall have that Marriage
betwixt Christ and him sweetly solemnized: And that when he is to step that
last step, he knows that death will make him change his place, but not his
company: And O that we could once win unto this, to seal that conclusion
without presumption, My beloved is mine, and I am his: We might without
presumption, sing one of the songs of Sion, even while we are in this strange
land, and taking Christ in our arms, might sweetly cry forth, Now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen thy salvation. Comfort your
selves in this, that all your clouds shall once pass away, and that that truth
shall once come to pass which was confirmed by the oath of an Angel, with his
hand lifted up toward Heaven, That time shall be no more. Time shall once
sweetly die out in eternity, and ye may be looking after new heavens, and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness. O long to be with him, for Christ
longs to have you with him.

SERMON VI.
1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that ye should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.
THere are three most precious and cardinal graces, which a Christian ough^
mainly to pursue: There is that exalting grace of Faith, that comforting grace
of Hope, and that aspiring grace of Love* and if once a Christian did take up
that heavenly difference that is between those sistergraces, he might be
provoked to move after them most swiftly, as the chariots of Aminadab. And
there is this difference between those graces; Faith is a sober and silent
grace, Hope is a patient and submissive grace, Love is an ambitions and
impatient grace. Faith cries out, O my soul be silent unto God: Hope cries
out, I will wait patiently for the Lord, until the vision shall speak; but
Love it cries out, How long art thou a coming? and it is waiting to hear the
sound of his feet coming over the mountains of separation. That is the Motto of
Hope, Quod defertur non aufertur, that which is delayed (says Hope) is not
altogether taken away and made void: and that may be the divine emblem of the
grace of Love. It is sight enfolding desire in its arms, and it is desire
clothed with wings, ^reading upon delay and impediments. There is this second
difference between these graces: the grace of Faith, it embraces the truth of
the promises: the grace of Hope, it embraces the goodness of the thing that
is promised; but that exalting grace of Love, it embraces the Promiser: Faith
cries out, Has he spoken it, He will also do it: Hope ^ryeth out, Good is
the Word of the Lord, be ^^ unto thy servant according to thy promise: And
Love, it cries out in a higher note, As is the apple tree amongst the trees of
the ^ood, so is my well-beloved amongst the sons. ^hirdly, There is that
difference between ^hese graces, Faith it overcomes temptations; Hope, it
overcomes difficulties; but Love stays at home and divides the spoil: There
is a sweet correspondence between those graces in this: Faith it fights and
conquereth; and Hope it fights and conquereth; but Love it does enjoy the
Trophies of the victory. And, Fourthly, there is this difference, the noble
grace of Faith, it shall once evanish into sight; That noble grace of Hope, it
shall once evanish into possession and enjoyment; But that constant grace of
Love; it shall be the eternal companion of a Christian, and shall walk in with
him unto the streets of the New Jerusalem. And I would ask you that question,
What a day shall it be when Faith shall ced^ to sight? What a day shall it be
when Hope shall yield its place to Love, and love and sight shall eternally sit
down and solace themselves in these blessed mysteries, these everlasting
consolations of Heaven world without end. And fifthly, there i^ this
difference, less will sa^isfie the grace of Faith, and the grace of Hope, tha^
will satisfy the grace of Love; Faith, i^ will be content with the promise,
and Hop^ will be content with the thing that is promised; but that ambitious
grace of Love, i^ will be only content with the promiser Love glaspeth its
arms about that Preciou^ and noble object Jesus Christ; Love is a ^^ spicious
grace, It oftentimes cries forth^ They have taken away my Lord, and I kno^ not
where they have laid him; So that Fai^^ is oftentimes put to resolve the
suspicions ^^ love. I can compare these three graces to nothing so fitly, as to
those three great Worthies that David had, These three graces, they will break
through all difficulties, were it a host of Philistines, that so they may
pleasure Christ, and may drink of that Well of Bethlehem, that Well of
everlasting ^onsolation that ^loweth from beneath the ^hrone of God: Love is
like Noah's dove, ^t never finds rest for the sole of its foot, ^ntill once
it be within that Ark, that place ^f repose Jesus Christ.

And sixthly, There is this last difference between them, Faith takes hold
upon the ^^ithfulnesse of Christ; Hope takes hold upon the goodness of
Christ; but Love, it ^^keth hold upon the heart of Christ. And ^hink ye not it
must be a pleasant and soul^^freshing exercise, to be continually taken ^^ in
embracing him, that is that eternal ad^iration of Angels. Must it not be an
ex^ellent life, daily to be feeding on the finest the wheat, and to be
satisfied with honey ^^ of the rock. O but Heaven must be a plea^^n^ place! And
if once we would but taste ^^ the first ripe grapes, and a cluster of wine ^^a^
grows in that pleasant land, might not ^^e be constrained to bring up a good
report it.

But now to come to that which we pur^^se mainly to speak of at this time. The
(...) thing concerning Faith, that we pro^^sed from the words, was the object
upon which Faith exercises itself, which is (...) set down to be the Mame of
his Son Jesus Christ. And that we may speak to this more clearly, we shall
first speak a little to the negative, what things are not the fit object of
Faith, and then to the positive, showing you how this Name of God, and of His
Son Christ, is the sure ground upon which a Christian may pitch his Faith: For
the first, ye must know that a Christian is not to build his faith upon sense,
nor sensible enjoy ments: Sense may be an evidence of Faith but it must not
be the foundation of Faith I know there are some that oftentimes cry out,
Except I put my fingers into the print ^^ the nails, and thrust my hand into
the hole ^^ his side, I will not believe; and indeed it is (...) mystery unto
the most part of us, to be exercising Faith upon a naked word of promise,
abstracted from sense; to love an absent Christ, and to believe on an absent
Christ, are the two great mysteries of Christianity. But that sense is no good
foundation for Faith, may appear. 1. That Fait^ which is builded upon sense, is
a most unconstant, a most fluctuating and transient Fait^ I know sense has its
fits of love, and as were, has its fits of Faith: Sometim^^ sense is sick of
love, and sometimes sense (...) strong in Faith, but ere six hours go about
sense may be sick of jealousy, and sick (...) misbelief, as ye will see from
Psalm. 30. 6, (...) sense, that bold thing, it will instantly (...) out, My
mountain stands strong, I will ^^ver be moved; but behold how soon it
chan^eth its note, Thou hides thy face, and I (...) troubled. At one time it
will cry for^^^ Who is like unto him that pardons iniquity, and that passes
over transgressions; but ere many hours go about, it will sing a song upon
another key, and cry out, Why art thou ^ecome unto me as a liar, and as waters
that ^ail? 2. That Faith which is built upon ^ense, it wan^eth the promise of
blessedness, ^^ this is annexed to believing, that is founded upon the Word,
according to that in ^oh. 20. 29. Blessed are these that have not ^en, and yet
have believed: nor has that ^ith that is built upon sense such a solid ^y
waiting on it, as faith that is built upon ^he naked word of promise, as may be
cleared from that word, 1 Pet. 1. 8. where faith exercising it self upon Christ
not seen, makes a Christian to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
a joy that does not at^^nd believing, founded upon sense. 3. That ^ith that is
built upon sense, it gives not ^uch glory to God, for faith that is built ^^on
sense, it exalts not the faithfulness (...) God, it exalts not the
omnipotency of ^od. I will tell you what is the divinity (...) sense; let me
see, and then I will believe; (...) it knows not what it is to believe ^^on
trust, and because the Lord has spoken (...) his holiness: And in effect,
Faith that is ^^ilt upon sense, is no Faith, even as ^^m. 8. Hope that is seen,
is no hope; And therefore, when the Lord sees a Christian ^^king sense an
idol, that he will not be^^ve but when he sees or feels, this does ^^en
provoke the Majesty of the Lord to withdraw himself from that Christian, and to
deny him the sweet influences of heaven and these consolations that are above,
so that in an instant he has both his sense and hi^ faith to seek.

2. A Christian is not to make his grace the object of his Faith, that is when
a Christian does behold love burning within him when he does behold influences
to p^ay^^ increasing, and mortification waxing stro^^ he is not to build his
faith upon them, thi^ was condemned in the Church, in Ezekiel. 16* 14. compared
with the 15 verse, I m^^ thee perfect with my comeliness: but the us^ that thou
did make of it, thou did put (...) trust in thy beauty, and then thou did
pla^ the harlot. It is certain, that grace when (...) is the object of our
Faith, it does provoke God to blast the lively exercise thereof, and to make a
Christian oftentimes have th^^ complaint: Woe to me, my leanness* my lea^^es^^
testifies to my face. I will tell you thr^^ great mysteries of Christianity,
about grace The first is, to ride marches between the^^ two, not to deny what
they have, an^ yet to be denied to what they have; ma^^ times, there is
grace-denying, and not sel^ denying; but this is that we would pres^^ upon you
to be denied to grace, according to that which is recorded of Moses, his fa^^
did shine and he knew it not, he did mis^e^^ (as it were) and did not at all
be puffed ^^ with it; for so the words we conceive m^^ run. Secondly, it is a
great difficulty f^^ a Christian to be denied to his self denial, (...) ^ee
humble in ^his being humble: for if pri^^ ^^n have no other foundation, it will
build ^^ self upon humility; and a Christian will ^^ow proud in this, that he
is growing humble. Thirdly, It is a difficulty for a Christian to examine his
growing in grace, and not be puffed up; It is certain a Christian ought to
examine his growth in grace humbly, according to that, Psalm. 63. 8. My ^^ul
follows hard after thee, thy right hand* ^^holdeth me: He does not only
take notice ^f this, that his soul did follow after God, ^ut of the measure of
that pursuit, my soul ^^lloweth hard after thee, and yet sweetly acknowledges,
it was not his own feet which ^^rried him, nor his own hand that kept him ^^om
falling.

3. Ye are not to build your Faith upon ^our works; and upon the
righteousness ^f the Law: I need not stand long to re^ure ^^at practical
Popery that is amongst us, ^^at thinks we can go to heaven through (...)
Covenant of Works. I told you not long ^^^e, what your going to heaven through
Covenant of Works speaks; even this ^^r^id blasphemy; That it was an act of
^onstruous folly to send Christ to die for ^^ers; for, if you can go to heaven
with^^t him, was not Christ then crucified in (...). And I would tell you now,
that ^^ is speaks out your damnable ignorance (...) the weakness and
deceitfulness of your ^^n hearts. O ye that are so great de^^ders of
Salvation by the Covenant of ^orks, I beseech you, What is the rea^^^ that ye
break the Covenant of Works oftener then any; for there is none the thinks
they will go to heaven this way but these that are the greatest breakers of the
Covenant of Works. And is not that inconsistent, and most contradictory
divinity, yo^^ faith contradicting your practice, and you^ practice telling you
that your faith is a lie.

Fourthly, We must not mix our ow^ righteousness with Christ, as the object o^
our believing: This is indeed an evil tha^ often lodges in the bosom of the
most refined hypocrite, when Satan cannot preva^^ to exclude Christ altogether,
then he is content with that whorish woman, to divide the child, and let the
object of our faith be ha^ Christ, and half of self; And the truth i^ many of
these poor unwise sons, who st^^ long in the place of the breaking forth ^^
children, do willingly hearken to this ove^ture, for fear it be presumption for
such po^^ wretches to meddle too boldly with the righteousness of Christ; but
it were good suc^ weak ones would consider that word, R^^ 10. 2. where the Holy
Ghost calls the making use of His righteousness, an act ^^ submission, They
have not submitted (says h^^ unto the righteousness of Christ. O will y^^ not
lay this to heart, that our Lord will ta^^ your believing, or your putting on
his righteousness for an act of great humility, a^^ will take your misbelief
as a marvelous act (...) the highest pride and presumption.

Fifthly, We are not to make providenc^ the object of our faith. I know there
^^ some that ask the ground of their right (...) heaven, they will tell us,
that God has been ^ind to them all their days. I would only ^ay to such, He
may be feeding you unto the day ^f slaughter, and no man knows love or hatred
^^y any thing that is before him. This much of ^he object of Faith negatively.

And now to speak to it positively, we see ^he Text holds out Christ himself
as that excellent and complete object of Faith, This ^s his Commandment, that
we believe on the ^ame of his Son: and thus Faith closes with Christ in a
fourfold consideration. First, It ^oseth with God in Christ, not with God
immediately and nakedly; for, he dwells in ^^ght inaccessible, that no man
can approach unto: He is higher then the heaven, what can we do? and deeper
then hell what can we know? Job 11. therefore we must approach unto Him
through a vail, even the vail of Christ His ^esh, Heb. 10 God is a consuming
fire, and of ^^rer eyes then that he can behold iniquity: and therefore we must
first cast our eye upon that ^essed Days-man, that laid his hand upon us ^^th;
and look upon God as in Christ recon^ling the world to himself, and so draw
near unto him through a Mediator, who is the first ^^d the last, and he that
lives and was dead, ^^d is alive for evermore, able to save to the ^termost
all that come unto God by Him, ^eing he lives for ever to make intercessi^n
for them. Secondly, Faith closes with christ, as tendered freely in a Covenant
of ^omise. We could have had nothing to do ^^th Christ, if he had not been
given of the ^ther, and offered himself in a free Covenant of promise; but he
being thus holde^ forth upon terms of free love (which dot^ utterly abominat
hyre) and so nodle a proclamation issued forth under the great se^ of Heaven,
That whosoever will, may come an^ drink of the water of life freely; Upon th^^
the poor creature draws near by virtue (...) a right, and stretching out the
arms of mo^^ enlarged affections, does run upon him wit^ that joyful shout, My
Lord and my God; an^ then makes an absolute resignation of it se^ unto him;
which is holden out in the Scripture by that sweet expression of kissing (...)
the Son. And there are three parts of Christ blessed Body that the Christian
must endeavor to kiss and embrace: the mouth ^^ Christ, the hand of Christ,
and the feet ^^ Christ: the kissing of his feet importing the exercise of love,
the kissing of his hands the exercise of subjection, and the kissing of h^^
mouth the exercise of communion and fellowship with him. Thirdly, Faith close^
with Christ as the purchaser and meritorious cause of all the good we receive:
He is the person that has purchased all these thi^^ unto us, and there is not
one blink of lov^ there is not the smallest enjoyment that Christian meets
with, but it is the price the blood of Christ; Christ's precious blo^ was laid
down for it. Fourthly, Faith ^^seth with Christ as the efficient and work^ of
all our mercies; all our enjoyments th^^ are far from him as the efficient
cause, that* He is the worker of all these things in (...) it is his precious
fingers that must accomplish that blessed work of grace, and they are from
Christ as the dispenser of these things; Christ is the great Steward of Heaven
that does communicate unto Believers all the Treasures of the Higher House; For
Him has God the Father sealed. O but that word that Christ once spoke, is much
verified by Himself, It is more blessed to give, then to ^eci^ve; Christ is
that fountain and treasure (...) whom all our gifts and graces are treasured
^p; for, before the blessing come to Believers, ^hey come to Christ as the
Head, according ^o that word, 2 Timothy 1 9. Which grace was ^iven to us in Him,
before the foundations of the ^orld were laid: It was given to Christ be^^e the
world was made, and for that end, ^^at it might be communicate unto all his
^embers, and so out of His fullness we all ^eive, and grace for grace.

But, secondly, The Text holds forth ^ore particularly this excellent object
of ^^th, to be the Name of his Son, That ye ^^ieve in the Name of his Son. And
here ^^eed we may be at a stand. It is long ^^ce Agur did non plus all the
world ^^th that question, What is his Name? and ^^at is his Sons Name, if thou
can tell? ^^ow little a thing can be known of Him! ^^d O how brutish is this
generation! that ^^w so much less then might be known Him in such a day of the
Gospel. But ^t we may speak a little, according to our ^^k measure of Faith, as
closing with the ^^e of Christ. His Name is His glorious ^^^u^es, by which he
reveals so much of Himself in the Scriptures, as poor mortals can take up.
We did show you before, that there was three of these that were the main
pillars of justifying Faith, Faithfulness, Omnipotency, and His infinite Love
and Mercy: And how from these may be answered all the objections of sense, of
c^rnall reason, and of misbelief, arising from convictions of unworthiness.
And certain it is, that Faith in all its conflicts, makes much use of the
Names of Christ. And there is not an objection that a poor tempted soul can
make, but Faith can frame an answer to it, out of some of these excellent Name^
of God, or of his Son Christ. It would be a more longsome work then I intend
to let you see this in all; But I shall only instance in that One glorious
Name of God, by which he proclaims his glory, Exodus 34. The Lord* the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth^ Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquit^ transgression and sin,
and that will by no mean^ clear the guilty, etc. I think there are seve^
ordinary objections which may be answere^ from that place. First, It is an
ordinar^ objection which misbelievers do make, th^^ they are under the strength
of their corruption, that they are black as the Tents of Keda^ and not
beautiful a^ the Curtains of Solomon And does not the first letter of that
Nam^ answer this, that he is a merciful Lord: the one importing his ability to
save, and (...) bring down every high imagination? The other importing, his
infinite delight to h^^ those who have no strength, and are under the power of
their adversaries, the power of God being of no larger extent then his love.
There is that second objection of misbelief, that we have nothing to commend
us to Christ: But all that we have to boast of, are infirmities and
imperfections: And this is abundantly answered from that second letter of his
Name, that he is Gracious: which imports the freedom of the dispensations of
his love that he walks nor with us, according to that rule of merit, but
according to that golden and excellent rule of Love. It is a great dispute
whether Mercy or Grace be the greatest wonder, Whether the love of Christ, or
the freedom of it be the greatest mystery: Sure both these put together make
up a matchless wonder? Thirdly, Misbelief will object, that we have forsaken
him days without number, and that we cannot trace back our apostasy unto the
first day of its rise: And is not that abundantly answered from that letter of
his Name, that he is long suffering? This being that Glorious attribute in
God, the glory of which he desires to magnify above all his Name. Fourthly,
Misbelief does ordinarily propose this objection, that we have multiplied our
transgressions, and have committed whoredoms under every green tree, and have
given gifts to our lovers, even hyring our idols: So that we may take up that
lamentation, is not our sin great, and our transgression infinite: And is not
that also answered from that letter of his Name, that he is abundant in
goodness? That though sin abound in us, yet grace does much more superabound
in him. We confess indeed, that there are some that may walk under that
condition, that if they had no other exercise throughout eternity, but to make
confession, they might confess and never make any needless repetition: And
truly in some respect, it is a mercy that we are mysteries unto our self: for,
if we did know completely the seven abominations of our hearts, and those
mysterious actings of the body of death, we would be in hazard to choice
strangling and death, rather then life: Yet may not one glimpse of that
abundant goodness satisfy us, and calm the storm. Fifthly, Says misbelief,
we know that we have broken our Vows and Covenants with God, and that all
these things that we have taken on, have been but as flax before the fire of
tentation; so that we have no hope that he will have mercy upon these that
have broken wedlock, and have not been steadfast in his Covenant. But is not
that abundantly answered from that letter of His Name, That he is abundant in
truth: which speaks, That though we deny our selves, yet he abides
faithful, and does not alter the word that has gone out of his mouth. It is
the infinite blessedness of man that though he be changeable, yet they have
to do with one that is an unchangeable being. Sixthly; There is that objection:
That notwithstanding all these things are matters of encouragement to some, yet
they know not whether or not the lot of everlasting love have fallen upon them:
And whether their names be in the ancient records of Heaven. But this is
answered from that letter of His Name, he keeps mercy for thousands? which
shows us that great number of those upon whom the lot of everlasting love
shall fall: And if there were no other sentence in all the Scripture, ^his
might be a sufficient matter of a Song, and might make us cry out, Who is like
un^o him, whose compassions have no end, And who desires to magnify his mercy
above all his works? And lastly, Misbelief makes this objection, They have
sinned not only against light, not only against vows, not only after much
enjoyment of God, but even after the application of threatenings: So that they
conceive, that their Maker will ^ot have mercy upon such. Yet this is fully
answered likewise from that letter of His Name, He forgiveth iniquity,
transgression and sin: which three words does abundantly speak forth; That
there is no transression which he will not pardon, there being but one
particular amongst all that ^^nu^etable number of sins which lodges (...) the
heart of fallen man, that he declared ^^pardonable: And there is none of our
^iseases that is above the infinite a^^e of love, and concerning which we can
take up that ^omplaint, There is no balm in Gilead, and ^^ere is no Physician
there. And though pro^idence may master up many impossibilities, ^et let Faith
take the promise in the one and, and impossibilites in the other, and desire
God to reconcile them; that if we cannot see any connection between Providence
and the Word, yet may we reflect upon the omnipotency of God, that can make
things that are seeming contrary sweetly to agree together, the Comment^^y will
never destroy the Text, nor Providence will never destroy the faithfulness of
God: And let me give you this advice, that those objections of misbelief which
you cannot answer, and, in ^ manner puts you to a non plus, and when ye have
looked over all the Names of God, y^ cannot find an answer to them, slight
them and cover them, as we have often told you was the practice of believing
Abraham, Rom* 4. 19. where that strong objection of misbelief appearing before
his eyes, the deadness^ of his body, and the barrenesse of Sarahs womb* It is
recorded of him, he considered not these things: as it were, he had a divine
transitio^ from the objections of misbelief to the actin^ of Faith: and this is
clear from Matthew. 15* 25, 26. Where that strong objection of misbelief being
proposed against that woman the she was not within the compass o^ Christ's
Commission, she has a noble way o^ answering with this, Lord have mercy upon
m^ And (if so we may speak) Faith has a kin^ of divine impertinency in
answering the objections of misbelief; or rather a holy sleighting of them that
gains the victory, when cavilling with tentations will not do it.

The like also may be instanced in His So^ Name: O how glorious titles are
given t^ that Prince of the Kings of the earth, and (...) that Plant of renown,
upon which the weakest faith may cast anchor, and ride out the greatest storm;
I shall not detain you long on this subject, but this we would have you know,
that there is no strait nor difficulty that a Christian can be exposed unto,
but there is some name or a^tribute of Christ that may sweetly answer that
difficulty, and make up that disadvantage. Is a Christian exposed unto
afflictions and troubles in a present world? Let him comfort himself in this,
that Christ is the shadow of a great rock in a wearied land; Is a Christian
under inward anxiety and vexation of mind? Let him comfort himself in this,
That Christ is the God of peace, and of all consolation; Is a Christian under
darkness and confusion of spirit? Let him comfort himself in this, That Christ
is the Father of lights, and is the eternal wisdom of God; Is a Christian under
the convictions of this, that he is under the power and dominion of his lusts?
Let him comfort himself in this, that Christ is Redemption; yea (that I stay no
longer) if it were possible that a Christian could have a necessity that he
could not find a name in Christ to answer it, he may lawfully frame a name to
Christ out of any promise in all the Book of God, and he should find it
forthcoming for the relieving and making up of that necessity, God would not
disappoint his expectation.

There is yet one thing further, in reference to the object of Faith, which we
shall desire you to tale notice of; and it is the way of Faiths closing with
its noble object, and its testing on him: and this we conceive may be
excellently taken up by our considering of the many several names that Faith
gets in Scripture, beyond any other of ^he graces of the Spirit. It is
called looking, Isa. 45 22. Look unto me: It is called abiding in Christ, Joh.
15. 4. Abide in me: It is called a keeping silence unto God, Psalm. 37. 7. My
soul trust in God; Or as the word is in the Original, My soul be silent unto
God; and that in Psalm. 62. 1. My soul waits; Or as the word is, Truly my soul
is silent unto God. Likewise Faith is called a leaning, Psalm. 7. 15. I have
leaned upon thee from my mothers womb. Faith is called an eating of Christ's
flesh, John 6. 53. Faith is called a casting of our burden upon God, Psalm. 55.
22. Cast your burden upon God: and Faith it is called a coming unto God, Matthew.
11. 28. And according to these different names, there are these seven noble
properties and ma^chless differences of this grace of Faith. The first is, That
this is this grace by which a Christian does enjoy much communion with God:
Hence it is called a looking: which imports, that Faith is a continual
contemplation of the immortal Soul upon that precious and excellent object
Jesus Christ. There is that second property of says, That it is that grace by
which a communion with God is maintained: Hence it is called an abiding in God.
It is that grace which makes Christ and the believer to dwell together. The
third property of Faith is, that it is a most submissive grace: Hence it is
called a keeping silence unto God: Faith as it were, it knows not what it is
to ^epine. It is the noble excellency of Faith, it never knew what it was to
misconstruct Christ. It is the noble excellency of Faith, it never knew what it
was to pass an evil report upon Christ. Faith it will promise good things to a
Christian in the darkest night; for, when Love asks Faith that question, Isa.
21. 11, 12. Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? Or, when
shall the morning break? Faith answers it with the words that follow, (only
a little inverting the order) The night comes, and also the morning; the
morning is approaching, that admits of no following night. There is that
fourth property of Faith, It is the grace which keep^th a Christian in ^e
severance, by its ^uilding upon the rock. Hence it is called a ^eaning upon
God; for a Christian by Faith does perpe^ually join himself to Christ, so that
what ever trouble he be cast into, by Faith he come^h up out of that
wilderness, ^eaning upon his beloved, and by Faith he is ^ed up to the Rock
that is higher then he, ^here he may sit in safety, and even ^augh at ^eath
and destruction when assailing him. ^here is that fifth property of Faith, That
^^s the grace that brings satisfaction un^^ the spiritual senses of a
Christian, by a ^ose and particular application of Christ (...) the
nou^^ishment of the soul. Hence it is ^lled an eating of the flesh of Christ.
There are ^ree senses that Faith satisfies, Faith satisfies the sense of
sight, it satisfies the sense of taste, and it satisfies the sense of touch:
Faith will make a Christian handle that eternal word of life: Faith will make
a Christian see that noble plant of renown; And Faith will make a Christian
taste and see how gracious the Lord is. And no doubt, these tha^ have once
satisfied their sight, they will b^ longing to satisfy their taste. There is
tha^ sixth property of Faith, It is that grace which gives rest unto a
Christian: Hence i^ is called a casting of our burden upon him: I^ is, as it
were, the soul giving unto Christ tha^ unsupportable yoke of our iniquities,
an^ taking from Christ that easy and portabl^ yoke of his Commandments. And
seventhly, There is that last property of Faith, I^ is that grace by which
Sanctification is pro* moved: Hence it is called a coming to Christ* It is the
soul in a divine motion and traveling from the land of Egypt unto the land o^
Canaan: Faith it is the soul in a pleasant motion from the land of the north,
the land o^ our captivity, unto that land of perfect liberty, all along going
out by the footsteps of t^^ flock, and walking in that new and living wa^ even
in Him who is the Way, the Truth and t^^ Life.

And now for a more full application (...) this, we shall speak but to two
things further. 1. We would have it considered, the there are some that come
unto the Covena^ of Promise with less difficulty, and after* more divine and
evangelick way; and the^ are some that close with Christ, in a mo^^ difficult
and legal way; there are some that before they can come to mount Sion, they
must dwell forty days at mount Sinai. There are some, before the decree of
heaven shall be given to them, they must roa^ as an ox, and must cover
themselves with sackcloath, having ashes upon their heads, we must be a Benoni
before we be Benjamin, that is, we must be a son of sorrow, before we can be a
son of consolation. But this is certain, that Christ leads sometimes some to
himself through a valley of roses: And I would only have you taking notice of
these two, which though we conceive they b^ not infallible in the rule, yet
oftentimes experience makes them out to be truth. 1. That there are three
sorts of persons who are most ordinarily brought under great terror, ^ere they
close with Christ. First, These who have committed some gross and abominable
sin that is most contradicting unto the light of nature. Secondly, That person
that sins much against light, before conversion: Hence it is observed in all
the Books of the Gospel, and in the book of the Acts, there was a more Gospel
and love way of converting the Gentiles, then was of converting the Jews, see
Act. 2. 37. there is a sharp Law exercise among them who had crucified the Lord
of Life, and Act. 9. Paul that had been a grievous persecuter, at his
conversion, he is first stricken dead to the ground before he be made a captive
of the love of Christ, and constrained to cry out, What will thou have me to
do: but look to Act. 8. and chap. 19. and there ye will find a more fair and
smooth way of begetting sons to Christ. And, thirdly, that person that is much
in conceit of his own righteousness, he uses to be brought to Christ through
much terror and exercise of the Law: that is clear in Paul, his condition
also, Phil. 3. and Act. 9. compared, and certainly, who ever thinks to come
that length in self abasement, and will count as the Apostle does in that
Chapter, must dwell many days at mount Sinai, and learn his Arithmethick
there. 2. We would have you taking notice of this, that though the person that
is brought in to Christ in a more smooth and evangelick way may have the
preheminency of the person that is brought to Christ after a more legal and
terrible way in some things. Yet we conceive, that a Christian that is brought
to Christ through much of the exercise of the Law, and through many of the
thunderings of mount Sinai, after he has wone to see his right of Christ, he
is more constant in the exercise of Faith; and the reason of it is, because
that an ordinary ground of misbelief is our not distinct uptaking either of the
time of our conversion, which is oftentimes hid from these persons that are
converted in a more evangelick way, as likewise this, that those persons that
are brought to Christ in a more Gospelchariot, are sometimes put to debates,
whether ever they were under the exercise of the Law, and this makes them
often (as it were) to raze the foundation, and to cry forth, My hope, and my
strength is perished from the Lord. And now to shut up our discourse, we shall
add this one word of exhortation; that ye would carefully lay hold upon that
noble object, and exercise your faith upon him; and I shall say but this, that
all these that have this noble grace of Faith, and that are he^^s of that
everlasting inheritance: There is a fourfold Crown prepared for you; There is a
Crown of life that is prepared for him that shall sight the good fight of
Faith; ^ut what may you say is a Crown of Life, except we have joy waiting upon
that life; ^or what is life without joy, but a bitterness, and a burden to it
self; Therefore ^e shall have a crown of joy; but what were ^ crown of Life,
and a crown of ^oy, except we had the grace of Holiness, and were complete in
that; Therefore, ye shall have ^lso a crown of Righteousness: But, what were
Life Joy and Righteousness, without Glory; Therefore ye shall have likewise a
^^own of Glory* But what of all these, if that Crown should once fall from our
head, (...) we should be deprived of our King^om? Therefore, take this to make
up all ^he rest, it is an eternal crown of Glory. that word in Prove. 27. n^a^
the close, The ^^own* says Solomon, does not endure for ever: ^ut this
precious Crown that the hands of christ shall fix upon the head of an
over^oming Christian, this is the mot^o that is ^^grav^n upon it, Unchangeable
and Eter^all, Eternal and unchangeable, and O what a day suppose ye shall that
be, when tha^ precious Crown shall be put upon our heads* What think you will
be the difference betwix^ Christ and the Believers in heaven. They shall have
these four crowns which are indeed one; but Christ shall have upon hi^ head
many Crowns, according to that word Rev. 19. 12. But let me say one word also
to you who are strangers from God, and ar^ destitute of the grace of Christ,
and will no^ by faith close with this excellent Object* There is a fourfold
crown that once shall b^ put upon your heads; but do not misinterpret the
vision: There is a difference betwix^ the Butler and the Baker; ye may
prophesi^ good things to your self, but there is a crow^ of death which ye
shall once have put upon your heads; ye shall be always dying, an^ never able
to die: there is a crown of sorrow that ye shall have put upon your head when
ye shall eternally sigh forth that lamentation, O to be anihilat, and reduced
unto nothing; when the reduction of you into nothing would be a heaven, when ye
shall b^ tormented in those everlasting flames. An^ I would say this by the
way, ye will be al^ miserable, comfortless one to another, ther^ will be no
ground of consolation that ye shall reap, for the community of your sorrow
shall increase the degrees of that sorrow And there is another crown also that
ye shall put on, and that is a crown of sin, instead o^ that crown of
righteousness: would you kno^ your exercise, O ye that are predestinate u^ to
these everlasting pains? Would ye kno^ your exercise? It is this, ye shall
eternally blaspheme, and curse the God that made you. I am persuaded of this,
that the terrors of hell will afflict you more, and does, then that of the
sinning perpetually in hell: Ye would think nothing many of you to be in hell,
if there were no pain there; for the exercise of sin it will be your delight
and life: but be persuaded of it, that when your conscience is awakened, the
exercise of sinning shall exceedingly aggreage your pain. And there is this
crown lastly, that ye shall put on, and that is the crown of shame: The Prophet
Isaiah makes mention of a crown of pride; but ye that have put on that crown
of pride, ye shall once put on that crown of everlasting confusion and shame,
when ye shall not be able to lift up your eyes to him whom ye have peirced: I
would fain desire you to know, what will be your exercise at these three days;
what will be your exercise when death shall be summonding you to remove, and ye
shall first be entered heirs unto these everlasting pains; I am persuaded ye
will reflect much? Will ye not reflect upon many Sermons that ye have heard,
wherein ye have been invited to partake of the sweet offers of Salvation. I
remember of one, that upon his death bed cried forth, A world for time, a world
for one inch of time, one that perhaps did hold his head high, and no doubt was
greater than the greatest here, his Crown could not purchase on inch of time,
but dying with this, Call time again, call time again; that petition was
denied, and so it shall be, I fear, to the most part that are here. I think it
was a pretty Hieroglyph^ck of the Egyptians, they painted Time with three
hea^s; The first head that painted out time that was past, Was a greedy Wolf
gaping, which imports this, That our time past was misspent, and there was
nothing left, but like a Wolf to gape for it again: And there was that second
head of a roaring Lion, round, which import the time pr^sent, and for this end
was so painted, that people might lay hold upon their present opportunities;
otherwise, it would be the matter of their ruin, and of their eternal
undoing. And there was that last head, which was of a deceitful Dog, fawning;
which signified, that people they ^eceive themselves with the time to come,
thinking they will be religious at their death, and that they will overcome at
their death, but this is ^^attery, no better then the fawning of a mad Dog. I
think we may learn much of this, even to be provoked to lay hold upon ou^
gol^^n opportunities, that we sell not ^ur time but that we buy it. There are
two thi^^gs that a Christian must not sell, that is, sell not the truth but buy
it, and sell not your time but buy it. I am persuaded of this, that one moment
of time is worth ten thousand worlds, if improven: And I would ask you, what
advantage shall ye have of all things that ye have ^o^mented your selves
about, when time shall be no more? I suppose indeed, this is an ordinary evil
amongst the people of this age, of which we have our own share and proportion.
There are many that envy Godliness, and the Godly, The excellent ones that are
in the earth, that think it a pleasure to vent their malice against such: I
know that ordinary practice it is older by a thousand years then themselves,
that they persecure Godliness under the name of hypocrisy: They call
Godliness hypocrisy, and upon that account they begin and speak maliciously
against it: only ^ would ask you this question, What will ^e say in that day
when Christ will ask that question at you, that Gideon asked at Zeba ^od
Zalmuna, who are these that ye killed with your tongue? Most it not be
answered, Every one did resemble the person of a King? ^ will ye not believe!
will ye not close with Christ? I know it is ordinary that we run upon these two
extremes, Sometimes we ^o not believe the threatenings of the Law, and sometimes
we will not believe the pro^ises of the Gospel. But I would only de^e to know,
what if it had been so order^^ in the infinite wisdom of God, that all ^^e
letters of this Book should have been ^^earnings? what should have been our
lot, ^^all the promises should have been s^raped ^t of it. But certainly this
must be your ^t* all ^he promises of the Book of this Co^nant shall be taken
from you, and all the ^^ses thereof shall be a flying roll that shall ^^er
within your houses, and shall there ^^^rnally remain. Know this, O ye that are
^^emies to Christ, know it and think upon it, Every battle of the warrior is
with confused noise, and with garments rolled in blood* But that war that
Christ shall have against the hypocrites in Zion, and those that are ignorant
of him, and will not close with him it shall be with fuel of fire, and
eternal i^dignation. O what will be your though^^ suppose you, when Christ
shall come wi^^ that two edged sword of the ^ury of the Lord, to enter to fight
with you? It i^ ^^ delightsome exercise. Oh that ye were n^^ almost, but
altogether persuaded to be Christians, and that once Christ might conq^^ you
with that two edged sword that proceeds out of his mouth, that so ye might
subject your selves to Him, and make Him t^^ object of your Faith. Now to Him
th^^ has engraven upon His vesture, and on (...) thigh, that He is the King of
kings, and (...) Lord of lords, we desire to give praise.

A SERMON Concerning the Great-Salvation.
Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him.
THis everlasting Gospel, which is preached unto you, is that glorious Star,
which must lead us to the place where blessed Christ does ^ly. This Gospel and
glad tidings of the Great Salvation is come near unto you: And Christ is
standing at the everlasting doors of your hearts, desiring that ye would open
unto him. There is that one great request which heaven, this day, has to
present unto you, and it is, That ye would at last embrace this Great Salvation
freely offered by him. It is the thing for which ye are called to mourn this
day, that since the days of your fathers, and since the beginning of your own
days, ^e have stopped your ears from that sweet and chaunting voice of this
blessed Charmer. Ye would never dance to Christ when he pyped, neither would ye
weep to him when he lamented.

But to come to the words which we have read unto you: The Apostle in the
forme^ Chapter has been discoursing most divinely, of the matchless and
incomparable excellencies which are in our blessed Lord Jesus; And in the first
verse of this second Chapter, h^ draws forth an exhortation from his former
Doctrine, which in short is this, That they would take heed to the blessed
Doctrine of the Gospel: And not at any time to let it slip out of our minds,
and that they would keep thi^ Gospel as a Jewel of great price, and would not
sell it, but that they would be induced to buy it. And this exhortation he
presses by two Arguments.

The first Argument is in the second verse where he says, If the word spoken
by Angel^ was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a
just recompense of reward, etc. That is, if the transgression of the Law, which
was delivered but by the Ministry of Angels, and every disobedience to i^ was
so severely punished; Let that provoke you to take heed, that ye transgress
no^ the precious Gospel which was spoken by the Lord himself.

The second Argument is in the word which we have read unto you, and it i^
taken from the certain and infallible stroa^ of the Justice of God, which shall
com^ upon those who slight this Great Salvation ^t is impossible (says he)
that there can be a ^^ity of refuge for these who slight this Great Salvation.

Now in the words which we have read, here are these six things to be
considered.

I. First, That it is an evil incident to the ^^earers of this precious Gospel
and Great ^^lvation, to slight and undervalue it; This is early presupposed in
the words, otherwise here had been no ground or access for the postle to
threaten so terrible things against ^^e slighters of it.

II. The second thing to be considered in (...) words, is, That the stroke and
ruin of ^^ose who slight this Great Salvation, is ^^^tain, and infallible, it
will surely come ^^on them: This is clear from these words, ^^w shall we
escape? As if he had said, there ^^no imaginable way for us to escape, if we
^^glect (this) so Great Salvation: we may ^^^e a city of refuge when we are
pursued the Law; or, when we are pursued by ^^ictions, and we may escape when
we (...) pursued otherwise by the Justice of ^^d; but if once we slight this
Great ^^^vation, there remains no city of refuge ^^o door of escape left
open) unto us: for ^ere will the person flee that slighteth this ^^at Salvation?

II. There is this third thing whereof we ^^^l take notice from the words, That
the ^^ak of the Justice of God comes justly ^n them who slight this Great
Salvation; truly it is a most equal and reasonable ^^^k, which is also clear
from the words, How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation! where he
puts it home to their consciences, as if he had said, think ye not tha^ it is
just and righteous that (if ye slight the Great-Salvation) there should not be
a doo^ of escape left open unto you? He puts the question home to their
conscience to answer, yea, or no.

IV. The fourth thing to be considered i^ the words, is this, That the
slighting thi^ Great-Salvation is a sin that has many aggravations which
attend and wait upon i^. And it has two great aggravations from the words
which I have read; The first great aggravation in that word of the Text, Great
Salvation, as if he had said, if it were not Great Salvation, ye might have
some clo^^ or excuse for your slighting of it: but se^ing it is such a great
and eternal Salvation^ there is now no cloak left for your sin. The second
aggravation is from the certainty (...) this Salvation: in these words, Which
at fi^^ began to be spoken by the Lord: and was conf^^med unto us by those that
heard him, viz. (...) Apostles, whereby he tells them, this Great Salvation
is no notion no^ fancy; but a m^^ certain, sure, and real Salvation, which y^^
they slight.

V. The fifth thing whereof we shall ^a^^ notice from the words, is this, That
the^ are no persons (be who they will, Minister (...) people) who slight this
Great-Salvatio^ that shall have a door of escape. Hence is, that the Apostle
puts himself amo^^ the rest, saying, How shall we escape; if (...) neglect
so great salvation; That is, How shall Paul, escape, if I neglect so great
salvation; and so frustrat the grace of God?

VI. Sixthly, We would take notice of this ^^om the words, That not only heart
despi^^ng of this Great Salvation, but even also ^he very neglecting of it,
has a certain infallible and unspeakable ruin attending upon it (...) Now
before we begin to speak to any of ^hese six things (which we have observed
from ^^e words) There are these two things where^^to we shall speak a little
for clearing of the ^ords. First, What is meaned here by Great ^alvation;
Secondly, How it is said, that Christ was the first preacher of it.

First, We conceive, that by the Great-sal^ation, is understood the Gospel, as
is clear, ^ph. 1. 13. Where it is called, the Gospel of ^^r salvation, and Act.
13. 26. it it called the lord of this salvation; So that by the word of this
Salvation, is understood the Gospel, ^^d these precious offers which are
contained in it. And we conceive, it may be called (...) Great-Salvation, in
these eight respects.

I. First, It is called the Great-Salvation, ^^ respect of the price that was
laid down ^or it: There being no less price laid down ^^ purchase this
Great-Salvation, then the ^loud of the Son of God. From whence then ^oth
Salvation flow unto you? It comes ^^nning to you in a stream of the blood of
the (...) of God. This is clear, Heb. 9. 12. Nei^^er by the blood of Goats and
Calves; but by ^is own blould he entered in once into the holy ^lace, having
obtained eternal redemption for us.

II. Secondly, It is called a Great Salvation, in respect of the many
difficulties and oppositions which ly in the way of bringing it about. What
great impediments (suppose ye) lay in Christ's way, before he could accomplish
and bring about this Great Salvation? Was not the Justice of God to be
satisfied? Was he not to die, and be made like unto one of us? Was he not to^ly
in the grave? And was he not to bear the to^ments of hell, before this
Great-Salvatio^ could be accomplished, and brought to pass (...) There were
such impediments in the way o^ bringing about this Great Salvation, that ^^ all
the Angels in Heaven had been set to the work, they had been all crushed under
(...) had it been but that one great impediment^ to satisfy the Justice, and
pacify the wra^^^ of God, even that was a pass, through which none could go,
but the eternal Son of God. It was so guarded that none durst adventure to
enter it (much less could any win through it) save he only, who was mighty to
save.

III. Thirdly, It is called a Great Salvation in respect of that high
estimation which the Saints have of it. O what an high estimation have the
Saints of this Gospel Salvation! There is no mercy which they think comparable
to this, all other mercies are but little Zoars in comparison of this great
Mercy, and Gospel Salvation.

IV. Fourthly, It is called a Great Salvation, in respect of these noble
effects which this Salvation brings about, and produceth^ Some of the great
effects of the Gospel? David has cleared, Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10. Is not this ^
great effect (of this Gospel Salvation) to ^ring us out of nature into an
estate of grace? And that is an effect of this Great Salvation? ^s not this a
great effect, to make us who were enemies, become friends? And that is ^^
effect of this Great Salvation? Is not this ^ great effect, to make us who were
moving ^^ the way to hell, move in the way to hea^^n? And that is an effect of
this Great Salvation. Is not this a great effect, to make us who were far off,
to be now made near? And ^^t that is an effect of this Great Salvation. And is
not this a great effect, to make us who were darkness, become light in the
Lord? and ^^at is the great effect of this Gospel Salvation: Yea, I may say,
time would fail me to tell ^f all the great effects of this Great Salvation;
^ut O will ye come and see, and that will ^est resolve the question unto you,
what the ^ble effects of this Great Salvation are.

V. Fifthly, It is called a Great Salvation, (...) respect of the great
advantages which ^oth redound to the person who imbraceth (...) First, Is not
Heaven a noble advantage? ^^d that is the gain, which attends the ^^bracers
of this Great Salvation. Secondly, (...) not Jesus Christ a notable advantage?
^^d yet he is the advantage which attends ^^ imbracers of this Great
Salvation* ^^irdly, Is not eternal communion with ^^d a notable advantage? And
that advantage attends the imbracers of this Great ^^vation. Fourthly, Is not
eternal liberation from the body of death, a great advantage? and that
attends the imbracers o^ this Great Salvation. Fifthly, Is not eternal
singing in the enjoyment of God a great advantage? and that attends the
imbracer^ of this Salvation. Sixthly, Is not eternal seeing of God as he is, a
great and noble advantage? And yet this (as all the former) attends the
imbracers of this Great Salvation* Ye^, would ye be rich? O then embrace thi^
Great Salvation. Would ye be honorable Come and embrace this Great Salvation
Would ye be eternally happy? O then com^ and partake of this Great Salvation.

VI. Sixthly, It is called a Great Salvation in respect of all other Salvations
that eve^ were accomplished. There was never a salvation, or victory obtained
by any General (...) Captain (unto a Land or People) that could have the name
of Great Salvation in comp^rison of this.

VII. Seventhly, It is called a Great-Salvation, in respect of the authority of
it. W^ have spoken of the greatness (as to the m^ritorious cause) of it, and
how great things does effectuate: and also in respect of t^^ authority of it,
it is a Great-Salvatio^ Would ye know who is the Author of the Great-Salvation?
It is Christ, Heb. 5. 9. (...) became the Author of eternal Salvation to (...)
them that obey him. And must not this Salvation be suitable to him who is the
Author it. This is one of the most noble and irra^^ant beams of the Majesty of
the Son of G^^ the Mediator, that he is the Author of (...) Great Salvation.

VIII. Eighthly, It is called a Great Salvation, in respect of the continuance
and duration of it. It is not a salvation which is but (...) a day: but it is
an eternal Salvation, Heb. (...). 12. He obtained eternal redemption for us.

Now the second thing whereunto we shall ^peak, for clearing of the words, is
this, viz. How it is said, That Christ was the first ^reacher of this eternal
Salvation. We do ^ot think that the words are thus to be understood, that the
Gospel, and this Great Salvation was never preached before Christ came ^^ the
flesh; but we think the meaning of the ^ords may be one of these three, if not
all ^f them.

I. First, That all the preaching of this Great Salvation under the Law, did
come ^ery far short in the point of fullness, in ^omparison of Christ's
preaching of it; Therefor is Christ said to be the first Preacher of his Great
Salvation: As if he had said, I ^now Adam, he preached of this Great Salvation:
and Enoch, he preached of this Great Salvation: And the twelve Patriarchs, they
^reached of this Great Salvation: And all ^he Prophets who went before Christ,
and (...) now in heaven, they preached of this Great Salvation; But all their
preaching de^erved not the name of preaching in compa^ison of Christ's; for,
Never man spoke as he ^pake. Thus Christ was the first great preach^r of this
Great Salvation.

II. Secondly, This may be the meaning ^f it, that Christ was the first
Preacher of ^^is Great Salvation, in respect of his clear way of preaching of
it: for he was the first Preacher of it without Types and Shadows, he was the
first Preacher of it clearly and fully, with so much demonstration and power of
the Spirit.

III. Thirdly, The meaning of this (that Christ was the first Preacher of this
Great Salvation) may relate to his appearing to Adam in Paradise, when he
became the first and great Preacher of this Salvation, when he did speak that
word unto him, The See^ of the Woman shall tread down the head of the Serpent.
The first glorious preaching of thi^ Great Salvation was, when Christ preached
i^ to Adam in Paradise. And that was the first and glorious morning of this
blessed Gospel*

Now we shall speak a little to the first o^ these six things which we have
observed from the words, viz.

That there are many within the visibl^ Church, who are neglecters and
slighters o^ this Great Salvation; (do ye not all tak^ with it?) It is clear,
Matthew. 23. toward the close, and chap. 22. 5. Where these persons being
invited to come to the marriage or feast of the Gospel, It is said of them They
made light of it. Which are the sam^ words in our Text. And Luke 14. 18* When
they were invited to come, it is said They all with one consent began to make
their excuse. And Isa. 28. 2. This is the rest where with ye shall make them
weary to rest, this i^ the refreshing, yet they will not hear. No^ is there a
person here who dare deny thi^ charge, that he is a slighter of thi^ Great
Salvation? I confess I am afraid, that ye will ^ot take with it; Therefore I
shall propose eighth sorts of persons who are slighters of this Great
Salvation. And I charge you, as ye will answer to God one day, that ye search
your hearts, whether ye be among the number (in the Catalogue) of the slighters
of this Great Salvation.

I, The first sort of persons, who are slighters of this Great Salvation, are
these persons who go about to establish their own ^ighteousnesse, and will not
submit to the ^ighteousnesse of Christ: (in a word) it is that sort of persons,
who think they may win to heaven by a Covenant of Works, and will not take the
Gospels way of traveling ^o heaven in the Covenant of Grace. And ^orely there
is not a person here, who has ^ot that cursed inclination to be as little
ob^ieged to Christ (for his Salvation) as he can. We would go to Heaven without
the Way, which is Christ. And (believe me) there are ^any in this congregation,
who go thus a^out to establish their own righteousness. And I shall propose
six sorts of persons who ^^ll under the first rank.

1. The first sort are these who trust on their own civility, and think these
will car^y them to heaven; These are the persons ^ho go about to establish
their own righteousness. Say they, I defy the world to ^^y any thing to me, I
was evermore an ho^est man, and I trust therefore that I shall ^o to heaven;
But I say to thee, (O atheist ^^at thou art) thou shall never win to heaven by
these means, till thou come to Christ with this, All my righteousness is lik^
filthy rags.

2. The second sort are these, who buil^ their confidence upon their denial of
their good works, but yet come never this lengt^ to make use of Jesus Christ.

3. The third ^ort are these, who buil^ their confidence upon their duties;
The^ think they will come to heaven by their goo^ prayers, by their reading,
and by their fasting (like unto that Pharisee, Luk 18. 11) I than^ God I am not
like other men* for I fast twi^^ in the week: I pay tiths of all that I
possesse^ But I say unto thee, thy duties will never bring thee to heaven, if
Christ be not the end of all thy duties, nor can ye perform an^ duty without
him.

4. The fourth sort of persons, who ^a^ under this first rank of slighters of
the Gre^^ Salvation, are those who trust on their co^victions. If they have
once been convinc^ of their sin and miserable estate, they thi^ their is no
more to do, Christ will never ^^ject them, so they sit down and build the hope
upon these convictions.

5. The fifth sort of persons are these w^ build their confidence upon their
resolution* Say they, oftentimes I have resolved to be better man than I am:
therefore I thi^^ (which is the fearful delusion of many that God will accept
the will for the deed: B^^ it had been good for many, such a word h^^ not been
in the Bible; or that their cu^s^^ eyes had never read it. But know this, t^^
though thou had as strong resolutions as Peter, or as good wishes as Balaam
had, if thou never labor to bring them to practice, God shall say to thee,
Depart from me, I know you not. And of you who build upon your resolutions, ye
build upon a sandy foundation, these being many times a goodness but like the
morning dew.

6. And the sixth sort of persons who fall under this first rank of slighters
of the Great Salvation (and wherein the evil is most subtle) are these who
build their Salvation upon their graces; these also go about to establish their
own righteousness: But I say to thee, Thy grace cannot be the foundation of
thy hope, though they may be as evidences to strengthen thy hope. Now are there
none here who fall under this first rank of slighters of the Great Salvation;
or are there none here who will confess that they have gone about to establish
their own righteousness? I say to thee, who will confess, put a rope about
thy neck, and come to Christ; for he is a merciful King: I say to thee, come
to Christ with this, All my righteousness is like filthy rags: And if thou will
come with this in sincerity, he shall say, Bring forth the white robe and put
it upon him: If thou can be brought to speak that in sincerity to Christ, there
shall be no more betwixt Christ and thee, But, Come and cloth him with the
white robe.

II. Secondly, These persons slight the Great Salvation, who delay their taking
hold of the precious offers of the Gospel: For there are many (when we preach
thi^ Gospel, and when we hold out the Great Salvation to them) who say, I will
follow Christ: But I must first go home and bury m^ father; (and so they delay
to take hold o^ ^his Great Salvation) But I say to you tha^ (who ever you be)
that thus delay to tak^ hold on this Great Salvation, ye are the sligh^ of it.
Is there a person within these doors, who dare, but acknowledge that he has
slighted this Great Salvation, and delayed to embrace it? O tell me? What d^
your consciences speak? Are there any bu^ they must acknowledge they come under
this second rank? And I say to you, who have thus delayed, will ye yet embrace
it? (...) say even unto you who are old men (now past sixty years, and have
slighted this Great Salvation so long) yet this day this great Great Salvation
is offered unto you: Wha^ say ye to it? O what do ye say to this offer* Are ye
saying, I must now delay (and not receive this Great Salvation) till my Harvest
b^ by, and over? I say unto thee, that the Harvest of the wrath of God is ripe,
and he shall put in his sickle, and cut thee down. I will say no more to these
who thus slight thi^ Great Salvation, but this, Why stand ye all the day in the
Market place idle, and doing nothing. O will ye at last be induced to tak^ and
embrace this Great Salvation, before ^^ be hid from your eyes.

III. Thirdly, These persons are the slighters of this Great Salvation, who
complement with Christ, when they are invite^ to come and partake of it: And
say silently ^o the Minister, (or rather to their own con^ciences) I pray you
have me excused at this ^ime, as these Luke 14. 18. But I would only ask at
such, have ye any lawful excuse, why ye will not come and partake of this
Great Salvation? Is there any person here, that has any lawful excuse to
present? I shall never take that off your hand, Have me excused: But be sure of
this, I shall never excuse you, but accuse you: Therefore I desire that these
persons, who have slighted the Great Salvation, by complementing with Christ,
that they would complement no more wi^h Him at all: But now embrace it.

IV. The fourth sort of persons who slight this Great Salvation, are these who
give way to discouragements and unbelief, so that they will not come and
partake of this Great Salvation: I say, such of you are slighters of it, and
Christ will esteem you such. Oh if ye knew the worth and virtue of this Great
Salvation, there would not be a tentation (you could meet with) that would
hinder you from embracing it, but if thou could not answer these ^emptations,
thou would not own them. I say unto such undervaluers and slighters of the
Great Salvation as discouraged persons ( And these who stay long in the place
of the breaking forth of children) tha^ when ye cannot answer your objections,
which hinder you from closing with Christ, I intrea^ you disown them, as if you
heard them not: Say ^^e, Think ye this lawful? I say, it is both lawful and
expedient: for it was the practic^ of believing Abraham, He considered not
(...) own body, being dry as an old stick, Nor the deadness of Sarahs womb.
He did not cons^der these things which might have been objections to keep him
from believing. He^ might have started at these two objections* Alas, I am old,
and that objection could he^ not answer: And my wife is past child hea^^,
neither could he answer that objection^ What then did he with them? He
slighte^ them both, and considered them not. Secondly, I would say this to you,
who thu^ slight it because of discouragements: If ye^ did know the worth of the
Great Salvation which is in this Gospel redemption that is offered unto you,
although ye had an Army o^ objections to go through, ye would go through them
all, To get a drink of the wate^ of this well of Bethlehem.

V. The fifth sort of persons who sligh^ this Great Salvation, are these who
will not do so much as take care, and give pain^ to hear this Great Salvation
offered unto them; for there are some persons who (i^ they come to the Church)
desire to sit farrest off, and so never take care to hear a wor^ of this Great
Salvation: And such are dreadful slighters of it. Like unto these mentioned,
Ier. 6. 10. To whom shall I speak an^ give warning, that they may hear? Behold
their ear is uncircumised, and they cannot hearken, Isa. 28. 12. But they would
not hear, Je^^ 7. 10. Who say, we are delivered to do all these abominations:
yet they did come and stan^^ before him, in the House which was called by his
Name.

VI. Sixthly, These persons are slighters of this Great Salvation, (who when
they hear it) are no more (nay not so much) affected with it, ^hen if they were
telling unto them the most senseless history of Thomas the Rymer, or some other
old fable; Like unto these mentioned, Ier. 6. 10. The word of the Lord is unto
them a reproach, they have no delight in it. I would pose you all as in the
sight of the Author of this Great Salvation, (men or women) did you ever set
your selves (or took ye ever pains) to bring up your hearts to the love of this
Great Salvation? Was it ever the rejoicing of your hearts that Christ dyed and
rose again? I do certainly believe it, (and I am persuaded) that there are
decrees past in Heaven against many of you. That in hearing ye shall hear, but
not understand; and in seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive, For God
has made your hearts harder then the Flint or Adamant; so that ye shall refuse
to return when he does exhort you. Believe me, (if I may so speak) I think
there is as much probability that the stones in the wall would hear (if we
would speak to them) as soon as many of you.

VII. Seventhly, These persons are slighters of the Great Salvation, who did
never complain that they wanted a right to this Great Salvation. I hope some of
you are now convinced that ye never came within the compass of this
Great*Salvation: I say yet unto you, if ye did never spend one hou^ in secret
weeping and lamenting, because y^ had not a righ^ to this Gospel Redemption^ it
is but too probable you never ha^ yet ^ right to it. Yea, know it, that such of
you would little care to let precious Christ depar^^ without any grief of
heart; I think if thi^ were voiced within this house to*day, whether or not
shall Christ go and depart, I doub^ if there would be many Heart diss^nters,
though many Tongue dissenters: Oh, I fear there would be many hearts here,
saying, O Christ depart and go thy way: yea, there are many Gadarens here, who
prefer their ^ine and swine to precious Christ, and would be^eech him to go out
of their coasts.

VIII. Eighthly, These persons sligh^ the Great*Salvation, who never took pain^
to engage their hearts to take hold of Christ and the Gospel. Christ is near to
you this day: The Great salvation is near to you, and is now, even now offered
unto you: Therefore are there any who will take pains to lay hold on it? I
obtest you all who are here, by the beauty and excellency of him who is the
Author of this Great salvation, that ye come and partake of it; I obtest you by
all the joys of heaven that ye embrace this Great salvation, I obtest you by
all the ^errous in hell, that ye embrace it, I obtest you by the promises of
the everlasting Covenant, that ye embrace it, I obtest you by all the curses
which are written in this Book of the Covenant, that ye embrace it, I obtest
you by the love ye owe to your immortal souls, that ye would once be wise, and
come and partake of the Great salvation. May I now have it, says thou? Yea, I
say unto you all, ye may have it to day, ye may be partakers of it before ye go
hence: And so before I proceed any further, I do in the Name and Authority of
him who sent me here to day, (and is the Author of this Great Salvation) freely
offer it unto you; Therefore take it off my hand, embrace this Great Salvation
offered to you to day; But I know there will be eight sorts of humors (within
this house to day) in relation to this Great Salvation, which now is offered
unto you.

1. I think there will be some of Gallio's disposition here to day, that will
care for none of these things; Yea, there are many here who will not give a fig
for this rich offer of the Great Salvation. But, I say, cursed be that person
who puts on Gallio's temper (to day) that will care for none of these things.

2. I fear there will be many of Pilat's humor here (to day) who will say, they
find nothing against the man; yet will cry forth, Take him and crucify him.
They find no fault with Christ, and yet will be con^ent that he be crucified.
Now can ye say any thing against Christ, who is the Author of this Great
Salvation? Produce your strong arguments; are there any here who have any thing
to say against Him? I am here to answer in His Name: I hope there ^s not one
here who has any thing to say against the Author of this Great Salvation. And
why then do ye not take Him? See unto your selves, that there be none of Pilats
humor here to day, that will cry out, Ye find nothing in Christ why he should
not be received and yet will be content, that he be crucified.

3. There will be many of the Jews humor here to day, who cry forth, Away with
Christ, away with Christ, and give me Barrabas. But oh what a hellish word is
that, Away with spotless Christ, away with transcenden^ Christ, and give us
the world? Now are there any here who will be so gross slighters of this Great
Salvation? Will ye slight this Great Salvation, and embrace your idols, which
shall once prove a crown of thorns unto you?

4. There will be some of Felix humor found here to day, that will say, O
Christ, g^ away at this time, and I will hear thee at a mos^ convenient season;
But I say unto you wh^ will not hear me to day, nor embrace th^^ Great
Salvation, I shall defy all the Ministe^^ in Scotland to assure you, that ye
shall get another offer, if ye send me away to day. Ther^ is not one that can,
or dare, engage, that the Great Salvation shall be in your offer and more.
Therefore I say, let none of Fel^^ temper be here to day, that will say, They
wi^^ hear Christ at a more convenient season.

5. There will be some of Balaams temper (to day) who will desire To die the
death of the righteous, and to have their last (...) like his; yet they desire
not to live the li^^ of the righteous. But I say unto you, ye sha^^ never die
the death of the righteous, if ye live not the life of the righteous.

6. There will be some of you here (to day) who (I hope) at least, will be of
Agripa's humor, that will say, Thou have almost persuaded me to be a
Christian: I say unto thee, O will thou quickly out with that word almost, and
put in that word altogether, and say, O precious Christ, Thou have altogether
persuaded me to be a Christian: However, if thou come no greater length, I
entreat thee come this length, that so thou may cry out, I am almost persuaded
to embrace Christ the Great Salvation, and may be ere long ye will come further.

7. There will be some of Judas temper here (to day) Who will betray Christ
for thirty pieces of silver; Yea, some would sell Christ, Heaven, their idols
and all, for less then thirty pieces of silver.

8. I think there will be many of Esaus pro^ane temper here (to day) Who will
sell their birthright for a mess of pottage. Now will ye enquire at your
selves, am I the person that will give my birthright for a mess of pottage?
Does my heart say, I will sell my birthright, because I am hungered and ready
to die: what will it profit me? Give me a mess of pottage, and I will quite
my birthright. I know it, there are not a few such here to ^ay; Therefore I
entreat you, enquire at your selves what is your humor. Oh shall the Great
Salvation, that ye have slighted ^o long, be slighted this day also, and
shall there be none to embrace it? Oh inquire, and stand inlaw, lest the wrath
of the most High pursue you.

Now I shall give you these seven considerations, which may provoke you not to
slight (but embrace) this Great Salvation.

1. The first Consideration, That the not embracing of this Great Salvation is
one of the greatest acts of folly that can be, Ier. 8: 9. They have rejected
the word of the Lord, (and immediately is subjoyned). And, what wisdom is in
them? And so Solomon does assure you they cannot be wise who neglect this Great
Salvation, Prove. 1. 7. Fools despise wisdom and instruction; Therefore, may
not I say unto you, be who ye will (though ye were the greatest heads of wit in
all this place) ye are but stark fools as long as ye neglect this. But would ye
be wise indeed, and wise unto eternal life? then I entreat you come and embrace
this Great Salvation.

II. The second Consideration, to provoke you not to slight the Great
Salvation, is this* that the ruin and destruction of the slighters of it, is
most certain and infallible, Ier. 11. 11. Where (speaking of slighting the
Covenant* which is indeed this same Great Salvation) there is a therefore put
to the threatening. Therefore thus says the Lord, I will bring evil upon them
which they shall not be able to escape I defy you all who are the slighters of
this Great Salvation, to find a back door, when justice shall pursue you: For
there is n^ door to escape if ye embrace not this Great Salvation: But the
earth will disclose your iniquity, and heaven will declare your sin.

III. Thirdly, Let this Consideration provoke you not to slight this Great
Salvation, that Christ is exceeding serious, and earnest that ye would embrace
it. And I think that, Isa. 28. 23. speaks out his exceeding seriousness:
where four times he beggeth of his hearers, that they would give ear and hear
his voice (saying) Give ear and hear my voice, ^earken and hear my speech. What
needs all these exhortations? But that Christ is most serious, that they
would embrace the Great Salvation. And O that there were a person here (to day)
as serious to the bargain as Christ is! But, be who ye will that slight this
Great Salvation, (believe me) the day is coming wherein ye shall cry out, alas
for my slighting of it. Will thou therefore think presently with thy self (O
thou slighter of this Great Salvation) what will thou say of thy slighting of
it, when the devil shall be leading thee in through these dark gates of hell? O
slighter of the Gospel, how many alaces will thou cry, when thou shall be
passing through these dark gates into thy everlasting prison? Will thou not then
cry out. (O me slighter of the everlasting Salvation) whither am I now going?
Alas, now for my slighting the Gospel: And as thou passest through, thou shall
meet with numbers of miserable comforters. There is not one in that prison who
can comfort thee: But many dreadful alaces shall thou then both cry and hear,
if thou embrace not this Great Salvation.

IV. Fourthly, Let this provoke you no^ to slight the Great Salvation, that ye
will get it for a very look. O ye within this house to day, ye will get this
Great Salvation for one look, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and b^ saved, all the
ends of the earth. For a very look ye will get this Great salvation: and do y^^
ever think to get Heaven at a lower rate?

V. The fifth Consideration, to provoke you not to slight this Great Salvation
and more, is this, There is not one of you wh^ is a slighter of it, but your
slighting it shall increase your immortal bonds. Man or Woman, be who thou will, when thou art slighting this Great Salvation; thou art but pla^ing a cord
wherewith to bind thy soul eternally in these unquenchable flames, Isa. 2^ 22.
Be ye not mockers, lest your bonds be man strong; I say therefore unto you, old
me^ mock not, lest your bonds be made strong: o^ women, near unto your graves,
mock not, l^^ your bonds be made strong: Young men, be (...) not mockers, lest
your bonds be made strong^ Young women, who are in the flower of yo^^ time,
mock not, lest your bonds be made strong* But now alas, will there (for all
this) ^e^ person here to day who will be a mockers this Great Salvation?

VI. The sixth Consideration, to provoke you not to slight this Great Salvation
a^^ more, is this, Ye know not but that yo^^ days may be near a close; I say,
ye kno^ not, but the day of the preaching of this Great Salvation may be near
unto a close. Wh^ know thou, O man or woman, but t^^ shall be the last
Sermon that ever thou shall ^ear concerning this Great Salvation? And yet for
all this, shall we be sent away without one consent to embrace or receive it? O
will ye be persuaded to look to Christ, and so to take him.

VII. The seventh consideration, to provoke you not to slight the Great
Salvation, is this, that there is a five fold Salvation comprehended under this
Great Salvation.

I. The first is this, come and partake of this Great Salvation, and thou shall
have Salvation from thy idols: and hereby I do proclaim liberty (this day) unto
captives. I am sent forth (this day) with the keys of your prison house, to
open your prison doors unto you, if ye will embrace this Great Salvation. I say
unto you. O ye prisoners come forth and show your selves; for the keys of your
prison house are with us to open your prison doors unto you, therefore O come
forth and embrace this Great Salvation. Will there be any (shall I think) here
that will refuse to come forth, O go forth and slay from the land of your
captivity, and from the house of your bondage.

II. Thou shall have Salvation from thy darkness, and from thy ignorance? I
say unto you who understand no more of God then the stones in the wall, I
command you to come forth, and partake yet of this Great Salvation; and unto
you shall light arise, even the Day Spring from on high shall visit you.

III. If ye will come and partake of this Great Salvation, ye shall have
deliverance from all your fears. Do thou fear that thou shall be poor: Come
and partake of this Great Salvation; and thou shall be delivered from it? Art
thou afraid of hell? Come and partake of this Great Salvation, and thou shall
be delivered from that fear. Art thou afraid at the wrath of God? Then come (^
say) and partake of this Great Salvation, and thou shall have redemption from
that and al^ thy fears, With him is plenteous redemption and he can make thee
quiet from the fear o^ evil.

IV. If thou will come and partake of this Salvation, thou shall have
deliverance from all thy anxieties, and from all thy cares: y^^ are now
careful and anxious about many things; Come and partake of this Great
Salvation, and it will make you careful but only for the one thing necessary.

V. If ye will come and embrace the Great Salvation offered unto you this day,
ye shall be helped before ye go hence to sing that song, O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? Now O will ye come and embrace this Great
Salvation, And ye shall b^ more then conquerours through Christ who love^^ you
Are there therefore any here to day that would have victory over the devil, and
over their own hearts? Then come and embrace this Great Salvation, and then
your victory i^ certain.

But now to press home this Great Salvation upon you a little further, there
are nin^ sorts of persons, who are invited to come and partake of this Great
Salvation offered this day: And I charge you answer to your names when ye are
called, and delay not to come.

I. First, I invite and call here to day, all who are willing to come and
embrace this Great Salvation. Now, are there any of ^ou here to day, who are
called willing? ^hen I invite you to come, and embrace this Great Salvation,
Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, ^et him come: But oh, are there none here (...)
day who are named willing? I entreat ^on, if there be any, do not deny your
name, ^^t come when you are called and embrace this Great Salvation.

II. Secondly, These persons who thirst ^^r it, are invited to come, and
partake of ^^^s Great Salvation, Rev. 22. 17. Let him ^^t is a thirst, come.
Now if there be any ^ere who are named thirsty, let them come and partake of
this Salvation, and they shall ^e satisfied.

III. Thirdly, Are there any money-lesse ^^lk here to day? Let them come and
partake of this Great Salvation; Are there no money-lesse folk here to day? I
mean not that money or coin in your purses, but want ^^e money? That is, want
ye righteousness? ^hen I pray you, come and partake of this Great Salvation. I
say, are ye so poor, that ^e have nothing but the fear of hell? Then I ^ay you
come. If there be any here who have nothing to commend them to Christ, but
necessity: I say unto all such, O come, come, ^^me, and partake of this Great
Salvation.

IV. Fourthly, These persons are invited ^o come (and I wish there were many
such) who are weary: But Oh! are there none here to day, who are called weary?
Are y^^ not weary in pursuit of yours? If there be any such here to day, I say
unto you, O weary folk, come, come, come, and partake of this Great Salvation,
and of this excellent Gospel Redemption that was purchased at so dear (...)
rate.

V. Fifthly, These who are heavy loadened are invited to come, (and I think all
of you may answer to this name) are ye heavy loaden^^ O then come. But are
there none here who are heavy laden with sin, with misery, and estrangement
from God? If there be any such here, I say unto thee, old man, or young man, be
who thou will, O come, and partake of this Great Salvation.

VI. Sixthly, Are there any here to day who are called blind? I say, if there
be any o^ you who think ye want eyes to see the precious excellencies of
Christ, I invite you to come and partake of this Great Salvation.

VII. Seventhly, Are there any who are called lame here to day? I say unto
such, ^ come, come, come, and partake of this Great Salvation: For we are sent
forth to day, to call in the blind and the maimed, and the lame that they may
come and embrace this Great Salvation: Therefore are there none he^^ to day who
may be called such: Are ye neither blind nor lame? I hope many of you will not
deny that ye are such; Therefore say unto you; O blind, halt and maimed com^
come, and partake of this Great Salvation.

VIII. The eighth sort of persons invit^^ are these who are sick, therefore if
there be ^y sick folk here to day, be who ye will, I say ^^to you, O come and
partake of this Great salvation, For the whole need not the Physician, ^^t the
sick.

IX. Ninthly, Are there any here to day who know not their name, or their
conditi^^, I say unto you, O namelesse folk, come and partake of this Great
salvation, come to Christ or the knowledge of your souls condition, ^ome as a
namelesse one, and he shall not re^^ct thee, though thy case were so evil that
thou could not give it a name; for, Of all ^^at come unto him he sends none
away.

Now where do you find your name and ^^name? O do ye not know it? I hope now ^e
may know; therefore I entreat you answer to it, and so come away and partake of
this Great Salvation.

But I am afraid there be many strong iron^^rs in the way of some of you, which
ye can^t win over. Ah, how fast are some souls ^^cked in Satan's snare; And
therefore I shall ^eak a little for discovering of these bars, that hinder from
embracing this Great Salvation, that so ye may be the better helped to remove
them.

I. The first great iron* bar which keeps ^olk from embracing this Great
Salvation, is ^he bar of ignorance; and I am afraid that ^^is (as a mighty bar)
hinders many of you: Ye are ignorant of your selves, and of ^he condition of
your souls, ye are ignorant ^f the Law and of its severity, and ye are ignorant
of the precious Gospel in its condescendency. O pray unto God that for Christ
sake, he would break that great bar of ignorance; for till that be done,
Christ may take up that complaint, Ier. 5. 4. Surely they are foolish, they
know not the way of the Lord, not the judgment of their God. I say, this bar
o^ ignorance keeps you from embracing this Great Salvation.

II. The second bar which keeps many from closing with Christ, is the bar of
presumption, for some will cry out, what nee^ have I to embrace the Great
Salvation? Have I it not already? But I say unto thee, O fool thou art (by all
appearance) yet in bondage* O that this evil bar of presumption were put away;
for it is one of the greatest impediments which lies in the way of your
embracing this Great Salvation that is in your offer to day: Therefore I say
unto you, i^ you will come no further; I entreat you come this length, to
confess that ye want this Gospel Salvation and that ye are indeed strangers
to this Redemption purchased by Christ.

III. The third bar that keeps persons from embracing this Great Salvation,
is the bar of unbelief, ye believe not what we say to you anent this Great
Salvation, I know that some of you are of the Stoics and Epicures humor, who
cry out, What means this man? He seems to be the setter forth of some
strange God. But I say unto you, I am no^ the setter forth of any strange God,
but it is Jesus of Nazareth whom I preach unto you* Alas, some of you thinks
this Great Salvation to be some morning dream, or some golden fancy: but I say
unto you, it is neither a dream nor fancy; but a real truth that we preach unto
you.

IV. The fourth bar that keeps persons from embracing of this Great
Salvation, is the bar of discouragement: This strong bar keeps many so fast,
that they cannot embrace this Great Salvation though it be freely offered unto
them. I shall say no more to you, who are such, but counsel you to do as these
four lepers did, 1 King. 7. 4. Who sat at the gate of Samaria: who said, Why
sit we here till we die, if we say we will ^nter* into the City, then the
famine is in the City, and we shall die there: and if we sit still ^^re* we die
also. Now therefore come, and let us fall into the host of the Syrians, if they
save us alive, we shall live, and if they kill us, we ^^all but die. Even so
say I unto you, that if ^t abide in the state of unbelief, ye shall surely be
undone; therefore go forth, for ye ^now not but God may work a Great Salvation
for you: and if ye will quite your unbelief and close with Christ in the offer
of this Great salvation (by says) ye shall have no more to do, but eat and
drink, and divide the spoil.

V. The fifth bar which withholdeth persons from embracing of this Great
Salvation, (...) the bar of unwillingnesse, Ye will not ^me to thee, that ye
may have life. And alas, that is an iron bar indeed, by which all that ^e in
hell have barred themselves out of ^eaven. Alace, shall ye be such wretches
^lso. O what a dreadful sound is that, Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou
not be made clean? When shall it once be? Ah, Turn you* turn you, why will ye
die? Why will ye slight this Great Salvation? O will none of you this day
embrace it!

VI. The sixth bar that withholdeth persons from embracing this Great
Salvation, i^ the bar of worldly mindedness: many of you are so fixed to the
world, that ye cannot come and close with this Great Salvation. I may allude
to that word spoken of Saul. 1 Samuel 10. 22. that he hid himself among the
stuff: for many have buried and nested themselves in the midst of the world,
that they cannot embrace this Great Salvation.

VII. The seventh bar which keeps many from embracing this Great Salvation,
is the bar of hard heartedness: there has such (...) stupidity and hardness
of heart seized upon many, that, let Christ preach as he will to them (by his
Word, or by other dispensations) they are no more moved, then if his Word and
dispensations were a thousand miles from them. O that strong bar of hardness
of heart, when shall the omnipoten hand of God break it?

VIII. The eighth bar that hinders many from embracing this Great Salvation,
is the bar of slothfulness. Many of you cannot be at the pains to embrace it:
but I say unto you, there is but small pains in the way o^ Godliness: I say
unto you, it may so easil^ be had, that it is in your offer to day; and (...)
ye will, ye may put forth your hand and take it. Consider therefore what ye
will do O will ye despise it! I say will ye still negle^ and despise it (will
ye but read that dread^^ll word, Act. 13. 40. 41. Behold ye despi^^s, and
wonder and perish. Tell me freely, would ye have us to return this answer to
him who sent us, that ye are despisers of the Great Salvation? Say to it, Are
there none of you, who (for all this) will consent to partake of this Great
Salvation? O captives and prisoners, and ye who are in the bonds of ^atan, will
ye come and partake of this Great salvation, and you shall be made free. I have
(...) act of release for you to day; If ye will ^ome, and make use of it, ye
shall be set at ^^berty. But, Oh shall the prison doors be ^st open, and yet
none come forth? But that (I may come to a close) I say yet unto ^^on, O poor
prisoners go forth, go forth, and partake of this Great Salvation. Oh, will ^e
not come forth? What holds you in? The foundation of your prison house is
taken to day, therefore if ye will but come ^orth and cast a look to Christ,
your very ^^kels shall fall off your hands, and ye shall ^^ as those who were
never bound. Now I ^ave this with you: and to make you think upon it, I shall
speak these five words unto ^ou, and I entreat you think upon them.

1. First, I have excellent tidings to tell ^^u (I hope some of you will give
ear to ^^em) viz. There is a great Person come ^ere to day, and that is the
mighty Author ^f this Great Salvation, who has brought ^erlasting
righteousness with him, desiring ^ou to make use thereof; It is his desire
that ye would take his excellent Gift at his hand. These, I say, are the
tiding^ that have to preach unto you: and I hope never to be declared a liar
for what I preach unt^ you: I say yet unto you, that Christ, the Author of the
Great Salvation, desi^eth to give it freely unto you, if ye will but take it.
But O will ye not take it? I think, ^^ ye did see an hundredth men lying in
prison or dungeon, without all light, bread, o^ water, and a great Prince
coming to them saying, I desire you all to come forth, an^ partake of this
Great liberty which I bring unto you: and every one of them should answer, I
scorn to come forth at this time* would ye not think them exceeding great
fools? And yet I fear this act of great foll fall out in many of your, hands to
day: tha^ when Christ has given us the keys, of you^ prison doors, and they
are opened, ye wi^^ not come forth. But I must entreat you y^^ to come forth
and show your selves; For who knows, but we may be commande^ to shut your
prison doors again, and to se^ them with seven seals: with an unalterab^^
decree from heaven, never to be recalled* Wherefore, O ye prisoners, go forth,
go for^ from your prison house.

2. Secondly, I would say this to you that it is not without much ground the
this Salvation (offered to you) is called Great Salvation. (I know a little
Paper two or three sheets, might contain all t^^ salvations that ever any man
obtained: b^ the world would not be able to contain (...) the Books which
might be written to the commendation of this Great Salvation; yea, (unto any
who will embrace it) I say, First, If thou find not this Salvation above thy
^aith, then go thy way when thou art come; But I know thou will find it both
above thy ^aith and hope. Secondly, If thou find it not above thy desires when
thou a^^ come unto it, then go thy way again: but were thy desires as the sand
upon the sea shore, thou shall always find more in this Salvation then ever
thou could desire. Thirdly, If this Salvation be not above what thou can
conceive, then go thy way when thou art come to it; But think of it as thou
can, it shall always be above thy thoughts of it: Fourthly, If this Salvation
be not above thy opinion of it, then go thy way when thou ^^it come unto it;
but I know thou will ^^nd it far above thy opinion of it. Therefore seeing it
is so Great a Salvation, as that all the world could not contain all the Books
^ight be written in the commendation of it. O will ye embrace it, even to day,
while it is ^o your offer.

3. Thirdly, I would say this unto you, (...) persuaded, that there is no sin
that will more provoke the Majesty of God to punish you, then the sin of
slighting the Greatsalvation. Bring forth these murderers says the Lord (of
the slighters of this invitation) and slay them before me. I entreat ^^en
enquire at your own hearts, what ye will answer when ye are reproved for
slighting of it (Old men, will ye ask at your own hearts, what ye will answer
to Christ when he shall propose that question to you Why slighted ye the Great
Salvation? Old woman, what will ye answer, when he shall say to you, why
slighted ye the Great Salvation? Young men, and young women, inquire at your
own hearts what ye will answer when Christ shall say to you, why slighted ye
the great Salvation? Can ye imagine any answer unto that question? O dreadful
shall the wrath of God be, that shall be executed upon the slighters of this
Great Salvation?

4. Fourthly, I would say this unto you that heaven is waiting to hear, what
acceptance the offer of this Great Salvation does get among you. Here is the
Great Salvation, here is the offer of it, and here is the commendation of it;
what say ye to it? i^ it not an excellent Salvation? Is it not (...) free
Salvation? Is it not a Great Salvation* Is it not an eternal Salvation? Why
then d^ ye not welcome it? Can any of you say an^thing to the discommendation
of it? I know you cannot? Yea I da^ say your own heart are admiring it as most
excellent; An^ therefore O will ye accept it. Alas shall the^ be none here who
will be found accepters (...) this Great Salvation* so freely offered to day*

5. Fifthly, I would say this to you, let a the Angels praise him who the
Author (...) this Great Salvation. All the Saints roun^ about the Throne praise
him who is the A^thor of this Great Salvation. All these wh^ are expectants of
heaven praise Him who (...) the Author of this Great Salvation: All y^^ to whom
this offer is made, praise him who is the Author of this Great Salvation. O
heaven praise him who is the Author of this Great Salvation, O all ye fowls of
the air, praise him who is the Author of this Great Salvation, O fire, hail,
snow, vapors, stormy winds and tempests, praise Him who is the Author of this
Great Salvation. All the tribes of the earth, praise him who is the Author of
this Great Salvation. Our own soul praise him who is the Author of this Great
Salvation, and all that is within us bless him who is the Author of this Great
Salvation. O who would not praise Him, who is the Author of this Great
Salvation? Are there any here that will refuse to commend him? O think upon
him, and let not this be a day of slighting him? Now where are your hearts at
this time? I will tell you where many of your hearts are, they are thinking
upon the world: but I am sure there are not many of them thinking upon this
Great Salvation. Now what resolution mind ye to go away with to day? Oh, have
ye no resolution beyond what ye had when ye came hither to day? Are there any
here who have this resolution, To whom shall we go, but to him who is the
Author of this Great Salvation, who alone has the words of eternal life? Even
the Lord breath it upon you. Or is this your resolution, that through Christ's
strength (forsake him who will) ye will never forsake him? Or, have ye this
resolution* That ye will esteem more highly of the Great Salvation then ever ye
did? O that the Lord may keep these in the imaginations of the thoughts of your
hearts for ever. But as for you who have no resolutions to embrace this
Great-Salvation, O wherewith shall I commend it unto you? Do not your own
necessities commend it? But if nothing can persuade you to come away and
embrace it, then this place shall be a heap of witnesses against you: For it
has heard all the words of the Law which he has spoken unto you, Josh. 24.

Oh cast your eyes upon these pillars of the house, and stones in the walls: I
take them as so many witnesses, that they may speak, and testify against you
in the great day of the Lord, if ye neglect this Great Salvation to day.
Therefore as ye go away, be thinking upon it, and whether or not ye mind to
embrace it, now while you may have it. This day I have set life and death
before you: I have set before you both the Great Salvation and the great
damnation; And O that ye had understanding in all these things; that y^^ being
wise might be provoked at last to embrace this Great Salvation, the which we
do yet again entreat you to think upon. Is not heaven looking upon you at this
time* to see what ye will do with this great offe^ of Salvation which I have
this day (from the Lord) presented unto you? Now, ^^ Him, that can persuade you
to embrace thi^ Great Salvation, this Gospel Redemption this blessed mystery
into which the Angel desire to pry, to Him, Who can bring yo^ back from the
pit; and can enlighten you wit^ the light of the living? To Him who has the
keye^ of your prison, Who can open and none can shut, and can shut and none can
open; To Him, who has all power in Heaven and in Earth communicate to Him, who
can deliver you from the power of the Grave, and can set you free from all your
enemies, we desire to give praise,

Amen.
SERMON II.
Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him.
THere are two great and most ordinary complaints in these days. 1. There are
many who complain, that their Estates and Persons are in bondage, and that they
are sold for slaves to the hands of strangers: But, O that we could also turn
over the complaint to this, that our souls are in bondage, and that we are yet
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, that so we might be
provoked to long for the Great Salvation that is in our offer. 2. There are
many complaining (and not without much cause) that there is now such a
tolleration of Errors: But, O will thou complain also of this, that within thy
heart there is a tolleration of lusts; is there no^ an act of tolleration
concluded within thy breast, that the devil and all his company may reign in
thee at pleasure: Oh have ye not need of Great Salvation; Shall I tell you,
that Christ is cou^ting you to embrace it, and that he puts on all his most
glorious robes, and manifests himself unto you, as a suitor making offer of
himself and of his Great Salvation. O tell me, have ye seen him? Or do ye think
to see him this day? What robes had he on. There are five glorious Robes
wherewith he clothes himself when he condescendeth to manifest himself to his
people* First, He comes to his own with the garments of Salvation, according
to that word, Zech. 9. verse. 9. Rejoice, O daughter of Sion greatly, shout O
daughter of Jerusalem; for behold, thy King comes unto thee, he is just and
having Salvation; ay, your King is come here to day, and will you not fall in
love with him when he is clothed with the garments of Salvation, can ye ever
have a more conque^ing sight of Christ, then when he is clothed with such an
excellent Robe, and offering you Salvation. Secondly, He appears to his own
sometimes in garmenes dyed in blood, according to that word, Isa* 6. 3. verse
1, 2. Who is this that comes up from Edom with dyed garments in blood, as one
that treads the wine fat: And now I say to thee that will not look to Christ
when he appears in the garments of Salvation, have ye a heart to refuse him,
that have fought such a comba^e for you, who has trod the winepresse alone,
and has stained all His garments with the blood of his enemies; o^ is there
any here who dare refuse this Salvation, when they see how he treade^h his
enemies in anger, and trampleth them in his fury, and thus sprinkleth their
blood upon his garments. O tremble at this sight, and seek quarter from him in
time, or he shall die his garments with the blood of thy immortal soul.
Thirdly, Christ appears unto his own, being clothed with these humble Robes
of condescendency. when he came in the simititude of sinful flesh: O what a
sight wa^ that; to behold the Prince of Heav^n cl^ath^d with our nature; What a
sight was that to b^ hold him that was clothed with light as with a garment,
to be clothed with our infirmities, yet he condescended to cloth himself
thus, that we might have access unto Him and be partake^^ of His gifts: O can
we refuse Him, when love has thus pressed him to put on the beggar weed, that
he might say to worms y^ are my brethren, and my sisters. Fou^thly, Christ
sometimes manifests Himself, being clothed with the garments of beauty, and
ravishing Majesty; such was the sight that the Spouse go^ of Christ, Song. 2.
verse. 8. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among
the sons; and Song. 5. when she saw him, White and rudy, and the standard
bearer of ten thousand, and such was that joyful sight of Him* when his
garments were as the light, and white as the snow which he had at the
Transfiguration, when these glorified ones did come (as it were) Ambassadors
from that higher house to make him a visit. And, fifthly, Christ he sometimes
appears to his own, in Robes of dreadful Majesty, and terrible highness and
loftiness, when the soul upon the first sight of him remains dead, add there
remains no more life in them; Such was the sight Daniel got, in his 10.
Chapter, and such was the sight that John got of Christ, Rev. 1 verse. 17. And
I would ask at all that are here, what a sight have ye gotten of Christ to day,
in which of all these robes have ye seen Him in: It is true, we are not now to
look for the extraordinary sights of Him; But yet if ever thou have seen him in
any of his wooing Robes, sure he has appeared matchless, and how shall ye
then refuse him.

But now to come to the words I was speaking unto you o^; The first thing in
the words, to wit, That there are many who live under the offer of this Great
Salvation that do slight it, and do not embrace it; And now I shall only add a
few things further unto you. 1. Let me propose a few Considerations to persuade
you to embrace the Great Salvation: God forbid we go a way before we embrace
this Gospel Salvation: And therefore, I charge you in his Name, go not away
before ye embrace it. And to press it home upon you, there are these eight or
nine properties of this Great Salvation, that is offered unto you this day.

And first, It is a free Salvation, ye have no more a do, but to put forth your
hand and take it: O come and take it: Christ has foughten for this Salvation,
and there is no more required of you, but ^o come and ^eap the fruits of his
victory; Who ever will let him come, there is nothing that should move you to
stay away, O captives bond slaves to Satan, O prisoners of hope, will ye come
and partake of the Great Salvation, what holds you from coming away and
partaking of it, it is freely offered unto you: ^^y, believe it, Christ
requires no more of you, but that ye should come and take it out of his hand;
If ye consent to ob^y, the bargain is ended; Ye shall ea^ the good of the
land, Isa. 1.

Secondly, This Great Salvation, is a complete Salvation, that is offered unto
you to day, this is clear, Luke 1. verse. 17. That we might be saved from our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, there is not any enemy that is
in thy way, but if thou will come and partake of the Great Salvation, thou may
have victory over it, so complete a Salvation is it that is in your offer this
day* O shall we pass away, and not embrace it: O shall our cursed hearts
undervalue this complete Salvation that is come to your door, believe it,
Salvation is near unto you, if ye will take it.

Thirdly, It is a wonderful Salvation, it (...) such a Salvation as the Angels
desires ^o pry into it, and it is such a Salvation, that all the Prophets
desire to pry into it; ^t is almost six thousand years since all the ^ngels in
heaven fell into a Sea of wonder ^t this Great Salvation; It is almost six
thousand years since Abel fell into a Sea of wonder at this Great Salvation:
And what think ye is his exercise this day? He is even wondering at this Great
salvation: Would ye ask at all the Angels in heaven, would they not all say, O
embrace the Great Salvation; Would ye ask at all the Saints that are above,
would they not advise you to embrace the Great Salvation: Would ye ask at Adam
would he not say, O embrace this Great Salvation: Could ye ask at Abel, would
he not say, O embrace this Great Salvation: And would not all the Patriarchs
say unto you* O embrace the Great Salvation: And do not all that have tasted of
the sweetness of i^ cry out unto you, Come and embrace the Great Salvation.

The fourth property of His salvation is that it was bought at an exceeding
dear rate it is a dear Salvation. Would ye know the difference between Christ's
coming to thi^ Salvation, and your coming to it, it is this Christ was forced
to travel through all the armies of the Justice of God; He was forced to drink
of the cup of the warth of Go^ before he could come to purchase this Great
Salvation; and now what is required of yo^ to obtain this, we may say no more,
but pu^ out your hands and take it; will ye look t^ the price that was laid
down for this Salvation, there is not a wound in the body o^ Christ, but it
says, This is a dear Salvation There is not a reproach Christ met with b^^ it
says, O is not this a dear Salvation: The^^ is not a buffeting Christ met
with, but it sai^ O is not this a dear Salvation: There is not a necessity that
he is put into, but it says* Is not this a great and dear Salvation. O Sirs,
will ye not come and take this Great Salvation, this dear Salvation. What must
I give for it say ye, I say, ye must give nothing for it* come and take it
without money, and without price; it was dear to Christ, but it shall be cheap
unto you, O! is it not cheap to you, I assure you, if you will come to the
market to buy the Great Salvation, there is none of you that needs to stand
for the price of it. O come and take it, and have it, and there shall be no
more priging.

Fifthly, It is an everlasting Salvation, that ye shall enjoy the fruits of
throughout eternity, as is clear, Heb. 9. 13. He became the author of eternal
redemption unto us, it is a Salvation that the devil can never be able to take
out of your hand, if ye take it, ye shall never be robbed of it again. O come
and partake of this Great Salvation, whereby the gates of hell shall never
prevail against you.

Sixthly, It is an noble and honorable Salvation, it is not to be taken out of
one slavery to another, but it is to be taken out of prison that we may reign:
Luke 1. verse 71. compared with verse. 74 it is, That we being saved, may serve
him without fear in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life. I
say, Come, come, and partake of this Great Salvation, that your glory may be
increased, and that ye may be exalted above the Kings of the earth.

Seventhly, It is a most advantageous Salvation: What are the advantages of any
Salvation that are not to be found in this: is there not peace to be found
through this Salvation, is there not liberty to be found through this
Salvation, is there not eternal enjoyment of God to be found through this
Salvation; yea, all Salvations are in this one Salvation.

Lastly, It is a royal Salvation, for it comes to us from and through the Son
of God: Christ is the Author of it, and we conceive, Christ may be said to be
the Author of this Salvation, in these respects, 1. He is the meritorious cause
that did procure it, it was the price of his blood that was laid down for to
purchase this Great Salvation. 2. He is the fountain from whence it flows,
according to that word which we have cited. Heb. 5. 9. He became the Author of
eternal Salvation. 3. He is the person that fitteth our spirits for partaking
of it, and it is he that removes mountains out of the way, that we may have
fair access unto the Great Salvation. 4. It is he that must persuade our
hearts to embrace and take hold of it. He stands without, and cries in to
the heart, to embrace the Great Salvation; And he stands within, making thy
heart cry out, Content, I will embrace the Great Salvation; He is indeed the
person that commends (...) and does point forth this Great Salvation unto us,
He is the noble Minister of it, it began first to be preached by him.

Now, Is there any of you that have fallen in love with the Great Salvation:
that ye may try your selves, I shall give you some evidences of the persons
that are near unto this Great Salvation. 1. Is thy estimation of the Great
Salvation increased, be what it was in the morning when thou came hi^her; Is
thy estimation of the great Gospel Salvation a foot higher then it was in the
morning, I say unto thee, thou are not far from the Great Salvation* Come away.
2. Is thy desire after the Great Salvation increased be what it was in the
morning; Has thou stronger desires after the Great Salvation, then before thou
came hither, that is an evidence thou art not far from it. 3. Is thy thoughts
of thy necessity of the Great Salvation greater then they were: Thinks thou
that thou have more need of the Great Salvation then ever thou thought^st
before: And is thy opinion and thoughts of saving thy self, less then they
were before thou came hithe^? Art thou forced to cry out, none but Christ can
save me? I say thou art not far from the Great Salvation: Will thou come away.
O that ye would once seal this conclusion with much heart ^eswasion. I am
undone without Christ* I am undone without Christ, who is the Author of the
Great Salvation. Are there any of you that are sensible that ye are in the
fetters of sin, and in the bonds of iniquity? Are ye brought to the conviction
of this, that ye are yet in the gall of bitterness? I say, if thou be brought
to this length, to be sensible of thy bonds, and art crying out, O Redeemer,
hasten and come away; I say, If thou be sensible of thy bonds and imprisonment,
and crying out, O thou that was anointed from eternity, to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, O hasten
and come away and redeem me, even poor me, sinking, sinning, perishing, self
destroying me, thou art not far from the Great Salvation. 4. Art thou a person
who begins to weep because thou have been so long a stanger to Christ, and
the Great Salvation: Old men, that are here, how long have ye been strangers to
the Great Salvation, and to the Author of it? Now will ye shed one tear for
your estrangement, and cry out, Woe is me that Christ and I have been so long
asunder* I say, if thou have come that length, thou art not far from the Great
Salvation, Come away* O pity your selves, make have, make have, and come away.

But now in the third place, let me give you some evidence^ by which ye may
know more clearly, whither or no ye have embraced this Great Salvation, that ye
may know your selves, and that ye walk not down to your grave with a lie in
your right hand* The first evidence of a person that has embraced the Great
Salvation, is, that he will have a high esteem of the Savior and Author of the
Great Salvation: Have thou ^^ matchless esteem of matchless Christ the
Savior of the world, that is a speaking evidence unto thee, thou art a
partaker of the Great Salvation: Art thou come this length that thou cries
out, none but Christ, non but Christ: It is a speaking evidence, that thou art
come to be a partaker of the Great Salvation, when thou can cry out that word,
Ex^d. 15. 2. The Lord is my strength and my song, ^he alone is become my
salvation: if Christ has become thy Salvation, then it is like he has become
thy Song. I would ask this at you, Were ye ever brought this length, that ye
durst no^ adventure to praise Christ your alone, but was forced to call in all
the creatures, and say, O magnify the Lord with me? O that is an evidence that
ye have embraced his Salvation.

Secondly, These who have embraced the Great Salvation, will study to maintain
and keep their grips of it: they will study to hold, fast so precious a Jewel;
this is pressed, Gal. 5. ver. 1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free; yea they will study to walk suitably to this noble mercy, at
least, they will strive and endeavor to do it, as is also pressed, in that same
verse. I say, if thou have been made a partaker of the Gospel of Salvation,
thou will strive to keep thy self from the power of these things that once
triumphed over thee.

Thirdly, A person that is a partaker of the Great Salvation, will have a high
esteem of this mercy and Salvation; so Paul, when he speaks of it here, he
cannot but put some note of excellency to it, calling it the Great Salvation;
Therefore, I say, if thou have embraced the Great Salvation, thou will have so
high esteem of it, that not to be so subjected to it as thou should: or to be
in subjection to the power of thy lust in any measure, will be his burden and
affl^ction. The man will be sorry when he is brought forth from the house of
his bondage, unto the Red sea; he will be sorry, that when he should have songs
of triumph over his idols put in his mouth, that they should sing songs of
triumph over him.

Fourthly, A person that has embraced the Great Salvation, he will be longing
sometimes for the day when this Salvation shall be complete, when he shall sing
that song with tha^ numerous multitude which cannot be numbered, Rev. 7 verse 9.
O what a day shall it be, when thou shall begin to sing that song: After this,
(says he) I beheld, and lo, a great multitude of all people which ^o man could
number, of all people, nations and languages stood before the throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, and they
cried; And how cried they? They cried with a loud voice: They would not mutter
the song, no^ sing silently, but cried with a loud voice: And what did they
cry? They cried with a loud voice, Salvation unto our God, who sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb. I would only ask at you that are partakers of the
Great Salvation, what songs shall be put into thy mouth, when the waters of
Jordan shall divide themselves, that the ransomed of the Lord must pass
through: when thou shall sing that song, Psalm 115. ver. 1. Not unto us, not unto
us, but unto thee belongs the glory of our salvation: O what a day shall that
be, when that excellent song shall be put in thy mouth; yea, what a day shall
it be, when thou shall the clothed with these excellent garments that are made
mention of Isa. 6. ver. 10. for he has clothed thee with the garments of
Salvation, and he has covered thee with the robe of righteousness: O what
robes are these? Did ye ever see such excellent robes at these must be? I
think we will misken our selves; O do ye not think we will misken our
selves, when we shall put on these excellent robes? Now therefore, is the
bargain closed: Or will ye go away before ye take this Great Salvation? Dare
ye go out at these doors, and neglect ^he Great Salvation? I would ask this at
you, Think ye it will not be most sad, that Christ should tell this in heaven
of you to night, I was preached to a pack of stones, that none of them would
love me: Will ye not be feared that this report shall be carried back to
heaven of you? For what report can Christ carry back but this? Now is the cord
of this Great Salvation let down unto you: Is there none of you that will take
a grip of it? O will ye flighter after it! Will ye make this a rejoicing day
in heaven, that is a fasting day unto you, and the way to make it so, is to
embrace the Great Salvation. Now what say ye to it old men, let me speak to
you, and ask your thoughts of the Great Salvation, gray hairs should be a
Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness, old men speak
your minds, that young men may not have your bad example; What say ye of this
Salvation? Is it not a most glorious Salvation, is it not a most excellent
Salvation that is in your offer; I entreat you speak your minds, tell Christ ye
are content to take the Great Salvation; otherwise, who ever he be that will
not partake of this Gospel Salvation; I in the Name and Authority of Christ our
Master, denounce eternal and irrevockable war against him; put on your
harness, ye shall not boast when you put it off again, the wrath and fury of
God shall come upon thee to the uttermost if ye embrace not this Great
Salvation. Other Wars are but for a time; the greatest Captains that ever the
earth did carry, are now laid down in the sides of the pit, and their swords
broken under their heads. Armies of ten hundredth thousand, a hundredth years
time have laid them all in their graves, and ended all their contests, but
there is no discharge of his war that shall be concluded betwixt Christ and
you, it shall become an eternal and most terrible War, which shall be but
beginning when time is ended: Now Peace or War, which of them will ye choice?
Dare ye send a charge to Christ, and say ye will defy him? I am afraid there
shall be two things that many of us shall report to day. First, I am afraid
there will be many that will give Pharaohs report to the offer of the Great
Salvation, and say, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? I tell you who he
is, He is glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing wonders; O embrace
him before he go hence, and give not Pharaohs report, lest ye be drowned in
the sea of His wrath, whence there shall be no recovery.

Secondly, I fear there will be many here to day, that will give Demas report
to this precious offer; I will go and for sake Christ; and ^mbrace this present
world: O bad exchange; ^ursed be he that shall make it, will ye be of Demas
humor; I fear there has been many of that humor of a long time; but I entreat
you once be wise before you die. I confess that proverb, old fools, are twice
fools: I think old men that will not embrace the Great Salvation, I think ye
are triple fools; What wait ye for, is there any thing can afford you any
satisfaction but this Great Salvation. Now are ye convinced old men, that
Christ is waiting for your answer; I entreat you before ye go hen^e, speak your
minds, what ye think of the Great Salvation; ^s it not a lovely Salvation, Is
it not lovely ^ow? What say ye to it; I am to go away, and the offer is to be
taken up at this time, and it is hard to say, if ever ye shall have an offer
again. I would only say this to you, and be sure of it, though I should never
be ^ partaker of this Great Salvation, yet I shall be a witness against you
that are not partakers of it: I tell and declare unto yon, shall be a witness
against you if ye embrace not the Great Salvation. Now, old ^en are ye
persuaded to embrace it? Let ^e ob^est you by the beauty of Christ, come and
partake of the Great Salvation, ye that ^^e traveling upon the borders of
erernity. ^ow, if ye will give no more, give this, will ye go home and think
upon it. I shall not be uncharitable, nor enter to judge your thoughts; I fear
there shall be many declared and found guilty among us, that we have declared
unto heaven we will not embrace the Great Salvation, but have trod the blood
of the Son of God under foot. Now I entreat you, every one of you, ask at your
selves if ye be the persons that will presume in your hearts to do so. Now I
shall leave it with you, let it not be a witness against you. I shall leave
it with this: O come away, Old men, Young men, Old women and Maids, come and
embrace this precious Gospel Salvation. Ye may say, Ye bid us come: but we
cannot come. I desite no more of you^ but to come with this: Lord, I am content
to come, but I cannot come. Come once to that: for if once ye be content to
receive it, it will not be long before ye be able to receive it. Now shall
Christ depart, and will none of you say, yet are content to take him? Will ye
charge your own Consciences with this: Am I content to take Christ and the
Great Salvation? O blessed, blessed, blessed be^ He that is the Author of this Great
Salvation and bles^ be he that gets any of the ends of the cord of the Great
Salvation, that we sink not under the wrath and fury of the Lord Come and
embrace this Great Salvation: and again I say, come and embrace it; for what
can ye have if ye want it? and what can y^^ want if ye have it? I shall say
no more but close with that word, Isa. 62. verse. 21 Behold, the Lord has
proclaimed to the end of the world, to those that are far off; What has he
proclaimed? Say ye to the daughter of Sion, behold thy Salvation comes,
behold it comes. I say to you that are the ends of the world, Salvation is
brought near unto you: Stout hearted and far from righteousness, the Great
Salvation is brought near unto you, and will you send it away? O consider what
ye are doing: And to him that can persuade you to embrace the Great Salvation,
we desire to give praise.

A SERMON Concerning DEATH.
Psalm. 89. 48. What man (is he that) lives and shall not see death, etc.
IT is very hard to determine, where all that are here shall be within thirty
years: for even ere that time come, many (if not all) of us who are here ^all
have taken up our eternal lodging. and whether we shall take it up in the
eternity of joy, or the eternity of pain, is also hard to determine: only this
one thing I am sure of, that all of us shall shortly he gone; And ere long the
shadows of death shall be sitting upon our eye lids, and our eye strings shall
begin to break, Therefore I would the more seriously inquire at you; what would
ye think if death were approaching this night unto you? Think ye that Jesus
Christ is gone up to prepare a place for you? even for you? Surely I think we
are all near to eternity; and there are some hearing me to day, whom I defy
the whole world to assure, that ever they shall hear another Sermon* Therefore,
I entreat* you all to hear this preaching, as if it were the last preaching
that ever ye should hear; and O that we^ could speak it as if were the last
Sermon that ever we would preach unto you. Believe me, death is another thing
then we take it to b^t: Oh what will many of us do in the day of our
visitation: when desolation shall come from a far; where will we flee for rest,
and where will we leave our glory? Old rich men where will ye flee when death
assaults you? Old poor men, where will ye flee when death assaults you? Old
women, where will ye flee when death assaults you? Young women, where will ye
flee when death assaults you? It was an ancient observation of David, Psalm. 39.
5. that God had made his daye^ as an hand breadth; which either may relate to
the four fold estate of man, viz* hi^ infancy, his childhood, his manhood,
and his old age: O it may relate to the fourfold time of his life, viz. his
morning, his forenoon, his afternoon, and his evening, yet all our lifetime is
but a day. And O think ye not that our day is near unto a close?

Now before that I begin to speak any thing from the words; I shall speak a few
things to these two questions; which I conceive, may not altogether be
unprofitable.

Quest. 1. Whether is it lawful for any to desire to die and to return unto
their long and endless home? whether it be lawful for one to cry out, O time,
time, flee away (and all my shadows let them be gone) that so long eternity may
come?

Answ. I say, it is lawful in some cases for one to desire to die: for it was
Paul's desire, Philip. 1. 23. I am in a strait betwixt two* having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ which is far better. And 2 Cor. 5. 2. We groa^
^arnestly, desiring to be clothed with our house which is from heaven. I long
greatly till the twentieth one year of my age come, when my minority shall be
overpast, that I may be entered heir to that matchless inheritance. But to
clear in what cases it is lawful to desire to die.

1. I say, it is lawful to desire to die, when it flows from a desire of
uninterupted fellowship and communion with Christ, and conjunction with him:
this is clear, 2 Cor. 5, 6. Knowing that while we are present in the body, we
are absent from the Lord. Therefore verse. 8. We are willing rather to be absent
from the body, and to be present with the Lord. Also it is clear, Philip. 1.
23. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far bettter. It was his great end to have neat and unmixed
communion with Christ. What aileth you Paul (might one have said) may ye not be
content to stay a while here? Nay, says Paul, I desire to be gone, and to be
with Christ; Wast thou never with him here Paul? (...) have been with him,
says he, but what is all my being with him here, in comparison of my being
with him above? While I am present in the body, I am but absent from the Lord.
Therefore I will never be at rest (says he) get what I will, until I get
Christ* until I get these naked and immediate imbracements of that noble Plant
of renow^ the flour of the stalk of Iesse, who is the light of the higher
house, the eternal admiration of Angels?

II. It is lawful to desire to die when it flows from the excellencies of
heaven, and from a desire to partake of these excellen^ things that are there,
this is clear, 2 Cor. 5. 4* We groan being burdened, or as the word is We
groan, as they who are pressed under a heavy burden, that we may be clothed
upon, etc* What aileth you to groan so Paul? O says he, I groan that mortality
may be swallowe^ up of life.

III. It is lawful to desire to die, when it flows from a desire to be freed
from the body of death: and from these ^entations that assault us; and from
these oppressions whereunto we are subject by it. Doubtless, Paul desired to
die on this account, when he cried out* Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He longs greatly for the
day, Wherein he should be made white like the wings of a dove, covered with
silver, whose feathers are of yellow gold. O says Paul, I am as one impatient
till I be above, where I shall be clothed with these excellent and cleanly
robes, The righteousness of Christ. Oh, says Paul, I think every day as a
year, till I be possessed of that Kingdom where Satan cannot tempt, and the
creature cannot yield, and where I shall be free from all my sears of sinning.
Now in all these respects, who would not desire to die? But to guard all these,
I would give you these four Cautions.

1. Caution. Your desires to die should not be peremptory, but ye should
desire to die with submission to the will of God, so that although he would
fill up fifteen years more to your life, ye should be content to live it out.

2. Caution. When your desires are hasty, and off hand, suspect them; for some
when they mere with an outward cross (without all deliberation) will cry our,
O to be gone, O that I were dead. But your desires to die, should be
deliberate, but not hasty, or rash.

3. Caution. It is not lawful to desire to die, because of personal affliction.
Many, when they meet with bitter afflictions, will cry out, O to be gone: They
long for death, even upon that account, such were Jobs desires, Job 20. 21, 22.
and chap. 6. ver. 7. 8. O that I might have my request, even that it would
please God to destroy me, etc. This desire was very unlawful.

4. Caution. It is not lawful to desire to die, when thy predominant idol is
taken away from thee; yet such was Ionahs desire, chap. 4. 23. Jonah thought
his credit and reputation (which was his idol) was gone, and could never be
regained: therefore he wished to die. But I would say this to you, that some
will have ten desires for death, when they have not one desire for heaven. And
what moves Christians to be so desirous to die? It is not so much because of
their hope, as because of their anxiety; it is not so much because of their
confidence, as because of their impatience. But I say unto you, when your
desires of death are not accompanied with desires of heaven, suspect them. 2. I
would say this, that there are some who will have ten desires for death* when
they will not have one for the death of the body of death; But it were good for
thee (who are such) to be desiring the death of the body of death, then should
thou be in a more suitable ^rame to desire to die.

3. Some will have hearty desires to die, and ye^ when death comes, they will
be as unwilling to die as any. It has been observed, that some who have much
desired to die, when death came, have cried out, O spare a little that I may
recover strength, etc. 4. There is a great difference between a desire to die,
and death it self. It is an easy thing to desire to die, but it is a very
great business to meet with death, and to look it in the face, when it comes.
We think death (ere it come near to us) to be but childrens play, but when we
meet with it, it makes us change our thoughts. For it is a great business to
die.

Quest. 2. Is it lawful for a Christian to desire to live, when he is summoned
to die?

Answ. In some cases it is lawful for a Christian to desire to live, even when
he is summoned to die; which is clear from the practice of David, Psalm. 39. 13.
where he prays, That the Lord would spare him a little. It is also clear from
the practice of good Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 3. when he was commanded to set his
house in order, for he should die, and not live, he cries forth, Remember now,
O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: and
have done, that which is good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore; Or as the
word in the Original, he wept with great weeping: But to guard this, take these
two Cautions.

Caution 1. Thy desires to live (when thou are summoned to die) should not be
peremptory, but with submission to the will of God, that if it be his pleasure
to remove thee presently out of time, thou should be content to die.

Caution 2. Thy desires to live should have gracious principles, and also a
very gracious end, as is most clear from David, Psalm. 39. 13. where he says,
O spare a little that I may recover my strength, before I go from hence and be
no more: his desire to live was th^^ he might have more victory over his
Idols, as if he had said, my desire to live is, that I may have strength to
wrestle with, and overcome my Idols: and without all controversy, Hezekiahs
desire was a most precious and well grounded desire: However, I would say this
unto thee, that thou should examine thy desires to live, as much (if not
more) as thy desires to die: for we are ready to shun death if we could, but
he is that universal King, unto whom all of us must be subject ere long.

Now in the words which are read unto you, there are these six things which may
be clearly observed from them.

I. First, That it is a most clear and infallible truth, ^at all persons shall
once see death: as is (...) in these words, Who is he that lives an shall not
see death. II. Secon^^^, That this truth (that we shall once see death) is not
much believed or thought upon by many, therefore it is that the Psalmist
doubleth the Assertion. Who is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall
he deliver his soul (that is his life) from the hand (that is) from the power
of the grave. III. Thirdly, That sometimes a Christian may win to the solid
Faith of this truth, that once he must die, this the Psalmist wan unto, as it
is also clear in that word (who) Who is he that lives and shall not see death?
IV* Fourthly, That the certainty of this, that once we shall die should be
still kept in our mind, therefore that note of attention Selah, is put to
it; as if he had said, take heed that there is none living that shall no^ die*
V. Fifthly, That howbeit some persons put the evil day far away, as if they
were not to see death, yet is the day coming when they shall see death, and
death shall take them by the hand. VI. Sixthly, We shall take notice of this
from the context, that the Christian who is much in minding the brevity of his
life, will believe the certainty of his death, the Psalmist was speaking of the
shortness of his life in the preceding verse, and in this verse, he speaks
of the certainty of death*
Now as for the first of these things observed, viz. That it is certain and
most sure that we must all once die; I hope there are none of you here who will
deny it; although I confess few of you believes it, yet said the woman of
Tek^ah, 2 Samuel 14. We must all die and be like water spilt upon the ground that
cannot be gathered up again, etc. God does not accept the person of any, and
Job 30. 32. I know thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for
all living. And it is very clear, Eccles. 8. 8. There is no man that has power
over the spirit to retain the Spirit, neither has he any power in the day of
death, and there is no discharge in that War; neither shall wickedness deliver
those that are given to it: It is also clear, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto
all men once to die. So it is most clear that we must die. I remember of one
Philip King of Macedonia, who had one substitute for this very end, to cry at
his Chamber door every morning, Memento mori, Memento mori, Memento mori,
Remember thou art to die, and it is reported to have been the practice of the
Nobles of Greece, and in the day wherein their Emperor was Crowned, that they
presented a Marblestone unto him, and he was inquired after what fashion he
would have his Tomb stone made: which practices speak forth this unto us, that
although these were most destitute of light of the Scriptures, yet were very
mindful of death. Believe me, death may surprise us before we be aware, for it
is most certain that we must die, but there is nothing more uncertain then the
way how, and the time when we shall die.

Death will surprise some, as it did Abel, in the open field, Genesis 4. 8, Death
will surprise some, as it did Eglon in his parlour, Judge. 3. 21. And death will
surprise some, as it did Saul and Jonathan in the flight, 1 Samuel 31.

Now in speaking to this point, I shall first speak a little to these
advantages which attend those that live within continual sight of death.
Secondly, I shall give you some Considerations to press you to prepare for
death. Thirdly, I shall give you some Directions to help you to prepare for
Death: And then we shall proceed unto the second point of doctrine which we
observed from the Text, and shall speak a few things from it unto you, and so
come unto a close for this time.

First then, we conceive there are these seven advantages which attend those
who live within the continual ^ight of this truth, that they must die.

I. First, The Faith of approaching death will make a soul exceeding diligent
in duty: this was our blessed Lords divinity, Ioh. 9. 4. I must work the work
of him that sent me, while it is day: The night comes, when no man can work;
That is, death is approaching, therefore I must work. It is clear also, 2 Pet.
1. 12. compared with verse. 14. In the 12. verse. Peter is exceeding diligenc^ in
his duty, and the ground of his diligence is in the 14. verse. Knowing that
shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, etc. Yea, it is even the Epicures
argument, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die; and should not the
Christian much more cry out, Let me watch and pray, for to morrow I may die? I
say, if the Epicures did make use of this notion, to make them vigorous in the
pursuit of their pleasures: O how much more should a Christian improve i^, for
making him vigorous in the pursuit of his duty? Therefore I say unto you all, O
be diligent, for your night is drawing near. O Christians, and expectants of
heaven, are ye not afraid lest ye be nighted before ye have walked the half of
your journey? For if ye be nighted on your journey to heaven, before ye come
to the end of your race, there is no retiring place whereunto ye may turn
aside to lodge: therefore, O work, work, work, while it is day; for behold
death is approaching, and then shall we all be called to an account.

II. The Faith of approaching death, will make a Christian exceeding active in
duty: he will not only be diligent, but also exceeding serious and zealous in
the exercise of his duty: This is clear from that notable exhortation, Eccles.
9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: and the reason
is, For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whether thou go. Wherefore O be active while ye are alive, for ye shall
never work any more after ye are dead; and if ye leave but one work undone,
there is no doing of it after death. There is no work (says Solomon) in the
grave; therefore, O be active.

III. The faith of this Truth, that we must all die, will help a Christian to
be exceeding mortified to the things of a present world. Oh, covetous men and
women, would ye shake hands with cold death but once every morning, I should
defy you to pursue the world so much as ye do. Paul was much in the meditation
of his change, which made him, 2 Cor. 4. 18. to overlook these things that are
temporary, while we look not (says he) to the things that are seen, which are
temporal, but to the things which are not seen, which are eternal, therefore,
chap. 5. 1. Knowing that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens, Therefore in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven. What aileth you Paul (might one have said)
may ye not take a look of the world (no says he) For I know that if this
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, I have a house with God, not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: That is, I know that ere long, the
pins of my tabernacle will be loosed, and it will fall down about my ears,
therefore I must look for another dwelling house: And, 1 Cor. 7. 24. The
fashions of this world pass away, Therefore, ^aith he, verse. 32. I would have
you without carfulness, caring how to please the Lord. And Phil. 4. 5. Let
your moderation be known to all men, The Lord is at hand. As if he had said,
Death is approaching and at hand, therefore I entreat you be sober: But I think
many of us will be found like Saul hid among the stuff, that is, we will be
lying amongst the midst of the pleasures of this passing world: But I say
unto thee who are such an one, that death will break the strings of thy harp,
and thy music will quickly cease. O but death will make thee have a low esteem
of the world. O blessed is the person who has these thoughts of the world all
along his way, which he shall have of it at death? Have not the most cursed
wretches been forced to cry forth, Oh, I would give ten thousand worlds for
Christ? Have not some persons (who have had the Moon upon their head, and that
have made their belly their god) being forced to cry forth at death; O cursed
person that I am that ever made the world my god? Alas that I contented my self
with the world. Therefore I say unto thee who art such an one, O stay thy
pursuit after the world, for death is approaching that will cause all thy
worldly comforts evanish.

IV. When a Christian believes this Truth, that he must die, it will be an
exceeding great ^estraint to keep him from sinning, as is clear, Job 31. 13.
compared with verse. 14. where Job reckoning over many good deeds done by
himself, says, What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits,
what shall I answer him? As if he had said, Sirs mistake me not, I am not
boasting much of my self, for I could not have done otherwise, else what should
I do when God rises up? How could I answer to God if I had done otherwise? I
think it were a notable practice for each of you, when temptations begin to
assault you, to say, O temptation, what will I answer to God, when he rises up
to reprove me, if I should yield unto thee? Likewise, Eccles 11. 9. Where
Solomon, dissuading young men to pursue after vanity, brings this as a
reason. Know thou, that for all, these things, God will bring thee to
judgment; Therefore I say unto thee, who art often tempted to sin. let (...)
and reckoning with God be still in thy sight, and I defy thee then to embrace
half so many temptations as now thou do. I entreat you to answer all your
temptations with that word, What shall I do when he rises up? And what shall I
answer when he visits me?

V. When a Christian lives within the sight of this Truth, that he shall once
see death, it shall make him exceeding patient under every cross wherewith he
meets; Such a Christian will hardly meet with a cross, but he will quiet
himself with this, Death will put me beyond this cross: this is but a cloud
that will quickly pass away. And for this cause did Divid so composedly put up
that desire, Psalm. 39 4. Lord make me to know my end, and the measure of my
days: He was sure that the knowledge of his end would put him in a sober and
patient frame.

VI. The sixth advantage is this, The faith of approaching death, will teach
the the person that has it, to study saving wisdom, This is clear, Psalm. 90.
12. Where David puts up this request, So teach us to number our days, that
we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. As if he had said, I will never think my
self wise, till I know that blessed piece of Arithmetic, How to number my
days. I would desire every one of you all to think with your self every
morning when ye arise, now I am a day nearer unto eternity then I was before:
and at the end of every hour, now I am an hour nearer unto eternity then I was
before. I say, think often, yea always thus, I was never so near my death as I
am now; For, oh! are we not all nearer to eternity to day, then we were
yesterday?

VII. The seventh advantage, attending the faith of approaching Death, is this,
That it will make a Christian very careful in preparing for Death. It is
impossible for one to believe really that Death is approaching, and not to
prepare for it. Say what ye will, if ye be not careful in preparing for death,
ye have not the solid faith of this truth, that ye shall die. Believe me, it
is not every one that thinks he believes this truth, that believes it
indeed. And O how dreadful is it for an unprepared man to meet with death? He
desires not to die, yea he would give a world for his life. but die must he
whether he will or not: for death will not be requested to spare a little when
he comes; And therefore I say unto you all, Set your house in order, for ye
shall surely die; Old men and women, set your house in order, for surely ye
must die; Young men and women, set your house in order, for to morrow. ye may
die, and be cut off in the flower of your age, Think not that there are any who
can sell time: for I say, ye shall never get time sold unto you. Alas, I fear
the most part of persons that dies now, death finds them at unawars; for
indeed the persons that die among us, when we come to visit them, we may give
you a sad account of them, for we think they are comprehended under these four
sorts.

1. First, When we go to visit some persons on their death bed, they are like
unto Nabal, their heart is dying and sinking (like unto a stone) within them;
they are no more affected with death, then if it were a fancy; (alas for the
great stupidity that has overtaken many) therefore I entreat you delay not
your repentance till death, left the Lord take away your wit, so that ye cannot
then repent for your senslesnesse and stupid frame of spirit.

2. A second sort we find in a presumptuous frame, saying they have had a good
hope all their days, and they will not quite it now; they will go down to the
grave with their hope in their right hand: or rather they will go down to the
grave with a lie in their right hand; they live in a presumptuous frame, and
they die in the same delusion. For when we tell them that by all probability
they are going down to hell, they answer, God forbid, I was all my time a very
honest man, or woman. But I love not that confession, for there are many such
honest men and women in hell this day.

3. The third sort we find, having some convictions that they have been playing
the fool all their days; but we can get them no further: I shall only say to
such, to go down to the gr^ve with convictions in their breast, not making use
of Christ, is to go down to hell (...) a ca^^^e in their hand to let them see
the way: and truly the greater part that die, die in this manner.

4. Fourthly, There are some whom we find in a self righteous frame, trusting
upon the Covenant of Works, and their own merits, and trusting by these to go
to heaven: yet neglecting the offer of Christ's righteousness. But, alas, we
find not one of a thousand in this frame, I desire to be dissolved, and be with
Christ, that is best of all: And scarce do we find any in such a frame, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Therefore I say unto you all who are here, O will ye mind death before it take
hold on you. Oh mind your work now; for ye will find that death shall be work
enough for it self, though ye leave no work till then.

VIII. The eight advantage that attends the Christian believing this truth,
that once he must die, is this, death will not be so terrible to him as it is
unto many when it comes. What (think ye) makes death a king of terrors? What
makes many to shake like the leaf of a tree, when they are summoned to appear
before Gods Tribunal? It is even because of this, they have not been thinking
on death before it came, so as to prepare for it, and I fear many in this place
may be feared for death, and that when it comes to them; they will say unto
death, at Ahab said to Elijah Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Surely, ^^ath
will take you and bring you to the judgment seat of Christ; Therefore study by
all means to think often upon it; and make ready for it: For (believe me) death
is a very big word, for it will once make you stand with horror in your souls,
if your peace be not made up with God: I know not a more dreadful dispensation
then death and a guilty conscience meeting together.

The second thing that I shall speak unto from this first observation (viz.
That it is a most certain and infallible truth, and all persons shall once see
death) shall be to give you some considerations for pressing you to prepare for
death.

I. The first consideration is this, That to die well, and in the Lord, is a
most difficult work; therefore I entreat you prepare for death. It is a
difficult work to communicate aright, it is a difficult work to pray aright,
and it is a difficult work to con^er aright: But I must tell you, it is a more
difficult work to die aright, then any of these. It is true, it is more
difficult to communicate aright, then to pray aright, yet it is much more
difficult to die aright, then to communicate aright: For it is a most difficult
work to die in the Lord. Death will put the most accurate Christian that is
here, to a wonderful search: and therefore I will tell you nine things that
death will try in thee. 1. Death will try both the reality and strength of thy
Faith. It may be easy for thee to keep up Faith under many difficulties, but
death shall put thy Faith to the greatest stresse that ever it did meet with.
Yea, know this that the Faith of the strongest Believer may get (and ordinarily
does get) a set at death, the like whereof it never got before: therefore
prepare for death. 2. Death will try thy love to God, some persons pretend much
love to him: but death will propose this question to such a person, Love thou
him more then these? Love thou him more then thy wife? More then thy house?
More then thy friends? But your unwillingnesse to die, gives us much ground to
fear that many have little love to Christ, but much to the world, and so dare
not answer the question, Lord thou know I love thee. 3. Death will try thine
enjoyments, some of you may be ready to think that ye met with many enjoyments,
so that ye might reckon (as you think) to forty enjoyments and sweet out
lettings: but beware that death bring them not down to twenty. I have known
some, who thought they had met forty times with God; but when death came, it
made them take down the count to the half, therefore seeing death will try the
reality of thine enjoyments, O prepare for it. 4. Death will try thy patience.
Thou may seem to have much patience now, but when death comes (and thou art
put to die) it will put thy patience to a great trial, therefore prepare fore
it. 5. Death will try the reality of thy duties, yea even these duties wherein
thou had most satisfaction, as thy communicating aright in such a place, thou
hopest that is sure: thy reading the Scripture at such a time aright, thou
hopest that is sure: thou prayed at such a time aright, and hopest that is
sure: thou meditated in such a place aright, and hopest that is sure. But
(believe me) death may make thee change thy thoughts: for there are some
persons who have communicated and prayed, etc. as right as any in this
generation, who (for all that) will not find six duties wherein they can find
satisfaction at death: Therefore our need is great to prepare for it. 6. Death
will exceedingly try thy sincerity when it comes: An hypocrite may go all
alongs his whole way undiscovered, yet death may bring him to light, and make
it appear what man he it. 7. Death will discover unto thee many hid and secret
sins, of which thou never had a thought before, yea, albeit thou thought these
had been forgotten, death will let thee see them standing between thee and the
light of his countenance. 8. Death will accurately try thy Mortification: Some
think they have come a great length in Mortification; but (believe me) death
will try it and put it to the touchstone. 9. Death will try thy hope, whether
it be real or not. I shall only say this, that all the other graces must low
their sails to Faith, and so it is Faith must carry us through, being that last
triumphing grace* which must fit the field for us, when all the other graces
will faint and ly by. It is Faith that must enter us fairly within the borders
of eternity, It is Faith must gainstand all the temptations of death, yea, all
the other graces must (as it were) stand by, and see Faith strike the last
stroke in this war.

II. The second consideration to press you to mind death, is this, that ye
are to die but once. O labor to do that well, which ye are to do but once,
and the wrong doing of which can never be helped. If ye pray not aright, ye
may get that mended: if ye meditate not aright, ye may get that mended: and
if ye communicate not aright, ye may get that also mended: but alas, if ye die
not aright, there is no mending of that: Therefore, O prepare for death, that
ye may die well, seeing ye are to die but once.

III. The third consideration to press you to mind death, is this, That they
are pronounced blessed who die in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, O let that provoke you to prepare for death, that so you
may die in the Lord, that is the only way to make you eternally happy. I
confess it is a question difficult to determine whether it be more difficult
to die well, or to live well; I shall not answer it, but rather desire you to
study both.

IV. The fourth consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this, viz.
That though thou put all thy work by thy hand before death, yet shall thou
find that death shall have work enough for it self, yea, as much as thou shall
get done. It will then be much for thee to win to patience, it will be much for
thee to win to the sight of thy Justification: and it will then be much for
thee to win to assurance: O then is it not needful for thee, to put all thy
work by thy hand before thy latter end come? Wherefore I may say to you as
Moses said in his Song, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end. O that ye had this
piece of divine wisdom. I pray you consider that sad word, Lament. 1. 9. She
remembereth not her last end, And what of it? Therefore she came down
wonderfully: So will the down coming of many in this generation be wonderful,
who consider not their last end.

V. The fifth Consideration, for pressing you to prepare for death, is this,
viz. That their labor shall end, but their works shall not be forgotten, as is
clear from that forecited place, Revel. 14. 13. They rest from their labors,
and their works follow them: and is not that a glorious advantage?

VI. The sixth consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this, viz.
That death may come upon you ere ye be awar: ye know not but death may surprise
you this night, before you go home to your houses: and therefore let that
press you to study a constant preparation for death.

VII. The seventh Consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this,
viz. That as death leaves you, so will judgment find you, If death shall
leave you strangers to Christ, ye shall appear before his judgment seat
strangers unto him: Therefore I entreat you all to prepare for it. I think that
noble practice of Paul exceeding worthy of imitation, 1 Cor. 15. 13. I die
daily, which (I think) does comprehend these three things. 1. That Paul had
death always in his sight. 2. It comprehends this, that he endeavored to
keep such a frame, as that every moment he should be ready to die, so that
whenever death should put the summonds in his hand, he should be content to
answer. 3. It comprehends this, that he labored to lay aside and remove all
things out of the way, that might detain him from laying down his tabernacle. O
says Paul, I labor so to clear my self of all hindrances, as that when ever
I shall be summoned to remove out of time, I may willingly lay down my life.
Thus Paul desired always to have his Latter Will clear; Therefore I would ask
you this question, viz. when did you make your last testament? I think it were
suitable for us to be renewing our latter will every day; for in so doing, Paul
made an excellent testament, the better of which, none that died since have
made, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith; These are very sweet articles, and then he adds,
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: And think ye not that very
sweet? And he would leave some thing unto you in Christ's Name, viz. And not for
me only, but for all them that wait for his appearance. Now I come to the third
thing proposed, viz. To give you some directions for helping you to prepare for
death.

Direct. 1. I entreat you, be much in preparation for death every day, for it
is even a preparation for heaven, to be taking a sight of your grave and latter
end every day.

Direct. 2. I entreat you, he much in these duties. First, In Self examination,
that your compts may be clear with God: for many a ragged count will we have,
when death and we shall meet. Secondly, Be much in the exercise of Repentance,
that so ye may have every fault of corruption in you mourned for, before death
and you meet. Thirdly, Be much in the exercise of Faith, making your calling
and election sure? Fourthly, Be much in the exercise of Mortification, and that
will help you to keep a loose grip, not only of the world, but also of your
other idols; And if ye be much in these, ye shall undoubtedly be prepared for
death.

Direct. 3. Be much in minding the excellent things of heaven. A Christian that
would be prepared for death, would have all his thoughts and conversation
there. I think, it would be an excellent help (in preparation for death) to
take a sight of the Crown every day.

Direct. 4. Labor always to keep a good conscience void of offense toward
God and men (...) I say, labor to keep thy conscience clear, and that shall be
a continual feast unto thee.

Direct. 5. Slight not thy known duty, do not crucify any conviction, neither
break any resolution: put these three together, and that will exceedingly help
you to prepare for death: I say, see that ye adventure not to slight any known
duty, see that ye adventure not to crucify any conviction, and see that ye
adventure not to break your resolutions

Now we come to the second thing which we observed from the words, viz. That
this truth, that we shall once see death, is not much believed by many of us.
And to make this appear, we shall only give some Evidences unto you, to prove
that we are not as yet prepared for death.

I. Evidence, Does not the unspeakable stupidity that have overtaken many, say,
that we are not a people prepared for death? Alas, many of us would find our
selves in a most stupid temper if we were presently to die; for many of us are
no more moved with the threatenings and terrouts of God, then if they did not
belong unto us; and this says we are not as yet prepared for death.

II. Evidence, That we are not prepared for death, is our pursuing so much
after the vain and passing delights of a present world. Many of us, Rise up
early, and go late to bed at night, and eats the bread of sorrow all the day,
and loading themselves with thick clay; And I am sure, that such a person,
(being night and day taken up with the world) is not prepared for death. I
remember a word recorded of such a wretched one, who was exceedingly rich; said
he, I would give so many thousands of money, if death would give me but one
day: yet he got it not. And O how suddenly will death surprise many of you as
it did him?

III. Evidence, which speaks forth our unpreparednesse for death, is our
impatience under every petty cross that we meet with, for the prepared
Christian will be patient under very sharp crosses.

IV. Evidence, That we are not prepared, is our not endeavoring to live within
sight of our interest in God* Oh if we were prepared for death, durst we live
in so much uncertainty of our interest in God, and of our assurance of heaven?

V. Evidence* Some of us can let our Idols ly in our breast six years without
repentance, and will never study to mortify them, nor to repent for them; and
surely such are not prepared for death.

Now I entreat you seriously to mind what has been said. And that ye may the
more seriously think upon it, I will tell you some material challenges that
your consciences at death will present unto you, therefore take heed, that ye
may know how ye will answer.

I. Challenge. Is the slighting of much precious Time, and sinning away the
precious offers of Grace. O what will ye answer to that Challenge, when Death
shall present it to you? Death will say (or rather thine own Conscience at
Death) what ailed thee to sin away so many hours, without either Praying,
Reading, or Meditating^? Now have ye any thing to answer when Death shall
present this Challenge to you? I entreat you premedita^e what ye will say: I
entreat you prevent death by presenting it first seriously to your selves.

II. Challenge, That Death will present unto you, will be, for the killing of
many precious Convictions which we have had. What will each of you answer at
death, when your conscience proposes this challenge to you? thou met with such
a challenge at such a time, and went home and crucified it, when at another
time thou met with another challenge, and went home and crucified it: These
challenges will be laid home to thy door, therefore think on them.

III. Challenge, Death will charge you for a formal hypocritical way of going
about duties: I say your Conscience will then tell you, that ye went to such a
Communion with a selfish end: and a^ another time ye prayed hyporritically and
formally: and what will ye have to answer when ye meet with these challenges? I
confess I know not what ye can answer to these; but I charge you, be thinking
what ye will answer, for it may be that these convictions shall ly on your
consciences, that even this day ye have heard two searching Sermons, and did
meet with some convictions; but made no good use of them; yea, and ^^ may be ye
did sleep all the time. O what will ye answer, when it will be said to you, ye
went to such a Sermon and sleeped all the time: and ye went to such a
Communion, but had no other end before your eyes but to be seen of men? I
entreat you consider presently what ye will answer to these.

IV. Challenge, Will be for your breaking of many precious resolutions. It will
be said to some of you, that at the Communion in this place, ye took on vows,
and did break them: I am sure ye cannot question the justice of this challenge:
therefore see what ye will answer?

V. Challenge, Ye slighted many precious offers of the Gospel; O men and women
in this city, what will ye answer to this? I was often exhorted to take Christ,
and yet would never take him; What will Conscience say to that, when death
shall table it before you? I tell you what ye must then answer, O cursed I,
that ever refused Christ in the Gospel, and ye shall then be confounded because
this is your sin. (Believe me) there was never an offer of this everlasting
Gospel, and of Christ in it made unto you, that shall not at death (before or
after) be brought to your remembrance; and O how sad and doleful will it be to
you, when Christ shall open the book where your sins are written, and begin
with the sin of slighting the Great Salvation? thus I invited you when you were
twelve years old, and ye would not come, I invited you when ye were thirty
years old, and ye would not come, I invited you when sixty years old, and ye
would not come: What will ye answer to this? Have ye any thing to say? Or must
ye not stand speechless before your Judge, when he shall put home this
challenge unto you, therefore think seriously upon it, how ye will answer to it.

VI. Challenge, will be for your sinning oftentimes against Light, and O how
sad and painful a challenge will that be at the day of Death! when it will be
said, thou sinned with a witness in thy bosom that thou wast doing wrong: thy
Conscience will say, oftentimes did I tell thee this is sinful, yet would
thou not abstain from it: And what will ye answer from this?

VII. Challenge, Oftentimes ye sinned upon every small temptations, and what
will ye answer to that? Must ye not then confess it, and say, O how often have
I deserted Christ and embraced my idols upon a small temdtation? Now I entreat
you be thinking what ye will answer to these seven most material Challenges
which certainly shall be presented to you at death. I assure you, ye must
either answer all your challenges in Christ, else ye will not get them well
answered. Therefore I would exhort you to embrace the Gospel and Christ in it:
that so let death propose never so many challenges unto you* ye may answer them
all as David did, viz. God has made with me an everlasting Covenant, (and that
will answer all your challenges) though my house be not so with God, yet I have
the everlasting Covenant to build my salvation upon.

Now to press you to make use of Christ, I shall give you these four
Considerations.

Consideration 1. If ye embrace not Christ now, Death will be very unpleasant
to you. O what else can comfort thee, when going through the region of the
shadow of Death, but this, I am Christ's, I am Christ's? is there any other thing
can comfort thee in that day, but only this, I am Christ's, and He is mine?

Consideration 2. If ye embrace not Christ and the Great Salvation now, It will
be an hundred to one, if ever ye get time or liberty to do it, when ye are
going to die. For although many delay their closing with Christ till death, yet
scarcely one of a hundred gets favor to grip Christ at death: therefore
think on it, for ye will not get your mind so composed at death as ye imagine,
nor all things done as ye suppose: therefore now embrace the Great Salvation.

Consideration 3. If ye delay your closing with Christ, till death seize upon
you, ye shall never be able to make up that loss, For will the dead rise and
praise God? Or shall any come from the land of forgetfulness, to take hold
upon a crucified Savior? Therefore, O will ye take him for your Salvation.

Consideration 4. If ye will take Christ now, he shall be your guide, When ye
are going through the valley and shadow of death. And O how blessed is the
person that can sing that word, Psalm. 48. 14. This is my God, he will be my
guide even unto death. If ye can sing that pleasant song, O how may ye be
comforted, when your eye strings shall begin to break? O how happy is he who
can say, Though I walk through the shadow of death, yet will I fear no ill*
(...) I know that the Lord is with me. Now this is the acceptable day, and the
year of salvation, therefore do not delay, but embrace Christ, lest death
surprise you ere ye be aware, and so the acceptable day be lost. But unto
these who think they may delay till death, I say, surely there are many damned
atheists in hell that (sometime) did think as ye think: I will make all wrongs
right when death and I shall meet: I hope that three days repentance will
satisfy for all my wrongs: for I am sure there are many in hell, who did never
get three days to think upon their former ways; Therefore, O come, come, and
embrace Christ presently: Now are ye all persuaded of this truth, that ye
shall once see death? Then study a tender walking; for (believe me) there are
many of us who shall go through death with many bruised bones, because of
untender walking before God. We know it is not the multitude of words can
persuade you to embrace Christ, for many of you never minded the thing: but
(believe me) death will p^each these things to you in a more terrible manner
then we can do at this time. Therefore I say ^o each of you, O prepare to meet
thy God; for, if death find you in an estranged estate from God, I defy the
Angels in Heaven to free you out of that estate. And the day is coming wherein
thou shall cry out, O slighter of the Great Salvation that I am, I would give
ten thousand worlds for one Sermon again that I once heard, wherein Christ was
freely offered to me, when thou shall be tormented without hope of remedy;
Therefore, While it is to day, harden not your hearts, for your late wishes
shall not be granted (when ye are gone) if ye make not haste. O therefore
Haste, haste in time, and come out from the land of your captivity, and from
the house of your bondage, and take Christ for your Redeemer, the guide of your
youth and old age. Now unto him, who can lead you through all these steps
betwixt you and heaven, be eternal praise.

Amen.
FINIS.

