Imprimatur,

GEO. STRADLING S. T. P. Rever. in Christo Pat. GILE. Episc. Land. a Sac.
domest.
Ex Aed. Sabaud. Sept. 15. 1662.
Virginia's Cure: OR An ADVISIVE NARRATIVE CONCERNING VIRGINIA. DISCOVERING The
true Ground of that CHURCHES Unhappiness, and the only true Remedy. As it was
presented to the Right Reverend Father in God GVILBERT Lord Bishop of LONDON,
September 2. 1661. Now published to further the Welfare of that and the like
PLANTATIONS: By R. G.

And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a
witness unto all Nations, and then shall the End come,

Mat. 24.14. Is it time for y^u O ye to dwell in your ceiled houses, and this
House lie waste? Now therefore thus, says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your
ways,

Hag 1.4, 5. London, Printed by W. Godbid for Henry Brom at the Sign of the
Gun in Ivy-lane. 1662.

A PREFACE.
THat the following Advisive Narrative was not at first intended for public
view, there needs no other argument then it self, the occasion and manner of
address to persuade belief.

The occasion of writing this. The present careful and ingenious Deputy
Governor of VIRGINIA, Col. Francis Morison sent Petitionary Letters with
Propositions for bettering the state of that Church, which fell to my lot to
present to the Right reverend Fathers in God the Lord Bishop of London, and the
then Lord Bishop of Worcester, understanding the Propositions, I made bold to
intimate, that those Propositions, though good, would only palliate, not cure
the miseries of that Church. Whereupon my Lord of London was pleased to enjoin
me to set down in writing some Propositions concerning it I gladly embraced the
injunction, and blessed God for the occasion.

But when I had stated and digested the Propositions, upon a reflex, they
seemed too Magisterial to present to such a r^verend Father of our Church,
without giving some account of the g^ounds and reasons enforcing their
Necessity.

In persuance whereof I thought fit to premise a brief and plain D^scription of
our Peopl^^ sc^tt^r^d manner of Planting VIRGINIA; which as to the in^abitants,
or those that have seen that Country, is I con^ess needless: But as to those
he^e, who can have no other Idea^s of it, than such as others Rela^^ons frame
in their Minds; as also to the Discov^rie of the Grounds of their present
unhappiness, and the asse^ting the kind and manner of their Remedy (which is
the argument of this Discourse) seemed to me no more then needful.

It is now published, through the hopes some have, it may further the Public
Good designed, which I pray God it may do; and possibly it may, by some or
other of these ways.

First, It may occasion some of greater Abilities to assert more copiously and
fully the Truth of that Proposition I have bri^fly proved, viz. That it is the
Duty of Christians ^especially of such Christians as ^eat Plantations among the
Heathen^ so to unite their Habitations in Societies in Towns and Villages, as
may ^est convenience them constant^y to attend upon the public Ministry of
Gods Word, Sacram^nts and wo^ship. A Duty of so cle^r consequence from Holy
Sc^i^ture, and so necessary to be put in practice, for (...) the w^ll being of
such Plantations (as I hope will app^^^ by the e^^uing Narrative and Dis^ourse
that ^f (...) to promote it, thr^ugh men's want of (...) gain their assent by
the ^vidence ^f (...) means alone, the number of the (...) if they assent they
will at least be (...) may not a little advantage the putting this Du^y into
P^ac^is^, especially in VIRGINIA (the most considerable Country under the
Heavens, which has so long been abused, and yet languisheth under the neglect
of it) which is the main End designed. Secondly, It may possibly help to
prevent the like Errors in Seating some new Plantations, which were committed,
and are yet continued in Planting VIRGINIA. Thirdly, It may direct noble
Heroic Spirits (those liberal Souls that devise liberal things) to the most
moving objects of Christian Compassion and Charity, that I think the whole
Latitude of our most orthodox Protestant Church can present them. Particularly
it may direct their Charity to endow Fellowships in our Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford, which may bear the Name of VIR^INIA Fellowships, and may
be appropriated for supply of the Churches in VIRGINIA, upon the Conditions
specified in the fifth Proposition (page 10.) Nor need such Persons doubt to
obtain by the Parliament a Confirmation of the Penalty therein specified, in
case the Persons that shall be admitted to such Fellowships shall refuse to
perform the Conditions of their Admittance, at the time limited to transport
themselves to VIRGINIA, to Serve that Church in the Office of the Ministry. Nor
can such Ministers plead their poverty and disability to do it, because there
is sufficient Provision made to defray the Charges of their Transportation: of
which they are desired to take notice by the seventh Proposal (page 22.) Nor is
it the least considerable, that such Students knowing for the space of seven
years before hand the Work to which they are designed, will be careful to order
their Studies so, as may best fit them for it.
Other ways there are, by which the making this Public may be subservient to
the End designed, which I purposely omit.

However it succeed, it may be some Testimony to my Friends there, that I am
not altogether unmindful of procuring to my Power the welfare of that poor
scattered Church, which indeed I am not, not only upon the account of Duty,
paying some solemn vows made in a time of trouble and extremity of Danger^ but
even of Gratitude, for the kind reception I found among them for the space of
above Ten years, when I could no longer endure ^he late Tyrannical Usurpations
of my native Country.

Virginia's Cure OR, An Advisive NARRATIVE CONCERNING VIRGINIA.
TO show the unhappy State of the Church in Virginia, and the true Remedy of
it, I shall first give a brief Description of the Manner of our Peoples
scattered Habitations there; next show the s^d unhappy consequent^ of such
their scattered Living both in reference to themselves and the poor Heathen
that are about them, and by the way briefly set down the cause of scattering
their Habitations, then proceed to propound the Remedy, and means of procuring
it; next assert the Benefits of it in re^erence both to themselves, and the
Heathen; ^et down the cause why this Remedy has not been hitherto comp^ss'd^
and lastly, till it can be procured, give directio^^ for the present supply of
their Churches.

That part of Virginia which has at present craved your Lo^dships Assistance
to preserve the Christian Religion, and to promote the Building Gods Church
among them, by supplying them with sufficient Ministers of the Gospel, is
bounded on the North by the great River Patomek, on the South by the River
Chawan, including also the Land inhabited on the ^^st side of (...) B^y, called
Accomack, and contains above half as much L^n^ (...) Engl^nd; it is divided
into several Coun^ies, and those Counties contain in all about Fifty Parishes,
the Families whereof are dispersedly and scatteringly seated upon the sides of
Rivers; some of which running very far into the Country, bear the English
Plantations above a hundred Miles, and being very broad, cause the Inhabitants
of either side to be listed in several Parishes. Every such Parish is ex^ended
many Miles in length upon the Rivers side, and usu^lly not above a mile in
Breadth backward from the River, which is the common stated breadth of every
^lantation belonging to each particular Proprietor, of which Plantations, some
extend themselves h^lf a mile^ some a mil^, some two mile^, some thre^ miles,
and upwa^^ upon the si^es of those Rivers, many of them are pa^te^ from each
other by small Rivers and Creeks, which ^mall Rivers and Creeks are seated
after the manner of the great Rivers. The Families of such Parishes being
seated after this manner, at such dist^nces from each other, many of them are
ver^ remote from the House of God, though placed in the midst of them. Many
Parishes as yet want both Churches and Gleabes, and I think not above a fifth
part of them are supplied with Min^ste^s, where there are Ministers the People
meet together Weekly, but o^ce upon the Lords day, and sometim^s not at all,
being hin^^ed by Extremities of Wind and Weather: and diverse of the more remote
Families being discouraged, by the length or tediousness of the way, through
extremities of heat in Summer, frost and Snow in Winter, and tempestuous
weather in both, do very seldom repair thither.

By which brief Description of their manner of seating themselves in that
Wilderness, Your Lordship may easily apprehend that their very manner of
Planting themselves, has caused them hitherto to rob God in a great measure of
that public Worship and Service, which as a Homage due to his great name, he
requires to be constantly paid to him, at the times appointed for it, in the
public Congregations of his people in his House of Prayer.

-- Hinc illae Lachryma.
This Sacrilege I judge to be the prime Cause of their long languishing
improsperous condition, for it puts them under the Curse of God, according to
that of Malachy 3.9. Ye are cursed with a Curse, because ye have robbed me.
Which Curse we find executed upon the Jews, after such a manner, as any
observing Person that knows Virginia, need not doubt to conclude, that it h^th
been long executed upon her Planters in the sam^ kind and manner, as it is
expressed to have been upon the Jews, in Hag. 1.9. Ye looked for much, and lo^,
it came to little: and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it: Why, says
the Lord of Hosts? because of mine House that is wast, and ye run every man to
his own house. By which Scriptures (comparing their Sins of Sacrilege
together) it appears, that the Curse o^ God was executed upon the Jews, for the
same Sacrilege Virginia's Planters are guilty of, the same Sin of robbing ^od
of his public Worship and Service in his House of Prayer. For, was the Curse
of God upon the Jews for not building his House according to the Prophet
Haggai's Sentence? But why did God regard his House, but for the recieving the
due tribute of his public Honor, Worship, and Service in it? Or was his Curse
upon them for detaining his Tithes and Offe^ings? But why did Go^ regard these,
but for the maintenance and continuance of his public Worship, and Service in
his House? The Con^lusion therefore is, that their great Sin of Sacrilege, for
which the Curse of God was denounced and executed upon them, was, that they
robbed God of his public Worship and Service in his Hou^e at the times
appointed by God for it.

Which if Virginia's Planters do, it matters not whether they do it, by
neglecting to build Churches, Hou^es of God amongst them, (which in great part
they are guilty of;) or by with holding, or not assuring the maintenance of the
Ministry of Gods public Worship, Word, and Sacraments (which I cannot wholly
excuse them of) or by planting themselves after such a manner, as may disable
them to attend as constantly upon such Sacred public Ministrations in the
House of God, as the Equit^ of the Fourth Commandment, the positive
Evangelical Duties, to be performed in public Co^gregations, and the Law of
the Church does require (of which they are generally guilty) whet^er they rob
God any of these ways, the Sin has the same stamp of Sacrilege, and
therefore the same Curse attending it. But long experience has ascertained,
and the before described manner of their Planting makes it evident, that
whilst our Planters in Virginia continue as at this day, dispersedly and
^emotely planted from the House of God, they will continue to rob God in a very
great measure of his public Worship and Service in his Hou^e of Prayer. Which
is the same Sin the Jews were Cursed for, and must needs put them under the
same Curse of God.

But though this be the saddest Consequent of their dispersed manner of
Planting themselves (for what Misery can be greater than to live under the
Curse of God?) yet this has a very sad Train of Attendants which are likewise
consequents of their scattered Planting. For, hence is the great want of
Christian Neighborhood, of brotherly admonition, of holy Examples of religious
Persons, of the Comfort of theirs, and their Ministers Administrations ^n
Sickness, and Distresses, of the Benefit of Christian and Civil Conference and
Commerce.

And hence it is, that the ^ost faithful and vigilant Pastors, assisted by the
most careful Churchwardens, cannot possibly take notice of the Vices that
r^ign in their Families, of the spiritual defects in their Conversatio^^, or if
they have notice of them, and provide Spiritual Remedies in their public
Ministry, it is a hazard if they that are ^ost concerned in them be present at
the application of them: and if they should spend time in visiting their remote
and far distant habitations, they would have little or none left for their
necessary Studies, and to provide necessary spiritual food for the rest of
their Flocks. And hence it is that through the licentious lives of many of
them, the Christian Religion is like still t^ be dishonored, and the Name of
God to be blasphe^ed among the Heathen, who are near them, and often among them,
and consequently their Conversion hindered.

Lastly, their almost general want of Schools, for the education of their
Children, is another consequ^nt of their scattered planting, of most sad
consideration, most of all bewailed of Par^nts there, and therefore the
arguments drawn from thence, most likely to prevail with them cheerfully to
embrace the Remedy. This want of Schools, as it renders a very numerous
generation of Ch^istians Children born in Virginia (who naturally are of
beautiful and comely Persons, and generally of more ingen^ous Spirits then
these in England) unserviceable for any great Employments eith^r in Church or
State, so likewise it obstructs the hopefullest way they have, for the
Conve^^ion of the Heathen, which is, by winning the Heathen to bring in their
Children to be taught and instructed in ou^ Schools, together with the
Children of the Christians. For as it is the Be^uty and Glory of Christian
^races, shining in the lives of Christians, which must make the Heathen that
are men, in love with the Christian Religion; so it is that love, which can
only per^wade them to bring in their Children to be taught and ins^ructed in
it: But as it is unlikely that ^uch love should be wrought in them by the ^lo^y
of Chr^sti^n ^races, appearing in the Chri^tians lives; who (as now planted)
a^e for the most part destitute of the ordinary means of Grace: so granting
that this might be, yet it is very unlikely that any rational Heathen should
be persuaded to commit their Children to the teaching and education of such
Christians, whom they shall perceive to want Schools of learning (the means of
both) for their own.

It were easy to add to these a heap of evil consequents of their scattered
Planting, which hinder their Temporal, as well as Spi^ituall happiness. But I
forbear, it being a task unsuitable for my Profession, and for that I know the
Remedy to be the same for both, and the removing the one will be the removing
of the other.

Only for conclusion of this part, discovering Virginia's Disease and Misery,
Your Lordship may be pleased to represent to your thoughts the Evils of the
forementioned consequents of their scattered Planting in reference to the poor
Heathen; The effecting whose conversion, should be the great end desig^ed by
all, who would be subservient to the Providence of God, in Transporting our
Colonies thither.

The Heathen enter frequently into some of the remote dispersed habitations of
the Christians, the premises considered, what can they see which should make
them in love with their Religion? They see their Families disordered, their
^hildren untaught, the public Worship and Service of the great God they own,
neglected; neglected upon that very day, which they hear called the Lords Day,
and to be by the Christians peculiarly set a part for it; yea so far
neglected, that some of the Heathen have complained it was the worst of the
seven to them, because the servants of the Christians Plantations nearest to
them, being then left at liberty, often spend that day in visiting their Indian
Towns, to the disquiet of the Heathen, but certainly to the great Scandal of
the Christian Religion, and little hopes have the poor Heathen of redress,
whilst they see that Day so far neglected by the Christians, that in many
Parishes they see no public holy Assemblies of our people, no Ministers
provided for the holy Ministrations of such Assemblies, no Churches erected and
consecrated for such public Sacred Ministrations; or such in such de^olate
Places, and ^o remote from many of their habitations that an ingenuous
Christian would blush to tell a Heathen, that They are the houses of the
Christians great ^od, that made the Heaven and the ^arth of nothing, in which
he is honored, worshipped, prayed unto, and his heavenly will taught from his
holy Word: for if a sober di^creet Heathen (and there are many such) should
reply, Why has not every Parish one of them, and Ministers belonging to them?
why do not the Christians build their houses nearer them, that they may come
oftener to them? wh^ are they not better built? why will not all the Christians
of a Pari^h bestow as much cost in building the house of their great God, as
one particular ^hristian among them bestows upon his own house? what defense
could an ingenuous Christian make, which should not at once both shame himself
and the Christians he would defend?

If then Sacrilege were so goodly a thing in the Heathens account, as to make
them in love with the Christians and their Religion for it, they see the
^hristians robbing God in all the forementioned particulars, robbing him of
his Days, Churches, Ministers, public Worship and Service. But I can truly
affirm (by what I have learned among diverse Nations of those Heathen) that it
is a Sin, which those Heathen by the Light of Nature do most detest and
abhor, and the holy Scripture gives Testimon^ to it: Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob
his God? will a Heathen do it? Can they then ob^erve it in the Christians, and
not abhor and detest both them and their Religion for it? and in stea^ of
acknowled^ing them a seed which the Lord has blessed, think on the contrary
that both they and their offspring are a Gener^tion whom the Lord has cu^^ed.

No hop^s therefore of bringing the Hea^hen in love with the Christian
Religio^^ whil^st ^o many evil an^ scandalous conseque^ts at^^nd the
Christians sc^tter'd manne^ of planting in that w^lder esse. An their scattered
Planning being the cause of such consequents, the co^se^^ents will r^main, so
long as that continues, as at this day it does. I have ^atherto ^orborn to
mention the great danger that man^ of the Christians are in, of being destroyed
by the Heathen, as formerly hundreds of them have been, because this
consideration does so easily o^fer it self upon the forementioned description
of their ^cattered Seating: By which and the sad consequents of it, if your
Lordship shall please to contemplate the deplorable Estate and condition of the
poor Church in Virginia (which implores your aid) it will present to your
charitable heart such a moving object of your fatherly Care, Pity, and
Compassion, as will employ all your Interest in the Kings Grace and Favor, and
your utmost power and endeavors to procure the Remedy.

The cause of their dispersed Seating was at first a privilege indulged by the
royal Grant of having a right to 50 Acres of Land^ for every person they
should transport at their own charges: by which means some men transporting
many Servants thither, and others purchasing the Rights of those that did, took
possession of great tracts of Land at their pleasure, and by Degrees scattered
their Plantations through the Country after the manner before described,
although therefore from the premises, it is easy to conclude, that the only
way of remedy for Virginia's disease (without which all other help will only
palliate not cure) must be by procuring Towns to be built, and inhabited in
their ^everal Counties. Yet left any man be hereby injured in his just Right,
even this Remedy ought to be procured after ^uch a manner, as the present
manner of planting themselves, their poverty and mean condition will permit.
According to which, whether the building Towns in each Count^ of Virginia, will
be best pro^oted by reviving a ^ormer Act of that Country for Markets in Stated
places of each County, where whatsoever should be transported into that Colony
was only to be sold (which Act was perhaps over-hastily repealed the next
ensuing Assembly held March 27. 1656. for in my hearing, they who were the
chief Agents in repealing it, have more then once repented it) or whether they
may best be promoted by some other way (it being out of my Sphere) I dare not
presume to determine, Your Lordship will best inform your self in th^s by
Con^ulting with Virginia's presen ^onourable ^overnour Sir William B^rkly, or
their late Edward Diggs Esquire

What wa^ ^oeve they determine to be best, I shall humbly in obedience to your
Lords^ips command endeavor to contribut^ toward the com^assing this Remedy by
propounding, 1. That your Lordship would be pleased to ac^uaint the King with
the nece^sity of promoting the building Towns in each County of Virginia, upon
the consideration of the fore-mention^d sad Con^equent^ of their present manner
of living there. 2. That Your Lordship upon the foregoing consideration, be
plea^ed to move the pitiful, and charitable heart of His ^r^cious Majesty
(considering the Poverty and need^ of Virginia) for a Coll^ction to be made in
all the Churches of his three Kingdom^s (there being considerable numbers of
each Kingdom) for the promoting a work of so great Ch^rity to the Souls of
many thousands of his Loyal Subjects, their Children, and the Generations after
them, and of numberless poor Heathen; and that the Ministers of each
Congregation be enjoined with more then ordinary care, and pains to stir up
the people to a free and liberal Contribution toward it; or if this way be not
thought sufficient, that ^ome other way b^ taken to do it. 3. That the way of
dispencing such collections for sending Workmen over for the building Towns
and Schools, and the assistance the persons that shall inhabit them shall
contribute toward them may be determined here, by the advice of Virginia's
present or late Honorable Governors if in London; and whom they shall make
choice of for their assistants (who have formerly lived in Virginia;) and that
the King (if he shall approve what is so determined) may be humbly Petitioned
to authorize it by his special command, le^^ what is duly ordered here, be
perverted there. Fourthly, That those Planters who have such a considerable
number of Servants, as may be judged may enable them for it, if they not
willing (for I have heard some express their willingness, and some their
aver^nesse) may by His Majesty's Authority be enjoined, to contribute the
Assistance that shall be thought meet for them, to build themselves houses in
the Towns-nearest to them, and to inhabit them, for they having horses enough
in that ^ountry, may be convenienc'd, as their occasions require, to visit
their Plantations. And the Masters who shall inh^bit the Towns, having Families
of Servants upon remote Plantations, may be ordered to take care, that upon
Saturdays Afternoon (when by the Custom of Virginia, Servants are freed from
their ordinary labor) their Servants (except one or two, left by turns to
secure their Plantations) may repair to their Houses in the Towns, and there
remain with their Masters, until the public Worship and Service of the Lor^s
Day be ended. Fifthl^, That for a con^inual supply of able Minist^rs for their
Churches, after a ^et ter^ of years. Your Lordship would plea^e ^o en^evour the
procuring an Act of Parliament, whereby a c^^tain number of Fellowships, as
they happen to be next proportionably vacant in both the Universities, may bear
the name of Virginia Fellowships, so long as the Needs of that Church shall
require it; and none be admitted to them, but such a^ shall engage by promi^e
to hold them seven years and no longer; and at the expi^ation of those seven
years, t^an^^ort thems^lv^s to Virginia, and serve that Church in the Office of
the Ministry seven ye^rs more, (the Church the^e p^oviding for them) which
being expir^d, they shall be left to their own Liberty to return or not: and if
they p^r^^^m not the Condit^o^s of their Admittance, then to be incapable of
any Prefe^me^t.


These things being procur^d, I think V^rginia will be in the most probable way
(that her pre^ent condit^on (...) admit) of being cured of the formentioned
evils of her scattered Planting.

For hereby her Planters will be convenienced to give God the honor due unto
his Name, by attending constantly in full Congregations upon his public
Worship and Service, they will enjoy the benefits of Christian Offices, of
frequent civil commerce and Society, which begets mutual confidence, trust, and
friendship, the best groundwork for raising Companies of the best qualified,
and most able persons to combine in Designs, most advantageous to their own and
the public Weal; they will enjoy the benefits of virtuous Examples, of public
Catechizing and instructing their Children and Servants in the Principles and
Duties of the Christian Religion, according to the Constitutions of the Church
of England; whereby not only Children and Servants, but Parents and Masters who
are ignorant, may (without being ashamed) be enlightened with true saving
knowledge, and their Children in Schools of Learning, may grow up to be
serviceable both in Church and State. And by good Discipline and careful
tending, in well ordered Societies, under faithful Teachers and Magistrates,
both Parents and Children would by the grace of God grow into habits of
Christian Living, and the light of their Graces and good works shining before
the Heathen, would above all other Oratory prevail with them, both to be
desirous to learn themselves, and to bring their Children to be taught in the
Christians Schools, how to glorify the same God with them.

That the former benefits will accrue to themselves, needs no Proof: the
experience of all united well ordered Christian Societies, sufficiently
confirms it.

That the latter ( viz. the gaining the Heathen to the Christian Faith) will be
the hopeful Consequ^nt of their habitual Christian living, of the united l^ght
of their graces and good works shining before the Heathen; I shall (not
presuming to inform Your Lordship, but not knowing to whom this Paper may be
communicated) make bold to add a brief Confirmation of it. First, by the
testimony of that virtuous Heathen Emperor Alexander Sev^rus, who when he
p^rceived two of his Servants to be per^waded to receive the ^hristian Faith,
by the Eloquent Orations Origin had made before him to prove the Truth of it. I
perceive (says he) Ye do wonder at the Learning of Origin, whereby ye are
induced to embrace the Christian Profession: But tru^y, the Humility and
Charity of the Christian People, which ^ do hear of, and daily b^hold with my
E^es; do much more move me to believe that their Christ is God, then all his
^loquent Perswasion^.

This Heathen Emperor understood the Language of Origin; and (as the History
relates) was much moved with the convincing persuasive Arguments Origin u^ed,
to prove the Truth of the Christian Faith: yet he professes he was much more
p^rswaded to believe it, by the Humility and Charity, the graces and ve^tues,
which appeared in the Ch^istians lives, which he heard of, an^ daily beheld.
But the Heathen in Virginia neither understand the Christians language, no^ the
Christians theirs; and although they did understand it, I think it too bar^en
to express the Christian Religion by, and therefore they h^ve no other
arguments left to convince them of the Truth of the Christian Faith, and to
per^wade them to emb^^ce it. But only (which that Emperor acknowledged most
per^w^sive) the ami^blenesse of Ch^isti^n ^races and Virtues ^hining in their
lives, whose excelling beauty and b^nefit, when they appear in united ^ocieties
of Christians, they may well per^w^de any rational He^then, that they are most
conducing to procure the true h^ppin^sse of ^ll united Societies and
Commu^ities of Men, and therefo^^ the Religion, that teaches t^em, above all
other to be embraced.

This Consider^t^on enforced the accute Acosta, after he had spent 17 years in
conversing with the Heathen in that new world (though he was of a Church that
pleads much for Miracles) ingenuously to confess, that the greatest, and even
the only Miracle necessary to the Conversion of those Heathen, is the gracious
lives of Christians, agreeable to that Christian Faith they profess, and in
this he subscribes but to St. Chrysostom affirming the same concerning the
conversion of the Heathen in his days. But long before Chrysostom, the
Prophet Isaiah foretold the power of this Miracle, how powerful the glory of
the Lord shining in the gracious lives of Christians should be, to further the
conversion of the Gentiles. Isa. 60.2, 3. Where speaking of the Church under
the Gospel. The Lord (says he) shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee, and what follows? the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and
Kings to the brightness of thy rising. What is this Light, and Brightness,
and Glory, which should be seen upon the Church under the Gospel, which should
invite the Gentiles to come into it? The same Prophet tells us Isa. 6^.2. The
G^ntiles shall see thy Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory. It Is the
Righteousness, the Holiness, the graces shining in the lives of Christians;
it is this should make their Seed known among the Gentiles, and their offspring
among the People: So that all that see them should acknowledge them that they
are the Seed which the Lord has blessed. Isa. 61.9. And this should make them
bring their Sons and Daughters to be nursed up at the Churches breasts. Isa.
49.22, 23. Isa. 6.4.

But when were these Prophecies fulfilled?

Two times are only remarkable for fulfilling them by Gods ord^n^ry way of
Converting Heathen (except the way of Converting them by Miracles) and those
were, First, The Times of Persecution, when the Faith, Constancy, Me^knesse,
P^tience, and Ch^rity of the Christian Ma^tyrs shi^e^ so bright in the Heathens
eyes, through the Flames, Wounds, and Tortures they endured, that it made them
wonder at the glory of the Lord, which was seen upon them, and fall in love
with the Christian Religion, which brought forth such glorious Fruits in them:
But neither does this reach all States of the Church, not particularly
Virginia's, so long as the Christians have the upper hand of the Heathen, which
God grant may continue till the End of Times. 2. The times of the Churches
peace, when the Christians in their united Societies, having the Liberty of
their public holy Assemblies in the House of God, did constantly attend upon
the Service of God in them, and the Heathen coming in among them, and
beholding the comely order and beauty of their holy worship, perceiving their
Unanimity and Uniformity in the same faith and worship of the same God, were so
convinced of all and judged of all, that the secrets of their hearts were made
manifest, and they fell down upon their faces and worshipped God, and confessed
that God was in them of a Truth, as the Apostle says Infidels would do such a
Case. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. And therefore no doubt but many of them did.


And as for those of the Heathen who lived in the Cities and Towns with the
Christians, or near unto them, and yet frequented not the Christians Churches
(which I suppose few of them would wholly omit, men being generally of the
Athenians temper, inquisitive after what seems new to them) but if there were
(as it is possible) any considerable numbers of such rigid Heathen; yet even
these beholding the comely order of the Christians Government, the amiablenesse
of their Conversations, their Meekness, Humility, Charity, their
Righteousness shining as the Light, and their just dealing as the Noonday: In
sum, seeing the light of their good works, they were allured, and won by
degrees to glorify the same God with them: and these latter I take to be
chiefly meant by the visible righteousness and glory of the Church, under the
Gospel, which the Prophet Isaiah foretold (for he says it should be seen)
which should be so prevailing with the Heathen; these the most ordinary ways
(though there were other) of Converting them to Christianity; which
Interpretation, besides that it is cleared by the words of the Text cited, and
the evidence of the matter, it exactly agrees with the judgment of the Learned
Acosta and St. Chrysostom before mentioned.

Object. But it may be objected, that neither of these, nor perhaps any other
Ecclesiatick Writers, have told us, that Christians for this end ought to be
^nited in Soc^eties in Towns, that it is the glory of the graces and virtues of
many Christians shining, not in scattered Corners, but invisible united
Societies, which is so persuasive and powerfully prevailing with the Heathen to
embrace the Christian faith; nor do they use any arguments to persuade
Christians to live together in Towns and to incorporate into Societies for this
end.

Answer. And no marvel; how could we reasonably expect it from them? The
Christians whom they knew dispersed through the the^ inhabited parts of the
World (except Hermites who^e con^ition of li^e is not here spoken of) were
united in such Societies, planted together in the House of ^od, ^o as they
might constantly attend upon the publiq^e sacred Min^strations of his Word and
Wo^ship; and their light best shine before men to the glory of God. Therefore
for this manner of Ch^istians living together, as there was n^ need to argue;
so they might charitably hope, there never would be, Christ^ans being bound to
it by virtue of Christ's co^m^nd. To seek first^ the Kingdom^ of God and the
Righte^^sness^ thereof, and to depend upon his promise, for adding all other
things to them: of which Duty, that the^ might be ^aily minded, Christ has
taught them by the metho^ of that daily Pra^er, which he has set them, as to
b^g of God, so to seek^ the Hallowing of his Name, the advancement of his
Kingdom, and the doing of his will before their daily Bread; from whence it
follows, that it is the Duty of all Christians to take care in the first place,
so to unite their habitations in Societies, after such a manner, as they may be
best convenienc'd constantly to attend upon the public Ministry of Gods hol^
Word, Sacraments, and Worship (which convenience only Towns and Villages
affor^;^ because God has ordained the public Mi^istery of these to be the
means by which (through his blessing upon the due using them) his Name should
be glorified, his Kingdom advanced, and his will performed, and has expressed
it to be his will, that he will be glorified before all the People; honored
and praised in the great Congregations, and therefore calls for it by his Word,
Psalm. 100. O go your way into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts
with praise; be thankful unto him and bless his name.

And perhaps it may be truly affirmed, that Virginia's Planters were the first
considerable numbers of Christians in the whole world, which first violated
this stated Order of Christ, (I say not in a remote desert, and in the sight of
the Heathen which hugely aggravates their fault) but the first that ever^
la^ted themselves after such a manner ( Hermites as before excepted, whose
manner of Life Virginians profess not) as might make their due and constant
attendance upon the public worship and Service of God impossible to them, and
consequently di^able them to glorify the Name, and advance the Kingdom of
God, in the way God has ordained and commande^.

It may suffice therefore for answer to the Object^ to say, that if neither
ancient, nor modern Writers have told us, that Christians (if they have
Liberty) ought to live together in visible united Societies, in Cities, Towns
or Villages, for the forementioned ends; it was, because they knew no present
need of writing any thing of it, nor could charitably conjecture there would be
any for the Future.

But d^er bought experience has taught, that it i^ now necessary, which has
made me thus f^r presume upon Your Lordships Candor and Patience for this brief
asserting it; There being no other Remedy for Virginia's Malady, but by
reducing her Planters into Towns.

Object. The common Objection against this way of being reduced into Towns,
which I have often heard among them, is, that they shall be undone by it in
their Estates.

Answer. For Answer to which it may suffice to say, 1. The most knowing and
prudent among them, have judged the contrary, and that it would be the only way
to enrich them, and therefore have both wished and endeavored it though in
vain, witness the abovementioned Act for Markets, contrived by the prudent
Edward Diggs Esquire their sometime Governor, and the very many attempts and
contrivances to compass it, made and devised by the most Noble lover of
Virginia Sir William Berkely their present Governor. 2. It will be the most
probable way of securing both their Persons and Estates against all attempts of
the Heathen, the Rumors whereof (frequently spread through that Country) do
often a^fright them, for hereby, either the Heathen will be gained, after the
manner before specified, or their power not feared. 3. Only Persons that are
able will be enjoined it, according to the Tenor of the fourth Proposition,
and perhaps Collections being made, and dispersed according to the 2, and 3.
Propositions, or agreeable Sums of money raised by a Rate set upon every
Hogshead of Tobacco imported into England, according to the Honorable Sir
William Berkleys Proposition in his view of Virginia, Workmen may be provided
for them and the Planters be at little Charge, besides affording them
Assistance and Diet, which they have in so great Plenty in that Country, that
very few or none will account the affor^ing that, any impairing to their
Estates. If none of these answer^ will satisfy such Objectors. 4. Yet let them
consider seriously what has been before asserted; That while they continue
their present manner of scattered living (whereby they necessitate themselves
to rob God of his due public Worship and Service) they will continue under
the Curse of ^od, but by uniting their habitations in Towns, they will make
themselves capable of giving God his due honor in his house of Prayer in the
great Congregations of his People, and consequently of procuring his blessing;
for them that honor God, God will honor, and they that are planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of (...) ^ouse of our God.
Psalm. 92.13. Now whether their living under the Curse, or under the Blessing of
the Almighty will best improve their Estates, let themselves judge.


These things considered, men may wonder why the attempts made by the
forementioned Honorable Governors to reduce Virginia's Planters into Towns
did never succeed, and perhaps it may be hard for any that never lived among
them rightly to conjecture. But the truth in plain English is this,

Whatsoever is of public concernment in Virginia, is determined by their Grand
Assemblies, which are usually held once a year, and consist of Governor and
Council, which make the upper house, and the Burgesses which represent the
People, and make the lower house, and are chosen out of every County by the
People, after the manner that Burgesses are chosen for Parliaments in England,
and are more or fewer according as the People agree, who are to defray their
charges^ Whatsoever passes into an Act of Assembly, must be agreed upon by the
Major part of Burgesses, and these are usually such as went over Servants
thither, and though by time and industry, they may have attained competent
Estates; yet by reason of their poor and mean education they are unskilful in
judging of a good Estate either of Church or Commonwealth, or of the means of
procuring it. No marvel therefore, if the best proposals, which have been made
to such persons, for reducing them into Towns, offending in the least against
their present private worldly interest (though never so promising for the
future) have been from time to time bandied against by such Major parts of
their Burgesses, and the fewer wise heads over-voted by them.

And if at any time it has so happened, that the Major part of the Burgesses
have been so meetly qualified and tempered, as to enact any thing tending to
such a public good; The following Assemblies have usually repealed it. The
consideration of which, is the true ground of the whole third Proposition: of
the Contents of which and the rest, if Your Lordship shall become the blessed
procurer. The forlorn Church which is now scattered in desolate Places of that
wilderness, without any comeliness, which should make her desired, and sought
after, may (through Gods blessing) in a few years, gain such beauty, wealth,
and ornament, as may either enable her to nurse up Children of her own, to
become her servants in the Gospel, or allure Strangers to court her for the
Favor, and if it shall please God to prolong your Honorable days, till you
shall hear of the promised blessed fruits of your labor of love and charity
for that poor Church, (which God grant in mercy for his name and Churches sake)
what ravishing joy and contentment will affect your pious and charitable heart,
to contemplate at this distance, the Glory of the Communion of Saints, in their
united holy Societies and Assemblies; the constant beauty of their public
Worship; of their holy Sacrifices of prayers and praises offered in a comely
order in their public congregations.

To contemplate the poor Church (whose plants now grow wild in that
Wilderness) become like a garden enclosed, like a Vineyard fenced, and watched
like a flock of Sheep with their Lambs safely folded by night, and fed by day;
all which are the promised fruits of well ordered Towns, under Religious
Pastors and Magistrates, with what joy, and delight may you likewise think
upon their comely and most ingenious Children, like hopeful plants growing up
in Nurseries of learning and piety, and when their time of fruit is come,
Transplanted into the enclosed gardens of God, and becoming fruitful and
useful trees of righteousness; which is the promised happiness and benefit
of well ordered Schools, in well governed Towns.

And lastly, wh^t rejoicing will it be to your most Christian heart, to behold
the glorious issue of that Prophecy, concerning the calling the Gentiles
fulfilled in those numerous herds of Heathen in Virginia. Isa. 11.6. etc. The
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc.
To contemplate the Heathen, who in that Prophecy are likened to Wolves,
Leopards, Lions, Bears, Apes, and Cockatrices; couching quietly and harmlesly
in the same fold of Christ's Church with the Sheep and Lambs of Christ, which
will be the hopeful Consequent of well ordered Towns and Schools. And the
procuring these, the only true effectual Remedy for Virginia's Disease, as has
been showed.

But this is a Work of time to compass; and we have an English Proverb, Whilst
the grass grows, the Steed Starves, before this can be compassed, many poor
Christians there, may p^rish for want of their souls food, where there is no
vision the people perish, and that is the case of the far greater part of that
Colony.

The encouragement therefore of Ministers to adventure thither to help them, I
humbly propound, First, That your Lordship be pleased to procure, that the next
grand Assembly in Virgin^a may enact. That what Tobacco any Parish agrees to
pay their Minister, shall be paid of the best Tobacco of every Man's own Crop,
and with Cask, otherwise experience has showed, that a Ministers livelihood
there will be very uncertain. Secondly, That at the same Assembly it be
Enacted, that every Parish choose a Vestry (in case they have not one already
chosen) and the Vestry of each Parish be enjoined to subscribe what quantity of
Corn and Tobacco of the best of their own Crops, with Cask, they will allow a
sufficient Minister yearly. Thirdly, That in the next and every Assembly, the
Act for paying 15 l. of Tobacco per annum, for every Tythable person, in every
Parish destitute of a Minister (which Act was made at an Assembly March 27.
1656.) be carefully executed, and strict Enquiry made, whether the Tobacco due
by that Act, be duly collected, and employed to the ends expressed in that
Act, viz. Building Churches, purchasing ^leabes, and stocks of Cattle to belong
to them. And if any Parish has employed any part of such Arrears to any other
use, that they be enjoined to make them good again. Fourthly, That the Act made
in the same Assembly concerning disposing intestate estates to public uses, in
case no Administratour of Kin to the diseased Proprietour appears) may serve in
the first place the needs of the Church, for furnishing each Parish with
Gleabes, and the Gleabes with Stocks of Cattle, before any part of such estates
be employed to any other use. Fifthly, that there being diverse persons already
in the Colony fit to serve the Church in the office of Deacon, a Bishop be sent
over, so soon as there shall be a City for his See, as for other Needs of that
Church, so also, that after due Probation and ^xamination, such persons may be
ordained Deacons, and their Duty and Service be appointed by the Bishop.
Sixthly, That the Ministers that go thither, be not hired by the year, as is
now usual, but firmly instituted and inducted into Livings of stated value by
the Subscriptions of their Vestries, according to the second Proposition.
Seventhly, That all Ministers desirous to go to Virginia, and not able to
transport themselves, be acquainted with an Act of Assembly of that Country,
whereby it is provided, that wh^t^oever sufficient Minister, shall not be able
to pay for his transportation, any Merchant that shall defray the charge of it
(if such Minister agree not with him upon other conditions) shall receive 20 l.
Sterling for his passage, from the Parish that entertains him, or two Thousand
pound of Tobacco, who shall also repay any Sums of money disburs'd for his
accommodation, and the Minister to be free to choose his Parish, which shall
make such disbursements for him.


This is all I can think meet to propound at present, only for a Conclusion I
shall add for the Encouragement both of Bishop and Ministers, that shall
adventure thither out of pity and compassion to the souls of so many of their
poor Brethren, that as their reward will be great in Heaven, so also, they
shall (in a very pleasant and fruitful Land) meet with a People, which
generally bear a great love and respect to their Ministers; And (if they behave
themselves as becomes their high calling) they shall find their ready help,
and assistance in their Needs; and (which should be much more encouraging) they
will find a People, which generally bear a great love to the stated
Constitutions of the Church of England, in her Government and public Worship;
which gave us (who went thither under the late Persecutions of it) the
advantage of Liberty to use it constantly among them, after the Naval force had
reduced that Colony under the power (but never to the obedience) of the
Usurpers.

Which Liberty we could not have enjoyed, had not the People generally
expressed a great Love to it. And I hope even this will be a consideration (not
of least regard) to move Your Lordship to use all possible care and endeavor to
supply Virginia's Needs with sufficient Orthodoxe Ministers, in the first
place, and before any other of our foreign Plantations which crave your help,
because in the late times of our Churches Persecution, her people alone,
cheerfully and joyfully embraced, encouraged, and maintained the Orthodoxe
Ministers that went over to them in their public Conformity to the Church of
ENGLAND, in her Doctrine and stated manner of Public Worship.

FINIS.

