A DEFENSE OF Christian Liberty To the LORDS Table; Except in case of
Excommunication and Suspension Wherein many Arguments, Queres, Suppositions,
and Objections are answered by plain Texts, and consent of Scriptures.

As also some Positions answered by way of a short Conference which the Author
has had with diverse, both in City and Country.

All which are profitable to inform to truth, and lawful obedience to
Authority.

By John Grant, who bears witness to the Faith.

Jerem. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of Man is not in himself, it is
not in Man that walks to direct his steps.

1 John 2. 26. These things have I written unto you concerning them which
seduce you.

2 Timothy 3. 13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived.

Published according to Order.

London Printed for John Hancock, and are to be sold at his shop in Pope's Head
Alley. 1646.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
OUR Lord once asked a question of his Disciples; Are ye able to drink of the
Cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism that I am
baptized with? In the answer he agrees with his servants, that it should be so
with them, Mat. 20. 22. 23. And as this was the case of James and John; so it
was Peter's and all the faithfuls also, and is now, and ever was Gods servants
case and condition, to suffer with him, as truly as they shall reign with him.
For as the shadow follows the natural body; so afflictions follow the Church,
the children of Truth, his mystical Body. And as there is an universal daily
proose of this truth; so in particular at Woolchurch, Anno 1645. for a modest
and private testimony of the two witnesses of sound Doctrine, the testifier
thereof was testified against with contempt and reproach, which for the truths
sake he has patiently born, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that the Lord calls his servants
thereunto, that they may inherit a blessing. And notwithstanding the
Parishioners his suffering, he being not thereby discouraged, went on in
discovery of the truth, and in opposition of the mistakes, so that the
questions were brought to publication in a small short Treatise called,
Christian liberty to the Lords Table: against which authorized Tract I have
received diverse exceptions from several friends, yea, friends, which does the
more take my affection: And the said exceptions under differing notions, as
below are mentioned. All which, with my defensive answers to each, I again
present with open face to the world. And in conclusion, a brief recital of
some short Discourses I have had in my journey in the Countries with such as
are opposite to the present government. And because since the time my small
Taper was lighted, there has risen a man of much eminency, a burning glory, a
star of great shining, holding forth with Scripture, Learning and Arts, the
subject and matter of my meditations, yet the manner being different, and my
phrase, style, and knowledge like my self, low and mean, I therefore commend
my thoughts to such of my own capacity, casting my mite into the Lords
Treasury, and thrusting in my weak and mean Sickle of plain workmanship into
the Lords great harvest, praying that all that read it with the same affection
that I write it, may gain the like benefit.

A Defense of Christian Liberty to the LORDS Table.
THE first thing I received by way of opposition to my book, were six Arguments.

My first Argument against your Treatise (says my friend) called, Christian
liberty to the Lords Table, is this:

Because the Scripture does not testify of any particular man converted by the
Sacrament alone: Therefore it is a reason to me to believe the Sacrament does
not convert.

My Defense to your first Argument.
Friend, by your first Argument you seem to divide between the Scriptures and
the Sacrament (in these words, By the Sacrament alone) which is a mistaking the
point in hand: For my book is entitled, Christian liberty to the Lords Table;
the Title thereof showing and preaching the quite contrary: for there can be
neither Christians so called, nor Sacraments so instituted where there is no
Scriptures. And that this might have been understood by you, consider the Texts
of the Old and New Testament alleged for proof, with the place, Preacher, and
hearers instanced, at Woolchurch in London. Secondly, there is no example that
the reading the Scriptures do convert: should any man believe therefore the
Lord does not many times convert by reading? We have no express Scripture to
testify that Peter, James and John, with the rest of the Apostles by name,
were outwardly baptized; shall we therefore not believe it? We do not read
that the Apostles. Evangelists, or Disciples of Christ, did once or ever use
the Lords prayer, although he commanded it, Luke 11. 2. is it therefore un
awful to use it? And that the Supper of the Lord is a teaching Ordinance, as
it is a confirming ordinance, we shall have many times occasion to clear in
making my defense.

His second Argument.
I do not read in Scripture that the Sacrament was administered to any
Christian Assembly, till some of that Assembly were begotten to God by the word
of truth, which makes me believe that it was for the Saints sakes only when it
was instituted and administered; and so to confirm and not to convert, but to
commemorate and strengthen.

My defense to your second Argument.
I do not read in all the Scriptures that the participation of the Lords
Supper was denied any common believer for want of special faith, and not being
a spiritual Christian: for although God did in a special sense institute and
ordain all his ordinances for his elects sake for their regeneration and
confirmation, their spiritual communion with God in Christ; yet I affirm, that
among these faithful, the outward and common Christians did in the Apostles
times, and may now communicate in the outward and common things of the word and
Sacraments: for they that gladly received the word, were baptized, and
continued in the Doctrine, Sacraments and Prayer, Acts 2. 41, 42. And as it was
thus at Jerusalem, so it was at Samaria, Acts 8. Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, and
in all the Churches of the Saints. And therefore the outward signs of the
Sacraments were not ordained for the Saints only, but it is with Christians in
our time, as it was with Abraham and his seed, that is, the elect, in these
words, Genesis 17. 7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: but the outward
signs of the covenant belonged to all his seed ingenerall, and to the seed of
all others that came to acknowledge the truth, and believe the Scriptures.

His third Argument.
Because the right use of the Sacrament is only and alone with the faithful;
they only have spiritual communion with the Lord, in whose remembrance it was
instituted.

My defense to your third Argument.
In my defense to your second Argument, the inference and consequence thereof
is, that the use of the Lords Supper is not for the Saints alone: for although
the Saints have the bliss and best use of the Sacrament, yet not the only
use. And as they have a special right, as spiritual Christians, by faith to
eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood to their confirmation: so the
unregenerate elect and common Christians have a true right to the communication
of the outward signs to their information and instruction, amongst the
faithful. For as the Paschal Lamb was generally to be eaten by both sorts of
believers, Exodus 12. 43, 44. Circumcise him (says the Text) and then shall he
eat thereof: so baptize the Christian, and let him examine himself touching
the knowledge of the Lords Supper, and so let him eat, 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26, 27,
28. And here take notice by the way, that this examining a man's self is all
one with the preparation to the Passover: for the true use of understanding
the Lords Supper, and discerning the Lords body in knowing the meaning of the
signs, is to lead us to repent of our sins: and to repent is to eat no
leavened bread; for this is to put out the leaven out of our houses, Exodus 12.
15. And the Apostles admonition to the Church of Corinth is in effect the same
that Hezekiah prays for, that the people before they came to the Passover,
might prepare their hearts to seek God, and that the Lord would pardon them
that were not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles.
30. 19. For (says the Text verse. 18.) a multitude of the people, even many of
Epbraim and Manasses, Issachar and Zebulon, had not cleansed themselves, yet
did they cat the Passover, etc. Observe how the Church of Corinth and the
Church of the Jews are paralleld, and although many defective in both, yet in
neither any denied. And this promotes the free mercy and goodness of God, that
the unregenerate are not restrained from no outward ordinance that might
further their co^version.

His fourth Argument.
That the Lords Supper does commemo^ate and confirm, is very clear and evident
from the Scriptures: but that it should be a means of conversion, that is
dubious.

My defense to your fourth Argument.
That which with the Word does commemorate Christ's death, that does also
signify, teach, and show forth, or is a means to attain grace even so often as
it is communicated with the word, Luke 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 26. And this is a
truth not dubious but perspicuons. For as by the eye the cutward sight does
affect the heart within, or inwardly, Lam. 3. 51. so does the calling to mind,
or remembrance, as David says, Psalm. 77. 3. Premembred God, says he, and what
did it lead him to, or teach him? He gives us the answer himself. And I was
troubled. And what was his trouble but godly sorrow and repentance? And upon
the sight of the bitter passion of our Lord, which was the same death the Lords
Supper holds forth to us, it is said, Luke 23 48. And all the people which came
together to that sight, beholding the things that were done, smote their
breasts and returned. Wherefore be satisfied of the converting operation of the
Sacrament. And the truth is, you confess it in all your Arguments, in that you
do acknowledge it does commemorate and call to mind. I pray consider what S.
Paul writes to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 6. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of
these things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ. So then to call to
mind, or to put men in remembrance of the truth, is a part of the ministry of
the Gospel, and that the participation of the Sacrament does both, our Lord and
his servant testifies, Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. The more fuller clearing hereof, I
refer to my defense against the two Ministers five Quaeres hereafter mentioned.

The fifth Argument.
That the Word and Works of God are a means to beget grace, the Scriptures
plentifully affirm, and they need no exposition at all; for they speak out the
glory of him that made them, the wisdom, bounty, and goodness of God which
leads to repentance: but the Sacrament, as the Bow in the clouds, cannot
without the exposition of Scriptures; and therefore not teaching.

My defense to your fifth Argument.
You say God has made his works as his word, the outward means to beget grace,
and they need no exposition, for they are made of God apparent to all, Psalm.
97. 6. but you say, so is not the Sacrament. Nor, say I, the written Scriptures
manifested to them that have them not: but as the Rainbow in the clouds
ordained by the word of God, does teach to the eye Gods faithfulness in his
promise and covenant, Genesis 9. 13. even so do the Sacraments, which are
likewise ordained by the same word, inform the heart by the eye, through seeing
Christ's death visibly represented by the elements, so often as by the word they
are consecrated, and by believers communicated; and do thereby teach, set
forth, and declare Gods faithfulness in his promise and covenant made with
mankind in and through the death of Christ. And Bread and Wine sacramentally
are to none so, but to such as believe the Scriptures.

His sixth Argument.
The Word and Works which are outward means to beget grace, are made of God
obvious to all men to see and read, to the end they may be won to repentance;
but the Sacrament may not be used to all the world, but only by such as
believe Jesus Christ manifested, which is a further ground to me that it begets
not grace, but commemorates and confirms only.

My defense to his sixth Argument.
This Argument is of the same nature with your former, and therefore one answer
may serve for both: for if the bounty and goodness of God be made known to
Christians by the Lords Supper, then by your own Argument they teach Christians
to grace, as the works of God, the whole creation manifesting Gods bounty and
goodness, who thereby win or lead men to repentance, even that part of
mankind that have not the Scriptures, which shall be more cleared hereafter.

Now after I had received these Arguments from a friend, there were sent me
from two Ministers of my acquaintance, these five Queres following.

The first Quere.
Whether to teach grace and confirm grace be two distinct things or no.

My defense to the first Quere.
In my defense I premise, that the visible Sacrament cannot be without the
audible word, and so I say, that the effect of both are distinct in teaching to
attain grace, and the confirming and strenthening the grace already wrought.

The second Quere.
If they be two distinct things, whether then can the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper teach so as to work a change in the affections, or not?

My defense to your second Quere.
Whatsoever God has made teaching, that by his blessing may effect grace to
whom it teaches it: for the Word and Covenant of life is manifested and
declared by preaching, Tit. 1. 3. Now the way of preaching that was committed
to S. Paul, was the Scriptures; yet he himself proves to the Romans, that the
same covenant of life, and word of grace which he taught by the Scriptures, is
taught to the Gentiles which have not the Scriptures, by the creatures, as Romans
10. 8. compared with v. 18, 19, 20, 21. and Psalm. 19. which is confessed and
acknowledged before in my opposites arguments; but because this is beyond the
question in hand, which is to clear the teaching use of the Sacraments by
Scriptures, I will therefore here wave the point of the creatures teaching
without the Scriptures, and prove it clearly by arguments drawn from the
Scriptures, that the Lords Supper has a teaching operation, for the
strengthening or confirming use no man questions.

My first Argument.
Whatsoever does declare or show forth Christ to a Christian, does teach Christ.

But the Supper of the Lord does declare and show forth his death from the tree
of his ignominy, to the throne of his glory.

Therefore the Supper of the Lord declares and teaches Christ so often as it
is communicated, even until his second coming.

And ths Argument I thus prove, 1 Cor. 11. 26. For as often (says the Apostle)
as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he
come. Agreeiong to which is that of the Prophet Dan. 11. 2.
when he spoke to King Darius; I will show thee the truth, said he. Did not he
therein declare and teach to him the truth. So also our Lord signifying and
showing the truth to the Apostle John, Revel. 1. 1. what was it but preaching
and manifesting the truth to him?

My second Argument.
Whatsoever is ordained of Christ to commemorate, call to mind, or keep in
remembrance himself or his death, that preaches Christ and the benefit of his
death:

But the communicating in the signs of the Lords body and blood, calls him to
mind, and keeps his death in remembrance to Christians.

Therefore the Celebration of the Lords Supper teaches or preaches the
benefit of his death.

And this Argument our Lord himself proves, whose testimony is beyond all,
Luke 22. 19, 20. This is my Body which was given for you, do this in
remembrance of me. This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which was shed
for you. I beseech you mark two things in these few words for the proving the
Argument; that is, first that the Lords Supper, the participation of the
Elements, they being set apart by blessing, according to our Lords example, and
the Apostles practice, the doing thereof is a remembrance of Christ's death. And
secondly, that thereby is made known and taught the Covenant of life and
salvation in these words, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood: then which
nothing can be thought of to prove clearer the teaching use of the Sacrament.
And that whatsoever calls to remembrance the truth, preaches the truth, is
plain and apparent: For Peter's putting the Saints always in remembrance of the
truth, thereby preached unto them the truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Your third Quere.
Whether the act of Cbrist in admitting of Judas, be exemplary.

My defense to your third Quere.
If the Lord did admit of wicked Judas unto the Apostleship, and so to the
participation of Baptism, the Word, Prayer, and to the breaking of bread, as
hereafter shall be particularly proved, then such Ministers that teach that
all unregenerate men are to be kept from the Sacrament, assume that to
themselves which neither Gods law nor man's law gives them. For the exception in
the law of God, is the case of excommunication; the exception in man's ordinance
is ignorance and scandal.

Your fourth Quere.
Whether there be like reasons of the Sacrament and the Passover: If there be
the like reason, then it follows not that the Lord did approve of every one
that came to the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. they were to prepare themselves before
they came.

My defense to your fourth Quere.
You both forget your selves to ask me a reason of Gods ordinances, for to give
a reason of them is peculiar to God alone that made them. But this I say, that
there is the same use and meaning of the Lords Supper as of the Passover in
the common fellowship of all believers, that is, Christ typified and signified
by both, Christ's death showed forth and called to remembrance by both, the
believers informed to grace, and confirmed in grace by both; and the spiritual
and truly faithful eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood by both, they being
both sacramental for that purpose. And as under the law they were to put away
the leaven out of their houses, and prepare and sanctify themselves: so under
the Gospel Christians are to examine themselves, repent, etc. For to keep the
Feast and holy day the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 5. 8. is to keep it with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, as I have briefly declared in my
Admonition in Christians liberty to the Lords Table, p. 18.

Your fifth Quere.
Whether can a natural man, or a man endued with the common gifts of the
Spirit, so try, examine, and judge himself, as to come worthily as the Apostle
1 Cor. 11. 28. does drive at?

My defense to your fifth Quere.
I answer: An inward or spiritual Christian as an inward, and an outward
common Christian as an outward Christian, may either of them discern the Lords
body to participate worthily or profitably, according to their different gifts
received; the high way, stony, and thorny grounds, may discern the Lords body,
and all the elect Christians unregenerate, by the visible fignes thereof in the
Sacrament, that therein Christ Jesus is manifested, giving himself to death
for mankind, and that he is the bread of life, declared and preached first by
the words of consecration and prayer, with admonitions then made by the
Minister. And secondly, by seeing the wine powered out, the resemblance of the
shedding his blood; and then seeing the bread broken, the resemblance of his
death and passion, with the consideration of all other circumstances, the
violence the Grape suffers in the Wine Press, and the cruelty offered to the
Corn both in the Mill, and in the insufferable hot Oven. And as thus the eye
affects the heart, so does the sweet comfortable refreshing, nourishing,
delectable relishing taste also, which are all evident sensible in-lets to the
soul of the mercy and goodness of God. And because the Christian has
received no other but common gifts, it is but information to him to the
special grace: but the good ground, the spiritual Christian his communion is
sustentation and confirmation in grace to eternal life; according to his
special faith and grace received of God, he spiritually eats Christ's flesh,
and drinks his blood, and is hereby more and more inoculated and rooted in the
true Vine Jesus Christ. And in this differing consideration both may discern
the Lords body, and communicate for the better and not for the worse.

From some other friends I have likewise received diverse objections against
Judas his being present at the institution and distribution of the Lords
Supper, which principally are these five following:

Their first Objection.
Judas went immediately out after the receipt of the Sop, John 13. 30. Now the
Sop was part of the Passover, therefore Judas was gone before the institution
of the Sacrament.

My defense to your first Objection.
This objection is against the consent of the three former Evangelists: for
they all agree and testify that as our Lord was eating the Passover, he took
bread and blessed it, and the cup and blessed it, which is the institution of
the Lords Supper. And this he did before they or any of them rose from the
Table, Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14. 21, 22, 23. And S. Lukes witness is beyond all
exception, or any excuse; Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me
on the Table, Luke 22. 21. Now John does not at all speak the least tittle of
the institution of the Sacrament; and therefore his knowledge of that must be
included in his discourse before he makes express mention of our Lords rising
from Supper, John 13. 4. because all the rest testify that he instituted it as
they were eating the Passover before our Lord did rise from Supper, even while
they were eating, at the later end of the Passover, as at the end of the first
course at a feast, the second course is brought in, in that instant Jesus
instituted the Supper of his passion. And to this agree the Apostles words, 1
Cor. 11. 25. Also he took the Cup when he had supped, that is, before he rose
from the table, because after he rose, John testifies of other actions. And
after he date down again to them, verse 12. of other discourses. And to this
accords S. Lukes witness also, Luke 22. 19. And he took the bread and gave
thanks, that is, the bread on the Table provided for the Passover. Likewise
also the Cup after Supper, that is, as they had finished the supper of the
Passover, as above said, no distance of time, but as they were eating the one,
Christ instituted and distributed the other. And as the Sop might be a part of
the Supper of the Passover, being a part of the fragments untaken away from
the table: so was the bread and wine a part of the provision of the Passover
Supper also, which the Lord blessed to institute the Sacrament with, and yet
neither of them for your purpose.

Their second Objection.
It is said in the Institution of the Lords Supper, Luke 22. 19, 20. This is my
body which is given for you, etc. In which words Judas could not be included:
for Christ gave not his body, nor shed not his blood for him, and therefore
Judas could not be there.

My defense to your second Objection.
I affirm, that as Christ gave himself to death peculiarly and effectually for
his elect; so generally and sufficiently for the whole world, according to that
of the Apostle, If any man sin, (meaning, if any of the justified elect) we
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours, (that is, for the elect) but
for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. 1, 2. And so says Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 10. For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust
in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe. Observe, in the general he has given himself to be a Savior, that by
and through his death there is now a way opened to life and salvation for all
men, without which no man could be saved. And this purchased and purchasing
life, is the true light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
John 1. 9. yet notwithstanding this light and remedy provided, such is the
natural opposition thereunto of all men, which through the first Adams offense
lie damnable, Romans 5. 18. and although the second Adam by his death, has
brought them to an estate saveable; yet notwithstanding this possibility, (when
none was before) through this new and living way by Christ's death, if God did
not after a special manner in an extraordinary respect make this means that is
sufficient for all, effectual for his elect, they should be condemned with the
reprobate world, for loving darkness more then light, because their deeds are
evil: but that God of his everlasting love and pity, works his own works in
them and for them, of repentance and remission of sins to salvation. And the
reprobate part of mankind, and such as perish, they also enjoy all Gods mercies
and goodness, long suffering and patience, life, food, and all things for the
body, the Sunshine and dewing rain of Gods grace in his ordinances for their
souls good, which could not be enjoyed but by the death and mediation of Jesus
Christ. So that in these considerations it may be said Christ has given
himself for all men, and his death in it self virtuall for all, but effectual
only for the elect.

Their third Objection.
Matthew. 26. 13. it is said, All ye shall be offended with me this night. Now
Judas could not be offended, therefore Judas was not there: for he effected
his treachery wilfully and for his hire

My defense to your third Objection.
In the Scriptures the term offense is diversely taken: there is an offense of
impenitency, an offense of imbecility, of wilfulness and weakness; Judas was
guilty of the first offense, of that of impenitency, and all the rest of the
Apostles of that of weakness and frailty. The Scribes and Pharisees were
wilfully and impenitently offended with our Lord, Luke 7. 30. who rejected the
counsel of God against themselves. So was Herod against John Baptist, Mark 6.
20. who notwithstanding the Prophets powerful Doctrine, which wrought such a
change in the heathen King, as to respect the Prophet so, as to hear him, to
obey and do many things, to honor his person with fear, and his doctrine with
gladness: yet rather then his lust should want prosecution, he will Judas-like
take up such an implacable offense against him and the truth, so as suddenly
barbarously to imprison him, and there to murder him. Thus Cain was offended
with Abel, Ishmael with Isaac, Esau with Jac^b. The several grounds that
received not the seed to perfection. And blessed are they to whom Christ is not
such a rock of offense.

Their fourth Objection.
I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine until tbat day when I
drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Matthew. 26. 29. Now Judas could
not be one that should drink with Christ in his Fathers Kingdom. Ergo Judas
was not there when our Lord spoke this.

My defense to your fourth Objection.
The words of the former verse are these; This is the blood of the new
Testament which was shed for many for the remission of sins. Now of that many
he speaks, in that he says, I will drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom. And in this distinction he might speak it to the twelve when Judas was
present. For you may say as well Judas was not amongst the twelve, when he said
to them, John 6. 70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil?
In this distinction of election may our Savior speak in the case of perfection.

Their fifth Objection.
I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, Mark 14. 27. And
again, I will lay down my life for my sheep, John 10 15, 17. Now Judas could
not be included, and therefore not present, for he was none of Christ's sheep,
but a traitor against the Shepherd and the Flock also.

My defense to your fifth Objection.
This objection extends not to the question in hand: for the Shepherd was
smitten after the Institution and distribution of the Lords Supper. And so also
after Judas left our Lord and his Apostles company, and went privately to effect
and perfect his treacherous conspiracy. And yet again in the Scripture phrase,
there are evil sheep unlost, as well as good, such as are lost and found in
the Scripture sense. And Indas was amongst them, and sent out with them when
our Lord said, Matthew. 10. 16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
Wolves. And the Prophet David knew well there was more bad then good men, when
he said, 2 Samuel 24. 17. But these sheep what have they done?

Now while I was making my defense against all these former oppositions, I
received from an honored friend of mine, this double supposition following.

His first Supposition.
Friend, I pray consider how the Apostle speaks of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.
15, 16, 17. I speak as to you wise men, judge you what I say, The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we
being many, are one bread and one body: for we are partakers of that one
bread. Now who are the wise but the regenerate? Who has communion in the body
and blood of Christ, but the faithful? Who are the many members that are one
body, the many grains that make one loaf, but the Saints? And therefore does
not the Sacrament properly and peculiarly belong to the Saints? Yea, only
ordained for them I suppose.

My defense to your first Supposition.
Sir, the answer lies in the Apostles words by you mentioned: for to say, For
the cup of blessing which we bless, and the bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body and blood of Christ? proves plainly, there are two
things considerable in the Sacrament, the elements or signs, bread and wine;
the substance or thing signified, the body and blood of Christ, of both which
the regenerate communicate; but the unregenerate, although acknowledging the
common faith, they of bread and wine the signs only. And this is plainly
proved by the Apostle by the instance he gives to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The multitude as well as the faithful: they passed through the
sea, they had equal benefit of the cool moist cloud in the heat of the day,
and of the light hot burning pillar in the dark cold night, and sustained both
with the same Manna, Angels food. And yet none did communicate of the
spiritual substance the Rock and Truth, but such as were spiritual, and
thereby could by faith eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood: and all the
regenerate and truly faithful did so; But with may of them (says the Apostle)
that is, with the carnal, impenitent, provoking, unbeleeving part, God was not
well pleased, but overthrew them in the wilderness, notwithstanding their
outward fellowship and communion with the faithful in the outward external
shadows. And the Apostle by way of comparison, seems to make the Church of
Corinth, and the Church of the Jews in the wilderness to agree in the like
participation with those that communicate, as in the things communicated, both
for the quality of persons, and distinction of ordinances. And if it were not
so, as you would suppose, then his exhortation were in vain, Neither be ye
Idolaters, as some of them, neither fornicators, nor tempters, nor murmurers,
etc. And if faulty and unregenerate Christians ought not upon any terms to
comunicate, then the Apostle in Chap. 11. would have forbidden them communion,
whereas he uses only admonition. And therefore as for the inward and
spiritual Christians, the spiritual part of the sacrament is peculiar, so the
external and common part is for such Christians as are but outward and common,
and ordained for them as for the Saints, as before has been showed.

His second Supposition.
If unregenerate men come to communicate in the Sacrament, they intrude and
thrust themselves to that which God calls them not to; and so therein do that
which they ought not: and therefore it is sin to such to come: for so much
seems to be implied by the Apostle in saying, They discern not the Lords body,
and so it proves to be punishment in stead of nourishment. And it may be said
to them as to the guest that bad not on the wedding Garment, Friend, how come
thou in hither? And their intrusion to the Lords Table, is like the false
Apostles and Prophets thrusting themselves into all the administrations of the
Gospel.

My defense to your second Supposition.
The first part of this Supposition being an inference of the former, by
consequence is answered already. And whereas you say, It is an intrusion in the
unregenerate, and so a sin in them to come to the Sacrament, you must show the
inhibition: for otherwise the text is plain, Where there is no law, there is no
transgression. Secondly, you instance the uncloathed man's coming to the Feast
in the Gospel, I pray consider, he was not condemned for coming to the Feast,
but for being there without a wedding Garment: for the feast is all the
ordinances of God which Christ has purchased, and freely vouchsafed for all
men to communicate in for their salvation, the coming to the feast is the free
liberty that all believers have in the enjoyment of these ordinances, and to
be fed and clad with the blessed spiritual benefit thereof, is to enjoy the
blessing and salvation that comes by these means ordained of God for that end:
but to enjoy the administration thereof, and not to be bettered by them, is to
be there where we might have been clad, and yet continue naked, fed, and are
yet starved. And so it comes to pass, that which is a savor of life to the
one, is a savor of death to the other; the first hears and obeys, the
second hears and rejects. In the next place I answer, Whosoever takes upon
him to be a Steward of that which is another, being not committed into his
hands, presumes of himself, and is an intruder: but this is not proved to be
the case of a believer that is baptized, to communicate in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, therefore the instance fails for your purpose.

Now to put an end to all further disputes upon these two points, that Judas
did communicate or participate in the Lords Supper with the rest of the
Apostles; and that the Sacrament is of a teaching use and operation, as
strengthening and confirming, I state both the questions affirmatively and
negatively; the affirmative of both questions, that Judas was present at the
institution and distribution of the Lords Supper, and that the external
elements are of teaching use, is proved plainly by these two Scriptures. Luke
22. 14. 21. 1 Cor. 11. 26. But I challenge the whole world to prove the
negative, that the elements of the Lords Supper do not teach, and that Judas
was not present at the institution. And by the way take notice that no
absurdity can possibly be a consequence of truth, but erring and mistaking
admits of little else: For it the ordinance of the Lords Supper have not a
teaching and informing quality, then it is useless to all the unregenerate,
yea to all the elect before reg^neration, which is such an absu^dity to
affirm, that Gods outward and common ordinances are of no use but
unprofitable: And that God ordained any thing in vain, this is so grolfe, that
it crosses all Scriptures; for ^hey generally affirm, that all that God has
made or ordained, show forth and teach his glory, Psa. 75. 1. Again, if none
but the regenerate should communicate of the Supper of the Lord, the paucity is
such as the Scriptures witness, that there is but one of a City, and two of a
Tribe; yea it will also follow, that he that blesses and distributeth the
bread and wine, must know the receivers conversion, or else he sins in
communicating it: these and an hundred more absurdities will follow, that a
wise man will blush to think of. For if this be so, then the same things that
show forth Christ under the Gospel, shall not be so useful to believers as the
shadows under the Law. And this were to turn the day into night, the light
into darkness. The last thing I intended now to publish, are some few short
conferences I have met with in City and Country, and all may be reduced into
these two positions.

The first Position.
That selected congregations are Churches rightly ordained, and truly
constituted. And that each congregation are free and independent either from
other.

My defense to the first Position.
In this first Position we must consider four things: First, that the
gatherers and avouchers of selected congregations, are Christians in
profession, not in authority, but under Christian authority, and members of
Christian congregations, in communion in all Gods external ordinances, and in
all these respects are those also that they gather to themselves.

Secondly, what is meant by congregations, forasmuch as there are three sorts
of them; that is, first, anthorized congregations; secondly, selected or
covenanted congregations in opposition to authority; and thirdly, spiritual or
voluntary congregations, the communion of Saints.

And the last part of the position is, what is meant by congregationall
Independency.

In the first place therefore we must confider, that all selected congregations
in England, teachers and people, are Christians in profession, and already in
communion and fellowship in the ordinances of the Gospel, being all under
Christian Authority. And notwithstanding all this, they do take up and assume
authority to themselves, so to select and congregate as they do in opposition
to authority, to which they are subjected of God. And for proof of this their
practice, they allege the example of John the Baptist. Mat. 3. 1, 2, 5. our
Savior Christ, Mark 1. 14 15, 16. and the Apostles, Acts 2. 37, 38, 41, 42.
Acts 11. 20, 21, 22. Now I deny that any of these Scriptures come home to prove
the state of your question, or warrant your practice: For John, our Lord, and
the Apostles, taught the doctrine of the Gospel, that Jesus was the Christ, the
Messiah prophesied of to such Jews as were not believers, but opposers of it
and them. And such by their Ministry converted to the faith, which faith is
believed and confessed by such Christians as you select to your selves. And
secondly, the Greeks that were converted, Acts 11. 20. were so converted from
heathenisme to Christianisme; but this is not your case nor practice; for you
pervert Christians from sound and wholesome doctrines, to vain janglings about
words that edify not. And from those Assembles assigned by Christian authority
to such as are of your own ordaining, devising and constituting, the matter and
form thereof is not to be found in Gods word. Now if any of you all could show
me a people that you have gained from among the Jews, and from among the
Heathens, to the acknowledgement and confession of the doctrine of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and that by your Ministry that they have not only believed the
truth, but obeyed it in the power of it, to the effecting in them repentance
and remission of sins; then I would speak and change my discourse to another
sense; but in regard you assume that which you are not, I will only testify
unto you, that that which you do is not warrantable by Scripture, but it is
your own carnal fancy and imagination.

Now the second thing in the Position is, what is meant by Congregation, and in
the threefold distinction the first is Authorized congregations, which are
usually called Parishes; and that is to say, so many Families assigned by
authority to make a congregation to communicate in Gods ordinances for the
salvation of the people. And to that end authority has ordained a way that
their teachers, or teacher, should be a man approved of for able gifts, that a
time, or times in the week, is appointed that men should dispense with, neglect
and lay aside their worldly employments and affairs and meet together in the
communion and participution of Gods ordinances; and to that end have appointed
a place for prayer, reading and expounding the Scriptures, for doctrine,
exhortation, and preaching, as also for communion in baptism and the Lords
Supper. And are not all these things in themselves good and lawful? And if
they be so, what ground have you then for dislike and separation? Nay, have we
not ground by the word of God, to give thanks for such governors that are in
authority over us? And are not their Ordinances and Rules such, without which
we cannot communicate in the outward ordinances of God? Wherefore let us
acknowledge their authority, and obey their rules. But in the next place, the
selected congregations allege, 2 Cor. 6. 17. and Rev. 18. 4. for their
separation and selection, for as much as the holy Ghost says, Come out from
amongst them, (meaning corrupt Christian congregations) and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. This
Scripture, you say, proves the state of the question on your part: for you say,
the Apostles here speak of the Antichristian church of Rome, whose filthy
unclean doctrines were such, that notwithstanding they were Christians in
profession, yet Gods people could not communicate with them, but they must
(there was no avoiding it by reason of their abominable canons) be defiled with
them. And therefore you say, these texts of Scriptures are a sufficient ground
to separate from Christian congregations. I answer, they are a ground to
separate from such Antichristian congregations as the Apostles speak of; but I
require of you to prove the abomination, the unclean thing in the authorized
congregations in England, and then you say something: but till that be proved,
this Scripture is not for your purpose. For the Church of England by the
Parliaments of reformation in King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth's days,
separated from the false doctrines and unclean practices of the church of Rome,
and then made acts, laws and ordinances against the abominable tenets, and
false devised imagined religion, their Priests and Sacrifices, and backed their
decrees with the penalty of death; yet notwithstanding in process of time, the
Prelaticall clergy brought in many corrupt innovations, tending to act again
the old uncleanness under new pretenses: yet this honorable Parliament has
rooted up and extirpated the Prelaticall Hierarchy root and branch, and still
sit spending their wits, spirits and pains, for the reforming of Doctrine and
Discipline, that all congregations may be regulated in and by the nearest way
agreeable to the word of God. Now considering all these things we enjoy under
this happy authority that is over us, and your condition being under this
authority, and so placed of God, take heed therefore, nay how will you avoid
it, but that your resisting this authority, you do therein resist the
Ordinance of God, and herein walk contrary to Gods word, Romans 13. 1, 2. Nay. do
you not fulfill the Prophecy of the Scriptures in presumption and
selfe-willednesse, to despise such Governors, and speak evil of such
digniti^s, as the Apostle foretold, 2 Pet. 2. 10. How can you possibly clear
your way from the gainsaying of Core? Jude v. 11. Nay, is there not a plain
parallel between him and his companies gainsaying, and you and your companies
gainsayings? Number. 16. Did not they which were under authority usurp authority,
and in striving against Moses and Aaron, those that God had set over them, did
they not strive against the Lord? Numb. 26. 9. I will forbear the consequence,
the Lord give you grace to repent of your striving, resistance, and gainsaying;
and murmr no longer against them in saying they impose will worship upon your
consciences in requiring many things there is not a plain word sor, if it be
not against the word, but agreeing with the sense and meaning of the word,
submit your selves to their rules. And if you conceive you know better then the
Parliament, your way is to petition, and not to make resistance.

The next consideration is, the Spiritual or voluntary congregation, the
communion of Saints. The Prophet David calls them the Assembly of Saints, the
Congregation of Saints, Psalm. 89 5. 7. The house of Aaron his Saint, the house
of Israel his chosen one, the house of Levi his Priest, Ps^. 136. and the
Apostle, the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. the household of God, Ephesians. 6. 19.
the house and Church of the living God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. This church is called,
The Lords body, Col. 1. 18. 24. because it is made living by the life that is
in him; spiritual by his spirit: for they are all begotten and born of the
Spirit: and that which is born of the spirit is spirit, John 3. 6. as that
which is born of the flesh is flesh. This communion and whole congregation by
the Spirit of God, are all baptized into one body, and have been made all to
drink into one spirit, 1 Corinthians. 12. 13. These are all the children of
wisdom, all sons of God and heirs of the promises; these all by
regeneration are as Peter was, made living stones, and are built of God a
spiritual house, a chosen generation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. These are
the little flock of sheep and lambs of Christ, to whom the Father has given
the Kingdom, who by faith have both the earnest and the abundant entrance into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, having fellowship with God
their Father, the Son their Savior, the holy Ghost their comforter, and with
each other in joying and sorrowing, comforting and lamenting, believing and
hoping, suffering and expecting with a mutual affection the morning and day of
salvation, 1 John 1. 3. 7 chap. 3. 2. These are they that fear the Lord, that
receive him and his, and often speak and confer one with another, that are
always mindful of his covenant, in whose heart is his Law. These are the Lords
Priests, with whom he has made a covenant of life and peace, who have always
the Lord in their thoughts, Mal. 2. and 3. chapters. These only have received
an unction from the holy One, that teaches them all things, 1 John 2. 20.
These according to the command of their Lord, give unto Caesar the things that
are Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods, Mark. 12. 17. they love the
Lord with all their heart, and their neighbor as themselves: they are all
spiritual, and so is their communion and fellowship, and none but such as are
spiritual are of this congregation, this communion of Saints?

But a Minister in the North country told me, the Independent congregations
were this communion of Saints, which is the last particular in the first
Position: To whom I answered, His expression was very strange to me: for I did
not find any such name expressing creatures, written in the book of life. And I
am sure all the Saints names are written there: Wherefore (said I) he that
gives that name to any people, and those that take that name unto themselves,
are both alike to be blamed: for there is no one nor very many creatures, can
be said to be Independent, but God alone, the great creator. I am the first and
the last, says the Lord, and besides me there is no God, Isaiah 44. 6. And
thou, even thou art Lord alone, Nehem. 9. 6. There is not a Saint, nor
congregation of holy ones can say one to another, I have no need of thee: for
they are all members one of another, and every one the members of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 25 chap. 5. 30. 1 Cor. 12. I wonder that so many learned that
profess that way, and own the name Independent, I wonder, I say, that their
learn^ng does not afford them a more proper term, for as ^uch as under this
notion they aim at liberty of conscience. Were they not better to express
themselves under the names of Religious freedom, for this is the effect of
your practice, which affirm in his governed church in which you are placed
under authority, you ought to have freedom of conscience to exercise your
gifts, to gather a people to your selves, and so to make use of all the
ordinances of God both for Doctrine and Discipline. And that no power nor
authority ought to question you for it, because you ought to have freedom of
conscience. This is another conceit of humane invention. Did you ever read of
such an expression in the Scriptures, so applied as to free a man from all
lawful obedience to authority? the consequence of truth is sincerity, but the
consequence of error is iniquity: For think you not that your freedom of
conscience, as you call it, which does acquit you from all obedience to lawful
commands, if you your self shall so judge of it, is not your own wilfulness
to disobey that authority that is over you, a permanent ground for the like
freedom for all in particular that are under you, to discl^ime your authority,
upon the same terms you do others? See in a word, how you by mistaking the
word, overthrow Gods ordinance of government, Romans 13. even that which himself
is God of, for he is the God of Gods, Dan. 2. 47. and the God of order, 1 Cor.
14. 33. Now to make your absurdity, more manifest, observe a similitude, make
the whole Kingdom of England the great national church, make the Parliament
and assembly of Ministers the Ruling and Teaching Elders in this great church,
your selves neither of them, but under this authority. And therefore by the law
of God and man ought to live obediently to all their lawful ordinances. You
pretend by religious freedom you ought not to obey them, but rather to follow
your own conceivings: Is not this your practice of disobeying your Superiors,
a perpetual ground for disobedience in your inferiors? For that inferior who
ever he be, that says, none above him has power to prescribe rules to him,
his own practice for ever frees all that are under him from all manner of
obedience to him: and so for ever to establish by this doctrine such dissenting
and contending, as that there is no such custom in the churches of God, 1 Cor.
11. 16. for the rule of Gods church is the quite contrary, as the Apostle
testifies, Romans 13. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. It is true the Saints and children of God are free, but that is in a
spiritual respect, by a spiritual birth, The truth shall make you free, John
8. 32. If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed, verse 36. but
with the right knowledge of this freedom, I find few professors are acquainted.

Their second Position.
When we have truly constituted our church by selecting us a congregation, then
we shall enjoy the spiritual administration of Christ's ordinances in their
purity, setting up Christ upon his throne, to the happy enjoyment and
accomplishment of all the prophesies and promises foretold of all by the
Prophets and Apostles.

My defense to your second Position.
There are three things considerable in this Position also: First, what you
mean by Ordinances: Secondly, their spiritual administration and purity: And
lastly, what you mean by setting Christ up in his throne to the fulfilling of
all the Prophesies and promises in the Scriptures. And first for the term
Ordinances, are they not those that we have in communion in our public
Assemblies, prayer, reading and expounding the Scriptures, preaching, and in
communicating in baptism and the Lords Supper? Is not the word of God the same
in public congregations, as amongst you: the same in a common and the same in
a special administration? Is not prayer the same in both with the spiritual,
the sacrifice of a broken heart, with the rest, a presentation of persons and
words? Is not baptism the same in the outward as in the inward consideration?
The Lords Supper the same in the corporal signs, as in the spiritual grace,
that as the earnall Christian through the common faith, eats the bread, and
drinks the wine; so the spiritual Christian by justifying faith, eats Christ's
flesh, and drinks his blood. You confess all this to be true; but you say the
difference lies in the point of the purity of the ordinances, the manner of
administration and communion in them, which is the second confideration in the
Position. And you say, for want of the spiritual administration, the
authorized congregations have lost the purity of all Gods ordinances, and
thereby continue the abominable and unclean thing amongst them. And you give
three instances to prove this: First, that our Minister are not truly called:
secondly, say some of you, we alter the ordinance of baptism: thirdly, you all
with one consent condemn us, for admitting of mixed congregations. To the first
I answer, Presbyters by the Parliament are ordained to examine, approve and
allow of men's gifts, and for their spiritual gifts received of God, to appoint
and allow of them therefore to be Ministers according to the Apopostles rule, 1 Timothy 3. 10 chap. 4. 14. against which there is no other external rule to be
showed in the Scriptures. And secondly, whereas many of you say, we alter the
ordinance of baptism, it is more then you can prove by Scripture: for although
it be said, Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. In your own understanding of that place, it does not say therefore
as you say, ye shall not baptize the infants of believers, who you therein
forbid to be brought to Christ, contrary to the command of our Lord, Matthew. 19.
14. Suffer little children to come, or to be brought, unto me; for so much the
Text inferres, and forbid them not to come unto me, and. Which inhibition of
yours is contrary also to Gods own ordinance and command, Exodus 12. Genesis 17.
which plainly commands that which you deny, that children are to communicate if
their parents were believers. According to which ordinance of God the Apostles
testify to all the world, Acts 2. The promise belongs to you and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even to so many as the Lord our God
shall call; as if he should say, whosoever God calls to believe, the covenant
belongs to them and to their infants, as the covenant belonged to Abraham and
to all strangers that should come to believe the truth, to them and to their
children also. And this is the reason that we find it written, and there are
many examples of it in the Apostles times, that when a man came to believe the
truth, the doctrine they taught them, not only they themselves but their
households were baptized, 1 Cor. 1. as the household of Stephan as, and the rest.
And the Apostle resolves the question to the Church of Corinth, says he to
this effect, If one of the parents be a believer, then are your children holy,
that is, then have they right to the external ordinance of God; and in this
sense the Apostle says, God has showed me not to call any man unholy, or
unclean, that is, whosoever believes Jesus Christ come in the flesh, may be
baptized, although before a Gentile, and they and their household have right to
Gods holy ordinance, as Cornelius and his household, Acts 10. And when you can
prove that the Minister taking infants into his arms, praying for them, and
washing them in the name of Christ (or Ahrahams circumcising of Ishmael at the
command of God) is more then Christ's taking them into his arms and blessing
them, then you will say something, till then you declare your own fancy, and
say nothing to the purpose. And for mixed congregations as you find fault with,
I pray, are you sure your selves are not weeds and cockle, but good corn? if
your selves were spiritual, then you would know and understand the meaning of
Gods spirit, that both must be let alone till the harvest, the end of the
world, as our Lord says, for till then there is no separation, Matthew. 13. 30.
but wicked Cain may bring and offer his sacrifice with Abel the righteous;
persecuting Ishmael may communicate in the ordinance of God with persecuted
Isaac: the bitter and unclean hypocrite Simon Magus, may be washed or baptized
in flesh, as well as Philip, Peter and John, and the holy ones of God, Acts 8.
And although our Lord knew the Devilish treacherous heart of Judas, yet his
participation in the ordinances, neither in Baptism, the Passover, or the
Lords Supper, did not prejudice, nor no way hindered the spiritual communion
of the faithful, for he participated in prayer, Mat. 6. in preaching, Mat. 10.
in baptism, Mat. 3. 15. in the Passover and Supper of the Lord, Luke 22. 14,
15, 21. and yet none of Christ's little holy ones makes your complaint; for his
carnal presence did no way detrifie their spiritual fellowship.

And in the third and last place, we are to understand what is meant by setting
up Christ upon his Throne, and the fulfilling and accomplishing of all the
prophesies and promises witnessed by the Apostles and Prophets. And here now as
with one consent you do all of you unanimously affirm, that all the Prophesies
in the whole Scriptures, are fulfilled in your congregated companies, and that
in doing that which you do, in assuming to your selves power to select
congregations, and prescribing to them the rules of Christ, as you call them,
although indeed they are rules of your own making, yet you therein set up
Christ upon his throne, and that your churches, ways, and devised order, the
matter nor manner thereof, being that which is not to be found in Scriptures,
yet you give it out to the world, that by you, and in your church government,
is fulfilled the prophecy of the new heavens, and new earth, promised of God,
and witnessed by the Prophet Isaiah and the Apostle Peter, the heavenly
country and city that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob sought for, Heb. 11. the new
Jerusalem that John saw come down from God out of heaven, and Sion that holy
and heavenly city, that great and strong city that God has appointed
salvation for walls and bulwarks, Jer. 23. 9. 6. chap. 34. 15, 16. Ezekiel. 37.
26, 27, 28. chap. 48. 35. and that of your gatherings it may be said, the Lord
is there, applying to your selves Sions own happiness, Zeph. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16,
etc. Isa. 49. 21.

Is it possible there should be such gross blindness in these days, in which
men say they see, and are in the light, wherefore their great darkness, and all
their bold avouchments like empericks, which fill market places with noises, and
churches and chambers, public meetings and meeting houses with voices, those
that have written such volumes, and printed such books to make known and
advance these false doctrines, to the belying the Prophets, the wounding,
scaring, and killing the truth their witness and testimony, the truth of God in
a word will reprove them, strip them, and discover their nakedness and shame to
all posterity, by a few questions resolved by the letter of the Scriptures,
which is as clear light as the Sunshine at noon days, and yet these flying
Bats cannot see the truth and light thereof. The first question is, What is the
throne of Christ? Secondly, when the time shall be that Christ shall sit in
his own throne. Thirdly, what is meant by Sion, mentioned by the Prophets. And
fourthly, what we are to understand of the Churches glorious condition, her
deliverance and perfection the Scriptures so often speak of.

Now Christ's throne is, that which he calls his own throne, as a note of
d^stinction between his throne and his Fathers throne; and therefore he says,
Rev. 2. 21. To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me in my throne,
even as I also overcame and am set down with my Father in his throne. And of
this throne our Lord speaks, Mat. 19. 28. When the Son of man shall sit in the
throne of his glory, verily ye also that have followed me in the regeneration,
shall also sit, etc. And of this throne of the Sons, and not called the
Fathers, is that throne the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 1. 8. But unto the Son he
says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a scepter of righteousness is
the scepter of thy kingdom. And the Prophet calls him God also, Psalm. 45 6. Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever, etc. To this kingly throne of God there
belongs a kingdom, a Church of Saints, which he will not perfect and accomplish
till his return from heaven, his coming again, his appearing, which is the
second consideration propounded, the time when Christ shall be set upon his
throne; and that is then (says the Prophet) Psalm. 102. 16. When the Lord shall
build up Sion, he shall appear in his glory, etc. Even then (says the Apostle,
2 Timothy 4. 1. When the Lord Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead,
then shall be his appearing and kingdom. Which prophesies are confirmed for
truth by our Lords own testimony, Mat. 25. 31, 32. When the Son of man shall
come in his glory, etc. and v. 3. Then mark, Then shall the King say unto them
on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my F^ther, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world. Note again, ^ere is the reward, the
inheritance, the kingdom, all this world long preparing and promised, which
makes me wonder, that so many seers have overseen and mist the reading of these
Scriptures, which in their literal sense plainly preach, that Christ shall not
be advanced into his own throne, in his own kingdom, till the harvest at the
end of this word, Mat. 13. 30. 40. And therefore the holy Ghost uses the future
tense in all his expressions. As the Apostle says, It is the world to come
whereof we speak, when he speaks of these things, Heb. 2. 5 even of the
throne, dominion, and kingdom of Christ. In the third place, we are to
consider, how we are to understand the term Sion in the Scriptures meaning. In
which we must mind a double respect, first, as the term Sion is referred to the
Churches estate of regeneration in this present life. And secondly, as it is
referred to the Churches estate of perfection in the life that is to come. In
the first sense the Prophet Isaiab speaks of her, chap. 2. 3. For out of Sion
shall go forth a law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And again, chap.
40. 9. O Sion that brings good tidings, O Jerusalem, that brings good
tidings, say, Behold your God So says another Prophet, Out of Sion the
perfection of beauty, God hath-shined, Psa. 50. 2. even shined forth in the
clear revelation or the truth and law of life, the covenant of grace, as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 3. 10. The manifold wisdom of God is made known by the
Church, which the holy Ghost calls the keepers of truth, Isai. 26. agreeing
with the Apostles testimony in another place, Gal. 4. 26. But Jerusalem which
is above, and from above, is free, and is the mother of us all. Now in another
sense, and in the second consideration, Jerusalem, or Sion so named, is to be
understood of her perfection and glory, ber deliverance and salv^tion, as Isai.
26. 1. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah, We have a
strong Ci^ie, salvation will. God appoint for walls and bulwarks, nothing shall
enter therein but the ri^hteous nation that keeps truths; and these can be no
other but the S^ints of God. Indeed they only are the righteous and holy
nation, a chosen, royal, blessed, peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And of these
the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of, None uncircumcised in heart and flesh, shall
enter into this holy City. And this is t^ City, the glorious and magnificent
Tabernacle spoken of throughout the whole Scriptures; the apprehension and
contemplation of which makes another Prophet break out into a ravished
spiritual expression, considering the exceeding glory of her to come, of whom
it may be said in this present life, that she flumbers, possesses weakness,
contempt, nakedness in the sight of men, seeming to die, to be forsaken,
desolate, trodden down under feet, no man no more regarding her then the dirt
under their feet. And yet in that morning of her Lords coming, so exceedingly
altered, beyond all comparison, as makes the holy man, Isa. 52. 1. make
acclamation in the words of admiration, Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O
Sion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem the holy City: for from
henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean:
for (says he) her Officers shall he peace, and her exactors righteousness,
violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy
borders; thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise, Isai. 60.
17, 18. Oh when can this strength, these beautiful garments be enjoyed by the
faithful, this separation from the wicked, when shall the oppressor, the
strong and violent, hatred of the wicked cease, and wasting and destruction be
at an end, but at the resurrection? And where can Sions deliverance and glory
be, but in the world to come, in the new heavens and new earth of the Lords own
making, and not of man's devising, wherein the righteous and righteousness
shall be no longer a sojourner and stranger, but a ruler and a dweller? Behold
(says the Lord) I create new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind, Isai. 60. 17. The former are these present,
that are defiled and polluted; but those that the Lord has promised to make,
shall succeed the passing away and desolation of these that are now, and shall
remain forever unmovable and unshaken. And this shall he do at his second
coming, in the day of the Lord, in the day of God, as the Prophet before
declares, and as here the Apostle testifies, 2 Pet. 3. 11. 12. This is Sion
in her glory, the holy city, the new Jerusalem. And Rev. 21. 1. 2. when the
beloved disciple saw in the Revelation of God, the promise of the new heavens,
and the new earth fulfilled, then in them he saw this city, this church in her
glory, prepared as a bride adorned, that is, beautifully clothed to marry with
her husband: and the great voice of the Lord declared it, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his
people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And this is the
accomplishment of the covenant, the salvation of the whole house of Israel,
when the Lord shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And that there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain: for the former things are passed away. And he that sat upon the throne
said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me write, for these words
are true and faithful. These true and faithful words shall rise up in
judgment against all such blind guides that teach their followers against the
very letter of the text: for though the word says, this estate of the churches
perfection shall be in that time when it shall be that there is no death, for
that shall be swallowed up in victory, yet they dare to affirm to their
deceived followere, that the glorious City is a fancy of their own framing,
even in this life, while death as an enemy reigning over them, surely they
cannot be said to be bright men, but blackmen, dark-men, no light men, men of
this world, and not of that to come; men in the flesh, and not in the spirit;
for the new heavens, and the new earth are the inheritance of the Saints, this
new Jerusalem is the City with foundations, whose builder and maker is God, the
better resurrection, the promise, the heavenly country, that Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob looked for, as all the other Patriarchs did, who when they were in
this world professed themselves pilgrims and strangers, as all their fathers
were, Heb. 11. Now as by this that has been said, it plainly appears, that a
multitude of unwary teachers, have perverted the Scriptures, in applying them
to their carnal conceited meanings. And as these, so most of all other
Scriptures they do allege: for not till the Lords coming at the general
resurrection, can come the churches deliverance and salvation, the times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord. And this Doctrine is justified by the
testimony of Gods Spirit, saying, He shall send Jesus which before was
preached unto you whom the heavens must receive and contain until the times of
restatution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the world began, Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. Hear all you that have
learned to speak contrary to the truth, the words and meaning of the holy
M^ssengers and Prophets of God, and repent, or else the Prophets themselves will
condemn you. And that you may know your indictment, behold and hear what they
say further in evidence against your doctrines: For thus says the Prophet
Zephany of the churches estate of the life to come, which you affirm is meant
of this life, The remnant of Israel (says he) shall not do iniquity, not
speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for
they shall feed and lie down and none shall make them afraid. Sing, O daughter
of Sion, shout O Israel. Me thinks it is the same our Lord says, I will see
you again, and will turn your sorrow into joy, never again to lose it, John 16.
And so the Prophet goes on, Be glad and rejoice with all thy heart, O daughter
of Jerusalem, the Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thy
enemies, the King of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee, thou shall
not see evil any more, Zeph. 3 13. Is not this the Lords return again to his
church for her everlasting comfort? And of this return of our Lord, and
deliverance of his church, are all other Scriptures to be understood, which you
have mentioned. Then and not before will the Lord perform that good thing
promised by Jeremy, chap. 23. 14. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that
I will perform that good thing I have promised to the house of Israel, and the
house of Judah. In those days and at that time will I cause the branch of
righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute judgment and
righteousness in the land; in those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem
shall dwell safely. And this is the name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness. And in the day of the Lords return to this City, the Lambs
wife, it shall be said, The Lord is here, Ezekiel. 48. 15. But to leave these
mistakers to their great mistakings, I will speak one word to the blessed
expecters, the sons of Sion, the children of hope, Be comforted, beloved, for
now it is but twenty days and the funeral day will come of Babylon, the
sons of confusion; and it will hardly exceed forty four days more, but
your blessed expectation will be accomplished: for in the midnight of that day
there shall be a great cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, and then
blessed Bride go out to meet him for evermore to enjoy him with unspeakable
joy, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.

Wherefore he that has eyes let him see, and he that has ears let him hear;
and he that has attained to a good heart, let him understand.

FINIS.

