A SONG OF SION.

Written by a Citizen thereof, whose outward Habitation is in Virginia; and
being sent over to some of his Friends in England, the same is found fitting to
be Published, for to warn the Seed of Evildoers.

The Seed is sown, from which rare fruits do spring,
The Plant is grown, that heavenly virtues bring;
The dead now lives, that is risen from the graves,
That praises gives, to him that sinners saves.
The morning of that day, is dawned clear,
Wherein men may walk in Celestial Sphere.
Nations partake of Gospel Tidings sound,
Sins to forsake, and in Christ to be found.
And happy's he, that is lived to see this day,
And blessed be, the living God always.
By the Publisher.

With an Additional POSTSCRIPT from another Hand.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

A SONG of SION.
A general Warning for all men to see,
That now the World may fully warned be;
And given unto you as a lovely Song,
That in your minds you may retain it long;
And a Witness against those let it rise,
That desperately Christ's Light do despise.
Tremble ye proud ones, let your fury halt
That so rebel, and yet your selves exalt;
Now mark this well, O thou America,
Europe also, Asia and Africa.
BE silent now all People, young and old,
Give ear all Nations, let your eyes behold
How Christ's pure Light, most glorious does appear,
O all mankind submit to him in fear;
And let your Priests for shame deceive no more,
For Christ does sure destroy great Babel's Whore,
Which proudly does on many Waters sit,
And to Christ's glorious Light will not submit,
But strictly will make Laws against the just,
And rob the harmeless, to fulfill their lust.
Was ever Pharaoh's eye more wilful blind?
And think you not, God's wrath as sure to find?
Would you prescribe how men shall serve the Lord?
And you your selves God's Laws never regard.
O wretched men, would you your selves enthrone,
And seek to rule, where Christ should rule alone?
Who truly will reward equal and right,
According as each loves or hates his Light.
Dare you revenge your selves upon a man
That fears the Lord, and not bow to you can?
Or for reproving you of any ill,
Will you your cruelty on them fulfill?
And for meeting together in Christ's Name,
Dare you make havoc of them for the same?
Let fury cease, for God's just wrath proceeds,
And gives to man according to his deeds.
Does Corn so plentifully now abound,
That upright men may not work in their ground,
And no place else can you to them aford,
But prison-holes because they fear the Lord.
Think you the Lord not angry is for this?
Or do you think, that ye his stroke shall miss?
O consider, and be astonished,
That you so wretchedly are hardened.
Let this be writ for the succeeding age,
To see their folly, and abhor their rage:
That they may know the dreadful works of God,
And say at last, these justly felt his rod.
Blessed are they that in their hearts have room,
For Christ to reign, before his anger come;
For dreadful time of wrath is sure at hand,
O faithless ones, when will you understand?
Now let this be imprinted in your mind,
In time repent, whilst you a time yet find
Fear the Lord God, cease from iniquity,
And love Christ's Light, else in your sins you die.
The everlasting Gospel, Saints declare,
O all mankind to hear it now prepare.
All People hear, both far and near,
of Tongues and Nations all,
That do belong, to Princes strong,
of Kingdoms great or small:
O mind all you, these words most true,
proceeding from above,
Whose just command, must ever stand,
who dares against it move?
The pure Fanner, gives his banner,
to them that fears his Name,
For to display, in this his day,
and spread Truths royal fame;
And glorious moves, his harmless doves,
for to declare these things,
O mankind all, mark well your call,
now hear most pure tidings.
Fear God most high, him magnify,
and dread his iron rod,
For Nations must, do what is just,
and serve the living God.
All in each land, now understand,
obey Christ's saving Light,
That in you is, and shows you this,
to walk most true and right.
And to beware, nothing to dare,
with any to accord,
That proudly seek, to turn the meek,
from serving of the Lord.
And now behold, all young and old,
and see your thoughts most vain,
Let wicked man, do what he can,
Christ over all shall reign.
Therefore awake, your sins forsake,
obey Christ's pure command,
All high and low, him mind to know,
And this now understand:
How you in sin, wilful have been,
greatly opposing those,
Which did discharge, their trust at large,
though for it they had blows.
And proud vain men, do yet again,
their fury greatly show,
Against Christ's Light, with cruel spite,
though for it they have woe.
Darkness therefore, such love far more,
than Christ's pure shining Light,
And Truth such hate, though high they prate,
they stumble in the night:
And will not see, the misery,
they plunge themselves into,
Nor yet will heed, how they make speed,
into Tophet to go.
Yet some may say, show us the way,
this madness to forsake,
For certainly, they go awry,
that do with such partake.
Also indeed, they do exceed,
religions all unsound,
Saints words to use, and yet abuse,
those in the Light are found.
To such true heart, I must impart,
glad tidings to thee sure,
If thou indeed, desires to feed,
on bread of Life most pure.
If thou will hear, O then give ear,
also receive true sight,
Let nothing be, so dear to thee,
as Christ's most glorious Light.
Turn thine eye in, and there begin,
to see its brightness shine,
There hear the voice, which may rejoice,
thy soul in mirth Divine.
Pure Doctrine there, is always near,
if thou in Truth abide,
To walk therein, and cease from sin,
and not from Christ to slide.
O who can guess, or ought express,
how great peace such do find,
Whose hearts always, on Christ do stay,
and do him ever mind:
And that do love, him far above,
man's tongue can well declare,
Surely they will, obey him still,
though for it they hated are.
But all the proud, may houl full loud,
and thus lift up their cry,
We fools alas, our days did pass,
in pride and vanity;
But now we find, we were stark blind,
and did reject the Light,
Which now will sting, everlasting,
sad thoughts does now affright.
So remaining, sad complaining,
may yet thus farther speak,
Horror and woe, oppresses so,
my heart, as it would break.
Can any thing, now easement bring,
my sins so numerous?
Is this my gain, sorrow and pain,
and ends mine honor thus?
Can house or land, or gold in hand,
avail my soul perplexed?
Or can pleasures, or yet treasures,
release my spirit vexed?
Can Physic rare, or Princely fare,
or musicks highest strain?
Or Monarchs great, though in their seat,
such seem a while to reign?
Or Prince, or Peer, of Kingdoms here,
on the terrestrial Globe,
Add a relief, unto my grief,
or soul of sin unrobe?
No they must die, and also lie,
in bowels of the earth;
Their honor flee, and nothing be,
and where is then their mirth?
Yea so it is, vain man amiss,
in darkness wanders so,
Till God's fierce storm, awakes their worm,
then are they filled with woe.
Thus men unwise, so lives so dies,
and thus their time they spend,
Yet must again, rise unto pain,
that never shall have end.
The Saints also, a time do know,
of gladness and of joy,
Though proud vain men, consult again,
thinking them to destroy.
Yet shall they sing, unto their King,
in pleasant mellody,
When those that would, Christ reign not should,
shall howl in misery.
Therefore no less, they do confess,
in anguish and sore grief,
They are undone, for in God's Son,
they had no true belief.
But hated such, that loved much,
for to instruct them well,
Therefore at last, are justly cast,
into the flames of hell.
Great joys begin, sweetly to spring,
the righteous have their part,
Sadness must flee, and gladness be,
to the upright in heart.
Man's rage shall pass, and he as grass,
shall fade and not be found,
His wrath shall be, his misery,
great woe will him surround.
And Christ alone, shall on his Throne,
most gloriously appear,
The Saints*rejoyce, in heart and voice,
they see this day is near.
And some may say, it is now bright day,
and Christ's now clearly seen,
And in his train, glorious to reign,
more than long since has been:
And in thousands, now glorious stands,
condemning what is ill.
Yea it is so, and yet we know,
the Lord of glory will*
Make all to bend, which do offend,
his royal Seed elect,
No greatness shall, defend their fall,
he will them not respect:
Nor strength nor might, of those which fight,
and scoff at purity,
But down they go, exceeding low,
and sad will be their cry.
O see how vain, such do remain,
their hope a spiders bed
Their rotten wall, will sudden fall,
and then their hope is fled.
Their deeds will not, then be forgot,
their sins will all appear,
How they did slight, Christ's saving Light,
will pierce their souls with fear.
O now lament, and pure repent,
whilst it is called to day,
Lest your morrow, meets that sorrow,
that must endure always*
God's love is found, grace does abound,
to them Christ's Light believe,
But great terror, woe and horror,
to those God's spirit grieve.
Mark well each one, let this alone,
of all things else above,
Most minded be, and in dread see,
how you regard God's Love.
Now I return to you who highly prize,
God's glorious Truth, for Christ has made you wise;
Whose Light you know, and gladly walk therein,
And for God's Truth, you sufferers have bin:
Divine influence does me purely move,
To give you all a joyful Kiss of Love;
Where ere you be in Countries far or near,
It joys my heart, your saving health to hear.
Of all Nations, Kindreds, People, and Tongues,
Where Christ's beloved ones at all belongs;
This loving greeting to you all I send,
That faithful follows Christ unto the end.
Pure Lambs of Christ, that do in pureness dwell,
Pearls of highest esteem, that do excel:
Celestial Lights, of the most noble birth,
Whose mournful nights, ends in eternal mirth.
Christ's precious ones, whom he so dearly loves,
Has heard your groans, you are his spouse, his doves.
Therefore arise, your royal robe put on;
Christ makes you wise, on Thrones to sit upon.
Therefore you shall so judge in righteousness,
That Nations all shall to Christ's Light confess,
How brightest beams of Light transparent show,
And pleasant streams of love, most sweetly flow;
Returning praise to Christ from whence they spring,
To him always high Alleluja's sing.
My Friends to me, you are exceeding dear,
That loves Christ's Light, and God most high do fear.
His power know, and where your strength does lie,
You hear his voice, and he has heard your cry.
His answer know, and in his promise trust,
Your day of Trials, end in Triumph must.
Christ's faithful ones, though scorners rage and frown,
God makes you heirs of an eternal C^own.
Glory to God, whose goodess, does increase,
Praise him ever, who gives to us his peace.
Not else I feel, that now to say I have,
But that I am, your fellow-friend, John Grave.
Virginia, The beginning of the third Month, 1662.
An Additional-POST-SCRIPT.
1. COme powerful God, O come thou Holy One
Possess thy Kingdom, and enjoy thy Throne:
How long, O righteous God, O glorious King
Shall Babel in her glory sit and sing,
And Tower and Vaunt her self upon the Wing?
2. Sits not thy Sion, weeping in the dust,
While the proud Gentiles (Lord) oppress the just?
Thou see the Tears of thy afflicted Seed,
Thou hear'st the Groans of Sion in her Need,
Is she not clothed in her mourning Weed?
3. Does not thy pierceing Eye, (pure God) behold
How Babel's builders brave it, and are bold?
Does not proud Babel all her forces bend
Against every one that is thy Sions friend?
When shall the Harlot come unto her end?
4. Ah how does mischief in her bosom boil,
How does her Merchants hunt for prey and spoil?
Ah have they not already, Lord, begun
To spoil thy People in the face of the Sun,
And glory in it, as if they had well done?
5. Do they not Snares and wicked Laws invent,
Fine, Praemunire, yea, and Banishment?
Is this the worst, (Lord) that the Woolf intends*
To thy meek harmless, helpless ones, thy friends?
Save Lord, or else his wrath in Murder ends.
6. Save Lord thy Remnant, let thy powerful Arm
Preserve thy suffering Seed, that means no harm:
Lord spare the People, open thou their eyes
Who only to do evil yet are wise;
O that thy Seed in such, pure God, might rise.
7. Then should our enemies know (Lord) we are thine,
The harmless Branches of thy lovely Vine:
Did they our innocence, Lord, behold,
Would they count that for Copper which is Gold,
Would they thus worry the sheep of the Fold?
8. Clear thou the eyesight, Lord, of such as be,
Through want of knowledge, enemies to thee;
Limit the proud, insulting, restless waves,
The desperately wicked that thus braves,
And Vaunts aganist thee; Thy poor servant craves.
9. Support thy Sion, let her holy Faith
Sound a defiance to the Dragons wrath:
Fill Sion with a holy zeal, let it be known,
The tender suffering babes, Lord be thy own,
Be thou their Armor, Then thy will be done.
10. Fill thou the hearts of thine (pure God) with love
With patience, meekness, wisdom from above,
Let not the weakest (ah Lord) be beguiled
Through Satan's wiles, let not his faith be foiled,
Make all thine valiant Lord, for thee, yet mild.
11. And as for me, thou know I am a worm,
Lord let me feel thy presence in the storm,
My wants, my weakness, Lord to thee is known,
Supply what is wanting, am not I thy own?
Ah help me, that I may not loose the Crown.
12. I see the Furnace must be hotter yet,
Lord so be it:
Preserve the Metal, burn but up the Dross,
And then what loss?
Thy Gold refined, there is comfort in the Cross.
Polish thy Jewels Lord unto thy praise,
So thou but shine upon me with thy rays,
What is it if Lord for thee I end my days?
25th. 6. Month, 1662. M. M.

Printed for Robert Wilson, 1662.


