THE Great Feast OF THE Gospel-Passover: OR The Commemoration of the Sufferings
of Christ, Celebrated in his last Supper.

Matthew. 26. chap. V. 26.And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
Body.

V. 27.And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of it:

V. 28.For this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for
the remission of Sins.

Christ's Flesh and Blood they feed on who Believe;
And he to them Eternal Life does give.
Christ died, to save from Death his Turtle Dove:
She offers up her self to him in Love.
John 6.40, 54, 63. Cant. 7.10. Romans 12.1.

A POEM.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for the Author by James Astwood, and Sold by Peter Parker at
the Leg and Star, and John Salusbury at the Rising Sun, both in Cornhill; John
Lawrence at the Angel, and John Harris at the Harrow, both in the Poultrey.
1694.

The Introduction.
THe Supper of the Lord Commemorates
The quintessence of all our Gospel Cates:
Christ's Institution makes each element
Transcendent excellencies represent.
In this great Mist'ry lively is held forth
A blessing of inestimable worth.
The apple of the Tree of life is here,
For God himself is a Believers cheer,
The banner of free Grace is here displayed,
And glorious'ly into the heart conveyed:
To Faiths sharp-sighted eye, Christ does appear
In The oriency of his beauty here;
And so his golden lines of Love imparts
Unto the center of Believers bearts.
The Word, does Trumpet-like, proclaim his grace;
This, like a Glass, does represent his face.
The things we see, far more impression leave
Upon our heart, than those the ear receive.
A Solemn spectacle of Death, invites
That heart to mourn, which an Oration sleights;
Even so Christ's Death, thus represented, more
Affects our Souls, than preaching on it before.
Thus Christ does both the soul and senses feast
Of every Self-examin'd longing guest.
Christ feasts his Saints with sacred wine and bread,
His body broken, and his lifeblood shed:
Christ's broken body, to a broken heart,
The only healing medicine does impart.
Christ's mourning is become our Song of mirth,
Which gives our dying hopes a Second birth.
Christ by his stripes our wounded Spirits heals,
And his free Grace, with his own Signet Seals:
Thus Christ, to strengthen our weak faith, conjoyns
His Sanctifying Word with sealing signs.
When we sit at his Table, the sweet smell
Of his rich Grace does Spikenard far excel.
Here, Christ, transfigured before our eyes,
Gives us a glimpse of the heave'nly Paradise.
Now we should mount upon Seraphick wings,
To meet this Prince of glory, King of Kings:
Whose mouth an olive branch of Peace does bring,
Whose kisses make the Soul with joy to sing.
Christ, in those pleasant Galleries resides,
Wherein the sweet perfume of Grace abides.
Let Us on those golden hours high value set,
When we do at free Grace's Table eat:
For Christ himself is present as a Guest,
And is both the Feast-maker and the Feast.
Who put off God with empty shows alone,
He only will to them by Signs be known:
Who but (to Him) the skin of duty give,
The Shell of Comfort only shall receive.
But God, his grace and glory will impart
To those who serve him with a perfect heart.
THE GREAT FEAST OF THE Gospel-Passover: OR, The Commemoration of the
Sufferings of Christ celebrated in his last Supper. Mat. 26.26, 27, 28.
ALL Gospel Institutions appertain
Of Right to Christ, who over his Church does reign:
It is a flower of his Crown, and He
On all Usurpers will avenged be.
Christ to the Deed of Grace subscribes his Name,
Appoints the Seal that ratifies the same.
Christ is the founder of this Ordinance,
Which does its worth and luster much advance.
The King of Kings this royal Banquet makes,
Whereof each Subject, high and low, partakes.
This Feast Christ after Supper celebrates,
Which shows it chiefly to the Soul relates:
It Is not to indulge the Senses, but to feast
The Graces, that their strength might be increased.
Christ seeing fear and danger near at hand,
Now arms his Saints that they may these withstand:
This Antidote will soon expel their fear,
This Cordial will their Fainting Spirits cheer.
As Christ set Bread, so God set Him appart,
For Man's Redemption, to rejoice his heart.
Christ separates and Sanctifies the bread;
So All should be that would therewith be fed.
He therefore chose this very Element,
'Cause Bread 1 Kings 7.48. Genesis 14.18. 1 Kings 19.6.
did formerly him represent.
Music and Colors please the Eye and Ear,
But bread gives life, it is that the heart does cheer.
As bread does to the Soul subsistence give,
So he that eats Christ, by him shall live.
As bread new strength 1 Kings 19.8.
transmits into the heart,
So Christ does by this bread more Grace impart.
Christ both the Soul and Senses satisfies:
He Is bread to the heart, and beauty to the eyes.
This bread it will supply of strength extend,
'Till we again the mount of God ascend.
Christ sanctifies the Elements, so they
His crucifixion to the life pourtray;
And thus the secret openly imparts,
How he conveys Himself into our hearts.
The Signs, through his effectual blessing Seal
Those privileges which He does reveal.
If He gave thanks who was to shed his blood,
Then how should we, who drink it for our good?
This box of ointment broke, ill Scents consumes,
And fills both Heaven and Earth with its perfumes.
Christ to his Church in truth might say, I see
A bloody Spouse Exodus 4.25.
thou have been unto me.
Water on red-hot Iron poured, makes fire,
Although the Iron suffers not, expire.
Christ's humane Nature suffering, the divine
Did then triumphantly in glory shine.
His birth is like unto the rising Sun,
His death is like him, when his race is run.
When as the humane nature was to dye,
Then the Divine did Justice satisfy:
Christ's Godhead, Majesty and power gave
Unto his sufferings; so our Souls they save.
Christ is our Altar, Priest and Sacrifice;
As man, God-man, Mat. 23.19.
and God; Gods Lamb thus dies.
Thus Christ our Passover for us was slain:
At this great feast let pure affections reign.
Christ's lingering, shameful, cursed Death was Smart,
The arrow of Gods wrath did pierce his heart.
His pains were equal to the pains of Hell,
Which in this 1 Pet. 2.21, to 24.
Tragedy are acted well.
Well might the lamp of Heaven withdraw his light,
And mask it self with darkness, black as night,
As blushing to behold the glorious Sun
Of Righteousness, this gloomy course to run.
Upon this King Eternal Life depends;
This Spring to drooping Souls refreshing lends.
This Deathbed Cordial fainting Spirits chears,
This Antidote expells all servile fears.
With Christ there were two pair of Thieves that died;
For Sin and Satan too, were crucified.
Christ also took the Cup, which shows how free
And large his Merits of Redemption be.
But how can those Men think with Christ to Sup,
Who Sacrilegiously withhold the Cup.
The mortal bleeding of this precious Vine,
Is signified by this Cup of Wine:
Now was the Lilly of the Valleys died
A deep Carnation Color for his Bride.
To Christ this did a cup of Terror prove,
But to his Church a Cup of dearest Love.
When He drank of this deadly cup of blood,
It wrought for her an everlasting good.
We see in this pure blood, so freely shed,
Sin fully punished, fully pardoned.
Well might the Spouse give Christ her spiced Wine,
And juice of her Pomgranates Cant. 8.2.
with it join;
When Christ gave her his blood, spic'd with his Love,
Perfumed with the Godhead from above.
Here Is Childrens food, with this Christ feasts his Friends,
These Cates he to each welcome Guest extends.
For these Christ poured out his Prayers, his blood:
Here Is Love transcendent; O how great! how good!
But to the Impenitent that have not Faith,
He Is given for a stumbling-stone, in wrath:
His blood, like Chimick drops a power distills,
That every Patient quickly cures, or kills.
Sinners turn bread to Poison by their breath,
For Judas from the Tree of Life sucked Death.
Saints, here your Everlasting Joy begins;
This Seals to you Remission of your Sins.
This mercy is of the first Magnitude,
This one all other Blessings does include.
Whoever has this Charter granted, is
Enrolled in the Book of Psalm. 103.3, 4. and 32 1.
Life and Bliss.
Adoption, Glory, Joy, are fixed here,
Within the Orb of this Celestial Sphere.
One fitly styles this feast, the Feast oth' Cross;
For Christ made that our gain, which was his loss.
To say the Bread is Flesh, is most absurd,
Contrary both to Reason, and the Word.
Until the Serpent turned a Rod again,
'Twas no Rod while that species did remain.
This casts contempt upon Christ's Ordinance,
Which is designed his Glory to advance.
Thus they, while thus the bread they Idolize,
Blaspheme Christ's Priesthood, slight his Sacrifice.
This minted Fancy dunghill Brains does yield,
It was not gathered in the Scriptures Field.
As this blessed Ord'nance does Christ's Beauty show,
So does its Virtue strength of Grace bestow:
This Breast, this Picture drawn, yields much delight;
It feasts the Eye, and sacred Appetite.
Who in the Sign alone their Scope do sum,
Short of the Mystery and Comfort come.
Be it enacted by the King of Heaven,
This Feast Act. 20.7, etc. 1 Cor. 11.18, etc. and 16.2.
be kept of the first day of the Seav'n.
Those who neglect it through remiss desire,
Do run into a Gospel-premunire.
The Trophie of rich Mercy's here displayed,
Wherein the groundwork of Salvation's laid.
To slight this Gospel Mercy is a Crime
Which God will sharply Punish Numb. 9.3. Luke 14.24.
in due time.
Proud Hipocrites do need a flaming Sword
To keep them from the Table of the Lord:
Others, Christ's whip of small Cords need to drive
Them, to fetch Virgin Honey from this Hive.
Christ's death must be Commemorated here,
'Till he at the last Judgment-day 1 Cor. 11.26.
appear.
Who come without true Grace fixed in the Heart,
Without true Comfort shall from thence depart.
To Hipocrites it is but a golden Dream,
If Conscience wakes, their wants prove more extreme.
Though Manna Isr'els camp enclosed, alas!
They looked thereon, but wist not what it was.
These Persons see the External Element,
Yet know not Christ, which it does represent.
There Is Honey in this Spiritual rock,
Which they n'ere taste of; thus their Souls they mock.
They feed upon the empty husk and rind,
While they the fruit and marrow leave behind.
Like Isaac they a kid for Venison take,
The substance of a shadow they would make.
Christ crucified before our eyes is laid;
How is Gods Love to Man herein displayed!
How far does this a finite Love excel?
This pattern is without a parallel!
We on his Love should greater value set,
Than if he freely had forgave the Debt.
That Viper, Sin, Christ off his hand did toss,
It was his Love that fixed him to the Cross.
We Are Vanity, yea emnity; yet Christ
Expressed his Love to us to the very highest.
When we are fighting with contemptuous Pride,
He Is dying, and the Spear does pierce his Side.
The quintessence of Love he did display,
When we our state and strength had cast away.
When Christ the travel of his Soul espied,
Redemption brought to light, he is Satisfied. Isa. 53.11.

Christ, though he on the Cross hard labor had,
Yet seeing this man-child brought forth, was glad.
Fallen Angels, golden Vessels, he forsakes;
Of us, though clods of earth, bright Stars he makes.
Christ dyed once, but he does ever Love,
And now does Intercede for us above.
How should this Heavenly fruit our Souls invite!
How should this Morning Star our heart delight!
His unconceivable surpassing Love,
Our Souls unto an exstasie should move.
Who parts with all, if this rich Pearl he gains,
Has purchased more than all the World contains.
Christ, as a Pipe, that golden Oil imparts 2 Kings 4.7. Isa. 10.27. 1 John
2.20.

Which brings Redemption to our captived Hearts;
Behold Sins odiousness, in the red glass
Of those sharp Sufferings through which Christ did pass.
Sin, out of Paradise did Adam turn,
And threw the Angels down to Hell to burn.
This Sin is a peace-breaker, that does make
Our God fall out with us, and us forsake.
Sin, of our Sorrows is the Viprous womb,
The grave which all our Comforts does entomb;
What crucified our Lord? Sins Hellish brood
Made Christ to vail his Glory, lose his Blood.
If that a woman on that Sword should light
Which killed her Husband, she would hate its sight.
Do we count that Sin light, call that a joy,
Which made Christ heavy, took his Life away? Mark 14.34. Isa. 53.3. 1 Pet 2.24.

What, shall not we those horrid Sins forsake
Which did 'twixt God and Christ such distance make?
Let Sin with Indignation be withstood, Psalm. 22.1. Mat 27.46.

Say, It Is this Sin that poured out 2 Samuel 23.17.
Christ's blood.
Sin pierced Christ, to it no pardon give;
Slay that, which would not suffer Christ to live. Exodus 21.28.

If He who knew no Sin did suffer thus,
Grudge not if God for Sin do punish us.
If Christ, who was our head was Crowned with thorns,
Shall we think much to suffer taunts and scorns?
Think it not strange with Gold and Gems to part,
When as the nails and spear did pierce Christ's heart.
Sinners may well expect the lash, when He
Who was an Innocent could not go free.
What influence should this have on our hearts,
That Christ for us with his own heart-blood parts!
The rocks did rend with Christ's heart-renting groans;
The Senseless heart is harder than the Stones.
What large affection should by us be shown,
Since he to spare our Life did lose his own?
O Christ! so fix thy Self within my heart,
That we may never from each other part.
This Manna is both Meat and Medicine;
Its Nature, and its Virtue are Divine.
Christ comes with Healing underneath his wings,
Sight to blind eyes, Grace to hard hearts He brings.
The Saints shall feed with Infinite Delight
On Christ for ever, with pure Appitite.
Should this Soul-satisfying Manna cease,
In Heaven there neither would be joy nor peace.
This Blessed Manna, in a Golden shrine,
The Humane Nature fixed in the Divine,
And laid up in the Ark of Heaven, must be
A Feast for Saints to all Eternity.
Christ's body on the Cross dug, was the field
Which did the Pearl of our Salvation yield.
His Blood's a balsom, and a Sweet perfume,
Which all our Sorrows will by joy consume.
Favor and Pardon both Christ's blood obtains,
It rents the Vail of Sin, Gods Love regains. Col. 1.21. 1 John 2.2.

This blood makes us to mount on Eagles wings,
A quickening Power into the Soul it brings. John 6.54. Lev. 17.11. Isa. 40.31.

Its merit does the wrath of God appease;
Its Virtue cleanse our hearts from Sins disease. Heb. 9.14. 1 John 1.7.

The Word's a glass which does our Spots display,
Christ's blood a Fountain to wash them away. Zach. 13.1.

This blood the foulest Spots will cleanse alone,
But 'twill not wash with Composition.
Lots Incest, Noah's Drunkenness, will grow,
Though crimson Sins, by this blood white as Snow.
Saints Merits, Prayers of Angels, will but smeer,
The smallest Spot they will not cleanse or clear.
Yet on this one black spot takes no effect,
But it is to him who does its use reject. Heb. 10.29.

This blood will turn a stone into a Spring,
From Rocky hearts floods of Repentance bring.
The Jaylors heart, like melting wax, would take
Any Impression God should please to make. Acts 16.30.

When Sin and guilt do set the heart on flame,
This blood, like Springs of water, cools the same. Jam. 3.6. Isa. 32.2.

This Cordial, at the hour of Death, will bring
Such comfort as will make the Soul to sing. Cant. 1.2.

Through this red Sea of blood, a gracious Man
Enters into the Heavenly Canaan. Heb. 10.9.

The Gate of Heaven, which Sin did shut, this key,
Does openly again to us display.
The blood of the Cross Eternal Life distills,
This Tree's blessed Fruit the Soul with comfort fills.
To know Christ crucified Paul highly prized;
And so should we; it is bliss Epitomized. 1 Cor. 2.2.

The Crowns of Kings are Crosses tumbling down,
The Gross of Christ it is the only Crown.
Let Us meet the Lord with well-prepared hearts,
Who to our Souls such Heavenly food imparts. 1 Samuel 7.3. Romans 9.22, 23.

Christ's blood the Unworthy do not drink but spill,
To whom God will his cup of Fury fill. 1 Cor. 11.27. Jer. 25.15.

The Word's a Touchstone, bring thy Heart to the touch,
There take a proof, try if thy heart be such. 1 Cor. 11.28.

Reflexive acts are difficult, yet we
Must inward look, our Spirits face to see:
If in the Covenant we no interest have,
It Is height of Pride the Seal thereof to crave.
Would have sin mortified, thy wants supplied,
Thy Graces strengthened? let thy heart be tried.
If thou without a wedding Garment come,
The Lord will try thee, and give thee thy doom. Mat. 22.12.

We are to deal with God, who gave us breath,
In matters which concern both Life and Death.
Let Grace our hearts so ballast, we may Sail,
Least Gods fierce storms of Fury make us fail. Mat. 22.12.

That heart cannot be good that wants true light,
No more than can the eye that wants its sight. 1 Cor. 11.28. and 14.15. Romans
12.1, 2, 3.

Gods Frowns, our Surfeit punish, and excite
Our Stomach to an Holy Appetite.
Let Us spread the Sails of our desires, so will
The gale of Heavenly blessings soon them fill: Mat. 15.22, to 28. Luke 18.38,
39. 2 Samuel 23.15.

What Royalty, and what Magnificence
Does God in this great Feast to Saints dispense!
Here Is Heavenly bread, here is juice of the true Vine;
These fill the Gracious Soul with joy Divine.
This Storehouse of Celestial blessings, yields
Life, Peace, Salvation; Come, let us reap these Fields.
All Heavens sweet delicacies at this Feast,
Are served in, t'accommodate each Guest. Isa. 25.6.

From Earth to Heaven's a Journey of great length,
So we shall need a fresh supply of Strength.
By Sins, wants, foes, we many dangers run,
Grace needs new Strength, and Duties must be done.
Since, by the way, our Souls recruit will need,
On this Divine repast let us freely feed. 1 Kings 13.7. Isa. 40.31.

Christ, is a Fountain flowing to each Guest,
It is but crying, and he gives the Breast:
Christ on the thirsty Soul his Blessings pours,
As freely as the Clouds distill in Showers. Rev. 22.17.

Here is no fear of Surfeit by excess,
The strongest Appetite Christ most does bless.
Christ says, Come, Drink and undantly my Dove,
Be thou inebriated with my Love: Heb. Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20. Acts 2.4.13, 15. Heb.
13.15. Cant. 5.1.

If People lose their Stomachs, Christ will say
Unto the Foe, Come take the cloth away.
The Cup of blessing will Support the heart,
When Persecutions Cup does make it Smart.
This did embolden Saints of Old to stand
With Courage, against the Persecuting band.
Let this Sauce sharpen our dull Appetite,
That we may feast our Souls with more Delight.
When Sin does broach our hearts with brinish tears,
The Sweetness of Christ's Love the more appears. Zach. 12.10.

True Gold has some allowance, if too light,
So shall the Upright heart, whose aim is right;
Who seeks both Sin and Satan to defeat,
And strives to make his Holiness complete. 2 Chronicles. 30.19.

Let strong endearments of Affection flow,
When Chirst his Love so freely does bestow. Cant. 2.6.

With empty hearts, unto this Well, now come,
And draw Salvation out, which bliss does Sum.
Christ with the humble heart Delights to dwell,
And makes it with the fruits of Grace excel. Isa. 57.15. Cant. 2.1, 2, 3.

How can those Worms feed on this Heavenly meat,
Who, like the Serpent, only dust do eat?
Unlikeness, from Communion us debars;
What likeness is 'twixt clods of earth and Stars?
An earthly man the World his God does make;
So vainly thinks another God to take.
In The Heavenly Altitudes affection place,
And mount up on the soaring wing of Grace. 1 Cor. 10.16.

Who Faithless to this Heavenly Banquet come,
May well expect they shall go Fruitless home.
Against Faiths eagle-eye there is no Fence,
It pierces into things Remote from Sense.
Of Heaven it Self, our Faith a prospect takes,
And the Invisible her Object makes.
She through the lattice of an Ordinance
Sees how Christ does his glorious Name advance.
And, which promotes our Everlasting good,
Beholds Christ's Love, come Streaming through his blood.
Who by the eye of Faith behold his Grace,
With glorified Eyes shall see his Face. Heb. 11.27.

By eating, Adam died; by It we live:
Feed on the Bread of God, which Life does give.
Here Christ's Divine and Humane Nature are
Both dished out; here is delicious Fare.
From him all kind of Virtues freely flow:
To him for Grace, and Peace and Comfort go.
The hand of Faith Christ's Merit does receive,
Which Justifies each Soul that does believe.
This Ring retains the Stone that stancheth blood,
This vein draws juice from Christ our heavenly food Ephesians. 3.19. 2 Pet. 1.9.
.
That Christ would feed and cloth her, Faith desires;
This humble Grace but to this pitch aspires, 1 Pet. 1.9.

False Faith will break, though Gloriously it show,
By Persecutions hammer at a blow.
Like Jonahs gourd, sprung up before the day,
By Persecutions blast Consumes away. Mark 4.3, etc.

False Faith is fancies fruit, true Faith's a flower
Produced by the Spirits mighty Power.
True Faith is an outlandish Plant, from Heaven
Extracted, bought with blood, by Grace it is given.
Our heart-deep Groans, and Pangs will make us mourn,
Before this sacred Infant can be born. Act. 2.37.

The Hipocrite loves those that praise him much;
Not those who bring his Faith to Scripture-touch.
Good David Prays that God himself would try
His heart and reins; this shows Integrity. Psalm. 26.2.

An Hipocrite will sell his Faith for wealth;
For he has none but what he got by Stealth.
A Saint will not his shield of Faith exchange
For a Crown of Gold; though some may think it strange.
An Hipocrite would Christ for Surety take,
Not of himself to Him surrender make.
True Faith's impartial, Christ 'twill wholly own,
Rely on, hearken to, serve him alone.
Christ says I with my body thee endow;
The Soul says I alone to thee will bow.
The Hipocrite is nothing else but Creed;
He no Commandment does purely heed. Jer. 3.4, 5.

Can health consist with Vitals perished,
Or Faith be true while men in Sin are dead?
True Faith, the mystery of Faith does hold,
In a good Conscience; this makes Christians bold. 1 Timothy 3.9.

The Woman who touched Christ by Faith she felt,
Such Virtue as her stony heart did melt. Mark 5.33, 34.

Although true Faith of Sin leave some remains,
Yet she of it a mighty Conquest gains.
The Fatling is the Hipocrites repast;
He in a Promise can no sweetness taste.
Yet is the Word, when Faith does set it home,
More rich than Wine, more Sweet than Psalm 19.20. Cant. 1.2.
the Honeycomb.
Some thought their Faith, a living Child in the bed;
But looking, found it a strange Infant dead.
Avoid Presumption: Cherish faith tha'ts good,
Which does concoct Christ's precious flesh and blood.
The blood of Christ, like Aqua vitae, does
Its Virtue lose, put in a dead-mans mouth.
Purge out the old leaven, Malice, which will sour,
The Ordinance, and make it lose its Power. 1 Cor. 5.7.

Though bitter tears become a welcome Guest,
Let bitter Spirits keep from this Love-feast;
Christ's blood between the Lord and us makes Peace,
And should make strife among the Saints to cease.
Should they who make the flesh of Christ their cheer,
With rage the flesh of one another tear?
Who comes with hatred to this Table, He
Will both a Murderer and Traitor be:
He like a Judas will his Lord betray;
And, like to Cain, will his own Brother slay. 1 John 3.15.

It thou to Poisonous malice do enure
Thy heart, think not this Cordial should thee cure.
They know not God, the Gospel, or true Grace,
That by this Sin Religion do deface. 1 John 4.19. Ephesians. 6.15. Jam. 3.17.

Should Saints divide, when devils do unite?
Could Love once cement us we storms should slight.
It, great reproach upon the head does cast,
When members one another honor blast.
The fire of rash Contention, Lord remove,
And kindle in our hearts the fire of Love.
As every Creature, so each Ordinance,
Prayer Sanctifies, and does Gods Name advance.
Thus as the Elements convert to food,
Our Souls shall reap a Spiritual good.
For Heaven, the Dove of prayer put on the wing,
And it the Olive branch of Peace will bring.
We should Gods presence and assistance crave,
That by this Ord'nance he may glory have.
That it may feast our Graces, and to all
Our flestly Lusts become a Funeral.
Pray, it may be a Sign, Seal, Instrument,
To Teach, Confirm, and yield Soul-nourishment.
For these, send prayer as Harbinger before,
Both to bespeak, and open us the door.
The Tree of blessing, shook by Prayer, recruits,
The fainting Spirits, with her Cordial fruits.
The Lord will not his Mercies cast away
On those who seek them not, nor for them pray.
With Sighs and groans, let us wrestle with the Lord:
The Lukewarm Suitor is by him abhorred Genesis 32.24. Romans 8.26. Jude 20.

Speak in the Language which God understands:
Who in the Spirit prays, his God commands. Ephesians. 6.18. Isa. 45.11. Jam. 1.5, to
8.

Prayer to walk in, is a Golden path:
As a crutch to lean on, it no Power has:
In our best Garments God can holes espy,
Our Righteousness as filthy rags descry.
In preparation mercy hope to find;
Deny thy Self when thou do Justice mind. Luke 17.15. Isa. 64.6.

Our Services, not purged by Christ's blood,
Do carry Evil in them; but no Good.
Use means; in Christ your Confidence still place,
For your acceptance at the Throne of Grace.
Be like the Dove, which used her wings to fly;
But on the Ark for Safety did rely.
Thus qualified; Gods Love shall us Surround;
We, with his fullness shall be filled and Crowned. Ephesians. 3.19.

Come hungring thirsty Soul, Christ calls on thee,
To Sup with him; fear not, his Grace is free Rev. 3.20. Mark 2.4, 5.
.
Christ of our Sins and sickness felt the smart
His precious Blood will cleanse thy leprous heart. 1 Timothy 1.15. Isa. 53.4.
Luke 14.21. Lev. 14.7.

Presumtuous Sin, which does Gods grace abuse,
Opens the mouth of Conscience to accuse,
And stops the Spirits mouth which should speak peace:
Yet to Sue out thy Pardon do not cease, 1 King. 11.9.

But on Christ's blood, thy Anchor-hold, rely,
Which cleanses Sin, though of a Crimson dye.
Noah was drunk though Saved from the flood;
And David stained his Soul and Robe with blood:
That Fountain still is open, to wash in,
Which cleansed them, and it can cleanse thy Sin. Zach. 12.1.

Peter denies his Master, others fled:
Christ, of his Resurrection from the dead
Sends them the joyful News, and passes by
Their failings; knowing their Infirmity: Math. 26.56, 69, to 75.

Of his Ascension also lets them know,
Uniting joys above with those below. Joh. 20.17. Mark 16.7.

The blood of Christ, like Abels, has a voice;
Whose Language makes the drooping Soul Heb. 11.14.
rejoice.
To Sin it is Mortal, Vital unto grace;
Meet Christ by Faith, his Love shall thee embrace 1 Timothy 1.5.
.
When Grace does strength against Corruption win,
When frozen hearts melt into tears for Sin,
When the herb of Grace does flourish, it is a Sign,
The Sun of Righteousness on thee does Shine. Zach. 10.12. Canr. 4.7.

To venture on Christ's blood true Faith is bold,
Hopes Christ will forth his Golden Scepter hold. Joh. 6.37. Mich. 7.19. Joh
20.24.

If God thy Soul with gladness does not fill,
To fil't with Goodness, he has given his Bill. Psalm. 107.9. Luke 1.53.

To wait upon the Lord thy Self enure,
His mercies often are Speedy, always Sure. Isa. 55.3.

This Sacred Festival, is to improve
The living memory of Christ's lasting Love. 1 Cor. 11.25.

Christ's Passion, keep within the Ark, thy mind;
It Is hidden Manna for the Soul designed. Joh. 6.48, to 63.

Christ's broken body Sovereign Power has,
To keep us from Gods dreadful flames of Wrath.
His broken body is our Sacrifice.
This box of precious Jewels open lies; 1 Cor. 5.7. Joh. 1.16.

His broken body brake the Serpents head,
Now at the Throne of Grace we freely plead.
To be an Heir of promise yields Renown
Of higher value than an earthly Crown.
To Christ the Cross a bloody way did prove,
To us the milky way to Heaven above,
Christ drank a bitter cup of gall, that we
With streams of Honey might refreshed be.
His Cross bestuck with nails, his flesh did tear,
That we a Crown beset with Gems might wear.
Christ on the Cross extends his arms of Love,
TO embrace his Saints, and their affections move.
Though Sin, which shed Christ's blood, may tears invite;
His blood, which Sin expells, should joy excite. Gal. 6.14.

Our thoughts of Christ should work Conformity;
His dying for us, make Sin in us dye. Phil. 3.10. Gal. 6.14.

If this Soul-sestival a dry breast prove,
Our Faith does not cooperate with Love.
When we on fat things feed, drink wine in bowls,
Shall leanness Seize upon our full-fed Souls? Mat. 15.28.

Faith puts the bond in Suit, to God she cries;
Trusts Him without a pawn, on him relyes. Hab. 3.17, 18.

Faiths rod does Smite the rock of Heaven, and so
Our want Supplies; makes Oil and Honey flow.
A great Faith opens Heaven, the world subdues, Psalm. 37.3.

Gods Glory still prefers, our Vows renews.
Our passion checks, our works by it are graced,
So gives our duties a Delightful taste. 1 John 5.4. 2 Samuel 22.22. Romans 9.1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6.

Our Glory antedates, and by its might
Makes things at greatest distance to unite. Heb. 11.1.

Thus the Springhead of Faith aspireth high;
While nature Sinks, or at her foot does lie.
This Faith in greatest Storms will steadfast stand,
It Is a' Pillar in Gods house, not built on Sand.
To take Faith off its Principles ar't bent,
First cast the Sun out of the Firmament. Rev. 3.12.

This Faith trusts in an angry God, and knows
That though he frowns, Gods love unto him Jonah 2.4.
flows.
A vigorous Faith, though it be beaten back,
Comes on again, its courage grows not slack.
Treble repulses Cana'ns Woman takes,
Discouragements good Arguments she makes;
And so with a fresh onset, winning Fame,
Her Faith prevailed, for Christ she overcame:
Her key of Faith unlockt his bowels: so,
He granted her request, e're she did go:
She having got his Heart, might likewise have,
His treasure too; all that she asked He gave. Mat. 15.28.

Suffering, before the Smallest Sin 'twill choose,
And Sanctity, though it should safety lose.
A Saint can Sail to Heaven against wind and tide,
Vain Reason, and Temptation cast aside.
Abra'ham by Faith the hardest knots unties;
Presents his only Son in Sacrifice:
Knowing that God could from his ashes raise,
A Mediator: Abr'ham God obeys. Heb. 11.18, 19.

Upon his Champion-Faith the Lord did set,
A Trophy of great Honor, lasting yet. Genesis 22.16, 17, 18.

Faith trades with God for time, it makes not have;
Long Voyages have rich returns at last. Isa. 28.16.

Who in this glorious Path of Faith have trod,
Declare the fruit of their Converse with God. Heb. 11. chap.

Infant believers, though your Faith be weak,
If true, this bruised Reed Christ will not break.
A weak Faith on a strong Christ can rely;
A palsy hand the Marriage knot can tie. Romans 14.1, 12. Mat. 12.20.

The stronger Faith the firmer union makes,
And of Christ's Sweeter influence partakes.
Profession's honored when our grace does Spring;
Strong Faith to God does greater glory bring. Romans 4.20.

Christ nurseth us with his own Breast and blood;
On this expressless Love, let us chew the Cud.
Though naught of Satisfaction can be done,
Something of Gratulation may be shown.
Christ our Sin-off'ring, did our Souls relieve;
Our Selves to Him, as a Thank-offring give.
Let us be steeled with Courage; Fight, not fly;
It is our Glory for the Truth to dye. 1 Pet. 4, 14. Dan. 3.17.

Let Us live to Him who died for us, dispense
Our choicest Gifts; our Gold and Frankincense. Mat. 2.11.

Christ's blood can kill our Sin, our grace increase;
Let Us bring forth Fruits of Righteousness and Peace. Cant. 7.7. Numb. 5.27, 28.

Lets with Seraphick Zeal the Truth embrace;
Zeal loves Truth most, when hate besmears its face. Psalm. 119.126, 227,

The Lord all knowledge void of Practice hates,
A Luke warm Temper, Christ abominates. Hos. 7.1. Rev. 3.15.

Lord let the Altar of our hearts still flame,
With holy Zeal, to magnify thy Name.
To God let us our hearts, hands, voices raise,
And dedicate our Selves unto his Praise. Psalm. 116.16, etc.

If by his Presence Christ our hearts revives,
Let as declare it by our heavenly lives.
Let us new Cana'ns sacred Language use,
Becoming words, by gracious Prudence choose,
While words of Truth and Soberness we speak,
Out, from our Lips does healing balsom break: Col. 4.6. 1 Pet. 3.15. Acts
26.25. Prove. 15.1, 4. and 12.18, 19. and 25.11, 12, 15. Jam. 1.26.

Let our Affections fix on things above,
Our breathings Heav'n-ward like sweet Incense move Col. 3.2. Phil. 3.11, 20.

In Saints, angelick Sanctity should shine,
Our Conversation should be all divine.
As Coin within the ring an Image bears,
And yet without a Superscription wears.
So where Christ's Image in the heart is found,
His Name writ in our Life should it surround.
But fleshly Lusts a Christian should not name,
For it becomes him to walk void of blame. 1 Pet. 2.11, 12. Ephesians. 5.3.

Judas, the Devil with the sop receives,
So of the blessing he himself bereaves. Joh. 13.26.30.

Afresh the Lord of glory's Crucified
By those who from his Precepts turn aside. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 2 Pet. 2.1, 21, 22.

He that unworthily drinks of this Spring,
Upon himself does swift damnation bring. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. and 11.27, to 30.

O that the luster of our Holiness
Might in our lives convicting proof express!
That in this Ordinance which Christ ordains,
Confirming and transforming Power remains!
Christ's blood has reconciled us to God,
He, underfoot, has Sin and Satan trod.
What cordial Comfort for our Souls is here?
What need we now the proudest Foe to fear? Acts 20.28. Romans 8.34. Genesis 3.15.

If Satan's pensil paint our Sins in grain,
Christ's blood, that Sponge, will wipe them out again.
His blood the Debt-book crossed, the Law discharged;
All bonds are Cancelled, and our Souls enlarged.
This Sacrifice a full atonement makes, Heb. 9.10, etc. and 5.6.

Whereof each Saint eternally partakes.
It Is called the blood of the New Testament,
Which is a Will of an unknown extent.
The Saints may Pardon, Grace, and Glory claim;
Christ by his Death gave force unto the same;
The Will was Sealed when Christ's blood was shed.
These Gifts are in the Scriptures registered. Heb. 9. chapter

Art thou not filled with Joy, possessed of Heaven?
Yet by this Will it is confirmed, and given:
The Deed is Sealed, the Inheritance is sure;
Than let us Hardship cheerfully endure.
A dying Christ allays the pangs of death,
It Is Conquered, and beaten out of breath.
Christ by his death cut off the lock of Sin,
So his strength fails, and he has slighted bin.
He brake this Lions teeth, plucked out the Thorn
Which often had the Conscience pricked and torn. Hosea 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54. to
57.

Death is disarmed, then why should Christians fear?
For though it strikes, it cannnot sting or tear.
Death's poison Christ drew out, so it is become
A friendly Beast, to carry Christians home.
Faith Heaven presents, and Death possession takes;
Thus death a blessed Change for Christians makes.
Christ's precious blood makes Deaths pale face appear
Ruddy Complexion'd; this our hearts should cheer.
But here is a dark side of the Cloud to those
Who dye in Sin, and Gospel Grace oppose.
Christ is a Lodestone, whose attractive Love
Makes his Elect with fervor Heav'n-ward move.
But like a Millstone, sinks down deep in Hell
Those Reprobates, who against his Laws rebel.
Who slight Christ's blood, and count it but as dross,
Shall feel that wrath, which Christ felt on the Cross.
Because they cannot at once endure that woe,
It, to Eternity they undergo. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.

Sinners will not believe till it is too late,
The wretchedness of their Eternal state.
It Is said the Mole is blind until she dies,
So Satan, this Worlds God, blinds Sinners eyes:
But dying, Conscience sees a gloomy light,
So of Gods flaming Wrath they have a sight:
Which sight will but a dreadful Prologue be
To an eternal horrrid Tragedy. 2 Cor. 4.4.

FINIS.
On the Excellency and Usefulness of Gospel Doctrine, Both in Public and
Private.
THe Doctrine of free Grace, and of its Seals,
By Faith applied, our wounded Spirits heals.
It is our daily food; and every Guest
Upon the Sabbath, on the same does Feast.
This Manna is a delicate so rare,
We never shall desire to change our Fare.
When God does not his Public means afford,
He privately Supports us by his Word.
God does the Poor maintain in health, as well,
As those who in a Princes palace dwell.
A Child is nourisht, and his strength increased,
With Milk; conveyed by the Spoon or Breast. John 5.39. and 6.63. and 17.17. 1 Timothy 1.5. Heb. 6.1, 2. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Romans 15.4. Romans 1.16, 17. Eccl. 12.9,
to 14. Romans 7.14. Isa. 8.20. Psa. 1.1, 2. and 19, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 119.1. to
12, 97. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 1.3. to 9. and 2.1, 1, to 11. Acts
20.6, 7.

Upon the Question, Whether the Righteousness of Christ, or our Faith justifies
us?
WE often unto the Servant that apply,
Which is the Master's in Propriety.
God sent his Son, the Spirit gave the Word, 1 These. 1.5. and 2.4, to 13. and
3.2. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. and 2.13, 14, 15.

The Word brings Faith, and Faith does Works afford.
The Platform of Salvation thus displayed,
Each Stone must in his proper place be laid.
The Father chooses, and the Son procures,
The Spirit sanctifies, so Life assures.
The Causes and the Means are here conjoined,
To each his proper Function is assigned:
If Faith or Works Christ's Justice should displace,
It would the Gospel Doctrine quite deface.
The Father, Son and Spirit justify,
The which the Word, Faith and good Works descry Romans 8.33. 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans
8.15, 16. Hab: 2.4. Gal. 2.16, to 21. Jam. 2.10. to 26. compared with 1 These.
5.23. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Joh. 17.17. Acts 26.18. Heb. 11. chapter and
12.1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. to 9.
:
Even as the Root, the Body, and the Head,
Their precious Fruits abundantly do spread.
When sacred Truth, the Heart, by Faith receives,
Its testimony by good Works it gives.
How perfect are these sacred Symmetries!
How sweetly all, together harmonize!
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 27. for King read Hinge. Page 12. l. 15. for andundantly, r.
abundantly.

