A Farther ACCOUNT OF THE Baroccian Manuscript, Lately published at Oxford,
together with the Canons Omitted in that Edition. In a Letter to his Friend in
London.
Enquire after the Old Ways.
SIR,
YOu Surprise me with the Baroccian Manuscript, but much more with the Account
of the Credit it has gotten. Its Admirers, I presume, take it to be an
excellent Tract upon R. B's word, and fancy ((...)) Providence was concerned in
the discovery and Publication of this piece. I must confess Providence has of
late been thought very busy, but I can assure you that Treatise was known in
my time, and despised too. The Reasons you will meet with anon, and after a
short Examination, I dare be confident you will confess it deserves no better
usage.

The Editor endeavors to get some Reputation to this piece, by fathering it
upon Pref. p. 1.
Niaphorus Callisti, a Man (he says) better skilled in Ecclesiastical History
than any of the same Age. Now, Sir, you know this Age was the 13th Century, a
time not over-stockt with Church Historians of any Credit; and therefore though
he was the best of that Age, yet the Censures of other Critics vid Beram Not.
ad Act. Apost. C. 1. v. 13. and Casabonum Exercit. 1. Sect. 17.
may be just, who say he was an idle Story-teller, of little Judgment but much
Superstition. But not to quarrel about Niaphorus, let us look upon the reasons
why the Editor fancys him to be the Author of this Treatise.

1st. He says this Piece is found in a Book mark^ CXLII amongst the Pref. p. 1.
Baroccian MSS in that Bodleian Library at Oxford, in which Book there are some
Historical Treatises, and particularly a Catalogue of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople under Niaphorus's name. This is all true, but the Editor should
have observed that that Book is a bundle of several Treatises of several
Authors, and particularly that this Tract is written in a different hand from
those to which the name of Niaphorus is affixt. So that from the Book it self
there is not the least reason to conjecture that Niaphorus compiled this piece.

He further says that Niaphorus must be the Author, because the Compiler may
be supposed to live within the Patriarcha of Constantinople, and about the time
Niaphorus flourished. There, he says, are no light conjectures. And indeed
Niaphorus Pref. p. 1.
is much obliged to him for giving him a title to all the nameless follys of
that Age. But if the Editor would have shown himself a true Critic, he would
have compared the matter and style of this Treatise with Niaphorus's History;
and then he would have found that Niaphorus had a better Pen, more Judgment and
Sincerity than this Collector. At least he would have considered that a
Favorite of an Emperor, who mortally hated the Latins, would not have used the
Authority of the Bishops of Rome, when he might have ^^d. p. 8. 9. and 10. of
the Latin and G. ^diti^on.
met with as great Examples in his own Church: The best account I can give of
the Manuscript is this. The Compiler of it seems to be a Latiniz'd Greek, and
at the time when he wrote it he was a kind of a Tutor, and this piece was a
reading to his Boys, so injudiciously composed, and in so mean a style, that
nothing but the Barbarity of the Age, and the meanness of the Auditory can make
any tolerable excuse for it. To think it a Homily, and pronounced in a Council
of Bishops (as the Editor seems willing to opine) is to libel a Century; for
how can a Man disgrace an Pref. p. 2.
Age more then by supposing the Bishops, the Men of Wisdom and Authority in it
could patiently sit out such an indigested crude tale? Had it still lain
amongst the Boys, it had been in its proper place; but to bring it out to Men,
and triumph in the Discovery, shows only that some do not know what Manuscripts
are worth printing. With this Character I should leave the Author, but R. B.
deserves a little more respect; and therefore, pray tell him when you see him
next, that the Oxford Copy of this Treatise is not the only Copy in the world;
Cotelirius had one of the same vid. Coteleri. Not. in 3d Tom. Men. Grac. p.
645. compared with p. 25. lin. 14. of the G. and L. Edition.
piece, and had that great Man lived a little longer, it would have been
published, and no doubt with the Canons at the end of it (the Reason why these
were left out in this Edition you will meet with in the Close of this Paper)
and then Providence had not reserved it for Mr. Hody's version, nor R* B's
preface.

However the Church of England is now on fire, and the Nethenim is ready with
his Buckets and Ladders to Pref. p. 3.
put it out. The first affront is to give the deprived Bishops adivce out of
St. Clemens, and persuade them to Pref. p. 8.
resign. (There would not be much need of this if the People were already
free.) It Is true, St. Clemens not only advises the injured Presbyters Sect. 54.
Edit. Oxon.
at Corinth, but tells them it was their real interest to withdraw; but then
this Council comes after a very severe Lecture to the People for their
disobedience. He tells them (Sect. 1.) their defection was impious, and
destable fomented by bold impudent Men, and a great Scandal to Religion. He
admonishes them to right their injured Ministers, and tells them they had been
diligent in their Office, and were great Ornaments of the Church. (Sect. 44.)
he adds that they lay under a great Sin. (...). (Sect. 44.) Nor is that
venerable Father less Zealous in his Address to the People to adhere, (even
after he had given this advice to the Presbyters, Sect. 57.) than to the
Presbyters to recede from an obstinate Generation. Yet I shall freely own the
direction is excellent; and who would more freely follow it then the ptesent
Bishops, were the case of the Church of England like that of Corinth? But let
us suppose that by such a recess the Laws of the Empire had been violated, the
Doctrines of the Church, for which they had suffered Persecution, the mockings
of the wordly, and the railing of the Proud, exposed; and that Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction which Christ settled on the Apostles, and they delivered to their
Successors, betrayed; and then would St. Clemens have advised them to
withdraw? Any man may answer that he was St. Paul's companion, and therefore
doubtless of his opinion who would not give place to Intruders ('it is the
Editor's word) so much as for one hour, Gal. 2. v. 5.

The next advice comes from St. Austin and almost three hundred African
Bishops, who offered to resign Pref. p. 6.
their Bishoprics to preserve the Unity of the Church: and no doubt they had
made a very good purchase. But is there no way, to preserve the Unity of the
Church but the Resignation of the Injured? Will not their Restoration do as
well? and would it not be a more Christian application to address the Intruders
to make reparation, and do right to God and Man at once? the Injured may
withdraw, but the Injurious I am sure, are bound to do it by greater and
stronger obligations, than those that come from African, however venerable
Examples.

But here, Sir, I must beg leave to expostulate a little, and desire to know
what grievous offense I committed, that I must be enjoined the ungrateful
penance of examining a piece, in which I can meet with nothing but confidence,
disingenuity and shuffle. For I have reason to believe the Editor never looked
into St. Austin, nor the Conference at Carthage which he quotes; had he seen
the Books, he would not have given Marcellinus another title then that he meets
with in them: Marcellinus is called Tribunus Notarius and Cognitor, but Passim
in Coll. Ca^t^ag. tom. 2. Counc. and in Brericulo ejusdem Coll. inter op.
August. tom. 7.
never Vicegerens, and the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius constitute him only
Moderator of the Assembly with power to give sentence after a full hearing of
the Catholic Bishops, and the party of Donatus, Cui quidem Disputationi
principe loco te vid Council. tom. 2. p. 1346.
judicem volumus residere. Nor had it been possible for a Man of so much Zeal
for Unity, as the Editor pretends, to have mangled the Catholic Bishop's
Letter to Marcellinus, or given another state of the matter then what St.
Austin had drawn up. The whole Letter is too long to be transcribed, and
therefore you must content your self with that venerable Father's abstract of
it. In jisdem literis etiam Breviculum Coll. Carthag. primae diei Sect. 5.
inter Op. August. tom. 7.
se obstrinxerunt Catholici and polliciti sunt, si in part Donati veritas eis
demonstraretur Ecclesiae, non se illic Episcopalem Honorem quaesituros; sed
consilium eorum secuturos pro salute Christiana: fi autem in sua Communione
potius veritas estanderetur Ecclesiae, Honores Episcopales eis se non
negaturos: and hoc a se fieri bono pacis, ut intelligerent Hi quibus hoc
praestaretur in ijs Catholici non Christianam Consecrationem, sed humanum
ditestarentur err^rem. Quod si Plebes duos in una Ecclesia Episcopos far non
possent, Vtrisq de medio recedentibus singuli, constituerentur Episcopi, abijs
Episcopis ordinandi qui in suis Plebibus singuli invenirentur. The ^atholick
Bishops did not offer to resign, ^ut upon condition the party of Donatus would
do so too: And therefore the Edi^or before he made use of this Example, ^ould
have gotten a Commission to pro^ose it.

The next is drawn from the behavior of Gregory the Divine, but this ^ref. p.
17.
Story told right, will show him ^o be no very passing Example in this case.
Gregory was Bishop of Nazianzum, * At least a Co^d^utor to his Father. ^id
vales^^ Not. ad ^5. Cap 7. Socratis.
and thence translated to Constantinople; Many (...). So^rates H^st. Eccles.
^5, 6, 7. ved etiam ^^om. C. 6. l. 7.
murmured at this promotion, and indeed Translations were not then thought as
Innocent as they are now. The great Eusebius of Caesarea had not very long
before refused the Throne of Antioch, when offered to him: He pleaded, that he
could not leave his old Charge without breaking the Apostolical Canons, vid.
Eusebius. de vita Constantini l. 3. C. 59, 60, 61, 62.
and violating his first Faith. His excuse was accepted, and the Honesty of it
very much commended by Constantine the Great, who loved him very well, and
desired his promotion. Eusebius of Nicomedia is censured as a Breaker of the
Th^odorit. Eccles. Hist. ^. ^. C. 9.
Ecclesiastical Constitution for leaving his own See, and stepping into the
Throne of Constantinople. And Theodorit in the second Book of his
Ecclesiastical History, Cap. 31. tells us the Arrians were the chief promoters
of Translations; and bitterly repro^ches them for transferring Bishops from one
City to another. His case standing thus, and his Interest at Court being
little, Gregory did not think vid. vitam Greg. ^^^^ p. 27.
it worth while to struggle for a Seat, in which he found he should be briskly
opposed, and poorly defended: and therefore he resigned. Nectarius an
Honorable person, and Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. C. 8.
a Man of great worth was chosen in his room, with him Gregory communicates;
and why should he not since he had resigned? He writes to him, and gives him
honorable titles, and is this so wonderful a Condescension in Gregory when
Nectarius was a greater Bishop, and a Man Superior to Himself? Nectarius had
done Gregory no injury, he neither sought his Throne, nor accepted it till duly
vacant by his Resignation: why then should Gregory be angry? But some Men have
reason to wonder at others who are civil and do their duty. The last is drawn
from that Council which Dionysius of Alexandria gives Novatian to forgo his
pretense to the Roman Chair: Pref. p. 8.
And this I must confess is very judiciously applied. For Novatian unless my
Eusebius very vid. Eusebius. Hifl. Eccl. l. 6. C. 43, and 45.
much deceives me, was the Intruder, and stepped into the Roman Throne before
Cornelius the rightful Bishop was willing to go out of it.

I had almost forgot St Chrysostom, and it had been well for the Editor if I
had. He seems to be in love PrSf. p. 4.
with the Story, and flourishes more upon it, than upon any of the Rest. But he
has not considered that St Chrysostom never offered to vid. the Case of
Chrysostom in the Treatise.
resign. That great Man knew well enough his Enemies sought his Life, they had
accused him of Treason, and he expected to lose, his Head publicly, or to be
murdered privately by those who were to carry him into Banishment; and
therefore expecting Death, he desires his Brethren the Bishops, to communicate
with his Orthodox Successor, and enjoins the Widows to submit. Observe his own
words. I have fought a good Fight, my end is nigh, and my Race is finished. But
to the last moment of his Life he never sat quiet under that unjust Sentence
which deposed him. Many Bishops stook close to him, the Widows, Virgins, and
People of Constantinople could not be forced by Fines, Whippings, and
Imprisonments, to forsake him, and communicate with the other party, And he
himself made Applications to the Bishops of Rome, Milan, and Aquileia to stand
his Friends, and to restore him to his Throne: If this be an Example of
Submission, let the Editor apply it, and try whether it will not fit the
stiffest of the present Age.

You must forgive me, if I do not take much notice of the Description of a
Schismatic, which the Editor gives out of Irenaeus: it is too rude in the
Application. Can any of the Dethroned Pref. p. 9.
Bishops be supposed to have an eye upon Vtilitatum and Res Medicas, Wealth and
Prosit? Take a view of them in the Tower, and there you will find them exposing
not only their Estates but Lives too for the good of the Church.

I should here leave the Editor, and proceed to the Treatise, but that you
think it necessary to pay Counsel with Advice, and therefore I must beg the
Editor, whenever he ventures to write again, to use Civil and respectful
Expressi^ns when he speaks of his Superiors, Bishops by title and by merit;
and to remember that the Nethenims were never permitted to bring rott^n wood,
or dirty water into the Sanctuary. Not to make Speeches for St Chrysostom, or
any Orator of his rank, and not to consult references and quotations shown him
by his Friends, but to read Books, and compare the several passages in them,
and then I am sure we shall hear less of his Examples.

The Pamphlet pretends, that the Church never troubled her self about the
Promotion of a Bishop, Answer to the M. S
nor his Right to the Throne he filled; but communicated with him who was in
possession of the Sea (provided he was Orthodox) though another had been
violently and unjustly thrust out of it; and had not resigned his right to the
Seat, and was still alive: This practice it does not attempt to justify, by
any Principles drawn from Scripture, the Ancient Canons or Customs of the
Church; nor the Writings of the three first Ages, but only cites some few
examples from the third to the thirteenth Century, and then concludes as
triumphantly, as if it had given the fullest demonstration in the world.

Now, Sir, you know this bare telling of Storys is the meanest way of arguing,
the work of memory only, and to be managed without though^; it is likewise of
very little force, because we ought to be privy to all the Circumstances, and
certain of the Integrity of the Man, whose Practice is brought to justify it
self: We should be sure that neither fear, nor Interest, nor any other motive
sw^y'd him in the least, and that he was well informed, duly considered, and
did not act upon mistake. Now all this is not easily discovered, nor are the
Best and wisest Men always in the right, nor Sincere all over. No action is
good, imitable, or just ^arely because done by such or such a Man; We must walk
by Rule and not Example. Nor can you, I am sure, be insensible that this
Treatise will justify the proceedings of an unjust viol^nt deposing Prince, as
well as those of a complying communicating Clergy, because several of the
Emperors which it mentions were better and wiser Men than many of the Bishops.
And if Examples when truly reported have so little force, what must those have
that are partly feigned, unfaithfully related, and will not reach the case for
which they are produced? it is certain they can have no influence on the cause,
but then they turn with a vengeance on the Collector of them, and sufficiently
prove very lamentable defects in his judgment, or something worse.

The Pamphlet in its title excepts the case of St Chrysostom as not favorable
page 2.
to his design, and yet begins with an account of that Excellent Bishop. It
says Chrysostom (as well as St Basil) was ordained Deacon by Meletius, who had
formerly been made Bishop of Sebastia by the Arrians, and was afterward
translated to the Throne of Antioch by the Suffrages both of the Arrians and
Orthodox. Eustathius the old Bishop of Antioch, page 5.
being then in Exile and alive. It adds that this Meletius thus ordained, and
thus seated in the Throne of Antioch, was, because he was Orthodox, accepted
by, and proved very beneficial to the Church. It Is true, Chrysostom was
ordained Deacon by Meletius, and Meletius made Bishop of Sebastia by such as
were Arrians in their hearts, but not public abetters of that Heresy. They
were Hypocrites indeed, and under the specious pretense of reconciling
differences, and making up the breaches of the Church, advanced the project of
a naked Gospel; such as Melitius, who was always Orthodox himself, did not
suspect to be unsound in the Faith; and such as at that time were not separated
from the Communion of the Church; and therefore Melitius had no reason to
refuse their ordination; and the Eustathians were too peevish to question it
afterward, and justly accounted guilty of the Schism that divided the Church of
Antioch.

But that Eustathius (which is the main point) was alive when Meletius came to
the Sea of Antioch, is false, as appears from Theodorit. Hist. Eccles. l. 3 C.
4. (...). The Editor to support his Author, cites Socrates. l. 4. c. 14, and
15. and page 4.
Sozomen l. 6. c. 13. who say Eustathius was recalled from Banishment by the
Emperor Jovian, and sent again into Exile by Valens, and therefore was alive
when Meletius was put into the Throne of Antioch in the time of Constantius. He
professes likewise that he cannot agree with Baronius and Valesius (no mean,
nor unthinking Men) who take Socrates and Sozomen to be mistaken in the Story.

I must confess that Eustathius (as the Editor observes against Valesius (might
have lived to the third page 4.
Consulship of Valentinian and Valens, for then he had not been above ninety
years of age; and therefore the Story of Socrates and Sozomen is not to be
rejected on that Account. But is this the Argument of Baronius, or does
Valesius produce no other? Had he looked into the Annals, An. 370. he would have
found that Baronius thought it absurd to imagine that the Oxthodox Bishops, and
Ca^holick People of Antioch would have suffered Meletius or Paulinus to have
sat in that Chair, had Eustathius been alive: that it is incredible he should
not rep^ire to Antioch, and appear in the Catholic Synod at that time; and
folly to fancy that Meletius and Paulinus would not have given place to him,
and to put an end to the Schism in that Church; and Valesius proves from vid.
Not. ad l. 4. c. 14. and 15. Hist. Eccles. Socratis.
St Jerome that Eustathius of Antio h was buried at Trajanople in Thrace, to
which place he was banished by Constantius (it should be Constantine) and
therefore vid. Caves Hist. Lit.
could not be that Eustathius who was banished by Valens to Bizua in Thrace.
But these are Arguments not very favorable to the Eduo 's designs, and
therefore must be shuffled over, and concealed: So that we have a full
Testimony of Theodorit, who wrote his History to supply the Defects, and vid.
Vales^. pref. ad Hist. Theodorit.
correct the mistakes of Socrates and Sozomen, and the Authority of St Jerome
against a senseless surmise of one single Socrates, (for Sozomen transcribes
him) vid. Vales. pref. ad Hist. Socratis and Sozomen.
who was neither so accurate nor judicious as either of the other two. But to
put this matter out of all doubt, I shall only desire it may be observed that
the Orthodox never chose a Bishop in the room of one who was thrust out of his
Throne, whilst he was alive, and therefore it cannot be supposed that the
Orthodox of Antioch would have given their votes for Meletius, had Eustathius
been in being; and consequently it must be concluded that Theodorit is in the
right, because his account agrees with the Practice of the Church.

For the first thre^ hundred years Dius and Germanius were the only Men who
sat in anoth^r's Throne, but then Narcissus being under some disgrace, had
voluntarily vid. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 9. and 10.
withdrawn from Jerusalem, and no body knew where he was. The Flock was
forsaken before they had provided for themselves. When the Bishops were
martyred, new ones were quickly chosen in their room, but when they were
banished, or forced to fly, their Chairs were thought to be still full: And
Dionysius the famous Bishop of Alexandria, who was banished from his City, gives
a very good reason for these different proceedings of the Christians in his
time, (...). vid. Eusebius. lib. 7. C. XI.
And St Hilary in the next Age could tell Constantius, Episcopos ego sum licet
in exilio permanens, and Ecclesiae adhuc per Hill. Liber. ad Constantinum.
Presbyteros meos Communionem distribuens. An unjust deprivation did not take
away their right, though driven from their Church, they kept their Character,
and were Bishops still: The Churches of those Ages knew as well as St
Chrysostom that it was necessary for them to be under Bishops, Pref. p. 5.
but they never thought their obligations to their Pastors were cancelled, when
they were deposed by the Edict of an Emperor, and forced to be absent from
their Charge.

To confirm these Assertions you may command a great many Instances from the
Churches of France, Italy, Asia, Egypt, and the like, at present I shall only
send you one from Rome. Liberius was banished by Constantius for refusing to
consent to Athanasius's deposition, and a perjured party vid. pref. ad Libellum
p^^^um ^austini and ^a^cellini.
of the Roman Clergy, put one Felix in his Room, who was Orthodox himself, but
being a Latitudinaian Reconciler, vid. Socrat. lib 2. c. 37. and Soz^^. l. 4.
c. 11. Theodorit. l. 2. c. 17.
and a Trimmer in his practice communicated with the Arri^^s: The sober* pious
Catholics of Rome withdrew from his Communion; and made application to
Constantiu^, for their restoration of their old Bishop: partly indeed because
Felix communicated with the Arrians, but chiefly because (...) there Theodorit.
lib. 2. c. 17.
was but one God, one Christ, and one Bishop.

The Pamphlet pretends farther that the Ordinations of Arsacius (who upon the
unjust deposition of St page 5.
Chrys^s^om, was put into the Throne of Constantinople) were never questioned,
and yet owns that we are not certain he made any. And then adds that Atticus,
who succeeded Arsacius in that See, whilst Chrysostom was in Exile and alive,
was owned and accepted by the Church, and commended by Pope page 6.
Celestine: that Sisinnius the Successor of Atticus was consecrated by those
whom Atticus ordained, that the third general Council of Ephesus took no page 6.
notice of any of these proceedings, and in the following paragraph goes on to
show that Maximiniam and Proclus the succeeding Bishops of Constantinople page
9.
derived their ordination from the same hands; that St Cyril communicated with
them, and that Innocent of Rome did not prosecute Severianus of Gabala nor
Acacius of Berraea, though he knew them to be the chief contrivers of all these
Injurys, which St Chrysostom suffered. Here is a great deal of History, but to
what purpose? our question is not whether the Ordinations of Intruders are good
and valid (even those of Schismatics and He^^^^cks have been frequently
admitted) (...) whether the Church might not own (...) after the death of the
injured (...) whether every Bishop is bound to prosecute those who have done
Injury^ to others: But whether the Church has received, and communicated with
such as have stepped into other men's Seats whilst they were alive, and had not
resigned their right. To this point the Author should have spoken, he should
have shown that Arsacius or Atticus was received and owned by the Church whilst
Chrysostom was in Exile; but since that could not be done, as will appear from
the following Abstract taken out of the Life of St Chrysostom, written by
Palladius, the Question was to be changed, and the dispute shussled.

St Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, was a man of a severe temper (p. 45.)
vehemently against the Vices of the great, and therefore not very acceptable at
Court (p. 35.) Theophilus of Alexandria a bold insinuating fellow, having some
disgust to him (p. 44.) undertakes the quarrel of the Court, proceeds against
all Rules and Canons, gathers a packt Synod, condemns and deprives Chrysostom
without hearing his defense (p. 74.) when Chrysostom was summond by the Emperor
to appear before Theophilus, he had forty Bishops with him, of which number
seven were Metropolitans (p. 67. and 69.) and to these he spoke words, which
the Editor has quoted in his Preface. He charges them not to leave their
Churches, but communicate with his Orthodox Successor, for He expected death
(p. 67.) it being the public report that He should lose his Head. (p. 68.)
After this deprivation he was restored, and kept his Seat some time; till
Theophilus's party grew strong, and condemned him again; and to put this
Sentence in Execution, Theophilus gets a Warrant from Court, sends the Sheriff
(p. 19. and 75.) with his Pass to drive him out of his Palace and Church too.
And (p. 26.) engages the Emperor to deprive and confiscate the Estates of all
those Bishops who should refuse to communicate with Arsacius, who was put into
the Chair of St John, and to seize upon the House of any Man who harbor'd any
Priest that communicated with John. The Honorable Deaconsses of Constantinople
were Fin^d, the Virgins whipped, and the Monks tortured, yet still Arsacius was
refused. Arsacius living but fourteen months, Atticus succeeds him, (p. 94.)
with whom none of the Bishops, nor the People of Constantinople would
communicate (page 95.) He procures Edicts to force them, (p. 95.) some were
prevailed on by Benefices and Bribes, but abundance of Rich and Noble Persons
fled (p. 95.) many Bishops suffered deprivation (p. 194.) and notwithstanding
the severe Laws, more of the People of Constantinople separated from Atticus
than joined with him (p. 96. and 149.) In the mean time St John makes
application to the Bishops of the West, to Innocent of Rome (p. 10.) Chromatius
of Aquilea and Venerius of Milan (p. 22, and 23.) desiring them to interpose
and do him right. Many Bishops and Presbyters made the same addresses for St
John (p. 28.) Innocent offers to communicate with Theophilus and Chrysostom
till the cause should be determined (p. 23.) but Theophilus declining a review
of his proceedings, Innocent by the advice of an Italian Synod, requests the
Emperor Honorius to write to his Brother Arcadius to summon a Council, that it
might be known with whom they should communicate (p. 30.) The five Bishops who
carried the Emperor's Letters, refused to communicate with Atticus (p. 33.)
Palladius glorys in his refusal (p. 214.) and tells us, p. 214. that a Western
Synod had determined not to communicate with the Intruders, nor with those who
joined with them. It Is needless to comment upon this History, for when the
deliberate determinations of whole Churches, the resolutions of Chrysostom, and
the best Men of the Age are on one side; and the violence only and fury of a
desperate faction on the other, it is easy to determine which ought to be
preferred

The next Instance is less to the purpose, but as unfaithfully reported as the
former. It says Dioscorus of Alexandria openly favoring Eutyches page 10.
his Heresy, condemned, despos'd, and murdered Flavian the Orthodox Bishop of
Constantinople, and ordained Anatolius in his Room, yet the fourth general
Council did not depose Anatolius, nor censure Juvenal of Jerusalem, nor the
rest who joined with Dioscorus in deposing Flavian. But did not the Council of
Chalcedon call Juvenal of Jerusalem, Basil of Selucia and the Rest to an
Account for their proceedings against Flavian? And did not they plead for their
Baronius An. 449.
excuse that Dioscorus had put a guard upon them, that they were beaten by the
Soldiers, and almost famished: that they were under the greatest Terror,
Swords being at their Throats, and Chains brought into the Room, and that they
subscribed his deposition against Their Conscience and out of fear? That they
heartily repented for what they had done, and begged pardon both of God and Man?
If any one denis this, the Acts of the Council at Chalcedon Council tom. 4. p.
111.
will sufficiently confute him, and Evagrius will Evagri. Hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 4. and Baronius An. 451.
prove that a sentence of deposition was drawn against them all, and that their
Restoration was looked upon as a kindness and favor from Pope Leo. (...). As for
Anatolius himself, the Council had no reason to deprive Him, for those that
ordained him were not declared Heretics, nor separated from the Church; He was
Orthodox himself, and put into the Throne of Constantinople before the death of
Flavianus: for Flavianus was Baronius tom. 6. p. 100.
murdered not long (Niaphorus says within a few days) after his deposition, and
the Niaphorus l. 14. c. 47.
Pamphlet it self says Dioscorus was a Murderer before he ordained page 10.
Anatolius. Leo received Him when he found Baronius An. 451.
him Orthodox, and never quarreled at this ordination of Anatolius Baronius
An. 452. compared with Leo's Epistles to Anatolius, Martian and Pulcheria in
the 4th Tome of the Councils, p. 843. 846. and 848.
till he began to dispute with Him about the Privileges of our See.

The Pamphlet goes on to the Reign of Anastasius, and says the Empecor deprived
three pa. 13. An. 495.
Patriarchs, Euphemius, Macedonius, and Timotheus, because they would not
Subscribe his Heretical Opinions. These three did not refuse one another
Communion; and Elias of Jerusalem did communicate with all three. [This was the
Emperor's accusation, though false.] Now this Story should run thus, Theodorus
Lect^r p. 559. Metaphrastes, Theophanes, and Cedrenus and others call him
Euthymius, and therefore all Historians do not call him Euphemius, as the
Editor asserts, p. 13. vid. Cotelerii. Not. ad 3. tom. Mon. Graec. p. 599.
Euphemius betrayed the secrets of the Emperor, and kept correspondence with
his Enemies. The Emperor calls a Synod, and Euphemius was deposed, so that he
was not thrust out by the Emperor, but regurlarly displaced. Yet the People of
Constantinople raised tumults, and could scarce be persuaded to forsake him;
Macedonius succeeds him, with whom Euphemius did not so well agree as the
Pamphlet pretends; Euphemius indeed made use of him upon a civil occasion, and
by his means procured a safe conduct from the Emperor; but when they were to
meet, Macedonius put off his Theodorus Lector, p. 560. and Not. Vales^i. in
locum.
Patriarchal Badge, otherwise probably Euphemius would have refused even that
Civil kindness at his Hands.

Some time after Anastasius A. D. 510.
expelled Macedonius if we believe Liberatus, for falsifying the Scriptures and
being a Lib. Diac. Breviar. Council tom. 5. l. 19.
Nestorian, but as the common and true Story goes for refusing to condemn the
Council of Chalcedon: Timotheus succeeds Him, a Man very infamous and
Heretical, and therefore it cannot Theodorus Lector, p. 563, and 564.
be thought Macedonius would communicate with Him, since so many of
Constantinople suffered for refusing his Baronius An. 510, 511.
Communion, and rebelled Marcellini Chronicon.
against the Emperor who would force them to it. This Timotheus was not
expelled by Anastasius, as the Pamphlet pretends: He died in his Throne, and
was succeeded by John. (...). Cyril. Schythop. vit. Sabae. p. 320. p. 296, and
297.
Indeed Elias of Jerusalem is said to have accepted Synodical Epistles both
from Macedonius and Timothy, and I believe he did from Macedonius, but Cyril's
legend's too weak an Authority to persuade any Man that he entertained any
correspondence with the infamous and Heretical Timotheus: He was to make all
the friends he could to put a stop to prevailing Heresy, and it is no wonder if
to secure the Faith of the Church, Crimes of lesser moment were overlookt.

The same Anastasius, says the Pamphlet, expelled Elias of Jerusalem, and put
John into his Throne, yet page 14.
Elias did not withdraw from his Communion, and Theodorus and Sabas, the
mighty Monks of that time, communicated with Elias, and John too; and the names
of Elias and John were both put into the Diptychs of Jerusalem: and for all
this it quotes the Life of Sabas written by Cyril of Scythopolis. Now the
legend of Cyril runs thus: Elias was driven from Jerusalem by force, and John
who had promised to Anathematize the Council of Chalcedon was put into his
Room: (p. 310.) John being persuaded by Sabas breaks his promise, and the
Emperor sends the Governor of Palestine to force John to keep his word, or
leave his Throne. He seizes John and puts him into Prison, and all the People
of Jerusalem reject (...): (p. 311.) John again gives his word to do at he had
promised, but in the mean time gathers 10000 Monks about him (p. 312.) and
getting into the Pulpit with Theodorus and Sabas, the Ringleaders of those
Monks, anathematized all those who did not receive the Council of Chalcedon,
and confirmed that Synod (p. 312.) The Governor was forced to fly for his Life,
and Hypatius, the Emperor's Nephew, was glad to purchase his with many Oaths,
and a round sum of Money.

The Emperor resenting this affront, resolved to banish John and Theodosius,
and Sabas: but the Monks got together again; wrote a remonstrance to the
Emperor, in which they call John (...) (p. 319.) and boldly tell Him they would
sooner lose their Lives, and burn their Churches, than suffer his Heresy to be
set up in them. Thus this matter ended. And sure Men must be at a strange loss
who would take Examples from such wretched irregular proceedings.

For the next instance the Pamphlet sends us to the Life of Athanasius, page 14.
and says we may read there how Acacius unjustly deprived Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem, and put Cyril in his Room, one who was then chief of the Arrian
party, but afterward becoming Orthodox he was willingly received, and allowed
as Patriarch by the Church: and Maximus himself did not withdraw from his
Communion; whereas all that I can find about Maximus vid. Vit. Athanasij. p. 48.
and Cyril in that Treatise are these words. (...). Acacius threw out Maximus,
and established Cyril, who was Zealous for Heresy, as Maximus for true Faith.
Not one word of Maximus's communicating with Cyril, nor can it be supposed so
glorious a Confessor as Maximus would have any thing to do with one of such a
Character. Besides, Sir, this whole story depends on the single Authority of
Socrates, who says Acacius and Patrophilus having driven Maximus out of his
Throne put Cyril in his Room. But Theodorit is positive that Cyril succeeded
upon the death of Maximus: (...). And the Councils at Constantinople Synodical
Epistle says Cyril was canonically ordained: (...). Theodorit Eccles. Hist. l.
5. c. 9.
Yet after all this I must refer you to Baronius, where you will find the
succession in the Throne of Tom. 3. p. 658.
Jerusalem to be very confused, St Jerome says four Cyrils succeeded one
another, Epiphanius says two, but both affirm Maximus was dead before any took
the Chair: so that the Pamphlet, besides its dishonesty in quoting the Life of
Athanasius, for what is not there, and its heedlesness in following Socrates
against better Authors, is guilty of a most Scandalous blunder, in confounding
the Cyrils, and making the little Arian Cyril the same with him who was called
the Holy and the Great. The following Storys about Anthymus, and the four
Monothelite p. 17. An. D. 552.
Patriarchs are nothing to the purpose; but that concerning Eutychius ((...),
not ex Amasia oriundus as the Editor imagins. Evagrius only says, (...)
Monachus Amasiae, and vid. Evag. l. 4. c. 38.
Noris Dissert. de quinta Synodo p. 51.) would come up to the point, if it were
true. To make short work I shall grant part of the story, and suppose Eutychius
to have been a good Man, and unjustly expelled. (The learned Dr Crackanthorp
endeavors to vindicate Justinian, and prove Eutychius a O^ the 5 th Synod, p.
340.
Heretic, and in the time of Justinian infected with those idle whimsies which
he afterward professed;) but of his uneasiness under his sentence we shall
find a considerable proof in the legend of Eustathius: for after John was set
in the Throne, when Eutychius was summoned to the Conventicle gathered at
Constantinople on purpose to depose him, he cried out, Patriarcha ego sum De
gratia, nec a Me quisquam Eustathio Baronius tom. 7. p. 534. and p. 615.
Hominum tollet hanc Dignitatem: Quis est ille qu^m meo in loco collocastis?
And where does it appear he communicated with John? Indeed it is certain he did
not, for John; as he was a vain ambitious Man, a servile Flatterer of the
great, and Baronius tom. 7. p. 534.
greedy of Preferment, so undoubtedly he subscribed to those wild Opinions,
which Justinian propagated with so much Zeal, and for opposing which ^t is said
Eutychius lost his Throne. And Justinian was so sensible of Niaphorus Hist.
Eccles. l. 17. c 29. and 30.
the Injury he had done him, and of his right to the Chair of Constantinople,
that as one affirms, upon his death Niaphorus Hist. Eccles. l. 17. c. 30.
Bed he ordered his Successor Justin to restore him, which was presently done;
for Niaphorus Patriarch of Constantinople, vid. Crackanthorp of the first
Synod. p. 340.
says John sat but two Years; and Paulus Diaconus says Eutychius crowned
Justin. John died in very convenient Hist. Mix. l. 16. p. 29.
time, just as Eutychius was to be restored, or else perhaps he might have been
an Example on the other side, and we should have met with a Patriarch dethroned
as an Intruder. I know other Historians put off John's death, and Eutychius's
Restoration to the 9th or 10th year of Justin, but they are Men of little
credit, and Of the fifth Synod p. 340.
Crackanthorp has confuted them already.

Now we are fallen into the dregs of time, years of Superstition, Idolatry,
Dotage, and Disorder; And therefore though the Instances produced out of this Age
were truly reported, and pertinent to the Purpose, they would be fit Examples
for us to follow. But the Collector is still the same Man, and trifles, and
falsifies in these as much as in the former.

Callinicus affisted Leontius, and encouraged the People to dethrone Justinian,
p. 18. A. D. 703.
cut off his Nose and banish him: He appeared at the Convention summoned
Platina vit. S^rgil. primi.
by Leontius, and urged them on to their loyal and Religious work, by telling
them this was the Day the Pauli Diaconi. Hist. Miscel. l. 19. c. 30.
Lord bad made. Justinian recovering his Throne again, used Callinicus as he
did the other Rebels, put out his Eyes, and banished him, and Pauli Diaconi.
Hist. Miscel. l. 20. c. 9.
placed Cyrus in his Room. The Collector says Callinicius did not refuse to
communicate with Cyrus; but that is more than he knows; the Histories speak
nothing of the matter. Callinicus might refuse, and no body take notice of it;
for who would regard the Actions of a poor blind Creature, without worth, and
without friends, and who was sent to Rome to beg his Bread of a proud haughty
Baronius A. D. 703.
Pope, whom he had very much offended.

John the next deposed Patriarch was a Heretic, (as the Editor himself vid.
Baronium. An. 712. page 18.
seems willing to grant upon the Authority of Zonaras and Nicephorus Callisti)
and ^ermanus was not deposed An. D. 730. vid. Paul. Diacon. Misc^l. Hist. l.
21. c. 26.
by Leo Isaurus, but resigned his Bishopric. I know Damascen, Constantine, the
Eastern Synodical Epistle to Theaphilus, and others, say he was deposed; but
those passionate vid. Spanhem. Hist. Imag. Sect. 2. number. 12.
Doters upon Images deserve little credit when they plead their own Cause, and
declaim against those Emperors who threw down Images, and would not let them be
Idolaters. God has given them over to believe a Lie, and the Men of that party
are as insincere Writers, as the Author I am now considering. But suppose
Germanus was deposed, is not Idolatry a sufficient Cause for Deposition? And is
not a worshipper of Images justly Banished from the Church?

The following long Story about Tarasius and others, is altogether impertinent:
for what if Tarasius for fear of losing his page 21.
pretty Pictures, did not do his duty, and Excommunicate Joseph for his
villainous compliance with the Emperor Corstantine? What though Theodorus
resus'd to communicate with Tarasius whilst he kept Joseph in the Church? What
though Irene (that admirable Empress) looked upon Theodorus to be in honest
blunt Man, and Tarasius to be a Courtier? What though upon Joseph's
deprivation, Theodorus and Tarasius were reconciled? And what though Nicephorus
the succeeding Patriarch at the instance of the Emperor recelv'd Joseph again,
and Theodorus with drew again, and those two were again reconciled upon
Joseph's second deprivation? What though Theodorus retracted all the Reproaches
he had thrown out against Tarasius and Nicephorus? What though the Monks of
Studium were condemned by Methodius for persisting in their separation; and
some body says, that Theodorus did not well in separating from Tarasius and
Nic^phorus, and that afterward he corrected himself, and made amends for his
unjustifiable proceedings? What I say (suppose the whole Story true) does all
this prove? Does it show, that a Bishop unjustly deprived, communicates with
his Orthodox Successor? There is not one word of any one's deprivation, but
Joseph's; and he was neither a Bishop, nor unjustly punished. And yet the
Collector has the Confidence to say (p. 30.) (...), etc. This is the scope and
design of the Histories here produced, to show that not one of all those
Patriarchs that were Unjustly and Vncanonically thrust out of their proper
Sees, did ever withdraw himself from the Communion of his Successor, or
persuade the People to separate from the Church, but that both they and their
People continued in Communion, provided their Successors were Orthodox.

Of the next Story I am willing to believe as much as I can find true. An. D.
861.
I will allow Ignatius was thrown out of his Seat by Michael, for reproving and
Excommunicating the Incestous vid. Baronium An. 861. N. 28. and 31.
Bardas, as Ignatius himself relates the Story to Pope Nicholas. I will
likewise grant that Ignatius was restored and Photius deprived (there an
Intruder is turned out) and that Photius replaced in the Throne after Ignatius
was dead: But that Photius was looked upon to be an Adulterer. and Usurper of
the Throne (which this Collector questions,) and that page 29. ^
Ignatius refused to communicate with him (which he denis,) is very evident
page 30. ^
from the best Records of that Age: Ignatius in the account of his Case which
he sent to Pope Nicholas, calls Photius, Adulterer and Intruder, Adulterum and
Intrusum Photium. Baronius A. D. 861. N. 311. and An. 886. N. 23.
He declined the sentence of the Pope's Legates, because they did not reject,
but eat with and received Presents from that Adulterer Photius. And (not to
trouble yo^ with a thousand other Records) Pope Nicholas by himself, and in
conjunction with the Roman Synod, resuses his Communion, and deposes him too,
because he had been ordained by Gregory of Syracuse. an excommunicated Bishop;
usurped another's Right, and got into the Throne of Constantinople whilst
Ignatius was alive: Vivente ac Superstite Consacerdote Baronius An. D. 862.
Number. 5.
Ignatlo, sedent ejus invasit, and Sponsam, violentus rapax and Sceleratus
Adulter. Baronius A. 859. N. 57, and 59.
Several Bishops and others stuck to Ignatius, and would not communicate with
Photius; and Ignatius was so far from communicating with him, that he lay very
hard upon all that did so, suspended vid. Daronium An. 867. N. 101. and passim.
Photius himself, and all that were ordained or communicated with him, and was
for inflicting upon them all the higest Censures of the Church.

By this time I believe you begin to stand amazed ^^ the confident Ignorance of
this disingenuous Scri^^^^, who produces the Example of Ignatius, and is
positive that he never refused to communicate with Photius; nor indeed could he
have pitched upon an Instance, which will more effectually ruin his whole design
than this. For Ignatius was deposed by the Constantinopolitan Synod under
Photius, because, as they pretended, he was not canonically ordained; nor did
ever a greater Schism follow any Bishop's deprivation. Page 29.
But the Collector cannot believe that Photius, had he been thrust out as an
Usurper, would have been replac'd in the same Throne: His Infidelity proceeds
from Ignorance, for any Man who knows the time, and Men of the Age, will never
admire at any strange and irregular proceedings in it.

Before I go to the next Instance, I must advertise the Editor of his mistake
about the Synodicon. Page 14. Edict. English.
For the Synodicon was not, as he imagins, the Decree made against the
Iconomachi, by the Synod at Constantinopl-under Michael and Theodora. A. D.
842. appointed to be read in the Greek Churches every Year upon the first
Sunday vid. Anastasiu^: Caesar. de Jejunio Deipare apud Cotelerii Mon. Graec.
tom. 3. p. 435.
in Lent, but the Book composed A. D. 920. in the Reigns of Constantine and
Romanus; it contained three Compare Anast Caesar. apud Cotelerii 3. tom. Mon.
rae. p. 432. with Baronius An. 921. N. 1, and 3.
Synods, two about Faith, and the third about Marriages, and was to be read
every Year in July: This Edict was made to lclose up the Divisions, and heal
the breaches of the Church, and particularly to put an end to that Schism,
which followed Nicholas's deprivation: for An. D. 901.
many adhered to him, and rejected Euthymius whom the Constantinus
Porphyrogenitus Praef. ad Edict. Vnionis apud Baronium An. 901. N. 6. and
Curopalates apud eundem, An. 911. N. 18.
Emperor put into his room; and the succeeding Emperor restored Nicholas and
expelled Euthymius, who was barbarously us^d as an Intruder: Adulterum vocabant
ut qui ad alienam uxorem ingressus esset, nempe Nicolai Ecclesiam acoepisset:
This is a full demonstration that Nicholas and his party did not communicate
with Euthymius, that there was a Schism followed Page 33.
his deprivation, and that this Story-teller cannot speak Truth. The Edict of
Union was a kind of an Act of Oblivion, all Irregularites were to be forgotten,
and all Persons, however culpable, to be looked upon as faultless and regular;
and he that will thence inser (as the Collector pretends to do) that there were
no Schisms in the Church, upon the unjust deprivation of one Bishop, and the
intrusion of another, and that the Intruder's Communion was not still avoided,
may as well prove that we had no Civil Wars, because twenty Years after an Act
of Indemnity set all right again, and forbad the Loyalists and Rebels to
reproach or speak ill of one another: So that Photius, whilst Ignatius was
alive, and Stephen and Anthony, whilst Photius was alive, were looked upon to be
Intruders; till a great many Years after Peace was to be established, and the
many Schisms their Irregularities had caused, were to be healed up.

Of Cosmus Atticus, who was deprived by Michael, P. 33. A. D. 1146.
Story speaks very little; yet had the Author given us all that Chroniates says
concerning vid. Nic. Chroniatem de Man. Comneno l. 2. Sect. 3.
him, he would have lost one Instance, though he would have showed himself
honest, but to falsify and misrepresent is the peculiar Talent of this Author.
Cosmus being under the Emperor's displeasure, was charged with Conspiracies
against the Emperor, and with some very odd Opinions started by one Nepho a
Monk: The Emperor calls a Synod, and Gosmus is convicted and deprived: Cosmus
curses the Empress, excommunicates some of the Nobles, and bitterly rails at
the Council for deposing him: By this temper and carriage, any one may conclude
he was not very quiet after his Deposition, but we hear no more of him; and
Baronius says, he died presently A. D. 1147. Number. 32.
after his Deposition.

The last Story is not worth examining; and now, Sir, pray reflect a little:
This is R. B's excellent Tract, in which there are not two words to the
purpose, nor one of Truth. This is that Antiquity which we admire the 6th, 7th,
8th and following Ages, the great disgraces of Christianity; and which should
always be forgotten.

The Canons being part of the M. S. not published by the Editor of the Greek
and Latin, nor in the English Edition.
IF any Presbyter despising his own Bishop, gathers a separate Congregation,
and raises another Altar, having nothing to object against the Faith or Piety
of his Bishop, let him be deposed as Abbitious and Turbulent. Let all the
Clergy that adhere to him lie under the same Censures: and the the Laymen be
excommunicated. But let the first, second, and third Admonition of the Bishop
precede this Sentence, Canon. Apost. 31.

If any gathers a Congregation separate from the Church, and despising the
Church shall presume to do what belongs to the Church without the Bishop, or a
Preshyter Licensed by the Bishop, let him be an Anathema; Council. Gang. Can.
7th.

If any Presbyter or Deacon despising his own Bishop, separates from the
Church, gathers a private Congregation, and sets up an Altar, and refuses to
submit to his Bishop after the first and second Admonition, let him be
deprived, and for ever made incapable of officiating again: And if he continues
factious, and raises disturbances in the Church, let the Secular power take
hold of him, as a Seditious breaker of the Peace. Synod. Antioch. Canon. 5th.

If any Bishop be accused before all the Bishops of the same Province, and they
all agree in their Sentence against Him, let not his Cause be reheard by any
other, but let the unanimous Sentence of all the Bishops of the Province stand
good. Can. 15th.

If any Presbyter puffed up with Pride against his own Bishop makes a Schism, let
him be Anathema, Council. Carth Can. 10.

The Devil having scattered Heretical Tares in ^he Church, and sinding the
Sword of the Spirit has cut them up by the Roots, falls upon another device,
and endeavors to divide the Body of Christ by the madness of Schismatics. To
bassle this contrivance the holy Synod decrees; If any Presbyter or Deacon
shall presume upon pretense that his Bishop is guilty of great misdemeanors to
withdraw from his communion before his Cause has been examined and determined
by a Synod, and not mention his Name in public Prayers according to the Custom
of the Church; let him be deprived and degraded: For he that is a bare
Presbyter, and pretends to the power of the Metropolitans, and as far as in him
lies condemns his own Father and Bishop, before they have given sentence is
unworthy both the name and dignity of a Presbyter; let the Clergy who join with
him be under the same Censures, and the Monks and Laymen stand excommunicated,
till they renounce the Schismatics, and be reconciled to their own Bishop;
Synod. dict. (...). Ganon. 13.

If any Bishop upon pretense that his Metropolitan is guilty of great
Misdemeanors, shall separate from his Communion, and not mention his Name in
public Prayers according to custom, the Holy Synod declares him deprived upon
being convicted of withdrawing from his Metropolitans Communion, and making a
Schism: for every Man should know his own bounds. A Presbyter must not despise
his Bishop, nor a Bishop his Metropolitan. Synod. ejusd. Canon. 14.

If any Bishop or Metropolitan shall presume to withdraw from the Communion of
his Patriarch, and not mention his Name in public Prayers according to custom;
but raises a Schism before a Synod has examined the Cause and given Sentence,
the holy Synod declares him deprived upon Conviction.

These Canons are made against those who divide from their Governors, upon
pretense they are guilty of some Irregularitys and Misdemeanors: for those that
separate from them when they openly profess, and teach any Heresy condemned by
the holy Synods and Fathers of the Church, are not liable to the Censures of
these Canons, if they withdraw from their Bishop before a Synod has examined
the Cause and given Sentence; but are to be looked upon, and received as
Orthodox. For they do not fly a Bishop but a false Bishop and a false Teacher:
they do not break the Church's Unity by Schism; but endeavor to preserve the
Church from Schisms and Divisions.

These are the Canons at the end of the Baroccian M. S. written in the same
Hand, on the same Paper, and joined in the same Page with the other part that
is published: The reason why these were concealed is very evident: The
Collector of the Storys was to be thought a Man of Ingenuity and Judgment, and
it is certain that could not be, had this latter part been published together
with the former: for who could think him to have either Modesty or Sense who
writes a Treatise on purpose to prove that a Bishop, howsoever deprived,
whether by the Edict of a Senate, or a Prince, or plain force, is bound to
communicate with him who is put in his place, provided he be Orthodox, and yet
produces Canons which peremptorily decree him a Schismatic, who separates
either from his Bishop or Metropolitan, before a Synod has examined the Cause
and given Sentence?

It Seems vid. Coteleri. Not. ad 3. Tom. Mon. Graec. p. 645. it is probable
this was that Joseph who usurped the Throne of Arsenius the Patriarch of C. P.
who was unjustly deposed by a timeserving Synod, called by the perjured Usurper
Michael palaeologus, who being constituted Guardi^n with the Patriarch of the
young Prince, John Lascaris put out his Eyes, and usurped his Throne. Upon this
the Patriarchs Excommunicated him for his Perjury, and Usurpation; and because
he refused to absolve him, he called a Synod to depose him, and upon his
deposition followed a great and long Schism in C. P. Se^ the whole Story in
Nicetas Gregoras. lib. 2, 3, 4*
Jos^ph the Presbyter against whom these Storys were collected had made a
Schism, and refused to communicate with one who was put into the Seat of a
deprived Bishop, but then it is certain; from this part of the M. S. that Bishop
who ever he was, deprived by a Synod; and had R. B. known this, doubtless he
would have given another account of this Treatise, than he has done in his
Preface.

There are a great many other faults in the M. S. which I forbear to mention
being, willing to make an End. Then shall only add that it gives no great
credit to a cause to see Men of parts and learning lay such mighty stress on
such crude false undisgested a Paper.

The Truth is, with due respect to Mr H. S. Curios^^^* and Mr B's. Observation;
the discovery is so far from being extraordinary or Miraculous, that I rather
wonder some ignorant Popish Priest upon the bare reading the Latin Title of it,
in the Catalogue of the Baroccian M. S. which runs thus, Exampla ex Historiis
Ecclesiasticis ^orum qui pr^t^r, Canon^s ad thronum P^triarchalem evecti sunt,
viventibus adhuc l^gitimis Patriarchis, had not without farther consideration
some years since produced the same, as an Apology for submittion to the late
Ecclesiastical Commissioners, whose powers were to deprive as well as suspend.
What sense the London Clergy would then have given of this M. S. their own
Conscience can best tell, and most will think it easy to imagine; at least
there would have been no occasion for the present labor of

Sir, Your Humble Servant,

FINIS.

