An Appendix to the foregoing Letter, being an Answer to Mr. Humphrey Hody's
Letter, concerning the Canons at the end of the Baroccian Manuscript.
Esse posse uno in loco aliquis existimat aut multos Pastores aut plures
Greges?

Cyprian de Vnitate Ecclesiae, p. 110.
Lingua Christum confessa non sit maledica, non convitiis and litibus
perstrepens audiatur; non contra Fratres, and Dei Sacerdotes post verba laudis
Scrpentis venena jaculetur,

p. 118.
SIR,
YOu will readily believe me, when I tell you the reading of your Letter gave
me unaccountable delight; The clean Conceits, various Inventions, smooth Style,
pat Similes, just Allegories, and sparkling Strictures could do no less; and
you are too well acquainted with the force of your own performance, and my
Sincerity, to think I have either need or design to flatter: Yet to take off
all doubt, I will point out some of those particulars which gave me the
greatest satisfaction; and if I now and then seem to laugh a little, pray
consider, that great Pleasures are not soon quiet: Passions are like Waters,
raise them once, and the Motion continues, though the Cause be over.

I must confess when in your Preface to the published MSS. you had put your
self amongst the Nethenims, the hewers of Wood and drawers of Water for the
Sanctuary, I scarce knew my Friend in so humble and so unseasonable a figure;
but now you please to assume Characters more agreeable to your worth, I can see
the Generous and the Brave in the habit of a Wrestler or Champion for the
Church, which under that of a Tankard-bearer lay too much, and too dangerously
obscured.

In the second Page you enter the Ring; Nature has given you Muscles and
strength enough, and every way fitted your Person for the Belt; but, Sir, you
must give me leave to say, that you are not skilled in the Terms and
Expressions of the Field: For none ever conjectured he had given his Adversary
a fall by the dirtiness of his hands; indeed that may Page 2.
prove he has over-weighed, and thrust him down on his Face by Brute strength;
but believe me, dear Sir, a fall comes from a neat Trip, and is always on the
Back. Besides it is not fair to choose a Dunghill to wrestle on, and then
complain your Adversary has bespattered you. Perhaps there were never such
foul Examples as the wretched Scribler of your Treatise has put together; and
I am sure a Man cannot stir in them without kicking up a Lie, a Forgery,
Idolatry, or Treason in your Face. Of all this I gave you early notice, and had
not the Letter been intercepted, I am sure you would not have thought that Fort
impregnable, one Stone of which I had not left upon another; nor mistaken, for
old trusty Veterans, such raw, undisciplined, new raised, unarmed Page 3.
Phantasms, which were too empty either to defend or to aliright.

Again, you conjecture by your Adversary's Passion, that he had a Fall; This
was a very unlucky guess, when you was about to show so much your self:
Rapparces, Stabbers to the Heart, and Page 2.
Kno^kers on the Head are no very temperate and cool Words, especially when
bestowed on Persons of Exemplary Humility, and known Meekness. But, Sir, you
may remember who formerly called you Feroculus; but since you have taken some
Degrees, and are commenced Ferocisfimus, as a learned man said when he read
your Letter. In short, Sir, if not only foul Hands, but a dirty Mouth, and a
Heart full of Passion will prove a Foil; I am afraid you mistook the Person,
and thought your Adversary suffered that disaster which fell upon your self.
But since you are plentifully bespattered with Dirt, you intend to rub it off;
Page 3.
It Is a cleanly design, for which I heartily thank you, for since I must be
some time in your Company, I would have it as inoffensive as I can: and
therefore having taken leave of these filthy Metaphors, I hoped in plain
cleanly English to understand the Cause of your present Concernment: But I am
no sooner out of the Mire than I am thrust into the Smoke; After Dirt fly
Squibbs and Crackers, Page 4.
of an Ancient Invention, and such as were thrown by the Philistines
heretofore. The next time you enter into Controversy, let me beg you to keep
down your Imagination, and not think a little Penduel to be a War; and then we
shall hear less of Mines, Forts, Powder, and old Soldiers, and write and read
with less danger than we now do: Though I must confess it were ingenious (as
you told a Friend of yours) to use Military Expressions when you was writing
about Canons.

But now the Air clears again, and I begin to see the Cause of your disquiet:
Page 4. you are accused for not publishing the Canons which are written in the
very same Hand, and with the same Ink in which the published MS. is written, and
immediately subjoyned to the MS. in the same page, without any mark of
distinction; and therefore by the Author of that Treatise designedly added to
it. These Canons no way favor the design which you had in publishing that MS.
(some of them expressly forbidding any Man to separate from a Bishop, unless
deprived by the Sentence of a Synod,) and therefore were purposely omitted

To this Charge you reply: The Canons were not collected, nor joined to the
Treatise Page 4.
by the Writer of it; and give these Reasons. 1st, You never thought they were,
page 4. 2dly, It Is possible the Storys and the Canons may be collected by two
different Persons, though afterward they may be both transcribed by the same
Hand, page 5. 3dly, The Treatise has a peculiar Conclusion of its own, p. 6.
4thly, Between the Treatise and the Canons there comes in an Abstract or
Summary of the Treatise, which stands as it were for an Index, p. 7. 5thly, The
writer of the Treatise makes no mention of the Canons, never refers to them;
and therefore cannot be supposed to have collected and subjoyned them to the
Treatise, p. 7. And 6thly, The Canons are not truly pertinent to the particular
subject of the Treatise, page 9.

These you look upon to be unanswerable Evidences, both of your Innocence, and
your Cause too; and sufficient proofs, that the Compiler of the Stories was not
the Collector of the Canons: Upon the strength of these you rise high, despise
the Judgments, and contemn the Reasonings of other Men; nor is this Presumption
unnatural in him who can mistake Falsehood for Integrity, and call Trifles
Demonstrations. This way of Writing, Sir, is no more Arguing than Stammering is
Speaking; it is only a weak imperfect endeavor after it, but such as disgraces
what it would imitate.

For suppose, when you first transcribed that Treatise, you did not think the
Writer added the Canons to it; yet before the Gr. and Lat. Edition you was
sufficiently informed of other Men's Opinions, which it is easier to despise
than to confute. Why then were they concealed, unless you found it necessary to
deal with your Author as Painters do with a Face with one Eye? They show only
the sound side. The Stories looked plaufible enough, but in the Canons there was
some thing so disagreeable, that it was convenient it should be hid.

Again, suppose it possible that the Canons might be added by another Hand; let
me beg you not to conclude they were, for fear of two or three old Logical
Maxims, which will grow very testy, if they once perceive their Authority
contemned. Your third and fourth Reason only prove that your Author's
Conscience began to stare him in the Face, and his Reading was at an end: that
as he could find none, so he would forge no more Examples. But your fifth and
sixth Reason, I must confess, would seem to conclude somewhat, had your Author
been a Man of any tolerable sense: But when I consider how injudiciously he
has put his Tales together, and how impertinent many of them are to that
purpose for which he has made them, I can think no proceeding that is idle,
unaccountable, and foolish, too mean for him, or disagreeable to his Character.

But to draw this whole trifling Controversy into a narrow compass, it is
evident from Cotelerius, that when one Joseph was put into the Throne of a
Bishop unjustly deposed, many refused to communicate with him; The Composer of
this Treatise endeavors to reduce the Refusers by the Examples of some Great
Men, who upon the like occasions did not think it lawful to withdraw. But lest
bare Story-telling should not do the work, he produces Canons which
peremptorily forbid any separation from a Bishop: by these he endeavors to
support the Chair of the Bishop in possession: and thus having Example backed by
Precept, he thinks the Refusers must be constrained to a submission: This
proceeding is natural enough, there is nothing of force in it; and when I find
any thing at the end of a Treatise written in the same Hand, immediately
subjoyned to it; which carries no mark of another Author, and is agreeable to
the Age, and serviceable to the main drift and design of the Composer of the
Treatise, I must think it added by the same Author, unless you please to
furnish me with a Reason to the contrary, better than any I have yet met with.
Indeed you pretend to offer one, when you observe the Author uses his own
Language in the Stories, but transcribes the very Words of the Canons, page 7.
But pray, Sir, is it unusual, or is it not necessary to cite the very Words of
Laws? Your Author might make Stories, but sure he was not considerable enough
to be a Canon-maker; and therefore was bound to those Expressions in which
Authority had put them. And your observation, that the Author always uses his
own Style in the Stories, shows you have not yet had leisure to compare them
with the Books out of which some part of them is taken.

And now, Sir, having considered all you have to say about the Canons, you must
excuse me from attending on your Triumph, in which you so indecently lead a
very great Man, (the same who gave you Information Page 8. and 15.
of every thing you know concerning this M S.) who fell into an unconsiderable
mistake, which yet he has rectified in his answer to your Book, only because
he had not leisure to be accurate about Trifles: for the way which you go is
too foul for me to wait upon you in. Yet Curiosity will force me as far as your
enchanted Castle, page 19. to see the Issue of that notable Adventure. But here
all my Expectation is quite dashed: for when I thought to find the Knight armed,
mounting the Ramparts, and breaking down the Walls, Modesty comes on, turns him
into a Pioneer, and sets him to cast up Works to enclose a SPIRIT, as wise a
design as theirs was who hedged about a Cuck^ow.

To be serious. An Acquaintance of mine bids me tell you, your Guantelet is
taken up, not by a Party, but a Single Person; and your Challenge is accepted:
He hopes you will observe the Laws of Combat, and not bring any Spells, Charms,
or unlawful Weapons into the Field: (to speak out of Metaphor) that you will
be plain, Civil and Even in your Writing; That you would leave your Intricate
Allegories, your Pride and Insolence behind you; and not indecently fall out of
fits of Rai^ing into as violent ones of Prayer: but dispute like a Scholar, and
like a Christian.

He desires likewise you would not produce such Examples, as that repeated one
of Photius, page 17. nor conclude that Constantine did not design to banish
Athanasius for his Life, because he afterward repented he had banished him at
all, page 23. To such Instances and such Conclusions he will think it
sufficient to reply, that they ought not to be made or produced by any Man of
Honor, Integrity, or Sense.

If you grant him these few reasonable Requests, he is very ready to engage
upon the Principles of St. Cyprian, and the Practice of that Age; and to make
short work of the Controversy, thus states it from matter of fact: But I need
go no further, you are a wise man, and this ^i^t is enough for you to guess,
how I would state it; and you may do it with more safety than I can: but if you
know not what I mean, conselt the This was no legal Repeal, because Edward the
2d was alive, and lawful King, or else Edward the 3d could never have been so)
in the time of that first Parliament of Edward the 3d, and consequently Edward
the 3d was at that time an Usurper, and the Proceedings of that Parliament null
and void.
85th page of the? Grand Question, and then guess how I would state it, and the
matter of fact being so stated, then let the Question be; Whether the Expulsion
of the Bishops, and the placing of new ones in their Sees, by an Act of State,
and without a Synodical Sentence, for not taking such New Oaths, be not
Schismatical? The Case is truly what I dare but hint to you, and you may begin
the Dispute as soon as you please; provided you procure us the same freedom and
safety to answer fully to the point, as you take to Challenge and Object.

And before (to use your modish Phrase) I subscribe a Vale, I must beg you to
pass by one small Mistake in my last Letter (if ever it comes to your Hands)
about Joseph the Presbyter, which yet I think I have corrected in the Margent;
and in requital I shall take no notice of twenty greater in yours. I shall not
examine your Criticism about (...), nor tell the World you produce, p. 43. for
your own Reading what you gather up from Co^elerius's Observation. And besides
all this, I shall own the Obligation, admire this single Instance of good
Nature and Condescension, and continue

Jan. 1st. 1691. Your Faithful Friend and Most Humble Servant.

FINIS.

