The Great and Wonderful PROPHECIES, OF Mr. Patridge, Mr. Coly, Mr. Tanner, and
Mr. Andrews.
Predicting what may befall this CLIMATE of ENGLAND And other Kingdoms, for
this year 1689. With the Account of the memorable Eclipses, and their
Signification, with other remarkable matters worthy of Note.

Pray: That he May Turn his Wrath Away great Wonders and Strange (...)



Printed for I. C. in Holbourn (...)

The Great and Wonderful PROPHECIES, OF Mr. Patridge, Mr. Coly, Mr. Tanner, etc.
It Is no wonder, if so many strange Events and Accidents are hidden from the
foresight of Mankind, since so few addict themselves to the understanding the
Caelestial Intelligences, in their sundry Aspects, Motions, Conjunctions and
Configurations, seeing by them as by the Monitors of Heaven, are pointed out
the Rise and Decay of Empires, Kingdoms, and States, Wars, Plague, Famine,
Fire, Losses, and the like, which the more judicious frequently foresee; and
which, by a true and timely Repentance may be averted, and the Almighty Hand
stayed, ever then when it is lifted up to give the Fatal Stroke, as appears by
the Ninevites Humiliation, David's opposing himself to the destroying Angel,
Hezekia's Prayer, that delivered him from appointed Death, and many other
Examples found in Holy Writ, and other Warrantable Records, etc. But not to be
tedious in the Beginning, I now Proceed to give the Reader the Sum of the
Predictions, Prophecies, or Prognostications, for the Year, 1689 As I find them
set down by these Four most Learned and Judicious Astrologers; whose heitherto
approved Truths foretold, have struck the World with no small Wonder and
Amazement.

This Year, says Mr. Patridge,
BEgins with no Extraordinary Action, but Great Councils and Consultations,
which may be hoped to very ^ood Purpose for at the Post-ventional New Moon; Two
days after its Ingress the Moon applies to the Sextile of Saturn, to which may
be adde^ the Conjunction of the Fortunes and the Sextile of the Sun and Saturn
which in the St^rry, Di^^ects, are Arguments of a Quiet and Peace able Time;
and much better (perhaps) than expected, for there are very Emergencies, Good
or Bad, that happen in the World, but have some Manifestation from the
Configuration of the Heavens; and they from the Beginning of the Year, till
toward the Spring, seem to Denote nothing less than a Stabilitie of Worldly
Affairs, were not the two Infortanes Stars, so called, possited in a
Headstrong, Malicious, and Treacherous Sign; however the Benevolent Positions
of the Favorable, Planets, Mittigate the Evil pretended, from whence we may
clouclude, and hope for better Things than many ill Spirited Persons desire;
Though to other Countries, under their Influence to Mars and Saturn in Scorpio,
threatened Rebellious Mutinies, War, F^lshood, Perjury, Violation, or Breach of
Leagues, between Neighboring Princes, Dissensions, Controversies, Murders,
with Ba^kbitings amongst Relations; some siding with one Party or Country, and
some with another; having thus discoursed of the first part of the Year; he
proceeds to the second.

Saturn, says Mr. Coly.
BEing in Scorpio, and Jupiter in Aquarius; it is an ill Wind that blows no
body profit: Things seem to be in a moderate good Posture; many cry out for
Justice and plead much Loyalty, some sticking of an Old Nature, falls in the
Quadrate of Saturn, and Mars threatens a Foot of subtle aged persons, and
usually produces many strange Effects; and this following the Suns Ingress,
some Melevolent Malady is to be feared, and the Aspects being for the most part
Partamicable, seem thereby to promise Unity, Concord, Good Agreement, etc. And
the Position of Jove in Aquarius, Denotes Advancement of Worthy Men of the Long
Robe, so that we have cause to hope well, notwithstanding the Endeavors of
some Wicked Persons to hinder our Tranquillity; and toward the Close of the
Spring, hope to hear Good News, even such as will prove grateful to all honest
Minds. From the Spring, proceeding to Summer, he says various Actions and
Effects will be produced throughout Europe, and we may wait to see the
Operation of Great Things, which are promised in Foreign Parts, and such,
perhaps, that many years before have not produced; for Jove falling Retrogade
into Pisces, in Trine, and great Reception with Venus; with many other
favorable or friendly Configurations, from whence we may Naturally expect as
propitious Influences; for in any ingress of the Sun, if the Fortunes are found
in their own Dignities or Reception, then do they influence Virtue and such
Actions as they Naturally signify, shall be exceedingly Augmented: And although
Eminent Changes happen yet to the Benefit of Mankind, etc. and Justice
Impartially Executed upon the Great and Powerful, as well as upon the Meaner
sort, all Things inclining to peace and Tranquillity; and so going on to
Antum^, or the last Division of the Year,

This Month says he, meaning September, we have a most hateful Opposition of
Saturn and Mars; attended also with the Opposition of the Fortunes, Jupiter and
Venus the Square of Saturn and Venus, the Square of Mars and Venus from fired
signs, which are notable Configurations, and usually produce wonderful Effects;
for Mankind is threatened with strange Distempers. of Body, as Fevours,
occasioning Megrim, Madness, Phranzies, Appoplexies, Lethargies; with many
other Anonimous Diseases and Unnatural, hard to be cured, and often terminate
in sudden Death, and now expect to hear of many Roberies, and inhumane Actions
amongst Mankind; as also Treacherous Enterprises, and very sudden and amazing
Accidents in many parts of Europe, for Nature still Acts to bring her Works
about:
Marss gives the Pox, but Saturn gives the Gout;
Seas plagued with Pirates, Thieves infest the Land,
Ease proves diseases to each unruly Hand.
And thus much for the predictions of this learned Man, from whence we proceed
to give you an account of the Predictions and Astrological Judgments of others
in General, for the year 1689. as taken from their own hands, etc.

In the Beginning of the Year, says Mr. Tanner,
SAturn being in the Ascending part of Heaven, and Jupiter in the Angle of the
Earth, signify Insurrections, opposing Princes, undermining Government, as
also Mutations and Changes in the Affairs of Princes and States Alterations in
Laws, etc. Threatening especially the Ottoman Empire, and not looking very
favorably upon Italy, and some of the German Princes, who will be detrimented
in their Affairs, and others find some difficulty and heaviness in the
management of their Estates and Government, and the quartile Aspect of Saturn
and Mars, Denote many bold, daring and unusual Roberies; and if Saturn shall be
in Scorpio, having North Latitude, it threatens abundance of Rain, overflowing
of Rivers, and Sea-banks, corruption of Waters; and if Oriential, it Denotes
Wars and Contentions, between Noble men and their Kings and Governors, etc.
Especially those Countries under Aquarius, Scorpio and Leo: Yet as to us, we
find that Saturn and Jupiter, are aptly toward their Trine Aspects, which
carry a signification of Love and Friendship along with them, and in May they
are partially so figurated, and so continue in the following July, intimating
En^cassies, Treaties for peace, and hopeful proposals, which will be promoted
by sundry well-designing people, if not hindered by some Malevolent Aspect,
stirring up such as may give it a disturbance; however, in the following
Quarter, the Aspects are more favorable, and give hopes of a great settlemen
of Affairs, which God of his Mercy Giant, especially to these Kingdoms.

To these we may add what He says in his prediction for the Year, 1689.
THe Configuration of Heaven, (says he) attending the Solar Ingress, are of a
pretty mild and calm Nature, and the heavenly Bodies are moderately disposed,
as to their Mutual Aspects, yet to Foreign Countries they prove not so
favorable, but threatens them with mortal Action, especially the Turks,
Tartars, Polonians, etc. yet soon after, Calmness may probably ensue, and we
may reasonably expect to hear of a greater Calm, though some other Aspect
threaten to keep the World in Action; nor are the Eclipse of this to be held of
little account in their Effects and Significations, according to the Rules of
Astrology, and since we have spoke sufficiently of other prognostical Effects,
produced by the Plannets and Heavenly Bodies; what is most Noted of them, is
material to be laid down.

Of the Eclipses, and what is observable from them this year, 1689. according
to Mr. Andrews.
THe Frst Eclipse will be upon the 25th. of March, being of the Moon, between
the hours of 6 and 7 at Night, being a total and centerial Eclipse, and is to
be seen in England, if the Clouds or Mists intercept it not. Its beginning will
be at 39 Minutes past 4 a Clock, the beginning of total Darkness will be at 45
Minutes past Five, the the middle or greatest Observation about 44 Minutes past
Six. The beginning of the Moons Recovering Light; about 43 Minutes past 7; and
the end about 49 Minutes toward 8, and at the time of these E^lipses, Saturn
is in the Fourth Degree of Scorpio, Retrogade in the ascendant: Jupiter and
Mars are in the Fourth house, Jupiter being in the 23d Degree of Aquarius, and
Mars in the 6th. Degree, thereof the Sun and Caput Draconis, are in the 7th.
house in the 15th. Degree of Aries, and Mercury is in the 6th. house, and in
the 10th. Degree of the same sign, Retrograde; but to come near in this matter,
it is the Opinion of the Learned, that an Eclipse so posited, is of no
Benevolent Nature, but Denotes, Sorrow, Labor; Imprisonment; secret
Contrivences, clandestive Actions, and Negotiations, etc. Wherefore it may may
be reasonably conjectured, that those Countries subject to its Effects, may
happen to fall under some unexpected Disorder; however, we are of Opinion, that
those being only secondary Causes, prompting and not compelling, may by the
overruling power of God, be prevented, for in his hands are the Breath of Life
and Actions of Mankind, on whom we ought to Rely for our safety and
preservation.

The second considerable Eclipse is of the Moon, on the 19th. day of September,
about half an hour after 2 of the Clock in the Morning, which will be a total
and centural Eclipse, visible with us, if the Air be serene and not over-cast
with Clouds: The beginning will be about 15 Minutes past Midnight; the
beginning of total Darkness, about 56 Minutes past one of the Clock; the middle
or greatest observation, about 48 Minutes past two of the Clock; the beginning,
or recovering Light, about 44 Minutes past three of the Clock, and the end
about 46 Minutes past four of the Clock, the total Duration about 3 hours and
54 Minutes, and the Digits Eclipsed, will be 20 and 39 Minutes, and the most
material Configurations attending this Eclipse, are the opposition of Jupiter
and Venus, and of Saturn and Mars, it happening in the Eighth House, called by
Astrologers Domus, morts and ends in the seventh, which they call the Angles of
War, Quarrels, Strife, and contentious Mars is Lord of Aries, where the Eclipse
falls out, is Retrograde and in his Detriment, so that the Effects may seem to
be of no pleasant Importance, as furthermore happening in the Fiery Triplicity,
and first Decant of Aries. and in this Case, according to the Learned, it
Denotes the motion of Armies, Death, and Destruction of small Cattle, Enmity
between the Vulgar and Noble sort of people, Murders, Thefts, Discords, Wars,
sharp Fevours, Apparitions in the Air, and Mutations in those parts subject to
the sign, wherein it happens, which we earnestly wish may be Averted from us
and that we may enjoy our Religion, Liberty and Property in ^^ac^ and plenty.
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

