A GREAT CONSPIRACY By the Papists in the Kingdom of IRELAND, Discovered by
the Lords, Justices, and Counsel at DVBLIN and Proclaimed there October. 23,
1641.

Which Proclamation was sent to the PARLIAMENT here in ENGLAND And read before
the Lords and Commons in Parliament on Monday November. 1. 1641.

Whereunto is annexed the Copy of a Letter written with the Kings own hand,
and sent to Mr. Nicholas, Clarke of the Counsel from EDENBVRGH October. 18. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1461.

BY THE LORDS JVSTICES, AND Council at Dublin in Ireland, October. 23. 1641.
W. Parsons, Io. Burlacie.
THese are to m^ke known and published to all his Majesty's good Subjects in
this Kingdom of Ireland, That there is a Discovery made by Us the Lords,
Justices, and Council, of a most disloyal and detestable Conspiracy intended
by some evil affected Irish Papists, against the lives of Us the Lords,
Justices, and Council, and many others of his Majesty's faithful Subjects
universally throughout this Kingdom, and for the seizing not only of his
Majesty's Castle of Dublin his Majesty's principal Fort here, but also of the
other Fortifications of the Kingdom. And seeing by the great goodness and
abundant mercy of Almighty God to his Majesty and this State and Kingdom,
these wicked Conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators
committed to the Castle of Dublin by us, by his Majesty's authority, so as
those wicked and Damnable Plots, are now disappointed in the chief parts
thereof: We therefore have thought fit hereby not only to make it publicly
known for the comfort of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts
of the Kingdom, but also hereby to require them, that they do with all
confidence and cheerfulness betake themselves to their own defense, and
stand upon their Guard, so to render the more safety to themselves and all the
Kingdom besides, and that they advertise us with all possible speed of all
occurrences which may concern the peace and safety of the Kingdom, and now to
show fully that faith and Loyalty which they have always shown for the
public service of the Crown and Kingdom, which we will value to his Majesty
accordingly, and a special memory thereof, will be retained for their
advantage in due time, and we require that great care be taken that no Levies
of men be made for foreign Service, or any man suffered to march upon any
such pretenses.

Given at his Majesty's Castle at Dublin, 25. October. 1641. The Names of those
Lords Justices, and Counselors in the Castle of Dublin, at the dating of this
Proclamation.
Robert Dillon. Robert Digby, Adam Loftus. John Temple. Thomas Rothoram.
Francis Willoughby. James VVare. Robert Meridith.


God save the King.
A Copy of a Letter written with the Kings own hand to Mr. Nicholas, Clarke of
the Counsel, bearing date from Edinburgh, 18. October. 1641.
I Hear it is reported that at my return I intend to alter the Government of
the Church of England, and to bring it to that form as it is here. Therefore I
command you to assure all my Servants, that J will be constant to the
Discipline and Doctrine of the Church of England established by Queen
ELIZABETH and my Father, and that I resolve by the grace of God) to dye in the
maintenance of it.

Charles Rex.
From Edinburgh October. 18. 1641.
FINIS.

