THE GRAVES-END Tilt-Boat.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE GRAVES-END Tilt-Boat.
BUsiness, like the Goddess Diana, is the Idol that all the World Worships; and
all pretend to it, even from the King to the Beggar; And is a thing of so much
Reputation, that they that have none, make it their Business to seek some; and
are as busy in looking after Business, as a Hen that scrapes for a whole Brood
of Chickens: This thing called Business is divided and diversified into all
sorts and sizes, and admits of more Variety than the colors of the Rainbow. It
was Business that brought me to the Graves-End Tilt-Boat, as it did several
others, for we were a whole Boat full, and every one pretended Business; and
though every Man's Business differed, yet it was all our Business to go to
Graves-End: And the Weather being Warm, and the bright Eye of the World
appearing in its Meridian Luster, invited us to sit very orderly upon the
Benches, and not to lie hickle-de-pickle-de, which is the Allamode-posture of
the Tilt-Boat Passengers.

And whilst each one was Endeavoring by some Discourse or other to while away
the time, and divert the tediousness of our Passage, there was one Person who
had the Mein of a Gentleman, (but both his Garb and Looks sufficiently declared
him a decayed one) who sat as Melancholy as an old Cat, and gave every one
cause enough to suspect that blind Fortune, like a very Jilt as she is, had
severely bent her Brows, and frowned upon him; and that he labored under the
Malevolent Influences of some unkind Stars, whose dire Aspects he was Unable to
Ward off: Which really touched my Foolish heart with so much pity, that I could
not but sympathize with him in his unknown Sorrows. Which that I better might
divert him from, Directing my Discourse to him, What, all-a-mort, Sir, says I!
If you have met with Troubles, trouble your self no more about 'em; there is
still a Morning to the Darkest Night; nor was the Sky ever so over-cast with
Blackness, but that the all-Enlivening Sun shot forth his bright Corruscant
Beams again, and dried up all those Tears the Clouds had wept, of which this
lovely Day is a sufficient demonstration; and since this Company, nay, and all
Nature smiles, why should a Cloud be seen upon your Brows? The Gentleman, who
had till now held down his head in a disponding posture, and looked as Meagre
as the Picture of old Envy on the Monument, at this raised himself up, and
said, Ah Sir! I thank you for your good Advice, but did you know my Griefs as
well as I do, you would say they were too great to hope a Cure; and there is scarce
a Day that passes, but makes 'em yet more desperate, and me more hopeless. Nor
is it for my self alone that I am troubled, for I could bear the worst of Ills
my self, and dare my Angry Fate to pour down all its Curses on my head, might I
alone be made the Object of 'em, and no one suffer else. But it is another's
Fate for whom I mourn, who from the greatest height of Happiness the World
could give him, is now become an Abject, and made the very Tennis-Ball of
Fortune. You have, said I, for ought I know, reason for your Grief, and would
you but relate the Story of your Sorrows, it would at least, I do persuade my
self, have this Effect, that by a generous sympathy we should Commiserate your
Fate, and have a fellow-feeling of your Sufferings; and it is, you know, some
Ease but to be pitied, and have Companions in Affliction. You Speak so
generously, replied the Melancholy Gentleman, That though to answer your Request,
be to renew my Grief, I Will give you the sad Story of my Troubles as briefly as
I can. Upon this, there was a general silence, for we had all a Mind to hear
him, whilst he thus began.

The First Tale. The Unnatural Children.
I Had once the Honor to be none of the meanest Servants to a Gentleman of the
first Quallity in England; and one not more remarkable for Greatness than for
Goodness; for he Excelled in every thing, and was the most tender of all
Husbands to his Wives (for he has had two) the most Indulgent Father to his
Children, the kindest Master to his Servants, and the best of Landlords to his
Tennants; whom he Endeared to him by so much Kindness and Freedom, that they
seemed to be the Family of Love: I have already told you that my Master had two
Wives, by the first of which he had two Daughters, who had they been as
Virtuous as they were fair, no Father in the World could have been happier in
his Children.

But, alas! The Case was far otherwise: For they both proved very Undutiful to
their Father; especially the Eldest, who was Proud and Imperious, looking upon
all others to be below her, and beholding 'em with scorn and contempt; so
haughty she was, she could not Endure to be contradicted; and naturally of an
Aspiring Temper, desiring to be possessed of her Father's Estate; which although
(if he had died without a Son) she would certainly have enjoyed, yet she would
rather have her Father turned out of doors, than tarry till that time came: In
which Attempt her Youngest Sister, who loved her Father best of the two, was
yet drawn in to join with her, and so was her Husband also, though otherwise a
quiet good natured Gentleman, who if he might but enjoy his Pleasure, was
willing to let the World go as it would; Being far unlike the Eldest Daughter's
Husband, who was Proud and haughty, and Ambitious beyond Measure; of a bold and
daring Spirit, but withal very Malicious and Revengeful, and one that would
stick at nothing to bring about his own Designs: Making great pretenses to
Virtue and Religion, which served only as a Cloak to his Ambition; and as a
Blind whereby he might conceal his Wicked Purposes; looking upon Justice,
Honesty, Truth, and Right, as things invented to keep Fools in awe; and those
that he chiefly hugged in his Bosom, and made Privy to his Designs, were men of
the same Profligate Principles with himself, by whose advice and counsel he was
always swayed: And then his Covetousness was as great as his Ambition; which
made him esteem every thing lawful, that he thought would prove Profitable; for
Right or Wrong were things that never troubled him. Now this being the
Character of my Masters Children, it was not likely that things should prove
much better than afterward they fell out.

Whilst things continued thus, my Master's Eldest Brother died, and having no
lawful Issue of his own, left all his Estate to him, with an increase of Power
as well as Riches; for he was Lord of several large and Wealthy Manors: All
which my Master used with so much Lenity and Moderation, as made him still
better beloved by every one.

And in a short time after, his Lady (who was a Gentlewoman of a high Descent,
and enriched with many great and Noble Virtues) was brought a Bed of a Young
Son, which caused no little Joy amongst us all, especially my Master, who now
had got an heir to all his great Estate; and this Young Gentleman was looked
upon to be the growing hopes of all the Family. -- But, O the Fickleness of
Fortune, and the Unconstancy of sublunary things! How quickly was our Joy
turned into Mourning? And our Rejoicing into Grief and Sorrow? My Master's
Eldest Daughter (although she had no Children of her own) who had always flattered
her self with the hopes of enjoying her Father's Estate, but now seeing a Young
Heir was born to put her Nose quite out of Joint, and cutting off her self and
Sister too, from the Inheritance, was mightily afflicted at this News, being
(as I have said) a Woman of a very haughty and Imperious Temper; and could not
forbear publicly to show her Resentment: But her Husband, finding on a sudden
all his great Expectations come to nothing, and that this Heir would deprive
him of the Inheritance, he fretted, fumed, and stormed like a Madman, giving
out that the Young Son was Spurious and surreptitious, and only a Trick of his
Mother-in-Law's to cheat him of his Right; saying his Father was either Imposed
upon, or joined in the confederacy against him; with many other Extravagant
things of that Nature, resolving however to run through all obstacles, to
gratify his Pride and Ambition.

And because he knew his Father-in-law to be of a Religion differing from the
Public Profession, he gave out that he had a design to introduce his own
Religion in all places where he had to do; and that all those who would not
profess it, should be turned out of their Farms, and their Leases become
forfeited: And if at any time any difference happened between my Master and the
Tenants, he would be still interposing by his Spies, (For he had corrupted
several of my Masters Menial Servants; and amongst others, his Secretary, who
still sent him word of all Occurrences that happened in his Family; and
likewise one of his Pages, bred up by him from a Child, who though he pretended
not to like my Masters Religion, was of an Ill Church himself; or else he would
never have forsook his Master, as he did) and like his Predecessor Absalom of
old, would seem to pity the Tenants, because there was none to do 'em Justice,
setting himself up for a Patriot, in a Place where he had nothing to do, for
his Estate lay in another County.

By these and suchlike Clandestine Proceedings, he had so far alienated the
hearts of my Masters Tenants from him, and many of his own Servants likewise,
that his Interest was very great among 'em. And my Master happening to lop down
some overgrown Trees that stood before his Mansion House, and hindered his
Prospect, his Son-in-law caused it to be insinuated among the Tenants, that
this was a Breach of the Fundamental Constitution that by the Laws of the
Manor it could not be done, but was an Arbitrary thing, and tended to the
destruction of the Tenants, all whose Woods he might cut down upon the same
Pretense. -- And then pretending, for the Security of their Religion and
Liberties, to assist them against these Encroachments, which were occasioned by
some Evil Servants of his Father's which ought to be removed, he raises the
Posse Comitatus of the County where he lived, and having got several of the
Tenants to join with him, comes upon the Estate, turns my Master, his Lady and
Son, out of Doors, and seizes on all that was Valuable there, commiting so
great a Ravage and Havoc upon the Estate, that a hundred years will hardly
make good again; turning all his Servants out of Doors, having first Stripped
them of what they had, except such as were in his Interest, for the only Crime
of being Faithful to our Master. Whose Disconsolate Circumstances, now in his
Old Age, troubles me more than my own.

He has indeed one Friend, at the Expense of whose generous Charity he has been
supported, ever since he was dispossessed of his Estate: This Friend commenced
a Suit at Law with my Masters Son-in-Law, for the Recovery of his Estate, and
said he would never give over till he had accomplished it, which gave us all
great hopes of seeing good Days again. But after a Lawsuit of Ten Years
continuance, first in one Court, and then in another, my Master's Friend being
almost ruined by it, his Son-in-Law having the largest Purse, being in
Possession, and Feeing high, and Corrupting all the Judges with Bribes, he
forced him at last (for all his great Boasts to my Master,) to comply with him;
so that there is an Agreement made between 'em; and he now owns the Son-in-Law
for the Right Landlord, and all the Tenants have acknowledged him for such, and
pay their Rents to him; and all this without any Provision made for my Old
Master, or his Young Son, or any of his Servants: So that now all our hopes of
help are become hopeless, and we have nothing left us but a Prospect of certain
Ruin; as you may see by the following Scheme of our present Condition. A
knagged Staff is our Companion, our Inn is at Beggars Bush, Duke Humphry is our
Host, and Mother Need our Hostess; our Bed is the Earth, the Air serves us for
Curtains, and the Sky for a Canopy: Our Meat is only Sighs, our Drink is our
Tears, our Sauce Hunger, and our Physic Patience, which being forced, is only
a Medicine for a Mad Dog.

Judge now Gentlemen, (continued this Antiquated Servant) if I have not great
reason in such a hopeless State to be Melancholy? Being reduced to so low an
Ebb of Fortune, and deprived of that whch is the Relief of the most Miserable,
I mean Hope, (which as I said) in our present Circumstances is become hopeless.

This is indeed a Melancholy Story, said another of the Passengers that sat by
him; but sure there must be something more in it: Why should the Son turn his
Father-in-Law out of Doors, and raise the Posse Comitatus without any
Provocation? What signified the cutting down of a few Trees? That could be no
great matter: Besides, they were his own, and who could hinder him?

To this Mr. Melancholy replied, You mistake the Case, Sir; it was not so much
the Cutting down the Trees; that was only a Pretense: It was the Young Son that
was the Provocation; for he being the Heir, the Hopes of the Inheritance was
thereby cut off: Had it not been for this, my Master might have cut down all
the Trees on the Ground if he would.

The Case was truly hard, Replied the Passenger again, for a Father to be
turned out of Doors thus by his Children; and shows 'em to be Extremely
Unnatural. But pray what became of the Youngest Daughter, for you don't tell us
what concern she had in the matter?

The Youngest Daughter, replied the Old Gentleman, always lived with her
Father, and so loved him the best of the two; but being Inveigl'd by her
Brother and Sister, who told her the Estate should come to her and her Children
after their Death, (the Eldest having no Children of her own) she consented to
them, and run away into another County with her Father's Chaplin (who had got a
pair of Jack-Boots and put himself into a Troopers habit) just when her Brother
came to take Possession of the Estate, and turn all out of Doors. Her Husband,
who I told you was a sort of Unthinking good-natured Man, being with my Master
at that time, he told him he heard his Eldest Daughters Husband designed to
Seiz on his Estate, and turn him out of Door: The Young Gentleman (who seemed
to have no hand in the Plot) told him 'Twas Imposseeble, and yet the next
Morning went away to his Brother, and left his Father: His Wife coming back, as
soon as her Father was turned out, and his Estate Seized.

Having heard the Gentleman's Story out, We all Commiserated the Unhappy
Condition of the Injured Father; and pitied the Meagre Gentleman that told the
Story; Upon which a Passenger that sat next but one to me, addressing himself
to him, said, I have heard your Tale, and am sorry for your Misfortunes; and
though it is not in my Power to help you; yet Sir, for your Diversion, I Will tell
you a Parallel Story to that which you have told; and indeed not much unlike
it, only yours is of Unnatural Children, and mine is of a Cruel Father, which
without any farther Preface, is as follows:

The Second Tale. The Cruel Father.
THere Lived not long since in one of the largest Counties in England, a
Nobleman that shall be Nameless, whose Nobility of Birth and great Estate, had
dignified him with the Title of Lord Lieutenant of the County where he lived;
and where he might have lived happily to this Day, had not he been far more
remarkable for Wickedness than for his Birth: It would be hard to give an Exact
Character of him, he was so great a Compound of all Vice, but Cruelty and
Revenge had the Ascendant over all the rest; and his thirst after Blood was
insatiable; which made him Implacable toward all whom he thought to have
Injured him: He did indeed profess the Popish Religion, but that, in the late
Reigns, was thought no Crime; and it is hard to say whether his Religion made
him so Cruel, or his Cruelty made him turn Papist, (for he was bred a
Protestant in his Younger Days) but this is certain, he was Proud, Revengeful,
and Malicious; and would carry on his Designs by Treachery, and Deceit; his
Words would be smoother than Oil, when the greatest Villainy was in his Heart;
and it was shrewdly suspected by many that he caused his own Brother to be
Poisoned, that he might Enjoy his Estate: And this was very common to him, that
he would commit Twenty Villainies to cover one; and but to know that any Person
suspected him, was to have that Person taken out of the World: to which End he
always kept a Crew of Beggarly Cutthroats depending upon him, which would
Swear any Man out of his Life upon occasion, especially if he was Rich, and
there was any hope of Forfeitures to fall to the King, which he would be sure
to beg, and thereby gratify his Knights of the Post out of the Ill-gotten
Spoils: But if the Person proved too great to be taken off under a Pretense of
Justice, his Crew were ready at his Beck to Cut their Throats, and then to lay
the Crime on the Person they had so Murdered, as if he had done it himself: He
turned out all honest Gentlemen from being Justices of the Peace, or Officers
of the Militia in the County where he was Lord Lieutenant, and affected an
Arbitrary Rule and Domination, in all that he did, not caring what he Swore, or
how he took his Oath; so that no Man could use that Confession in the common
Prayer, We have done those things we ought not to have done, and left undone
those things we ought to have done, better than himself: And such as himself
was, were his Servants likewise; being a Pack of the greatest Villains that
ever escaped the Gallows; as forward to do any Mischief, as he was to set 'em
about it: The most beggarly Scoundrels, and Blood thirsty Rascals that ever
came into the Service of a Gentleman; their only Virtue being
Passive-Obedience, for they were, for the most part, such Cowards, that they
knew not how to resist.

And yet this Gentleman (as wicked as he was) had two fair Daughters whose
Piety and Virtue was so great and Exemplary, that it did more than Compensate
for all their Fathers Ills; who every Day offered up Pious Prayers to Heaven,
to turn him from the Evil of his Ways; and grieved to see the courses that he
took: Who in return, repaid them Hatred for their Love and Duty; though for no
other Reason, but because they were Virtuous, and would not turn Papists, as
their Father had done, but both continued Zealous Protestants. The Eldest of
them, who was much the fairest of the Two, and was the Wonder of her Sex, for
Piety and Virtue, was Married to a Gentleman so truly Noble, and Complete in
all Perfections, as if his Breast had been the Magazine of all the Virtues, for
there they had their Constant Residence: His Actions were always the Product of
a well-grounded Judgment, having Reason and Religion for their Basis; In all
his Attempts he was Brave and Undaunted, but would never attempt an Unjust
thing: He was always a great Assertor of the Liberty of Mankind, and always an
Enemy to Popery and Slavery, for which reason his Father-in-Law hated him.

I have forgot to tell you, That the Lord Lieutenant had a mighty kindness for
a Great Man in a Neighboring County, who governed the People there with the
extremest rigor and severity Imaginable, using all manner of Cruelty and
Oppression toward, 'em; breaking down all the Bounds and Fences of Law and
Justice, and making no Distinction either of Right or Wrong; not Valuing the
most Sacred Laws and Edicts that had been Confirmed with the greatest
Solemnity; so that none that knew him would ever trust him, if they could avoid
it, and whoever did, was sure to come off a Loser: For Vows nor Oaths could
hold him, any longer than till he had an Opportunity to break 'em. This was t^^
only Crony of the Lord Lieutenant, who ^dmir'd his Conduct, and followed his
Exampl^ in all he could: But his Noble Son-in-law had always opposed his
Practices, and hindered him several times from Oppressing his Neighbors as he
designed to have done. Which made his Father hate him the more, for he loved no
body so well as this old Tyrant; and had rather his Estate should fall into his
hands, than into the hands of his Son-in-Law; Who having as I said Married the
Eldest Daughter, and having no Son, the Estate must of Necessity fall into his
hands; which the Lord Lieutenant and his Lady, (a Popish Bigot like her
Husband) thus Endeavored to prevent: They gave out a Report, and spread it
abroad, that his Lady was with Child, who to make herself appear big, wore a
Cushion upon her Belly; and understanding that two or three Poor Women that
were their Neighbors were with Child at that time, had agreed to take away one
of them that should be a Boy, and privately convey it to her, who should then
pretend to be brought a Bed, and it should pass for her own Child. Who by that
means should be the Heir of the Estate, and be brought up in the Popish
Religion, and so his two Heretic Daughters and their Issue should be Excluded.
This Cursed Design to deprive his Children of their Right, was mightily hugged
by him and his Lady; who thought the matter laid so well, it could admit of no
Discovery. --

But it often falls out, the Crafty are taken in their own Snares; for as
closely as the Design was laid, several of their own Servants having a Watchful
Eye over all that past, and who pretended to be much in their Interest, and
showed a great Inclination to turn to their Religion, (though in their hearts
they abhorred both their Religion and Practice, especially this his Villainous
Contrivance against his own Children) upon which account they were sworn to
Secrecy, and let into all the Design; by which means it came more particularly
to be discovered. Besides which, several of the Gentry, and chief Freeholders
in the County, were very suspicious of the Imposture, and amazed at the Villainy
of the Contrivance; which yet was mightily Encouraged and cried up by that old
Rogue I have before Spoken of, in the adjoining County, from whom he generally
took all his Measures.

The time of the pretended Lying-in being come, for that a poor Cottager, one
of their Tennant's Wives, being delivered of a lusty Boy, Notice was instantly
given to the Lady thereof, who presently orders the Child to be brought, and
then feigns to fall into Labor, in which she made a great crying out, to put a
gloss upon the matter, but it was quickly over, for the Child was born to her
hands, which was well known to several of the Servants: However it was
presently published that a Son was born, and great Rejoycings made upon it.

But the Gentry and several of the Freeholders of the County, being now beyond
all Doubt assured of the Imposture, were extremely troubled at the Daringness
of this Wicked Contrivance; and justly reflected, that since their Lord
Lieutenant had been guilty of so great a Piece of Barbarity to his own
Children, there was no Wickedness that he would stick at; and consequently that
both their Lives and Estates were in continual Danger from him.

And they had so much the greater reason to fear this, because but the Day
before his Lady pretended to be brought a Bed, he had caused several of the
Principal Clergy of the County (whose watchful Eyes he was afrai'd would have
discovered his Villainy) to be accused of Disloyalty to the King, and clapped up
into Prison; having also sometime before, sent down a Bloody Villain that was
his chief Servant, into the Western Parts of the County, and made it almost a
mere shambles, upon the like Shameless Pretenses; and being great at Court, no
Complaints there would be heard against him; Besides, he was so upheld in all
his Wickedness by that old Villain, the Lord Lieutenant of the adjoining
County, between whom and himself there was so strict a Friendship and Amity,
that he now began to think himself above the Fear of Punishment.

Upon all these Considerations, several of the Principal Gentry and
Freeholders of the County secretly consulted together what they should do for
the Preservation of their Lives and Estates, and found they had no Remedy left,
but to send to their Lord Lieutenant's Eldest Daughter's Husband, who was a
Gentleman of great Interest and Power, both in his own County and in the Lord
Lieutenant's, and who was both Wise and Valiant, and of Unspotted Integrity and
Honor; of which all that knew him were very sensible: For there had been very
great offers made to him some time ago both by his Father-in-law, and his Old
Neighboring Brother in Iniquity, That if he would change his Religion, and
come into their Interest, he should have whatever he would ask; But he
generously refused their offer, and let 'em know that he would not do a
dishonest thing to be made the greatest Prince in Europe; after which, they
always both feared and hated him.

Being come to this Result, they sent two or three Gentlemen to him privately,
who gave him an Account of the then sad Condition their County, Religion, Lives
and Liberties were in, by the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Proceedings of their
Lord Lieutenant; and likewise how lately he had substituted an Impostor instead
of a Son, as was pretended, to deprive him and his Lady of their Natural
Birthright. Adding, That he could neither Answer it to God, his Country, his
own Conscience, nor his Lady, if he thus suffered her to be deprived of her
Birthright, by an Impostor.

Having maturely considered of these things, and especially of the Danger both
Religion and Liberty were in, by these Violent Proceedings of his
Father-in-law, and how Dishonorable a thing it would be, to Suffer a Beggars
Brat to deprive his Lady of that Inheritance which is her Right; he resolved to
accept of their Invitation, and at least to reason the Case with his
Father-in-law about it.

But knowing well how Deceitful and Treacherous he was in all his Actions, he
thought it would be a great piece of Imprudence in himself if he should put
himself into his Father's hands; and therefore took along with him several of
his best Friends, as well to be a Guard to his Person, as to advise him in any
difficult Emergencies that should happen.

He was no sooner come into the County, but the whole County expressed an
Extraordinary Joy, looking upon him to be (as indeed he was) their Friend and
their Deliverer. The first thing he did, upon his coming into the County, was
to send a Letter to his Father, to let him know he was coming to wait upon him;
and to Endeavor to compose the Differences that had unhappily fallen out
between him and the Freeholders and Gentlemen of the County, and also to
Enquire into the Truth of a Report that had been brought to him about the
Imposture of his Pretended Son, which he should be very glad to find false.

Upon the receiving of this Letter, the Lord Lieutenant changed his
Countenance; but when he had read it, and found his Son-in-law had an Account
of what had been done, relating to his pretended Son, his Guilt flew in his
Face, and he was filled with the greatest Consternation imaginable; and
presently sent away his Lady, and her pretended Son, to his Neighboring
Companion in Mischief; by whose advice he had all along steered his Course.

The next Day the Lord Lieutenant was in a great agony in himself; the horror
of his Wickedness and the just Vengeance due to him on that Account, made him
extreme Uneasy; so that instead of Adjusting things fairly as his Son-in-law
desired, (being conscious to himself that he was justly hated by the generality
of the People in the County) he rather chose to withdraw himself out of the
County, and go after his Lady and her pretended Son, than to look his
Son-in-law in the Face, whom he had so much wronged.

The News of his having withdrawn himself out of the County, was no sooner
known, but it caused a general Rejoicing; (none being sorry for it, but a few
beggarly Scoundrels, whom he had made the Instruments of his Injustice and
Cruelty; whose chief Sorrow was, that they had now no more opportunity to ruin
their Neighbors.) And his Son-in-law having taken Possession of the Estate,
which of Right belonged to him, he was soon after chosen Lord Lieutenant, in
the Room of his Father-in-law.

This made the old Lord Lieutenant almost raving Mad, who was still as Wicked
as ever, and now Plotted by all the ways and means he could to take away his
Life, sometimes by Poison, and at other times by Assassinating him as he rid
upon the Road; but being the Darling and Peculiar Care of Heaven, he has
hitherto been preserved, and I hope will always be so, having done nothing but
what became an honest and worthy Gentleman: Himself, his Lady, and her Sister,
having Justified themselves to be the best of Children, to the worst of Fathers.

As soon as the Gentleman had made an end of this Tale, and we had all showed
our Resentments at the Barbarousness and Cruelty of so unnatural a Father; one
that had said nothing all this while, but sat as if he had been asleep, having
roused up himself, said, Well Gentlemen, I have heard both your Tales, which I
take to be one and the same, diverse ways told; but you have done neither side
that Right, which a Printed Copy of Verses has done, that I found the other day
at the End of a Book; and which for the, Ingenuity of 'em, I committed to
Memory; and if you please, Gentlemen, for your further Diversion, I Will Repeat,
as well as I can. We were all desirous to hear what they were, and so entreated
him to begin. Which he did thus:

The Third Tale.
WHAT I am going to repeat, is called A Dialogue between the late King James
and King William, after the Battle of the Boyn in Ireland: The Words are these:

King James. No Injured Monarch can his Fate Explore,
A Father, and an Vnkle's Right, is more:
Nature pleads here; your Blood is on my side;
Each beating Pulse, and every Vein's Allied:
What Fever then thus boiled you into Arms?
Is it Religion, or the Crown that charms?
If from my Daughter's Right, your Claim you bring,
She is too Early Queen, whilst I am King.
Your Love to her, you show by wronging Me;
You praise the Fruit, and yet cut down the Tree:
That Crime Rome blushed to punish, you pursue;
Make it your Conscience, and your Glory too:
Why should you shake my Glass so nearly done?
The Ebbing Sands have but a few to run.

King William. I took but up that Crown you durst not wear,
And am Your Conqueror, as well as Heir:
If Right Divine, does unto Kings belong,
Where Is the Divine, when once the King does Wrong?
All Monarchs did from Civil Contracts spring,
And he who breaks the Law, Dissolves the King.
Nor can you here a Parent's Right pretend,
For Public Safety knows no Private Friend:
Thus Generous Pompey for his Country drew,
Forgot his Julia, and her Caesar too.

King James, New Titles may be scaffolded with Laws;
And frothy Monarchs of the Mobs applause,
Accept a Crown on Terms too mean to wear;
Then boast themselves they are the Peoples Heir:
But he that Crowns from Contracts does receive,
Is King at Will, and Governs but by Leave:
A Marble Caesar, 'Pinion'd to a Throne;
The People Regnant, and the Monarch Stone.

King William. When Men did first their Brutish Lusts pursue,
And Force alone was all the Law they knew;
When Sense was Guardian, and when Reason Young,
It Was then the Weak submitted to the Strong:
Thus as the Bull walks Monarch of the Ground,
So Nimrod, Caesar, and the rest were Crowned:
For he that could Protect, and Conquest bring,
Was from a Captain, ripened to a King.
Thus they the People's Safety made their Choice,
And Heaven confirmed it hy the People's Voice.
When you to Priests and Rome, the Laws Betrayed,
The Injured Nation called to Me for Aid:
And it is their Choice the Noblest Title brings,
For Subjects are the surest Guard to Kings.

When he had made an End of Repeating his Verses, all the Passengers Commended
them for Ingenious Lines; and most of us were of Opinion that those attributed
to King William were more to the purpose than those of the late King James.
Whilst we were thus discoursing of the matter, a Country-like Fellow amongst
us, said, Gentlemen, I have heard your Discourse, but it is above my
Understanding; nor indeed do I love to meddle with Kings and Princes, they are
Persons of too high a Quality for me to talk of: And I am sure it would be more
to my purpose to talk of the Tilling of my Ground, and the Sowing of my Corn,
for that is a thing that will turn to some Account, if GOD send a good Seed-time
and Harvest: And yet I am thankful to GOD that has given us such a good King,
and can drink his Health as heartily as any one; but as to matters of State and
Government, that is none of my Business: Let us but serve GOD, and obey the
King, and live quietly under his Administration, and I don't doubt but we shall
do well enough, without Prescribing Rules to our Superiors: For if the King
and Parliament don't know how to order things, I am sure I don't: And now,
Gentlemen, since you have been telling Stories, pray give me leave to tell a
Story too, but it shall be a very short one. -- We were all taken with the
Honest Plainness of the Countryman, and bid him go on; which he did thus:

The Fourth Tale. The Traveller and Lion.
THERE was a certain Traveller that going through a Wood saw a huge Lion lying
upon the Ground, which at first put him into a very great fright, but seeing
the Lion lie still, he began to recover himself again, and went nearer him,
till at last he got so near that he perceived the Lion was asleep; upon which,
being now grown a little foolhardy, he surveys him round about, and mightily
liked his Shaggy Neck and Noble Head, but thought his hinder parts were not so
handsome as they might be made; for he had seen of your Island-Dogs, (which is
a Creature very much resembling a Lion in its shape) and he had often observed
that the Shaving or cutting off the hair of their hinder parts, made 'em look
much more hand some, and therefore they were generally served so: And this
Traveller being conceited of his own Abilities, and being willing to oblige the
Lion in the same manner, he pulls out his Tackle out of his Pockets, and goes
to work accordingly: He had'nt proceeded far in his Business, but the Lion
wakes, and having never been Trimmed before, and not liking of it now, wondered
at the Impudence of the Traveller, that he should go about to Trim him, without
asking his Leave: However, though he did not set him a work, he was resolved to
pay him his Wages, and so turning his head about, he gave him a Mortal Gripe,
which put an end to his Work and Life together, as a just Reward of his
Presumptuous Folly. And thus, As he that did the Lion Shave,
Found 'twas a dangerous thing,
So will each bold and saucy Knave
That meddles with the King.
Let Kings alone in their high Sphere,
And our own Business do:
For things in a false Light appear
Unto the Vulgar's View.
He that presumes to shave the Lyon's skin,
Does little know what Danger he is in.


The Countryman came off with great Applause; and we all concluded he had
reason for what he said. -- This made another of the Passengers, that had said
nothing yet, to tell this following Tale.

The Fifth Tale. The Faithful Shepherd.
AN honest and careful Shepherd, that had the keeping of all the Flocks of
Sheep in a Country Town, belonging to his Charge, and had approved himself for
several Years of being very just in Discharge of his Place, whose Industry and
Solicitude for the good of his Flock, was equal to his Judgment and Honesty;
had certain Intelligence brought him, That there lay abroad not far off, an old
Wolf, and a Young Whelp, which they were afraid would make a Ravage upon the
Flock of Sheep: The Shepherd began to be concerned at the News, and was
presently for setting his thoughts at work, how he might best preserve his
Sheep in case of Danger; and considering the Largeness of his Flock, and the
great Extent and compass of Ground they took up in feeding, he thought it
Necessary, to have a Guard of Dogs to attend the Flock for their Preservation
from the Out-lying old Wolf, and her Young Whelp: Upon this the Shepherd
desires that the Town would Assemble themselves together, to consider of a
Proposal he had to make to 'em for the Safety of the Flocks under his Charge;
which accordingly they did; and then the Shepherd gives 'em an Account of the
Danger the Flocks were in, by reason of an old Wolf and her Young Whelp, that
lay Skulking abroad, and was Watching for an opportunity to come down upon the
Flocks and spoil 'em; to prevent which, he desired to have a Guard of Twenty
Dogs to be always in readiness to resist the Wolf, whenever she should make any
Attack upon the Sheep.

This Proposal was canvass'd by the Towns-folks, some being for it, and others
being against it: Those that were for it, urged that the Proposal was highly
reasonable; and that those justly deserved to lose their Sheep, that refused to
be at the charge of a Guard to defend 'em in time of Danger* And that it was
impossible that the Shepherd's Dog he had already (who was as old and feeble as
a London-Watchman) could preserve so great a Flock from the Wolf, in case she
should set upon 'em: Those that were against it, Replied, That the Demand of so
great a Guard was unreasonable; and that seeing the Wolf abroad had yet made no
Attempt to come down-upon the Sheep, why should they so much fear her now? And
that for their parts, if such a Number of Dogs should be raised for the
Security of the Sheep, they should be more apprehensive of danger from them,
than from the Wolf: It Is true, they knew the Shepherd was careful and honest,
but they did not know what the Dogs might be; and therefore were very unwilling
to have so great a Number raised, and that Ten was more than would be needful.
To this the other Party replied, That as long as they were assured of the
honesty of the Shepherd, they had no reason to be afraid of the Number of Dogs;
besides, the Flock consisting of above Twenty Thousand Sheep, Twenty Dogs were
as few as could be thought on to preserve 'em: And to say, That the Wolf had
made no Attempt to come down upon 'em yet, was no argument at all that she
would not; and that it might more reasonably be thought, That because she had
not yet, therefore she would, as soon as she found an Opportunity: Upon the
whole matter, it was at last carried in the Affirmative, That the Dogs should
be raised, and the Shepherd have the Guard he desired: And they were raised
accordingly; and with their Noise and Number so affrighted the Wolf, that she
never offered to make any Attempt upon the Sheep; but in a short time after,
the Dogs being a little sharp set, fell upon the Sheep themselves; and would
make nothing to devour half a score, and sometimes twenty in a Night: This
occasioned horrid complaints to be made against the Dogs to the Shepherd by the
Townsmen; but the Dogs being slush'd and fatten'd with sucking the Sheep's
Blood, r^fus'd to be commanded by the Shepherd, and would do only what they
pleased themselves: This mightily troubled the Shepherd, who was so much
concerned at it, that he desired another Meeting of the Towns-folks, and there
laying the Exorbitant Carriage of the Dogs before 'em, they ordered 'em to be
immediately suppressed, choosing rather to run the hazard of the Wolves coming
upon the Sheep, than to have 'em certainly devoured by their own Dogs.

Some, that they Sylla's Rock may Shun,
Do on Charibda straightway run.
And of two Evils, each one knows,
The least is always to be chose:
Better let Foes beyond sea Roam,
Than be destroyed by Friends at home.
This Tale was no sooner told, but a Kentish-Man in the Boat said, I don't care
if I tell you one Tale, but it shall be a Merry one: Whereupon he thus began.

The Sixth Tale. Of a Widow and her Son.
A Thrifty staid Batchelour in our County took his Mother, being a Widow, to
keep his house, and so they lived together; yet his Mother had a great mind to
see her Son Married, telling him he would never be settled till he had a good
Wife: But he usually answered his Mother, that he had no mind to Marry, and as
long as he had her Company to look after his House, he was very well satisfied:
But as continual Dropping will make an Impression upon a Stone, so his Mothers
continual Solicitations made him at last have a desire to Marry, if he could
light of a good Wife: This his Mother promised to hearken out for him; and in a
little time she was as good as her Word, having heard of a young handsome
Widow, and rich withal: To this Widow she takes her Son, who sees her and likes
her; and she gave him leave to make his Addresses to her, with some hopes of
Success: In prosecution of which Amor, he rises betimes one Morning, takes his
Horse, and goes to make the young Widow a Visit; but she not expecting him so
soon, he was surpised to find her in Bed with another Man, as he did; but so
as his Mistress had no knowledge of it; and so without speaking a Word he went
away again, and rides directly to his Sisters, to make his complaint of his ill
Luck to her, whose Husband he knew was gone a Journey Forty Miles beyond London
the day before: When he came to his Sisters, he finds the door open, and so
goes into the Kitchen, but seeing no Body there, he goes to the Parlour where
she lay, and the Door standing a Char, as we say in the Country, he Peeps in,
and sees a Man in Bed with his Sister, doing Business there; he was once about
going in, but Shame and Grief prevented him; and so shutting the Door, away he
goes from thence, and rides to Maidstone, where meeting with several of his
Acquaintance, he falls a Drinking to drive Care away, if he could; and stays
there till 12 a Clock at Night; but says nothing to any one of what he had seen
that Morning, either with respect to his Sweetheart, or his Sister.

Being come home, he finds the Family all in Bed; and being unwilling to
disturb 'em, puts his Horse to Grass, and gets into the Barn, and lays himself
down upon the Straw, and being weary, and having drank hard, falls fast asleep
till Morning. At which time the Thresher comes into the Barn, and falls to
Threshing as hard as he could; but did not see him, who lay at the End of the
Barn, with a heap of Straw between, which hindered the Thresher from seeing
him. About an hour after, comes in his Mother, with a Tankard of Ale, and a
Toast and Cheese, which the Thresher and she Eat and Drank together, and
afterward he laid her upon the Straw, and there gave her what she wanted: The
Son being a witness of this, was so troubled he was like a Man distracted; but
still kept himself private. At last the Thresher going out of the Barn about
some Business, he steps out, and goes into the House as if but new come home,
and sits himself down by the Fire side in a Melancholy posture; whereupon his
Mother asks him what is the matter? He falls a railing upon Women at a great
rate: She desires to know the occasion, and asks him whether his Mistress was
not kind to him? He replies No; but he had seen her very kind to somebody else;
and then tells her, he had seen her a Bed with another Man: At this the Mother
called her a hundred Whores, and seemed mighty glad that he had discovered it;
and told him he had no reason to be troubled for that, as long as it was found
out; and that she would provide a better Wife for him, for she wou'd'nt for
never so much have a Whore in their Family, which had always kept it self clear
and unspotted: The Son then told her that was'nt all his Trouble, for there was
something else that was worse, troubled him; and his Mother being very
solicitous to know what that was, he told her, That riding to see his Sister,
to make his Complaint to her, he had also found a Man a Bed with her, his
Brother being gone beyond London: Out upon her for a Whore, cries the Mother, to
bring our Family into Disgrace thus! Well, I Will never own her for my Daughter
more; with many other words to the same purpose. Then the Son told her, that
was'nt all his Trouble neither; for coming home Early this Morning (says he)
from Maidstone, and being loath to disturb you, I turned my Horse to Grass, and
went into the Barn, and fell asleep upon the Straw; and about Eight a Clock I
saw you come in with a Toast and Ale to the Thresher, which you and he Drank up
together; and then he laid you down upon the Straw, and you know what he did
there, as well as I can tell you? And did you see that too? Says his Mother:
Yes, that I did, said he: Well then, says she, go your ways, and Marry your
Sweetheart, and make no words on it; for I tell you, They Will all do it; they will
all do it, as soon as they have Time and Opportunity.

This Justifies the Proverb; still the worst
And greatest Whore of all, will cry Whore first:
And when she is caught, and most of all put to it,
She pleads for an Excuse, They all will do it.
If that be true, what shall a Man say more?
If all will do it, then every one's a Whore.
But you will say, All to Condemn it is hard;
Those that are honest ought to have regard:
With all my heart; to that I Will say Amen.
But if they will all do it, Pray who is honest then?
This Story made us all Laugh; and Encouraged another Passenger to tell that
which follows.

The Seventh Tale. Of the Ass and the Scholar.
A Country Gentleman of a good Estate, of all sorts of Creatures loved Asses
best; (and some have not been afraid to say, He was an Ass for his Pains) but
whether that be true or no, I will not determine; but the Tale I am going to tell
you is matter of Fact; which is, That a certain Country Gentlemen loved Asses
above any other sort of Creatures, fancied an Ass to be the handsomest, and to
have the most pleasant Voice; and accordingly gave order to his Servants that
they should have the best Provision and Looking to, and would always choose to
be in their Company (perhaps as being fittest for him) so that the dull lazy
Asses were fat and plump, and in good case, and looked as Bluff as a Dutch
Butter-Box: It happened that a Poor Scholar coming that way, and by the
Largeness of the Mansion House, guessing there was as large a Soul inhabited
within, he made up to it, and coming into the Court, asked a Person with a fine
Outside, Who it was that lived in that House? The Man told him, A Lover of
Asses; I thought so, replied the Scholar, by your being so fine. If you will not
a Cox-comb, returned the fine Gentleman, you would be an Ass too, and then you
might be as fine as I: For none but Asses are respected. If that be true, said
the Scholar, I Will even burn my Books, and go to play; or if I Study, it shall
be how to be an Ass, that I may get Preferment.

Sure now the World's come to a pleasant pass,
When men must Study how to play the Ass:
And yet there is reason for it, because we see
Asses most fit for all Employments be.
If Asses therefore ben't accounted best,
Why are they still preferred above the rest?
But yet an Ass so base a Creature is,
I Will be no Ass, though I Preferment miss.
The Eighth Tale. Of the Mayor and the Kings Ape.
SOme few years ago, there was a fellow that wore the Kings Cipher and Crown
upon his Coat, with the Two Letters of the Kings Name; this Fellow had a
Warrant from the Master of the Revels to Travel throughout England with a fine
Ape that he had, which could dance, and do several Feats of Activity, whereby
he got his Living by showing him at Markets and Fairs: and this Ape always rid
upon a Mastiff Dog, and a Man with a Drum to attend him.

It happened that these four Travelers came to a Town called Looe in Cornwall;
where the Inn being taken, the Drum went about to signify to the People that
at such an Inn was an Ape of great Quality, and extraordinary Virtue, if they
pleased to bestow their Money and Time to see him. But the Townsmen being for
the most part Fishermen, and other Painful and Laborious Callings, had no
leisure to waste either Time or Money to see an Ape show Tricks, so that no
Audience came to the Inn, to the great Disappointment of the Jackan-Apes and
his Master: Who finding himself like to be a Loser, Resolved to put a Trick
upon the Town, let the Issue be what it would. Whereupon he called for a Pen,
Ink, and Paper, and Writ the following Warrant to the Mayor of the Town:

These are to will and require you, and every of you, with your Wives and
Families, that upon the sight hereof, you make your Personal Appearance before
the King's Ape; for it is an Ape of Rank and Quality, who is to be practiced
through his Majesty's Dominions, that by his long Experience among his
Majesty's Subjects, he may be the better Enabled to do his Majesty Service
hereafter; and hereof fail you not, as you will answer the Contrary, etc.

This Warrant being brought to the Mayor, he sent for a Shoemaker at the
farther end of the Town to read it: Which when he heard, he sent for all his
Brethren, who went with him to the Town Hall, to consult what to do in this
weighty Business, where after they had sat a Quarter of an hour, no Man saying
any thing, nor any Man knowing what to say; at last a young Man that never had
born any Office, said, Gentlemen, if I were fit to speak, I think (without
offense, under the Correction of the Worshipful) I should soon decide this
Business; to whom the Mayor said, I pray, good Neighbor speak; for though you
never did bear any Office here, yet you may speak as Wisely as some of us;
Then, Sir, said the Young Man, My opinion is, That this Ape-Carrier is a
scoffing gybing Knave; and one that designs to make this worthy Corporation a
mere Laughing Stock through-out the whole Kingdom; for was it ever known that a
fellow should be so Impudently Audacious as to send a Warrant without either
Name or Date, to a Mayor of a Town, to the King's Lieutenant, and that he with
his Brethren, their Wives and Families, should be all commanded to come before
a Jackanapes? This is against the Liberty of the Subject; and I am sure our
gracious King, who is in all respects so tender of his Peoples Liberties, would
never grant such a Warrant. My Counsel therefore is, That you take him and his
Ape, with his Man and his Dog, and whip the whole Crew of 'em out of Town:
Which I think will be much for your Credit; for he deserves to be punished that
dares Counterfeit the Kings Warrant.

At these Words, a grave Man of the Town, who seemed to be in a great Passion,
said, My Friend, you have spoken little better than Treason; for it is the
Kings Ape; and therefore beware what you say: For had it been in the late
Reigns, you might have been fairly hanged for it, and this Corporation have
lost their Charter for hearing you: You say true, said Mr. Mayor, with a great
deal of Indignation; I wonder who bid that saucy Fellow come into our Company?
And what had you to do among us? For you never bore any Office, and that is a
sign by your wise Speech: You are a fine Counselor indeed, to advise us to
whip the King's Ape! The Rogue had a mind to have us all hanged! Get you out of
my sight, Sirrah! For I cannot be well while you're here. So away went poor
Peel-Garlick; for he was no Company for them. He being gone, Well, says Mr.
Mayor, what is now to be done in this matter? Marry, says another Senior, we may
see by the Crown upon his Coat, that he is one of the Kings Servants, and who
knows what Power a Knave may have in the Court, to do poor Men wrong in the
Country? Let us go and see the Ape: It is but two pence a piece; no doubt but
it will be well taken: And if it comes to the Kings Ear, he will think us good
Subjects that will show so much duty to his Ape: What may he think we would do
to his Bears, if they should come hither? Besides, it is above Two Hundred
Miles to London, and if we should be complained on, and be fetched with
Pursivants, (whereas now every Man may escape for his Twopence) I Will warrant
it would cost us ten Groats a piece at the least.

This Counsel, being grounded upon so much reason, past current, and all the
whole Drove of the Townsmen; with their Wives and Children, went to see the
Ape, who was sitting on a Table with a Chain about his Neck: To whom Mr. Mayor
(because he was the King's Ape) put off his Hat, and made a Leg; but Jack let
him pass unregarded; But Mrs. Mayoress coming next in her clean Linen, laid
her hands before her Belly, and like a Woman of good Breeding, made a low
Courtsie; whilst Jack (still Courtier-like) though he respected not the Mayor,
yet to show his kindness for his Wife, he put forth his paw toward her, and
made a Mouth; which Mrs. Mayoress perceiving, said, Husband, I think in my
Conscience that the King's Ape does Mock me; Whereat Jack made another Mouth at
her: Which Mr. Mayor espying, Was very angry, saying, Sirrah, thou Ape, I do
see thy sawciness, and if the rest of the Courtiers have no more manners than
thou have, they have all been better fed than taught: How thou came to be the
Kings Ape, I know not; for I believe thou art a Jacobite in thy heart, or else
thou would behave thy self with more Reverence before his Lieutenant: And I
will make thee know before thou go hence, That this Woman is my Wife, and an
Ancient Woman, and a Midwife, and one that might have been thy Mother for Age.

In this rage, Mr. Mayor went to the Inn-Door, where the Jack-an Apes's Master
was gathering Money as fast as he could: To whom Mr. Mayor said, Sir, Do you
allow your Ape to abuse my Wife? No, Sir, said he, by no means: Why truly Sir,
said the Mayor, there is Witness enough within, that have seen him make Mops
and Mows at her, as if she were not worthy to wipe his Shoes; and I will not so
put it up: Upon which, the Apes Master replied, Sir, I will presently give him
Condign Punishment; and straight he took his Whip into his hand, and holding
the Ape by the Chain, he gave him half a dozen such Jerks as made the Apes
Teeth to chatter in his Head, like so many Virginal-Jacks: Which Mr. Mayor
perceiving, ran to him, and held his hands, saying, Enough, enough, good Sir;
You have done like a Gentleman; let me entreat you not to give Correction in
your Wrath: And I pray you and your Ape, after the Play is done, to come to my
House, and Sup with me and my Wife, where you shall be very Welcome.

When once a Fool rules in a Corporation,
He makes himself the Byword of the Nation.
The Ninth Tale. Of the Countryman and the Physician.
A Countryman and Neighbor of mine, that lives near Sittenburn, had a Wife
that was always out of order, and never well, (which had reduced the poor Man
to a very low Condition.) Once she persuaded her Husband (who was a very
ignorant Man) to carry her Water to a Doctor, new come into those parts, of
great Reputation for many Remarkable Cures said to be by him performed.
Accordingly the Husband goes one Morning with her Water, and being had into the
Room where he was, Good morrow to your Worship Master Confusion, says he;
Physician, thou would say, said the Doctor: Truly, said the Countryman, I am
no Schollard, but altogether unrude, and ingrum, and my Wife having pissed in a
Pottle-Pot, I have brought it to your Doctorship, beseeching you to taste her
Water: So the Doctor took the Water and put it into an Urinal, and having
viewed it, he said, My Friend I find thy Wife is very weak; I found that my
self long ago, said the Countryman, for I have kept a wench this Quarter of a
Year, to lead her up and down the House; I did not bring her Water to know that.
Was you ever with any Doctor before, says the Physician? Yes, indeed, Sir, says
he, with many a one, to my cost: What did they tell you her Distemper was, says
the Doctor? Truly Sir, they tell me she is in a Presumption; Consumption, thou
should say, said the Doctor: I told you before, said the Countryman, I
didn't understand your allegant Speeches; but I believe yow'n speak true
enough; for she has well nigh consumed all that ever I had: Well, said the
Doctor, but does she keep her Bed? No truly Sir, said the Countryman, for
being hard put to it for Money, I was fain to sell her Bed a Fortnight ago.
Is'nt she very costive, said the Doctor? Costly, says the Countryman? Your
Worship's in the right on it there, indeed; for she has Cost me all that I have
upon her already: Said, the Doctor, You mistake me, Friend, I don't say Costly,
but Costive; I mean is she loose or bound? Indeed Sir, said the Countryman,
she is bound to me during term of Life: And I am bound to her too, the more's my
Sorrow. I but prithee, says the Doctor, tell me plainly, how does she go to
Stool? Just as she goes to a Chair, Sir, says he: I am fain to have one to lead
her: Pshaw! says the Doctor, thou do not apprehend me yet; I see I must be
plain, to make thee understand; how does she go to Shit? Why truly Sir, says
he, as other Folks do; the Backward way; she has a free Passage behind still:
But I mean, says the Doctor, almost angry, is it thick or thin? O, as to that,
says he, in the Morning it is so thick you may cut it with a Knife; and at Night
it is so thin, your Worship may Eat it with a spoon.

Although the Clown and Doctor disagree,
Both Fool and Knave the one and the other be.
These Tales made the Time pass away so pleasantly, that we were arrived at
Graves-end sooner than we expected: Which hindered some Passengers from Telling
other Pleasant Stories. But several of us being to return to London again in a
day or two, We promiss'd one another, that if we should be so happy as to meet
together again, we would then renew our Conversation.

FINIS.

