GRATIAE THEATRALES, OR A choice Ternary of ENGLISH PLAYS, Composed upon
especial occasions by several ingenious persons; VIZ.

THORNY-Abbey, or The LONDON-Maid; a Tragedy, by T.W.

The Marriage-Broker, or The Pander; a Comedy, by M. W. M. A.

GRIM the Collier of CROYDON, or The Devil and his Dame; with the Devil and St.
Dunstan: a Comedy, by I.T.

Never before published: but now printed at the request of sundry ingenious
friends.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. and are to be sold at the sign of the Black Bear in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

To the accomplished Travellour, and Friend of the Muses, WILLIAM AUSTIN
ESQUIRE.
Sir,
AFter you have with much expense, and greater pains, searched what the world
has worthy to enrich so ^ble a mind; you have given your (...) now happy
Country (because you (...) returned) an essay of what it is to ^^^ct from your
Pen, by the Poem ^^^^ecrated to the immortal name of (...) sacred Majesty. Sir,
but that I ^ould not make you blush at your own (...), I could tell you, how
that (...) seem to have been designed for (...) exercise of your Pen, as the
fittest (...) the best of that sex, which ^^mmand the whole world. Thus that
^^tertainment of Queen Christina of ^^^den at Rome had lost its best solemnity,
had not she been famous by the large, but excellent Poem of yours, which so
earnestly the learned world expects, and by me begs, that you would not deprive
that work, and the world together of the light. But Si^, since you are the
Ocean whence Wit springs, justly you may expect that other Wits should pay
their tribute in thankful rivulets to your greatesse. To you therefore these
Poems run as your due: but, were they not of themselves things of worth, your
name prefixed had made them so. For there cannot want devotion to the building,
where the frontispiece challenges so great a reverence, as all the world
willingly pays to your name, but most particularly

Your devoted Servant R.D.

The Preface to the READER.
Reader,
I Justly urge that common excuse for my self, that the importunity of some of
my ingenious Friends forced me to publish this Ternary of Plays: which are
wrote with so much ingenuitie; that, though they were the Masterpieces of
three several Wits, yet for the continued vein of vivacitie and spirit, which
runs through them, they seem to have been composed but by one head. That they
are no spurious offspring, but the genuine product of noble Parentage, each
will confes^, who views but with a transitory eye the lineaments of their
composure. Wherein, I can assure you, and your own judgment will tell you,
they will find nothing flat, low, nor sordid; nor yet any flatulent,
puff-past, or enchanted Language, fitter to raise Melancholy Devils, then to
excite a modest laughter: nay, even in the last of all, where bumbast would, if
ever, be proper, is so true a Decorum kept, that I know not whether any Plot
was better suited with becoming language, or good language bestowed ever on a
better Plot. I had once a fancy, there being three of them, to have entitled
each to a particular Grace; but when I considered, how those Goddesses were
painted by the Ancients hand-in-hand, I was loath to do them so much injury as
to part them: and indeed there being not a Play of them, wherein all the three
Deities are not equally concerned, I thought it best to get them to stand
goddess-mothers jointly for all three, to whose Patronage, and your perusal,
they are committed.

To the READER.
WHile that queint Prologues the Hearer's ears bewitch,
It Is, Reader, my design, your eyes to catch.
Our aim's in both alike; we to attain*
Applause do strive, and get a private gain.
As cunning Fencers make at parts below.
When they intend to give the Head the blow:
So we do humbly court your ears and eyes,
While it is your purse we aim at for our prize.
A Play's commended, if the Stage be full,
And what Book sells well, 's never counted dull.
Thus do the Actor's and Book^^ller'^ gains
Give the best judgment of the Poet's brains.
Then never enquire how these Plays have took,
But buy them quickly, and commend the Book^
R. D.

To his worthy Friend Mr R. F. upon his publishing his Ternary of English Plays.
BElieve me, Friend, when the other night you lent
Your Plays to read, I thought my time well spent:
For, though I would not play my time away,
I would pass time to read a well-penn'd Play.
And such are yours, in which all things so fit
The Decorum both of Judgment, and of Wit;
That, though unposted yet, nor with applause
Or acted here or there, the Comic Laws
Are in them so well kept, that hence you may,
Were they all lost, pick plat-forms for a Play.
Nor need you doubt, in this our Comic Age,
Welcome acceptance for them from the Stage:
For, if it is true the Proverb does express,
That (...).
He Is best Prophet, who does nearest guess,
This I Will dare to foretell, although no Sear,
That Thorny-Abbey will out-date King LEAR;
And Captain HOG his old Trade would give over,
When his Play's acted, might he keep the Door;
And who in GRIM spies not both wit and pains,
Needs Robin's flayl to beat it into's brains.
But if in w^bs so fine the lists chance shrink,
When you compare them* somewhat; or you think.
That I Hyperbolize more then is fit:
Excuse my Judgment, and accuse my Wit.
THEATRO-PHILOS.

THE PROLOGUES To the ensuing Plays.
A Prelude to THORNY-ABBEY.
Enter a Fool with a Paper in his hand for a Prologue. Fool. HA! ha! I Am come
now at last, or at first, which you will: for I am first here. Do You called a
Tragedy? so they tell me it is, and that no fools must be in Tragedies: for
they are serious matters, forsooth. But I say there may, and there must be
fools in Tragedies, and you call them Tragedies, or there will be no Tragedies.
And I tell you more, they are all fools in the Tragedy; and you are fools, that
come to see the Tragedy; and the Poet's a fool, who made the Tragedy, to tell a
Story of a King and a Court, and leave a fool out on it; when in Pacy's, and
Sommers's and Patche's, and Archer's times, my venerable Predecessors, a fool
was always the Principal Verb; and, as I suppose, was so too long before that;
and, as I suppose, when Thorny buil^ his Abbey ^oo; I, and as I suppose, we
shall by his good leave, or without it, continue so still to the end of the
Chapter. But, now I talk of the Principal Verb, I have a part to say to you, if
the Prompter would come to tell me, when I am out.


Enter Prompter, and takes the Fool 's Paper, and stands behind him. Fool.
We Are to present you -- (Ha! ha! he thinks I have pigs in my belly.)


Prompter. Si^rah! go on* We Are to present you --


Fool. I will not have't nonsense We Are to present you -- but I Will hav't I am to
present you --


Prompter. And what are you to present them, I pray?


Fool. A P -- a P -- a P -- a Pick-pocket.


Prompter. A fool's head: are not you? a Pick-pocket, quoth he; a Prologue you
mean.


Fool. Why? I was sure, it began with a P. And though you will have it a
Prologue, I say, it is a Pick-pocket too, I and a Pick-pocket Prologue too: for
ask um, if all their pockets be'nt the worse for it.


The Prompter offers to strike him, and he runs in. Prompter. Though he is
unready in's part, I dare say,
He did intend to bid you Welcome to our Play,
What more he had to tell you in his mind,
I find not by the Notes h'has left behind:
But within gather from their studied parts,
And ti^ing-habits, they will use their arts,
To show how Royal bloud's revenged when spilt,
And THORNY-Abbey first came to be built,
A place for great devotion of much fame,
Which since to Westminster has changed its name.
Then, if you will silent sit, and mum not say,
The Actors enter, and begin the Play.

The Epilogue to Thorny-Abbey.
AFter so grave a Scene, since 'twere not fit
For to unhinge your thoughts with flashy Wit;
Or when the King and Court in mourning's clad
For Thorny's death, that you alone be glad,
Lest you approve your selves a kin to those,
Who sooner then comply with, Kings depose:
The Old Hermit's Doctrine only we will apply,
And teach you from a Stage to learn to die,
Whose Monumental Lesson, though 't be true,
That death betides to Men, and Here the Candles are putting out.
Tapers too,
Yet this one favor we do hope you will give.
Through your Applause that this our Play may live.
The Prologue to the MARRIAGE-BROAKER.
YOu, who are seated, and for entrance pay,
I bid you hearty Well-come to our Play.
A Play span-new, and never yet on the score
For the Poet's faults, or what is the Actors more.
We therefore hope 'twill please: and reason good*
Since 't does present no tale of Robin Hood,
No musty Story dr^ss'd in Phrases new;
And yet you will find in it Wit and Language too.
Its subject is well known, a common Vice,
Made up of Riot, and foul Avariee:
For when a Royster spends his fair Estate,
And penny-less'gins to repent too late,
His first-fetch'd project how again to thrive,
Is ^ast about how richly he may Wive,
This soon is broke to some, whose reaching Wits
Can well contrive, and's conscience wrinkled sits:
Who, out of hope to share the prey, about
Soon plods, and finds the youth a Mistress out.
The Match soon made* they are married with all speed:
But hasty Weddings soon contention breed.
Our Play lays open every wile and gin
Whereby they coaks and draw the Fein^les in:
The^ be attent and since fare armed fore warn^d.
How to beware such guiles may hence be learned.
The Prologue to GRIM the Collier of CROYDON.
YOu're Well-come: but our Plot I dare not tell ye,
For fear I f^ight a Lady with great belly:
Or should a Scold be among you, I durst say,
She Would make more work, then th'Devil, in the Play.
Heard you not never how an Actor's wife,
Whom he* fond fool, loved dearly as his life,
Coming in's way did chance to get a jape,
As he was 'tired in his Devil's shape,
And how aquivocal a generation
Was then begot, and brought forth thereupon?
Let it not fright you; this I dare to say,
Here is no lecherous Devil in our Play.
He will nor rumple Peg, nor Joan, nor Nan,
But has enough at home to do with Marian;
Whom he so little pleases, she in scorn
Does teach his Devilship to wind the Horn.
But if your children cry when Robin comes,
You may to still them bu^ here Pears or Plums.
Then sit you quiet all, who are come in,
St. Dunstan will soon enter, and begin.
THORNY-ABBEY, OR The LONDON-MAID.

A TRAGEDY, Written by T. W.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1662.

The Persons who, are represented in THORNY-ABBEY.
Sibert Earl of Coventry. Emma, his Wife. The Earl of Wiltshire. The KING.
Lucius, a Bishop. Prince Edmund, the King's Brother. Ann, Daughter to old
Thorny. Lobster, old Thorny's Man. Joan, his Maid. Old Thorny. Mr. Woodford,
his Cosen. Gaufreid, an Attendant on Prince Edmund, and his Pander. Two
Murderers. The King's Guard. Pages to the King. A Post. A Constable with
Beadles attending. Chorus with dumb Shows. Two Citizens, overseers of Thorny's
Will. Abbess of Haly-well. Edmund, the King's base Son by Ann, old Thorny's
Daughter.
The Scene LONDON.

THORNY-ABBEY, Or The London Maid.
Ent. Sibert Earl of Coventry. Emma. The Earl of Wiltshire meeting them.
Sibe. GOod day and wellcom too my Lord of Wiltshire.


Wilt. Most Noble Sibert, Earl of Coventry,
Our good King longes to see you.

Sib. Is he alighted?


Wilt. Yes Sir, and at your Castle-gate he stands,
Cloyd with Petitioners, from whose humble hands
He fills his own with papers of complaints,
Still promising redress and comfort to them.

Sib. He Is a right gracious Prince: the fire of Hell
Consume the Slaves and their petitions,
For Sibert is not free from their complaints:
I fear our ruins.

Emma. Why should Sibert fear?
The King, nor all the Land can wrong thee here.

Sib. A thousand hearts must bleed first: hark he comes.


Enter King, Bishop, Prince Edmund, Earl of Wilsthire, Attendants. King. Oh
me, good Heavens, what strange petitions
Have these poor people here delivered us?
Command them all to morrow here attend us,
Where we will answer their petitions.
Renowned Sibert, Earl of Coventry,
To you and your virtuous Lady her^,
For some few days we must be troublesome.

Sib. Great King, my State, my Castle, self and all
Here in obedience at your feet shall fall.

King. We thank you both.
Come Brother Edmund take your place by us.
Good Bishop Lutius, rest your Reverend age:
And you good Earl of Wiltshire counsel us
To work the Commons safety of the Land,
And weigh all doubts with an impartial hand;
Only for this our resolution makes
A progress through the Land, with our own eyes
To look into the States inormityes.

Sib. 'Twill be a deed worthy your ear and care.


King. So had'it need, good Sibert, for we here intend
To see the poor man's wrongs paid with redress*
And let not great thieves swallow up the less.

Wilt. It is not well my Liege, for since you came
From your Court at London still you see
Corruption like a loathsome leprosy
Has made the fair face of aged ancestry
Deformed and hateful. Temples, erected only
To holy uses, are now for thrift turned into barne^ and stables.

Edm. 'Twere fit for to reform them.
Royal Brother, such ulcers found
Must needs be cut, least they corrupt what is sound.

King. Such and far worse the sad complaints here speak:
But by my Crown we will have them all removed.
Brother, back you to London to your Earldom,
And in our name, summon all the Citizens
Unto a general Council, and there make
A stric't inquiry both of all offenses, and
The Offenders see that you punish.

Bish. Happy is England in so blessed a King,
Whose only pleasure is his Subjects safety,

Edm. Our self will play the thrifty husbandman,
And pluck the rank weeds from the fruitful earth,
That Justice may manure our tillage so,
That Peace may spring and Equity still grow.

King. And herein shall you do your self much right;
For know, my Brother, all my studies be
To banish vice, and call back exilde virtue,
And but to leave it quietly to Thee,
That art true heir to all our Sovereignty.

Edm. Which care if it fall on this tender unapt prop,
I shall with patience bear the heavy load,
And with my care break my now quiet sleep,
And let my eyes and ears still open be
To hear and see with pure integrity.

King. Brother be gone;
You are the Earl of London; let us see
The City by your care so ordered be,
That no oppression wrong her: pray be careful.

Edm. Brother I shall, and so I take my leave
For to redress in what I can the wrongs
Of the poor wretches that with bended knees
Throw down their wrongs and prayers all at once.
Oh, may their ear be deaf that stops their ears
Against the poor, that plead with supplyant tears. Exit.

King. Be it your charge, good Sibert, to proclaim
In all the government you hold of us;
As Gloucester, Worster, Warwick, Coventry,
That all oppressed people may repair
Here to your Castle, where we will do them Justice.

Sib. I shall my Liege. the Devil shall damme um first,

King. Keep carefully those papers, they contain
Several complaints, for whose redress our self
Will this day sit in Counsel to determine.
Believe me Lords, that Prince whose fair example
Draws other to be good, may justly claim.
His peoples love and live in books of Fame. Exit.

Sib. So then I see in this the threatening storm is come,
And points at me, which we must cast to shun,
So all those ills he means to punish now:
My Conscience tells me I have in some sort acted:
Tush, what of that, who dares accuse me for it.
Say, on my back I wear the poor man's sweat;
My power and greatness might have borne that out,
But that this virtuous King in this bad age
Will needs be good, and here in my own house
Grant some access unto the multitude,
That all with base exclaimes as loud as thunder,
Accuse my actions, and in them my life.

Ent. Emma. Em Come Sir, I have overheard your passion;
Take my counsel, let not the name of King
Dishearten Thee, or strike amasing terror to thy heart!
Were it ten Kings that should oreturn my State,
I Would work my safety out of all their ruins.

Sib. Oh, He or I must down.


Em. Then let him die.
There is no other way to set you free.

Sib. Thou have awak't me, and I must confess
Thy counsel though through danger points at safety,
And I will take it in time: the King shall die.
To save my life is soundest Policy. Exit.

Ent. Anne, Lobster, Ioane. Io. You lay all on me, Lobster.


Lob. And I should lay all my wayt on thee, Ioane, thou must
Not refuse it, for thou know, women are born to bear.

Io. I, but not such burdens.


Lob. Nay, and you bear not me, you will never bear child
I warrant you Ioane.

An. So Sir, what discant can you make.


Lob. I, young Mi^, but it is upon the plain old Song
That every one desires to sing a part in.

Io. You have it without book, Mr Lobster


Lob. Oh, by the book in any case, it must be pricked to them.


An. Very well Sir, whatsoever maids bear, they must be sure
To bear your knavery, for thou art never laden with that.

Lob. Or else I were worse then clean linen, Mris,
For maids use to bear that.

Ent. Old Thorny and Woodford. Th. Come Cousin Woodford,
Are you not weary with my long discourse.

Woe. By my good hopes I swear, unless your change
Will interrupte me with some other matter,
I shall find naught to talk on, but my daughter.

Th. I tell you Sir, her duty, modesty and huswifry
Are such large theams and so delightful to me
As I can speak no other.

Woe. Sir you do that which all tongues else proclaim,
Your daughter is the mirror of this City:
And nothing that is good can glut my ears: beside
Your talk has made the way seem short,
For see we are upon them: see your man Sir.

Th. He Is kissing of my maid, by the mass, how now Lobster?
What are you doing Sir?

Lob. The clothes are dry Sir, and Ioane and I am a foulding.


Th. Thou art foulding her in thy arms, me thinks; away knave.
It Is well done girl: and hark you, Mr Woodford,
I have already vowed a single life,
Chiefly to give her all unto her portion.
Oh, it would joy my heart to see her well-bestow'd,
That she might keep my name alive unto posterity:
She shall have rich possessions to indow her
To a good husband.

Ent. Edmund and Ga^foord. Woe. Her face without possessions will deserve.


Th. St. Cozen, what honorable Persons have we here?
Fore heaven, it is my Sovereign's brother, Noble Edmund,
The Earl of London, our gracious Lord,
He must not pass without my duty: health to your Grace.

Edm. Our thanks good Thorney Justice is now impeacht,
And is araignd by fell oppressors,
And craves you as a prop for to uphold here.

Th. A weak decaing prop, my noble Lord.


Edm. In this small scedule is a mass of wrongs
Which cry for a redress; be it your care to summon
All that are oppressed, for to repair to the Earl of Coventry;
There to give up their grievances.

Th. It shall be speedily performed my Lord.


Edm. A heavenly prospect! what fair Creature's that?


Woe. His daughter.


Th. My only Child, my Lord; even all the fruit
That heaven, that time, and death has left unpluct
From this old sapple-tree.

Edm. It is a fair one Sir: what sudden fire is this,
That shoots through all my veins? it is scorching heat,
It Is of aspiring flame, and through my eyes
Shootes a hot lustful fire, that must be quenched
In yonder Sea of pleasure; no trick yet -- I hav't.
Sir you have a fair ring here, trust me,
I never saw a richer in my eye, troth
It Is a fair one, or else my fancy wrongs me;

Th. You praise it to the best, my Lord, and yet I love it;
This gift did part my loving wife and me.
Peace with her Spirit, and yet my honored Lord,
I am no scrupulous Idolater, to keep such notes
To my perpetual vows: it shall be yours.

Edm. This courtesy for ever binds me to you:
I will in some measure gratify your kindness,
Pray in exchange accept this ring of mine.

Th. Be your own Chapman Sr: please you bestow it,
I Will wear it for your sake.

Edm. With all my heart:
Knews't thou the sequel of this rings entreaty,
Thou would have bin more nice in parting with it.
But I forget me, I must to the King.

Th. We shall attend your grace.


Edm. Lead on, i will follow you. Exit.
Gaufreid, it is thou must make me fortunate:
Thou see you Ceature: go to her by this ring;
I blush to speak the rest: hark in thy ear.
You know the purpose Sir.

Gauf. Perfectly my Lord, and I Will practice it.


Edm. Oh! that we should not fear to do those things
We shame to speak of, but the fire is kindled,
With once suppressed, flames with the greater force.
Silence contains more passion then can be
Expressed in any rapsody of words.
Deep floods run still: when those that murmur
Are of a shallow slight profoundity.
I know that my desire is ill; yet cannot I
Desist from my foul purpose; for my bounded course
Of humane reason overflowes their banks,
And runs disorderedly through all my veins:
Frail flesh is weak, and reason stepped aside,
Our spring of goodness needs must puddled glide. Exit.

Gauf. Fair greetings beauteous Virgin;
By his commandes your father thus salutes you.

An. It was my mothers ring, I know it Sir;
And his commends is a command to me:
What his pleasure pray you.

Gauf. That you accompany me unto him self,
To whom I am charged to conduct you presently.

An. My duty is obliged to his command;
Nay I Will not question, but attend his pleasure.
Go Sirs, get home your clothes, and let your cares
Be diligent in house till my return.

Io. Will you dispatch?


Lob. Yes Joane, and you will take up your clothes once, the baskets are ready.


Io. You shall carry it then.


Lob. I warrant the wench, I have a carriage
That will carry home, i faith, if it be discharged once.

Io. I have heard so.


Lob. Never fear that faith wench:
You had not best make too much haste Mris.
Do you here, you Courtier, she is the flower of the City,
And therefore use her well, I pray: and 'twere not
For this Porters office, I would trust none of you all Exit.
With her. Go forward Joane: here is a fine world,
When the cart must go before the horse:
A man to come poking thus behind a woman.
My Mris. is gone before Ioane, you shall go behind;
I Will put you in before another time. Exit.

Ent. Emma and Sibert. Em. The night grows old; we must dispatch and kill him.


Sib. True Emma, for ere to morrow's breath
Our lives do hang in fearful hazard.

Em. Think then what follows.


Sib. Nothing but this, that thou observe my vow,
Which this night here I make in sight of heaven,
And call the powers both good and bad to hear it;
By Sibert's soul I Will never see the Sun,
Till the King die, and this black deed be done;
Let hell record my vow, the King shall die;
This night concludes his horrid tragedy.

Em. Enough, I Will show thee then these instrumental hands
That shall perform it: see Sibert, here they are,
Ent. Two Murderers. With resolution more strongly armed then with their hands.

1 Murd. That Is worth a thousand weapons.


Sib. I like their looks, they have no sign of pity.


2 Murd. Pity? a pox of pity; pitty's for babies.
Say but the word, and I Will wipe out pity, sheath this weapon in your side.

Sib. The deed once done I Will load you both with gold.
But where will you hide the body when he is dead?

Em. Know this my Lord; here by the uncouth cavern of a wall,
A solitary brook does glide along,
Which we have turned from forth his proper course,
And in the midst o'th channel dug a pit,
Where when the murdered King is once entombed,
The nimble current shall be brought again,
And overrun the royal Sepulcher:
This being done, what bloud-hound, or what art
Can find the body some fifty fathom laid
Beneath the river?

1 Murd. This is brave my Lord.


Sib. Beyond comparison* I admire thee Emma.
Go, conduct them to the chamber secretly,
And when the King's asleep.

2 Murd. He never wakes.


Sib. Follow my Lady then.


Both* Murd. We Will bear her company. Ex. unt.


Sib. So, so; ha, ha, he! sleep Lord secure,
Until the horrid shreekes of a Kings murder wake thee.
Night yet thou art smooth, and lookst upon us with a
Smiling eye: keep still thy golden cheek;
Be not thou sick, for under casualities;
The Eclips is past, that was the Herald to this fatal hour,
Some twelf months since; or if thou will frown on us
We can not be out dared; who is there;
Ent. Emma. My Emma, speak is all prepared.

Em. All to the life, my love.
The murderers placed; the King's a bed.
His first sleep is his last.

Sib. Excellent sentence.
Have thou the Postern key to convey them forth*
To bear the body to the place appointed?

Em. Think you that any thing I could forget
That houlds dependence on so deep an action?

Sib. Good: obscure your self until the watch be past,
Whose company I Will keep to night; and hear you,
See you remember still to urge the murderers
When all is dispatched to fly the Land with speed,
Till wonder be worn out.

Em. Till fear be under foot; I Will forget nothing. Exit.
The Gard's upon the round, I hear them coming.

Ent. Wiltshire and Guard. Guard. Stand; who is there?


Sib. A friend, and your kind fellow, Gentlemen;
The Lord of this poor mansion, whose watchful duty cannot sleep to night.

Guard. My Lord of Coventry.


Sib. Nay, lay by all Titles; I Will partake your travels;
I Will tell you Sirs, it is my honor's test
That nothing do disturb the quiet sleep
Of my most Royal Liege: you shall accept me a companion,

Wilt. Your Honor do express your self most noble,
To give attendance in a personal duty,

Sib. It Is fit it should be so; it is my Castle,
And I can guide you through all the turns
And angles of the Court, and as you find my care,
So make report.

VVilt. I shall attend your Lordship: another with the lights. Exeunt.


Ent. Murderers with the body, Emma meeting them. 1 Murd. Tread softly, you
slave.


Em. O happy sight! is it done?


2 Murd. This does confirm it.


Em. Did he not shrick?


1 Murd. Sfoot, do you think we gave him warning?


2 Mard. No, we took him unnawares; he prayed devoutly
When he went to bed, as if he meant never to
Wake again; no sooner was he laid, but ere his eyes
Had closed their fleshy windows of their light,
But we stepped in, and with the pillow stopped his mouth,
Lest with his clamorous cries he should have raised the house;
Or by his prayers wan us to pity;
Him then with these poniards
Yet reeking with his blood we pierced his heart,
Cut off his tedious prayer.

Em. Here, take this key, and by the Postern bear it to the pit
Dug in the river bottom, which being covered,
We Will turn the water to his former course;
Then make for safety, till the storm be past,
And we are all secure. Here Is more gold for you.

2 Murd. Look you be silent, and never fear our safety.


1 Murd. It shall never be reveald for us.


Em. Was ever murder done and hid so rarely?
The body buried in the rivers bottom.
What policy of men can ever find it?
Ha! who is it that speaks so loud? crack the clouds?
This crying seen is not yet heard in heaven, I hope:
Is it for that this dreadful voice of thunder
Roules through the black enraged Elements,
And wraps this bright diapome in fire:
Or are these sounds the knelling obsequies
You use to keep at a King's Funeral? if so,
King treason out, but only this I bar,
Wake not the dead, nor name the Murderer.
Exit.
Ent. Bishop and Wilsthire, Sibert meeting them. B. Lu. Angels defend us! what
a night is here?


Sib. How now my Lords, you have had ill rest to night.


VVilt. Who but the dead can sleep in such loud summons?
The blessed powers defend us: it is most fearful.

B. Lu. We come to see the King in this sick hour.


Sib. And for that only cause, my Reverend Lords,
We draw our care so nigh his Highness chamber,
That had he called, we had attendant bin
To furnish his desire: but sure he wakes not.

VVilt. And sure he sleeps not; let us to his chamber.


Sib. With all my heart. See here comes my Lady.


Ent. Emma. B. Lut. Alas! good Lady, waked from your bed with thunder?


Em. Oh! who can rest in such a dreadful hearing?
When every crack of thunder that breaks forth
Seems as if heaven would fall upon our heads.

VVilt. Noble Lady, accompany us to the King's bedchamber.


Em. With all my heart. I Am sorry he is thus disturbed.


VVilt. Softly, least being not yet awaked,
We fright his Highness with our sudden coming.
Ha! the bed empty: his Highness sure is up.
My Lord, my Liege, ha! no answer?

B. Lut. Strengthen me heaven! lights here a little:
Is not this blood?

Sib. Ha, blood! more lights.


VVilt. I fear my royal blood, my Lord, my Liege, my King.


Sib. Cry treason louder then this voice o'th thunder.
It Is that that he has all this while proclaimed,
And we dull animals could not perceive it.
Treason, murder, treason.

All. Treason, murder, treason.


Sib. Call for the Pages; raise up all the Court.
And hollow treason through out every room.
Oh! who is he has staind my Loyalty,
And made my house the author of this treason?

Ent. Pages. VVilt. Be patient Sibert; here come the Pages,
Let Us examine them.

Page. Where Is the King?


Sib. Who Is that that speaks so drowsily? base villains!
When blood of Kings besmears the Royal bed.

Page. Ha, the King's murdered! my Royal Master!
Thy loss is our decay.

Sib. Die Loyal traitors, you have murdered him. Kills them.
Over take him Slaves, or hide your guilt in hell.

VVilt. Alas my Lord! you do you know not what.


Sib. Do you uphold them; take heed, tempt not your spotles
Loyalties with any scrupulous thought; I would fain believe
That you were as my self, right loyal.

Amb. 1. That shall be seen Sir, in our diligence.


Sib. You talk but nothing do, search for the body,
If we find that, we soon shall find the traitors.
Search every room; the body is not far;
The murderer will be found: black deeds of hell!
Who was the author.

Exit Sibert and Emma. Em. Those that will not tell.


VVilt. This is a horrid night.


Bish. To kill the Pages unexamined, these are not just proceedings.


VVilt. I do not blame his loyalty, but his rage,
That in their deaths, we should have questioned
Prevents the means of our discovery.

Bish. This night is fatal, for it is hatched in blood.


VVilt. Heaven cease this thunder, it is a time of sorrow:
But come my Lord, think of the Kingdoms safety.
First let us resolve with swiftest speed
To greet the Earl of London,
Royal Prince Edmund, with thi^ heavy news.

Bish. As it is most fit. See here is Sibert.


Ent. Sibert. Sib. No marvail tho the heavens speak in thunder
To see anointed blood spilt on the earth!
And in my house! oh heavens!

VVilt. Nay good my Lord forbear.


Sib. Did not I tell you that those drousie Pages
Whom this hand slew (and I thank heaven for it)
Were the tour traitors, perhaps hired to do it.

Lut. That we would have found my Lord.


Sib. I would my heat of rage had given you leave;
I do repent it now, but it is most certain;
For that the Postern gate, whose keys they had in keeping,
Was now found open; tax me to any pains
To find this treason; set me down half the world
For my own travail, I Will bring the Traitor forth
Or never return.

Lut. Use your care, whilst we send post away.
This night's the worst that ever covered day.

Exit VVilt. and Bishop Lut. Sib. Ha, ha, ha, ha; the best to me: So, so.
Speak louder thunder, make a more horrid night:
Conscience is not at home thou can not fright:
Cry Traitor still, though I thy meaning know.
Here Is none that understands thou call'st me so.

Exit. Ent. Edmund and Anne. Edm. Nay, do not grieve.


An. Can you allow me less then tears, my Lord?
Oh, what a noble Traitor have you proved
In that deceiving ring, that brought me to you?

Edm. When I beheld this glorious frame of Nature;
This ever praised, yet never praised enough.
Proportion, O what a sudden passion I was in?
The Queen of love drew forth a fie^y shaft
And shot my breast, which rancle did so sore
The more I let it rest it raged the more,
Till from the storehouse of my hatching brain
This balsome of remedy I distilled,
And cured the wound: this rich Ambassador
Discovered to me more then the Indies wealth.

An. Oh! what a jewel then beyond esteem
Have I then lost, which gold can never redeem?

Edm. That is not lost, that is repayd with love,
Such is our fair exchange: had some rude slave
Polluted thy white soul with ugly lust,
Thou then had cause to grieve; but my desire
Was free from the least baseness: what I have borrowed
Of thy maidenstore, I will repay, and with a husbands love
Give satisfaction: nay weep not, good sweetheart.

An. A pretty Epitaph for wantons to congratulate withal.
You did salute me with a sweeter name
Then I imagine this sweetheart to be:
But you have robbed me of it.

Edm. Nay lovely maid.


An. Were it heavens will, would I had kept that name.


Edm. Would you have then ingrost perfection,
And like a usurer have hoarded up
The Princely jewel of your maidenhead?
And let pale death have bin your husband?
You were created that from you should spring
The worlds increase; then would you most unkind
Alter what you were made for? it is
A husband you must have: and if it be so,
Why not as good me, as another man?

An. If you want no vail to shadow, Sir,
How many have you caught within this snare?
Am I the first?

Edm. Yes, by this blessed air;
Nor art thou caught in any lustful net,
But in a sacred matrimonial band,
Which we have registered in heavens white book,
Where all the sacred Hymeneall oaths
Are writ in golden Characters,
And there are mine recorded; then it is no snare,
Nor incest can it be, thou art my wife.

An. Before I yielded up my virgins name
You swear no less. Oh heavens! do not you think
The air is troubled for our private sin.
This thunder tells me, we have angered heaven.

Edm. Sweetheart,
It is the years due order, and the air
Through heat and sulphur sends the thunder cracks:
Thou will be mist at home; I prithee haste unto thy father's house.

An. Oppressed with shame.


Edm. In troth I shall be angry with thee sweet,
If thou continue in these fond delirements;
Can there be shame in matrimonial rites?
Thou art my wife, and here I fealt with these
Kisses her.
An. Had you sealed no otherwise with me,
I could have born the impression willingly,
And called again for more security.

Edm Thou shall ere long embrace me lawfully;
The Priest shall join our hands with our true hearts:
My business calls me; hence I must be gone,
But leave my heart for ever, sweet, with thee.

An. As good as naught; how ere both sin and shame
I bear for thy sweet sake, my lost good name,
My fathers anger, all is for thy sake.
If thou proof false, and that for grief I die,
It Is for thy sake, and shall do it willingly. Exit.

Edm. Farewell thou soul of virtue.
Ent. Thorney and VVoodford. Now Master Thorney.

Thor. Health to you Sir: I have according to your good appointment
Caused all the Commons that are oppressed with wrong,
For to repair to the Earl of Coventry's Castle,
Whereat your Princely Brother keeps his Court
To show their grievances, and against whom they complain

Edm. You have bin careful, Master Thorney,
And in it shows the duty of a Subject,
For it is a perilous time.

Thor. I, I, my Lord, a mostrous stormy time,
For since my birth I never heard the like:
This many a day we have not seen the Sun,
But still continual thunder frights the earth;
What this portends, he that is the cause,
Best knows.

Ent. A Post. Edm. True Mr Thorney, and it is not fit for us to question his
intents.
Thy news! why do thou look so pale.

Post. Oh my Liege, I come to sing to you a schritch ou'ls note,
That will afright your hearing: your Brother Sir.

Edm. What of him?


Post. He is

Edm. Dead?


Post. How apt you are
To pluck the mishap't embrion of mischance,
Ere it be fully molded from the womb:
He Is dead my Liege, and murdered.

Edm. Murdered, how?


Post. In his bed, my Liege: by whom is yet unknown.


Edm. Then this the cause is that the heavens so scould
And rend the clouds with fearful thunder cracks
I Will find the murderer, though I search the center,
And from the earth pluck the abhorrid caitiffes.
Let all the passages be strongly guarded:
For till the mutherous villains be brought to light,
We still shall live in this perpetual night. Exit.

Ent Sibert and Emma. Sib Oh conscience! thou art a mortal wound to murderers
No balm can give thee ease: oh! this dred thunder
Will never cease his loud amasing terror
Till this most fearful murder be reveald.

Em. Art thou a man, and keepst such cowardly apprehension
A sound of thunder? why? me thinks this hour
I see ten thousand like thy self that stand
Applying all unto their proper sins;
The bribed Lawyer having taken his fee
With ambodexter, feeling cunningly,
Hearing this voice, says, from his conscience sting,
The heavens are angry at his dubble dealing;
The griping Usurer that has taken the forfeit
Of some great Estate, this voice of conscience
Now a little wakens him; the Thief,
The Tyrant, and the Adulterer, all tremble
Now: and what is it but Palsy-conscience
That appropriates unto it self
Things that we never knew.

Sib. But this is all my own.
Did not the instant deed call up the thunder?
Did not I vow to heaven, I never would see
Nor Sun, nor Moon, until the King were dead?
To which I fear the heavens have added further,
That those clear lights the world shall never see
Till this black deed of hell revealed be.

Em. This is your conscience still: awake for shame
From this same drousie Lethargy of mind.
Seek for thy safety Sibert, and assure it.
The Lords are gone to London, follow them,
And dive into the owse of all their actions;
The general voice cries, Edmund King of England.
And being enthroned, the Royal Policy
Will mount him with a strict and nearer quest
To find the author of his Brothers murder.

Sib. That starts my heart: hence coward conscience,
If any conscience shall but wrinkled sit,
And bend a doubtful censure upon Sibert,
I will again dip these my hands in blood
Of the most daring opposite; I see it is fear
That man accuses* resolves acquit all guilt,
All must to earth, where then can blood be spilt?

Em. Why now thou speak.


Sib. I Will put it all in action; stay thou here:
Gather our friends and Tenants to a head:
Then with them fortify our strongest Castles, it is fit
For him that injures others, to secure him self.

Exit. Ent. Thorny, VVoodford and Anne. VVood. Good Sir, have patience.


Thorn. Away, she is big, big with child;
Out of my doors, thou strumpet.

VVood. Dear uncle.


Thor. Cover my shame with some deformity, turn me to a beast,
That is not capable of what joys are past,
Or griefs to come: blast all my faculties;
Hide my white head in everlasting darkness;
Let me forget that ere I had a child,
And never remember that she turned a strumpet.
O heaven defend me! Let me curse the whore.

VVood. Good Sir forbear, my charity is such
That I must hinder you.

Thor. You do me wrong to hinder my devotion.


An. Oh! dear Sir, forbear to invocate; you will offend,
And make your virtue sin, to call for curses.
Have charity with your self, if not, with me:
Impose me to the Laws severity.
Hurt not your self with this impatience;
I Will stoop to all with mildest sufferance.

Tho. So, so, it is done, and it is recorded now,
And I have done ill with a mental vow:
Better then windy words; my soul's a witness
Never to let a ^^nediction fall
Upon the strumpets head; never to know
Or own thee for my child; never to give
A penny of my substance to thy succor;
Never to look on thee: this I affirm,
Ever to follow thee with extremest hate;
Still to pursue thee with extremest rigor;
The Law provided has for such offenders
Nay thou shall stand example to all children,
How they invoke a Fathers aged wrath.

VVood. Good Sir, qualify this rage* tell us who the offender was.


Thor. Who should offend with an adulterous whore,
But some loose varlet, or luxurious knave,
That would have company along to hell:
And she must needs go with him: but I Will begin
Your everlasting torments, and fetch such whips
Shall make your sweet sin smart; no weight of fate
Can be so ponderous, as love turned to hate. Exit.

VVood. Cosen you see how your Father is enraged,
Therefore his anger for to qualify
Is in my judgment, to him, to reveal
The man that made him loose your Virgins name.

An. O my dear Cuz, it is a waigthy secret that is enclosed
Within my answer; nor can it be reveald
But to a bosom sworn to secrecy.
And yet your love should not be questioned.

VVood. Were all the engines of tormenting terror
Put to my flesh, if I do vow a secret,
None near shall force it from me.

An. I believe it.
Know then, kind Sir, the author of this folly,
Sin, or shame, or how you please to call it,
Was youthful Edmund, now th'elected King.

VVood. Prince Edmund!


An. He may deny it now; but here is a witness:
Oh! do but think with what unequal strength
This Citadell of honor was besieged,
And you will hardly blame my yielding weakness,
When opportunity, the bawd of time*
Had called me forth and brought me to his presence,
Think what amazing terror Royalty could do,
With a commanding love: what sugared breath,
Words able to infuse an appetite
In a cool votarist; yet manger all
My vanquishment was but conditional.
You do not hear me Cuz.

VVood. Yes, and so you yielded on conditions.


An. True Sir, when flattring oaths, sweet vows,
Coind love, were out of breath, still I remaind
A maiden votaris: but then came forth this
Murdering piece of grief; we changed the
Jugall words of matrimony between our
Souls; and the large ceremony was but
Deferred unto the King's consent, which by his
Brothers death is now his own.

VVood. But lust once sated, they forget all oaths,
That helped them to it; and though a Prince, he is
Subject to affections; I but think you
He Will not forget.

An. I cannot tell.


VVood. And violate his vow.


An. Alas! I dare not claim it: but how ere
This token of his love I Am sure to bear.
And for his sake, thus have my vows decreed,
No man shall ever second this his deed.

Ent. Lobster and Ioane. Lobst. O Mris, Mris, I have run so fast and taken such
Pains,
That my wind's gone backward and foreward;
And have stirred so much that I do
(Saving of your presence) you may smell the rest.
Ioane has bin down; but, but
I took her up again: yonder comes your Father
With such a company of Beagles:

Ioa. And such a company of whips:

Lobst. And such a company of sumners:

Ioa. And such a company of knaves:

Lobst. Slaves, that look as if they had eat
No meat this seven years, and they
Bring the ingines that must give your
Shoulders the bloody lash.

An. Oh heavens forgive me! am I the first offender?


Thor. Let all the Officers beset the door,
And look Mr Constable, here is your pray;
Go strike your tallent in.

Ent. Thorney, Constable and others. Thor. Here Is banquets for you; I Will make
her pass
Through all the pu^gato yes of penance.
You are the Phisician that let wantons blood,
To cure the itch of lust: you may do good, but yet beyond your help,
There will remain an everlasting scar, a spot, a stain,
That never will be out: oh! look on me,
You that distribute justice partially:
Scourge your own flesh and blood when it rebels.

VVood. Good Sir be patient; I pray depart,
And consider what he has done, is not in hate, rashness.

An. Upon my knees, dear Sir.


Thor. I will not hear thee strumpet.
Heaven, earth, and men give ear and hear my words.
Here take my vow his force: beyond this hour.
We never more will meet. I Will hate the place that keeps thee.
And as a lasting trophie of thy guilt:
I will dispose my self, that did beget thee:
Never shall razor prune thy careless looks,
I Will never hence forth feed but on the ground;
I Will never pare my nails, but let them grow
Into unseemly claws, with which I Will dig
My Monumentall bed.

An. Oh kill me Sir! and end my miseries.


VVood. Good Sir, calm this passion.
All this distemperature for a grief so slight.

Thor. Oh! shut me up in everlasting night:
Let me but see her under Justice grip't,
And then I Will turn away my eyes for ever,
For now I go to contemplation:
Thy soul I pity yet, though not thy flesh.
That wealth should have endowed thy nuptials
Shall build a sanctuary for holy men,
To make thy peace in heaven; lewd world farewell.
I never will discover more of thee
Then from the humble prospect of my grave.
My charge can be but small, my care much less,
I have not left me now a child to bless. Exit.

Lob. If every wench should be so used that had eaten white puddings,
We should not have so many Children left upon stalls as we have:
Unnatural Father, that would whip his own child for drinking a little white
bastard:
Ye ill looking rascal,
Can find in thy heart to whip a great
Bellyed woman? Mris, now I am in a good mind
Here Is good hanging me; I beseech you Mris,
Let me be flead from the chin to the navell,
Rather then you shall be whipped.

Io. Or I beseech you, let me endure the ponnance.


Lob. I, good Mris, if you will not let me be whipped,
In any ^ase, let Ioane be whipped.

VVood Pray will you be gone?


Lob. Yes. I go, but I cannot choose but cry
To think that a woman* for once doing,
Should be undone for ever* Come Ioane here is
A fair example for you: let us then to the buttery
And candole; for sorrow's dry, you know,
We Will weep whole pa^l fulls, and in briny tears
My self and Ioane will ducke ore head and ears.

VVood. Mr Constable, I beseech you Sir, to show to us what
Favor you can, you see her case, therefore I pray,
Leave unto me your Prisoner; i will pass my word
For her apperance at her delivery.

Constable. Sir, I am but the Laws dependancy;
And for her Fathers sake, though against his will;
I Will leave her to your care, and take your bayl,
Till course of Law shall further summon her.

VVood. I pray Sir, depart as privately as you can,
To avoid further punishment.

Constable. Well Sir, I Will follow your directions.
My charge is yours. Exit.

VVood. There now remains only this,
That I entreat you to accept my house
For entertainment, till you be delivered:
There you shall want for nothing, but have
Kind respect.

An. Heaven make me able to requite your love.


VVood. Come home with me, and bid all grief Adieu.


An. The health of my sick soul relies on you:
There is another home, I dare not name.
I Will be disgraced ere, I his worth defame. Exeunt.

Ent. Edmund, Earl of Wilsthire, Sibert, Bishop. Edm. How like a tedious day
is Majesty*
Which gives his light unto succession?
The day expired, night with his pale dark cheek
Wraps up his brightness, and gives day repose,
To give another a reflection.
So by death's hand my brothers days destroyed,
My Sunshine day refulgently appears:
Which, how he died, the heavenly eye of love,
Whose searching Majesty lightens all thoughts,
And opens all her dark obscurity,
Best knows whose hands were bathed in the blood.

Wilt. You see the cruel terrors of these times,
Oh! gracious Prince, and that which does exceed
The strength of all amazement, since the death
Of our late murdered Lord and Sovereign:
The Sun and Moon was never seen to shine.

Edm. The eye of heaven is banished from the earth,
And gone to wander in eternal night;
And ransake some Cemerian seated cave,
To find the Murderers, that with horror sitts
Starting at every apparition;
And never will illuminate the world,
Till it has brought him to transparent view;
And to him speaks this thunder.

Sib. No, it is to me: but I Will not answer,
Though the boults should fly and strike me to the center.

Edm. How horridly it cracks!
A general desolation sure is come,
And heavens glorious eye
I think is banished hence eternally.

Sib. Take courage Sir a Royal thought
Stoops not to Fortunes blindness: great thoughts are ever
Fixed to the publik good, and not kept down by passions.
Oh! the blood.

Wilt. Let Us invocate the powers above
For to reveal the horrid Murderers.

Sib. Hot vengeance light on him that so persuades him.


Edm. Swear as you hope for heaven, your careful studies
Shall be to si^t this execrable deed,
And bring to light this damned Murderer.

Sib. Zoundes I must kill him too, and prevent his purpose.


VVilt. We vow the same with force and diligence.


Edm. As for my self I will outwatch the night,
Wast these life-seeing tapers of mine eyes
Till they drop forth the sockets of my skull:
But I will find the execrable Slave.
Why standst thou silent, Sibert?

Sib. Alas! my Lord, I am hid in sorrow,
That in my house this mischief happened:
And yet dear Prince, I have already spent
The utmost minutes in this fatal business:
No place, no person, no suspected breast
That might unto the act be aidable,
But I have torn it open, and examined,
So that deceit it self could not deceive me,
But all in vain, the damned Murderer lies unrevealed,
And heaven or none must find him, he is so subtle.

Edm. I fear thy Loyalty; come let us to Coventry,
And there we will fifth out murders darkest ways
Sibert, let us have your Company along.
Were millions given this purpose to prevent,
All Europe shall not hinder our intent.
Be ready, Sibert.

Sib. With all my heart, my Lord. Mischief confound it.


Edm. Set forward Lords,
Thou that still guards the right,
Bring this dark obscure murder to the light.
Exeunt. Manet Sibert. So the King's for Coventry, and I as marked
With some brand of suspicion, must be the man
To attend above the rest: Sfoot, what note
Or character of guilt lies on my brow
More then the rest: my speech was firm,
I was less frighted with this loud tongued thunde^
Then was the King, or any of his Peers.
And but my conscience nothing troubles me;
And that is no man's burden but my own*
Which I Will conceal, though with the Kingdoms ruin:
Let Hell spit fire, I Will not accuse my self,
Although the Sun and Heaven be hid in clouds,
And with an everlasting darkness cover us.
Thunder loud. Oh! I presume too much, that crack has mazed me.
Horror of Hell! what shall I do? think, Sibert and conceive;
What if the King should call my wife in question,
Or that the Murderers, we hired to do it,
Should be surprised, and brought unto the King,
Examined, put to death: where is Sibert then?
Thrown in Hell fire, never to rise again.
Which to prevent, I Will presently make flight,
And leave with them my fear and jealousy.
I Will ship my self for Ireland, and there
Shroud my self safe, and there close up my ears
From this loud peals of thunder, which are sent
And on my head with winged vengeance bent.

Exit. Ent. Mr Woodford and Anne Thorny. Wood. Now you are a happy mother, the
good Heavens
Has brought your burden to a happy issue, you may
Now curse the cause; you shall have my instructions
To direct you.

An. Now, Heaven forbid.


VVood. By his delay you may see how he stands affected.


An. It Is a delay without proportion.


VVood. Your Father threatens and persues your lives best shipwreck,
Vowing, if you should starve, not to give
A penny for to comfort you.

An. Yet I will pray for him eternally:
And for my Sovereign which has forsaken me;
But of his love I will expect no more,
Think wise, or dream then of that thing
Unknown, unsought, or never thought upon.

Wood. Oh! be not to your self so cruel.


An. Since in his loss, I have lost my self and honor;
I now resolve in this unblemisht habit to wear out
The remnant of my days in penetance
Amongst the holy Nuns of Holy well,
Into whose Sister-hood I am admitted,
And there for ever will I plant my being.

VVood. Oh! gentle Cuz.


An. I am deaf to all persuasions,
My best of blood, I have no friend but you,
And in your virtue I impose my trust,
That with all secret care you choose a time,
To give this ring to my dear Sovereign,
The once dear pledge of his forgotten love:
With it this letter, in whose sad contents
Is nothing but a virtuous mild entreaty,
That he would graciously behold this child,
His hapless Son, and called by his name,
Edmund, that among the longer of my sighs
I may have comfort to keep down my griefs.

VVood. And as my own, I mean to tender it.


An. Your virtue makes my care lie easy on me:
Good Cosen speak what temper holds my Father?

VVood. Has given over his house and all his wealth,
He means for to distribute to holy uses.

An. And yet I live and breath that am the sinful author
Of these sorrows: but flows this deluge for his own
Offenses, Or the remembrance of my hateful shame.

VVood. From your disgrace.


An. Then to this World Adieu, why do you urge
To hold me longer here a Prisoner?
I have out lived mine honor, buried alive
My old and virtuous Father, for which I am below
All reach of humane pity that I know.
They wish to Serpents more prosperity.
My soul's as black as darkness, and can take no light
Of other beauty, till my tears have washed it:
I do beseech you Cuz, commend my duty
To my Father, and entreat his virtue,
To l^y no more affliction on his age for my offenses past
And last to thee, my first of cares,
Whose innocence is spotted with my sin.
Oh! be thou made so blessed, that in thy virtues
I and my faults may loose their memories.
Take my last kiss, and with it these my tears,
Which to thy Royal Father thou shall bear.
Now take it ^r and with it all my comforts, all my prayers.
Love it dear Cuz, and though from grief it spring,
Yet it is the only Son unto a King: farewell.
I fear we never more shall meet on earth,
Here my joys end, you have my sorrows birth.
Exit.
VVood. Success attend you: would all that stepped awry,
Would be but subject to thy penalty.
Come on thou brat of woe, and sad defame,
Although a Kings he cannot hide the shame.
Exit.
Ent. King, Earl of Wiltshire, Bishop Lutius, and Emma. King. Thus Royal
Lords, we are in Justice placed,
And by the assistance of the all-seeing heaven
To search forth murder. Are the suspected persons
Yet brought?

Wilt. They are my Liege.


King. Speak woman, and remember as thou speak,
That thou art before heaven as well as we,
Who them with all thy cunning caust not blind;
What know thou of the murder?

Em. I do beseech, bring forth my accusers.


VVilt. I am the first, yet free from spot of envy,
And thus I ground my fear, if your white hands
Have taken no tincture from the bloody wounds
Of our late murdered Prince, why is your Lord
Against his oath, allegiance, and command.
Fled thus preposterously in the self-same hour,
In which he should have done his Country-service.

Em. The Law which did ^nite my Lord and me
In one firm body: never did impart
The freedom of his thoughts into my boosome
Neither does that or any English custom
Impose on wives their husbands blemishes.
I pray, my Lord, accuse me for my self.

King. It Is from your self if you be foul in him.


Wilt. Besides it is affirmed by solemn oath
The self same night the King forsook the World*
You and your Lord did never come in bed;
So that in common sense, you either were
Or chief, or aiding to the murderer.

Em. Our busy care to entertain the King,
Did make us leave our beds to virtuous ends.
Oh! my good Lord, you would disgrace my goodness,
But my poor innocence is so clear from blemish,
No filths of any tongue can sully it.
And here before your Master, I wish,
If I be guilty, or in thought or action,
May I be made a warning to all women,
And branded with most black damnation, -oh! -- oh --

Wilt. Defend us heaven! Look to the Lady there.


Bish. Are you hurt, Madam?


Em. No, but amazed at this dreadful thunder.


Bish. Oh! be advised in time, and tempt not heaven.
Scarce had denial issued from your lips,
B^t thunder cries aloud that you reueal
What else heaven will speak in miracles.

King. Do woman, tell the truth.


Em. You mad me wi^h your vain suggestions:
Your actions are unjust and terrible.
I do defy what ever can accuse me;
Though it be wrested in loud peales of thunder,
Yet with a breath more noble then your slander
I throw defiance at your envious boosoms.
What do you think to work upon my weakness?
Tush, I am armed with better fortitude
My Lords, I ask a husband at your hands:
A Noble Prince, which you have murdered;
And now with these suggestions would overwhelme.
My life and fortunes, making me confess
A crime, of which I am more innocent
Then you your selves, or babes new born this hour. A blasing star appears.

Bish. Se, se, my Lord, a blasing star appears,
And hangs directly over this fatal house.

Edm. Angels pro^ect us!


Em. Ha, what art thou?
Thou do amaze me with thy curled fires.
Why does thy flaming train thus point at me, -- oh! -- oh! -

Bish. How fare you, Lady?


Em. Oh hide thy branded fire, whose flaming beams
Are shot into my brain; it flames and burns,
And all the waters that o'rewhelme the King,
Can never quench it, till his body come. - oh! - oh!

King. Does water then o'rewhelme his body?


VVilt. Perhap it is cast into some River, Sir.


Em. Spare me, oh! spare me, gentle heaven, be dumb*
Call not so loud, let me unload my boosom
Of this eternal weight of sin and murder;
Then let thy winged lightning split my breast,
That all the World may know, my Lord and I
Contrived the King's most bloody tragedy.

King. It is confessed.


Em. Oh! Royal Sir, I am inforst to speak:
Frowning heavens, and that almighty fire
Has thrust it from my mouth, and I confess,
My Lord and I did hire two desperate men,
And they by our command did kill the King.

King Where are those men?


Em. The murder done they fled to find out safety,
But whither, by my soul's sick estate, I know not.

King. What did you with the body of the King?


Em. Hard by the Castle stands an old grown oak,
Close by whose side a little River runs,
Whose quiet streams we stopped, and turned h^s course
Up to his head, till in his sandy bottom
We dig'd a pit and therein laid the body;
Which done, we covered it with earth and stones
And turned the water to his former passage,
That running over it, none might see
Or find the author of this tragedy.

King. Unheard of stratagem! take pity on thy soul!
Thou barbarous woman; call to the powers above
For to be merciful.

Em. False World, farewell; let me example be,
A warning to our sex from blood to flee. Dies.

King. Go home and see the body be brought before the Judge.


Wilt. I shall my Lord perform it carefully
Enter some with Sibert and Murderers.
Wilt. Come bring him before the King.


Sib. Let me not see the King, nor be examined
That cursed, which did bewitch my sense,
And made me hire the slaves to murder him.

King. Discourse to us the manner of their taking,

Sib. I Will tell the tale my self, hear me, O noble Judge:
When in disguise laden with desperate thoughts,
I meant to pass to Ireland by the Seas,
The angry heavens called up the mounting waves*
And bad them in their hollow murmurs say,
They would not bear a Kings base murderer*
My passage thus denied by raging storms,
Like a distracted outcast forth I went
Into strange paths, careless and negligent,
And there I met these damned Murderers,
Mad as my self: and horror with despair,
They hollowed still for mudering the King*
We all are damned to eternal tortering:
Which when the people heard, they us surprised
And brought us thus a bloody sacrifice.

King. The Gods are ever just: oh! Coventry,
Thou art the bloody Subject of our curses;
Thy bloody hand has bathed the anointed King
In his own blood, for which we will be swift.
In vengeance: take these three, and by their heels, hang
Them upon stakes; let ravens, mastives, worry* them to death:
That when they s^rick, their hideous fearful cries
May draw the Land to see their miseries:

Sib. and Murd. The doom is Royal, just, and merciful.


King. For this vile woman, see her senceless body
Be on a pile of faggots burnt to earth,
And scattered before the blustering wind
That on their winged convayes they may fly
To the Worlds furthest verge or memory.
See it performed; they thus to death are sent,
The Heaven I hope will pease her punishment.

Bish. Take comfort, Princely Sir, the worst is past,
The sacred powers are pleased with this your justice:
For with the Traitors deaths the storms are ceast,
The air is clear, and all the thunders past,
And see, the Sun and Moon give blessed light,
And quite abolisht our diurnall night.

King. Now the news. Ent. with the body.


Wilt. The body's found my Lord.


King. Bring it in.


Wilt. It Is here my Liege.


King. Here on this humble ground lies he
That once was King of this vast Monarchy*
Alas! What are we Kings? what is Majesty?
But like a flattring glass that shows forth pride,
And with one stripe, of all destroying death,
Is past to nothing: looks that face now
Like to a brow that did command a Kingdom.
Thus pale and bloodless; was this the head
That wore the golden wreath, thus groveld all with earth?
Take up the body, and let it have a second burial,
And laid within the sepulchers of Kings:
Our self will take our way,
And make a progress to establish Laws,
That this our Land Justice may rule so even,
Our life may be acceptable to heaven. E^eu^^.
Enter Chorus. The body being entombed, King Edmund takes
A progress through the Realm to establish Laws;
Himself in Judgment. Sits to hear men's cause?
Five years he spent: mean time what cares befell
Unto his Love, the Nun of Holy-well,
And her affection'd Father: now behold
What Is done in show, I shall in words unfould.
A dumb show. Enter Thorny with Citizens, giving them large sums of money:
showing them the money: desires them to see his building go forward: takes his
leave with a deaths head in his hand: goes into the tomb. Second dumb show.
Enter one way Edmund, Wiltshire. Bishop Lutius; at the other, Woodford and the
Child: he kneeles, delivers to the King a Letter and a Ring: he reads the
Letter and smiles; blesses the Child, and gives it to Wiltshire; the King and
Bishop departes to see Anne. Chorus. Old Thorny thus over grown with misery:
Who never more would see his virtuous Child,
But in a plot of ground, a mile from London,
Builds up a tomb where night and day he lives*
His goods are sold, and to the poor he gives
Large sommes of money, and takes a solem^ oath,
Of those his friends and worthy Citizens
Fast by his tomb to build a famous Abbey,
And with three hundred work men daily plied
To have it finished ere old Thorny died.
This done, the King returned back to London
And faithful Woodford watching a fit time,
Presents him with a Letter and a Ring,
His long forsaken love had sent to him,
Which read, the King wi^h much astonishmen^
Remembers her, and does with tears express
How much he blames his much forgetfulness,
Vowing to see her: presents to him his Son,
Being grown to years of some d^scretion:
Which the King gladly takes, and smiles on him.
What now shall follow with your gracious favor,
We humbly beg attention to the end,
And if we fail to please we will strive to mend. Exit.
Ent. Old Thorny in his tomb. Oh brightsome day! thus low poor Thorny bows,
To strive with briny tears thy gladsome light,
Whose hopes have shut him up in darksome night,
Here in this tomb sequestered from the world
Will Thorny spend his life; and with my nayls
To dig my grave, and in this glass to see,
And view the end of all mortality.
Court-pomp, and City pride, look, look on this,
And teach your souls the way to happiness:
^oor flesh and blood, is this the face of man,
After the worlds sad separation?
Must all return to this! oh London, London:
Thy flattery and guile
Has bin the cause that I my self exiled,
By Servants sorrow and Daughters sin*
I will behold thy populous streets no more,
Nor breath in thee, nor surfeit in thy store:
Here in my grave, I Will live and learn to dye,
That after death my Soul to Heaven may fly.
Enter Lobster. It Is a fine world, when a man must call a man
Out of his grave to eat vittles.
They talk of watching of a dead corse; I am
Sure, I have watched a quick one this
Month, and brought him meat so long
That I am almost starved my self.
I have brought him a clean shirt,
I would he would shift himself.
I found a lowse about him as big as
The top of my thumb, I thought as much:
He Is talking with that same casts head still;
Sure it is a Lawyers head, he
Finds so much talk wi^h it, it is not abel to
Answer a wise word: I am so hungry,
My guts are almost clung together.
Mr, pray will you leave your prating
To that Memento mori, and go to break-feast.

Thorn. No, set it down, I have no mind of meat,
Till we have thankful bin we should not eat.

Lobst. Will you say grace? and if you will wash your hands,
I Will fetch some water.

Thor. Oh vanity of fools! have thou thus long
Bin my careful contemplation,
And learn'st thou nothing yet* look on this hea^
This careless skull had flesh and blood,
And all like this must meet deformity.
What swearer sees this moth and does not tremble
Oh man! how vain art thou that speak the labors
For one bewitching minute of this world.
And after all thy joys to hell be hurld.

Lobst. I would I were at the heaven of my vittals.
I Would talk of hell afterward.

Thorn. Have thou no abstinence for pious work^

Lobst. There Is a piece of pie, I would feign be at it,
Will you eat that, and leave talking to that Test^ de morte?

Thorn. Go call my friends that over see my work,
Bid them come speak with me, and then I Will eat*

Lobst. I will Sir, but I Will take away the provant,
Least they oversee that you see over.
Ent. 2 Citizens. My Master would speak with you.

1 Citt. All hail to you Sir.


Thor. All are alike to me, storm, hayl or snow;
I take them thankfully*
You two were sworn overseers and performers of my will.
Tell me, how goes the Abbey forward?

2 Citt. It Is almost finished Sir,

Thorn. When it is finished, I Will have it dedicated
Unto the Monks of St Benedict's Order;
And since I have no child to keep my fame,
^e call it Thorny-Abbey by my name.

1 Cit. We shall perform your charge: good Sir for pity
At least remember your most wretched daughter.

Thorn. You tear my heart, when you but mention her;
Were every penny that is mine a pound,
And the least part of it given for her dowry
Would raise her to the Title of a Queen:
She never should possess it. Her soul sin
Has brought mine age with sorrow to the grave.

2 Citt. Poor soul, she spends her hours in a reclusive life
With holy Nuns, and lives a votarist in Holy-well;
That comfort, Sir, should somewhat ease your grief.

Thorn. It does, it does, and draws down tears to hear it.
Give her a constant heart: oh powerful heavenl
Still to perseve^e in that pious end.
And as a sign that I forgive, so she continues firm,
Bear her this blessed token sent from me:
A Fathers gift, and charge her carefully
To look upon this head, and there select
Reasons to answer all the Arguments
Of flesh and blood; there she shall see
The perfect way to find eternity.
And so for ever may your souls be blessed;
Whilst from the world and you I thus take rest.
Exit.
Lob. Are they gone; then Lobster lay about thee:
Open thy mouth, and let in these
Morsels of mortality to gorge thy hunger.
Well, i will in to a corner and feed like a mandi^ Soldier. Exit.

Ent. Edmund and Bishop. Edm. Seek not to disallow my good intent,
For I must visit her.

Bish. To give your grace some satisfaction,
I Will pass a little with Religious Orders:
For never no man, unless a ^rier in confession,
Might meet in private with a sacred Nun.

Edm. High seated Jove far meaner shapes di^ take,
When he did visit his fair Parramour,
And shall I, that am a mortal then disdain
The holy habit of a frolic Friar?
No Reverent man, stand it with thy good liking*
That shape above all other I would take.

Bish. You shall, in hope your deeds
Shall no way tend to acts of sacrilege.

Edm. To sacrilege: no our thoughts are pur^ and free
From the least thought of such a horrid crime:
The habit I will take only because
I would be admitted to her unknown.

Bish. Your thoughts are noble Sir, and we'l^ assist you:
Puts on a Fryer's shape. Put on this habit, and affect your wishes,
Let me alone to get admittance for you.

Edm. How do you like me in this habit, my Lord?


Bish. Now by my holy Order, Royal Lord,
You in this shape may be admitted
Unto all our Nuns, and be a helper
To increase their stoie.

Edm. There will be one the less by her I fear.


Ent. Abesse and Nuns. Ab. Your humble handmaids, High and Reverent Lord,
Thus bow themselves before your Fatherhood.

Bish. We come grave Lady to have conference
With one of your Religious Votarists,
That has, we hear, without Confession
Lived many years in this your Nunnery:
Whose Father being a worthy Citizen,
All careless of his life has left his calling,
And by the River Thames, a mile from London,
He late ha^h builded up a famous Abbey,
Called by his own name, Thorny; and for this,
Fearing some sin of hers has thus enforced him;
I have here brought a holy Confessor,
That finding the true cause, we may appear
To reconcile her to her Fathers love.

Ab. It Is a pious work.


Bish. Is she not here amongst these holy Sisters?


Ab. No, my good Lord, go on and call her forth.


Edm. I Will be her Confessor.


Bish. And will not trouble your devotion;
Come holy Sister, leave them to themselves.

Ab. Believe me gracious Lord, I know no cause
In her that should enforce her Father
In such sort to estrange his love;
Her life is modest, chaste and virtuous.
Ent. Anne with a deaths-head. See here, she comes sadly alone:
Ever in grief and contemplation.
It is the Reverent Bishop holy Daughter,
That here has brought a holy Confessor
To have some conference about your Father.
Ex^^*
Edm. Oh! who can see a beauty mufflled up
Thus like the sun in a malignant cloud,
And not shed tears: Beauteous Nun,
I came from your Father.

An. My Father? oh! holy powers forgive him
That has forgotten me: but I Will pray for him.
He never more will see me but in death,
As this sad token sent me witnesses;
And it is more welcome coming from hi^ hands
Then all earths pleasure: here I Will learn to dye,
And never grieve him with my memory.
This object tells me, that this life is vain,
All come from earth and must to earth again.

Edm. A good resolve a virtuous persuasion;
But tell me fairest, what was the cause
That made your Father to forsake you thus?

An. Heaven pardon him, I pray, that sundred us.


Edm. Him? who? why? were ^here more Originalls
Then your self?

An. Oh holy Friar, let that point alone.
I may hurt one by that confession,
Which once I dearly loved, but woe is me,
His love has brought me to this misery.

Edm. Wha^ was he? speak, for you are swor^
To open every ^cruple of your conscience
To your Confessor that hi^ sa^ient judgment
May minister a balsome to your wounds,
The oy^ of vertuo^s counsel ^hat's distilde
From he unf^ined co^^sell of a tongue
T^a^ st^ll speaks truth Play the good Surgeon,
Draw forth the filthy ulcers of your ill.
That your immaculate good may still rest sound:
Else the corrupted fistula of Sin
Will putrify the purest of your goodness:
Nor need you fear I will disclose,
For I am sworn ever to keep it close.

An O! holy Father, pray for me, and him
I once did love.

Edm. It is my duty for to pray for him,
To entreat the powers above to quit his sin*
And yours: what e're it were, but one
You once did love; in that there is no sin.

An. Not, if the hearts be true;
But ours met not, and there my sorrow grew.
His place wa^ high, and eminent in State:
Mine low of birth, and most unfortunate.
Oh! let me name his Name with Reverence,
He is a Royal, great and gracious Prince:
Nay more, he is now a King.

Edm. But tell me pray,
Was not your love equally paid from him?

An. Oh no! his very thought yet comforts me:
Yet it is for him I live in misery.
Lord Edmund, Brother to the King deceast,
Made me believe he loved me, and I thought
His oaths and protestations like himself
Should all be Noble, true and virtuous.
So rendered up my Virgin state to him:
Oh! then my grief began; he soon forgot
His former vows, and left me big with child,
Which being by my Father once espide,
And I not daring to make known my love,
Lest I should wrong the Prince: in rage and grief
He thrust me forth his doors: exclaimed on me*
Taking such grief unto his aged heart,
That never since he would acknowledge me;
And in a grave he leads a life so poor,
That to my heart it is a grievous sore.
The angry Fates have all conspird to show
The most that their enraged power can do.
My father's heart has quite renounced his child,
And my affections from my self exiled.
I only wish my hasty hourglass run,
And with my cares my daily tears were done.

Edm. The King is just; how can there be then
Such unexpected Constancy in men?

Anne. My noble King is just, to whose royal breast,
It Is too great boldness, for me to make request.
I am too mean for him to think upon,
Long may he live, and long to enjoy his own:
That everlasting days may Crown his-head,
Shall be my prayers while here I Am Cloistered.

Edm. What a soul of Virtue has this woman?


Anne. My father's Legacy, this Sceleton
Shall be my mate, and sole Companion;
This face will not deceive me: it is my dear
And counstant tutour, I will it hear;
And in my arms for ever shall it lie,
'Till death and dust have hid my misery.

Edm. Oh my heart, how heavy art thou grown!
My lord Bishop, I can no longer own
This F^yars Coul, for I must now disclose
My self, sh'has suffered for my woes.
But yet I Will stay and see the event of all.

Enter Wiltshire, young Edmund, and Abbess. Woodf Here comes your fair Son,
To see you, Nun.

Ann. Oh my dear Child!


Young Edm. Am I a King's Son, Mother?


An. I dare not say, thou art; yet heaven we^ knows it.


Wilt. Our good King's fair soul has confessed it,

An. My duty on my knees I render him,
Beseeching you to assure his Majesty,
That if the holy vows of faithful hearts,
Witnest by heaven, may make a marriage lawful
Without this earthly ceremonious state,
This c^ild is only hi^ leg^t mate.

Edm. I can forbear no longer, I believe thee.
Come to my soul, thou best of women!
Within this small circumference of my arms
I hold a j^wel,
That which ^ prise more then my diadem.
Come my dear love.

An. Oh my dear Lord!


Abb. The King turned Friar?


Edm. Come I must take away your Votari^.


Abb. Your Highness may command, so she be pleased.
I could my self change states, to be so raised.

Edm. Dry up these tears, all grief is overthrown.


An. Content be yours: I am no more my own,
But Oh! my Father.

Edm. Has lost himself in grief; but when he hears
Our sacred union, he will find new joys:
Come my fair Queen, set forward to our Court,
Where we will espouse thee. On Reverend Bishop,
Thy hand shall join us; let all people sing,
Anne Thorny's wife unto Great Englands King.
Exit.
Ent. Old Thorny, led by an Angel. Th. Oh! stay, thou Minister, yet speak to me*
Why have thou led me all this silent night
'Bout this large building, as if y'ould survey
Their workmanship and stateliness;
I did not for my self erect this pile:
I have a Palace for my proper use.

Ang. From the white path of blessed Eternity,
I Am sent to comfort thy mortality:
Persevere Thorny, as thou have begun;
Thou shall be made a bright-Celestiall Sun,
And with a quire of Angels thou shall sing.
Thy pilgrimage and toil is almost ended,
And now arrived whither thy steps have tended,
Leaving the world and her abortive race,
And sit as King in an immaculate place. Exit.

Thor. Into what Sphere is my transcending soul
Climbed from the earth: me thinks even now, I see
How death comes in, to part this world and me.
I Will have me to my tomb, and meet thee there.
What ho my man; wake Sirrah, rise, and leave
My silent tomb: I Will now go sleep my self.

Lob. I can never rest, sleeping nor waking^ This it is to serve a Master that is
troubled with Chollimolly. Some talk of taking pleasure in their bed, I Am sure
I take none there; for I am almost asleep before I go to bed, and I am called
up before I wake. And this my masters bed, that he says shall be his grave, is
none of the softest, and surely none of the easiest neither; for if it were he
would not talk so much of it. He thinks, says and speaks of nothing else, but
of that and his dying, two things I cannot abide to hear of: If he would mention
good provision, as plum-PUDDING, good powdered beef, mutton or veal, turkies or
capons, pasties or tarts; there were some comfort toward the keeping up of
this poor frail flesh. But he is always peeping on a bare deadman's head,
talking of grim death, of an hourglasse run out, and of tapers that are burnt,
and such like heavy stuff, that my weak stomach cannot digest. Well, I Will walk
easily home and see what ^oan has provided for us; for unless I do look after
all, we shall have nothing.

Exit. Thorney awakes and enters. Thus, thus my joys are quite extinguished,
never
To be revived: thus gone, thus gone for ever.
Oh world, what art thou? naught but discontent,
A Chaos of confusion, making man repent
All his delight and pleasure he has past;
That brings naught but misery at last.
Oh heaven! how much unto thee am I bound?
That I an end of this my grief have found;
And through this pilgrimage of life at last
Wi^h patience through it I have gone and past;
But oh! the sad remembrance of my child
Has drawn back my grief, that now was quite exiled;
Still gripes my heart; but being now to die,
All dying men should end in charity.
I do forgive her now: do thou so heaven,
And then the debt of her defame is even.

Enter Young Edmund, Wiltshire and Woodford. Young Edm Good Sir, where, where is
my grandfather?
Pray show him me,
That I may ask his blessing on my knee.

Thorn. Ha! what apparition's this? I was awake even now,
Why do you kneel, or thus stand bare about me?
You do not worship me, I Am sure; I am no Idol;
You hear me speak, I hope.

VVood. We think no less, but that you are a man,
And living;
This, Mr. Thorney, is the Royal Prince.

Thorn. Pray, pardon me, I do not come at Court.
You see good Sir, what doting age can do:
It is my duty then to kneel to you.

VVood. Stand up, good Sir, alas! why do you kneel?
Why do you turn aside?

Thorn. Stand up my Daughters Son,
And tempt no more my resolution:
I Will never more see thee, nor thy worthy Mother Queen,
Though trap't with all the ornaments of state:
And for her memory, even Thee I hate:
Yet though I see thee not, thus on thy head
I Will backward lay my hand, and bend my knee,
With sighs and tears to pull a blessing down,
Shall be more precious then thy fathers Crown;
Let heaven and holy Angels ever spread
Their blessed beatitudes upon thy head;
Peace crown thy days; all graces thee attend,
And to thy race, let thy race never end:
Live long in virtue, let thy good o'regrow thee,
Or die before thy bad shall overthrow thee;
Nay rise my Child, thy face never more I Will see,
But pray to send thee blessed eternity:
Commend me to thy Mother; say, that I
Freely forgive her, and to heavens do pray,
To wipe her deep insculped sins away:
And though on earth she now is placed high,
Oh! let her never transcend Humility.
My stars burn dim; my times sand-glass is run*
Record what for a daughter I have done;
And to the King, my Royal Son, say thus,
That his ba^e Father died ambitious.
For when his fainting body thus sunk down,
His soul flew up to heaven, to gain a Crown.

Young Edm. O my Grandsire! Dies.


VVood. I want tears to lament his misery.


VVilt. Where Is the Reverend man?


VVood. He Is dead, he is dead.
My good Lord of Wiltshire;
Before the gasp of his last breath was gone,
(His speech being ushered with a deep fetched groan,
Through the sad confluence and mistie throng
Of his distracted thoughts) his feeble tongue
Dropped forth these words; Thus fleet, thus transitory
Is man's delight, and all that painted glory
Poor earth can give: Nor wealth, nor blood, nor beauty
Can quit the debt, that necessary duty
They owe to change and time; but like a flower
They flourish now, and fade within an hour.

Wilt. The world is like a Play, his glass is run.
Death acts the Epilogue, and thus his days are done.
The King and Queen are come to comfort him.

VVood. They come too late,
Whirlewinds of grief has overwhelmed life's state.

VVilt. He is then dead.
Alas! this sudden death
Will strike the Court with grief and heaviness;
But hark, they come.

Ent. King, Queen and Attendants. King. Where Is aged Thorny?


Quee. Where Is my displeased Father?


VVoodf. Here Is his Effigies drawn unto the life:
By the grave workman of mortality,
All dreading death: this does prefigurate
Man's pilgrimage; on earth whose steps do tend
To bring his life unto his journyes end.

Que^n. O me! unhappie eyes, rain down* bring drops,
And with them here embalme my Father's Corpse.
Had I but got his blessing e'^e he died,
I had bin happy.

Young Edm. You want not that, Mother.
For in his blessing me, he did name you,
And sent to you a blessed Beatitude.

Queen. Heaven quit him for it: let all the Court
In black lament his death:
And let us in sighs chaunt forth his requiem;
And to express my love unto the Hearse,
From whence I came, the Nuns I Will freely give
Five hundred pounds a year whiles that I live.

King. And I Will make sure thy gift. And now,
His old lamented Corpse let be convai'd
Upon a Chariot, lined and o^erlaid
With Sables; then to receive the Crown
Prepared for Virtue and deserved Renown:
Where now we leave him to be full p^s^est
Of endless peace and everlasting Rest.
Set on to Court, 'till a fit time does call
To solemnize this mournful Funeral:
And while the world shall last, old Thorny's name
Shall live recorded in the book of Fame.

FINIS.

