THE Great CURES, AND Strange Miracles, Performed by Mr. Valentine Gertrux, who
restores the Blind to sight, the Deaf to Hearing; the Lame to strength; and
Cripples to walk without Crutches. As also, He cures all manner of Diseases,
with a stroke of His Hand and Prayer; as is testified by Captain Haslell,
Captain Lancaster, and diverse others: The like not known these many Hundreds of
Years. With His Christian Speeches, and Divine Expressions, during the time of
His Stroaking; And the wonderful Performances of Remarkable Things on
Sabbath Day last in the City of London, and on Monday morning at the
Charter House.



London, Printed for John Thomas, 1666.

The Great CURES And Strange MIRACLES Performed by Mr. Valentine Gertrux, since
his coming out of Ireland to the City of LONDON.
AS for the great Cures performed by Mr. Valentine Gertrux, formerly a
Lieutenant for King and Parliament in the Kingdom of Ireland, and a Gentleman
of a considerable Estate in those Parts, having the Character of a very sober,
discreet, civil, and pious Person; and having such a full Concurrence of
Testimonies, concerning the truth of this Relation about him, that it is
obvious and manifest, that what he does, is wrought by the power of a Divine
Hand. Besides, the Confirmation from Captain Haslel of Plymouth, which he had
from his Son in Waterford; as also from Captain Lancaster, and others, may be
sufficient to evince the truth of these following particulars: Together with a
Letter from one Mr* Beacher in Youghal, containing a very sober and rational
account, to this effect:

Sir, Considering the great things done by Mr. Gertrux, to be both stupendous,
and full of admiration, I went to Affans, near to his own house, and there
found a great Concourse of people; and going in, standing close by him, saw him
to stroke them, causing them to strip off their Clothes where their pains and
griefs were; I saw him touch many of the Kings. Evil, and others whom he had
cured, came to acknowledge it; I faw him heal 8 of the Dead Palsy of their Arms
and Legs, who after he had touched, had instantly the right use of their Limbs;
I also saw him touch above 60 more, many being troubled with the
Falling Sickness, some whereof being suddenly surprised in the Room, foaming
at the Mouth, and wallowing on the Ground, as soon as he had touched their
breast with his Hand, their pain ceased, and they stood up, and said, they were
very well. Many deaf persons also he restored to their Hearing, and others
troubled with Convulsion Fits he oured by stroaking; Two poor Cripples also
coming into his Chamber halting on their Crutches, whom when he had stroaked
where their pain lay, they immodiatly walked about the Room; And going forth,
one of them not minding his Crutches, left them behind him; but he called him
back, saying, Friend take away thy Crutches, for I hope here will be no need of
them; and so the poor man went merrily forth with them in his hand. Since his
coming from Ireland, he has also cured diverse in the West of England; the like
blessing has attended him since his arrive at the City of London; for not only
before diverse persons of Honor, on Friday and Saturday last, but also before
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor on S^bbath-day last, diverse forts of
persons addressed themselves, and received much good; the like in Ch^^^r house
yard on Mondaymorning last, where the Son of Captain Buroughs was, who had
been touched for his Eyesight; and received great help.

He takes awy all sorts of pain and old Aches, though of twelve, sixteen or
twenty years continuance, or longer, only with stroaking and smoothing the
party grieved with his Hand: for immediately upon laying his Hand upon the part
grieved, the pain removes; and if at any time they feel it sensibly in another
part of the body; as, from the back to the breast, from thence into the Legs
and Arms, or other extreme parts, and when the party tells him where it is
removed, he follows it with his hand, which drives it out, sometimes at the
fingers ends, sometimes at the Toes, other times at the Crown of the Head, and
sometimes at the Mouth; and when the person says, it is gone, and he feels
no more pain, He bids him be gone, and glorify GOD, and forsake his sins.
He does it freely unto all, and is so far from taking any Reward, that he does
not allow them to give him Thanks; but bids them praise and thank the LORD, for
that he has vouchsased to make use of such a poor Instrument, as he does, to
do them good. And as People of all sorts of Diseases and Distempers did daily
resort to him in Ireland, so do they here in England also; many having received
not only a perfect Cure, but others likewise present ease at his first
stroaking of them; amongst whom, Mr. Lee, a worthy Citizen, presenting of
himself before him, being troubled with a great Deafness; and a dead Palsy in
his hands, as soon as he was stroak'd, sound a great deal of warmth in his
hands, a comfortable compliance and nimblenesse of Joints, and a perfect
restoration of his former Sense of Hearing;

Praise be to the most High.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IT is now clear this Gentleman has no universal Charm against all Diseases,
as some out of prejudice at first conceived, but that the Things are absolutely
wrought by the power of a Divine Hand, in which there can be no Juggle or
Delusion, as to the Verity thereof; the Truth being evinced by many hundreds of
Eyewitnesses; for he only calls upon the Name of God whilst he is doing of
it, and though briefly, yet divinely.

VALE.


