The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the grace of GOD King of Great Britain
France and Ireland*

P. Stent excud*



THE ROYAL GAME OF CHESSE-PLAY.

SOMETIMES The Recreation of the late KING, with many of the NOBILITY.

Illustrated With almost an hundred GAMBETTS.

BEING The study of BIOCHIMO the famous Italian.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Anchor, in the lower walk of the New Exchange, 1656.

To the Industrious Chesse player.
I Shall not trouble thee with the insipid relation of the profit and pleasure
which may be reaped by this game of Chesse, nor as little as I can with the
Analogy it really has with the drawing up, and encounter of two Armies, the
mysteries which every man may and do, ut suo abundat sensu, find out in almost
every Art and Science, as we see not only in common, but even in the most
grave and serious Professions, being innumerable, my intention being to set
forth the easiest and shortest way for one who is desirous to play at this
game, to atchieve his desires, and for him who is but an easy proficient, to
arise almost to the highest degree of well playing, which he shall attain to,
if he diligently peruse this Book, and not only learn, but examine the reason
of the following Gambetts (practiced by the best of our Nation) wherein he may
observe such deep and intricate* designs, with such admirable and answerable
events, as may instruct him to lay such like plots of his own, as also to
foresee and prevent the endeavors of his adversary, with unexpected
counterplots, to the gaining of such pieces from him, as will give him so much
advantage, that he may easily destroy all the rest, and then (if not before)
give him Check mate. I forgot to tell you one thing, that a Gambett signifies
here a game, so contrived, that he which loses shall have a palpable reason
for every remove he makes, whereas the reasons of the removes of the winner
are so hard to be found out, that they seem rather preposterous, and unfitting,
which shows the excellent contrivance and invention of the Authors of them.

SIr, now unravelled is the Golden Fleece,
Men that could only fool at Fox and Geese
Are new-made Politians by the Book,
And can both judge and conquer with a look.
The hidden fates of Princes you unfold,
Court, Clergy, Commons, by your laws controlled.
Strange serious wantoning! All that they
Bluster'd and clutter'd wisely for, you play.
On the incomparable Game of CHESSE-PLAY.
WE read of Greeks could ten years wars define,
And draw its whole design in drops of wine:
Could show where Rhesus, where Ulysses lay.
Who stole the Horse, never touched the fatal Hay.
This was weak demonstration, Sir, but you
Bring us the very Siege and Soldiers too.
E. Revet.

Upon Chesse-play. To Dr. Budden.
TO thee Laws Oracle, who had the power
To wage my pens employment for an hour,
I send no Frogs, nor Mice, Pigmees nor Cranes,
Giants nor Gods, which trouble so the brains
Of feighning Poets; nor my leisure sings
The Counterbuffs of the four painted Kings:
Those worthy Combatants have had their times,
And Battles sung in thousand curious rimes.
I sing the fierce Alarm, and d^refull stroke
Of passing timbred men, all heart of Oak;
Men that scorn Arms defensive, nor, in beat
Of bloody broiles, complain of dust or sweat.
Men that do think, no victory is fit
That Is not compacted by the reach of wit.
Men that an Ambuscado know to lay,
T'entrap the Foe in his retiring way;
Plot Stratagems, and teach their brains t'indite
What place is fittest to employ their might.
Dull downright blows, are fit for rustic wits,
Within the compass of whose scalp there sits
A homebred sense, weak apprehension,
That strike the first they cast their eye upon*
Those are the chaff of Soldiers, but this Corn
Of choicest men, at highest rate is born.
Here life is precious, where the meanest man
Is guarded by the noblest, who do scan,
(Not what a poor man is, but) what may prove,
If bravely to the Armies head he move;
Such may his valor be, he may of right
Be an executor to Rook or Knight,
Whose Lands fall to the King (their Master dead)
With which this Pawn lives to be honored,
And do his Prince good service. Tell me then,
Thou that do distribute Justice to men,
Must Honors ever follow blood? or should
Virtue be graced, though in the meanest Mould?
Tell me, thou man of Peace, are not these Wars
Lawful and commendable, Where the scarres
Are for command, where either Enemy
Seeks to himself a fifth great Monarchy?
Where neither knows his confines, but each foot
Is his, where he or his, can take firm root?
Pity with me, the fortunes of those Kings,
Whose battle such an untaught Poet sings.
Know, that the great Alexander could not have
An Homer; and remember, in wars brave,
Each deed*s a Poem, and he writes it best
Who does engrave it on a conquered Crest.
If I offend, part of the blame is thine,
Thou gav'st the Theme, I did but frame the Line.
Two angry Kings weary of lingering peace,
Challenge the field, all Concord now must cease:
So do their stomachs with fired anger burn, (turn.
Nothing but wounds, blood, death must serve the
They pitched their field in a fair checkered square
Each form two Squadrons, in the former are
The common Soldiers, Whose conrageous scope
Is venturing their lives, like Fortune, Hope.
These still march on, and dare not break their rank,
But for to kill a Foe, then it is their prank
To make the ground good against the enemy*
Till by a greater force subdued, they dye.
The Kings for safety in mid-batel stand
And marshall all their Nobles on each hand.
Next either King, an Amazonian Queen,
Like our sixth Henry's Margaret is seen,
Ready to scour the field, corner, or square,
She succors, where the Troops distressed are.
Next stand two Mytred Bishops, which in war
Forget their Calling, ventring many a scar
In Princes cause, yet must no Bishop stray,
But leave the broad, and keep the narrow way.
Next are two virtuous Knights, whose nimble feet
Leap over men's heads, scorning to think it meet
They should stand Sentinels, while the poor Pawns,
With danger of their lives do scour the Lawnes.
The Battles out spread wings, two Rookes do guard,
These flank the fields so well, that there is barred
All side assaults: these, for their valors grace,
(The King in danger) with him change their place.
But Majesty must keep a settled pace,
Rides not in post, moves to the nearest place,
That Is to his standart: If there be report
Of the Kings danger, all troops may resort.
But now they sound Alarm, each heart does swell
With wrath, strikes in the name of Christabell;
Strike, strike, be not aghast, soldiers are bound
To fear no death, much less to dread a wound.
Now with mercy dies the common Troop,
A Rook a Bishop, and a Knight does droop;
Yet neither boasts of Conquest, though each hope
To win the field, Which now is half laid open
By soldiers death; now dares a martial Queen
Check her Foe King, when strait there steps between
A ventrous Soldier, or a Nobleman
Who cares not for his life, so be he can
From danger keep his King; he fears not death,
In Princes cause, that gives each Subject breath.
But this Virago dies, being left alone,
When straight a nimble Soldier steppeth on,
And through the thickest Troops hews out his way,
And till he come to the head does never stay.
This brave attempt deserves the honoring;
The Queens colors are his, given by the King*
Who knows that valor should not want reward,
And ventrous spirits, best keep Princes guard.
Now is the War in heat, bloody the Field,
Mercy is banish^d, none has thought to yield,
Basely to beg his breath; the fame now ran,
That they must fight it out to the last man.
All Soldiers die, but one, who to his King,
Grieved with his great loss, does this comfort bring,
That their great Foe, whose Troops are all now dead,
Must to their swords, yield up his conquered head.
Then with their Check, and check on either hand,
The poor disheartened King does mated stand.
Though thus to dye it be the Princes fate,
Who dares pronounce he had a whisking mate;
Who, rather than mumping forego the Field,
Joys in the place he stands, his breath to yield?
But now the conquering couple want their breath
Their festered wounds do rankle, and grim death
Creeps through the gashes, down the Victors fall,
And then one general Hearse entombs them all.
To the Right Honorable, MONTAGVE, Earl of Lindsey, etc.
THe Consideration, that to find out a certain Rule for this Princely Game of
Chesse, is generally, (and I think, justly) esteemed to be impossible, was the
first cause that invited me to publish these Gambetts, which do, in a very
great measure, supply the defect of such an advantage, which in respect they
were in the Delights of his late Majesty, and many of the Nobility of these
Kingdoms, I presumed to dedicate unto your Honor, whom I have understood not
only to take pleasure, but to be very judicious in this Incomparable
Recreation, beside the particular relation of the Duty I have to submit my
self, on all occasions, unto your Honors Censure and Commands, and the
necessity I have of desiring your Lordships Protection for that I have
attempted to publish, that which some Gentlemen have already in Manuscript, and
peradventure to their displeasure; Instructions also for Learners being already
in Print, and very plain, might have deterred me from meddling, as it were, with
another man's work; but for these, I have excuse, that these Gambetts being so
beneficial, cannot but be very acceptable, and also give invitation to those
who are but small Proficients, to take a greater delight, than formerly, in
this Pastime; and alteration of the Instructions being made more brief, are
consequently more useful. I am only therefore to crave your Honors Pardon,
for disturbing your Honors more serious Contemplations with these trifles;
which if I have, I shall rest secure from Calumny, that can be thrown upon

Your Honors most humble Servant, Fr: Beale.

THE GAME OF CHESSE-PLAY.
CHAP. I.
Of the Antiquities and Inventors of this Game.
DIverse are the opinions of the antiquity of this game of Chess. Some think
that it was invented by Palamedes one of the chief Commanders of the Grecian
forces at the siege of Troy. Others that Xerxes the great King of Persia
devised it: but the most received opinion is, that at that siege or some other
place blocked up by their adversaries, by some of the most learned and
experienced besiegers, meeting and clubbing their inventions together, this
inimitable game was found out: and the rather, because who ever plays at it
shall not be able to carry on any design with any success, or understand the
plots of his adversary without his whole intention is fixed upon it, and he be
abstracted from all other contemplation.

CHAP. II.
Of the shapes, names, and places of the Chesse-men.
ALthough in all Countries the shapes of the Chesse-men are not the same, yet
are the figures framed so distinctly from one another, that they never breed
any confusion: The Chesse-board therefore (which is divided into sixty four
square houses) standing (as usually) with the white corner to the right hand,
the first and highest generally called the King, stands in the fourth house
from the corner of the board in the lower rank, with this observation, that the
white King must stand in black, and the black King in the white: where note
that every piece stands right over his adversaries piece of the same sort.

The next in height is the Queen or Amazon, who is placed in the fourth house
from the corner of the field by the side of her King, and always in her own
color; whence Rex albus in atro, Rex ater in albo,
servat Regina colores.


Next to the Kings other side place a Bishop o^ Archer, who is commonly figured
with his hea^ cloven, next to him the Knight, and in the corner of the field:
the Rooke, Rock, or Duke who is sometimes fashioned with a round head sometimes
like a Castle, etc. So also on the Queen side, place her Bishop Knight and
Rook, who always stand in different colors to those of the King.

Lastly, before each Great man stands their particular pawn or Serving-man,
so that the King and Queen have three great men and four pawnes a piece.

CHAP. III.
Of the draught, guard, worth, and Prerogative of each plece, and first of a
Pawn.
THe draught of a Pawn is only one house at a time straight forward in his
own file never retiring; but he differs from all other pieces, in that it does
not take the adverse pieces as it goes, but that which stands aslope in the
next house forward of the next file on either hand, and then goes forward upon
occasion as at first; now as all other pieces do, he guardeth any piece of his
own side just as he takes, that is, if a piece of his side stands in that
place where if it were an adverse piece he might take it, he then does guard
it, so also does he check, that is, (give notice to) the adverse King that he
can take him, which check if the King cannot avoid either by taking him up
himself if he be unguarded (for a King can at no time remove into check) or
by causing him to be taken up by some other of his pieces, it is check Mate,
and the Game lost. This is the draught of the Pawn who though it be of least
value, yet has it three, great privileges.

The first is, that whereas his remove is but one house forward at a time, yet
every pawn for his first draught, may remove two houses forward.

The second is, that if any pawn comes up to the fourth rank of the adverse
party, if any of his pawnes of the next file on either side do remove two
houses at one time, that is beyond his guard, he may take him as if he had
removed but one.

The third and greatest is, that if any Pawn can arrive unto any house of the
uppermost rank of the adversary, you may immediately make him a Queen, or what
piece you have already lost, (yea in foreign Countries, and amongst the best
players, here you may have two or three Queens at a time) who shall be able at
that very instant, to check the adverse King, and use all power the Piece you
make him has.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Bishops, and Knights.
NEXt in value above a Pawn are Bishops and Knights. The Bishops walk is,
always in the same color he is first placed in, forward and backward aslope
as far as you please, and the way is clear betwixt him and the place you
intend to remove him to, so does he guard any piece of his own side; take any
of the contrary, and check the adverse King, which unavoided by either taking
or causing him to be taken up, or interposing some piece between him and the
King, it is Check mate.

The Knights draught is forward and backward on either hand aslope from the
place he stands in, to the next save one of another color, skipping over any
piece that stands in his way; and in the same manner does he guard, take, and
check; which check, because (as the Pawnes check) it cannot be covered, the
King must either remove out of check, or cause him to be taken, for he cannot
take him himself, it is Check mate. Now the difference of worth between the
Bishops and Knights is uncertain, some preferring one, some the other, as they
play best with either of them themselves, or observe it in their adversary: but
generally the Knights are more esteemed, because their walks have more variety,
that is, into all the sixty four houses, but a Bishops walk is, but through
thirty two of them: A Knight likewise guardeth three houses before he does
remove, and eight when he is from the side of the file, whereas the Bishop
guardeth but two houses in his first place, and but four afterward; Thirdly,
the Knights can guard one another, which the Bishops cannot do, because they
move into one another color: Fourthly, a Knights check cannot be covered, but
a Bishops may, and I cannot see, but that the two Knights and a King may give a
mate though not so well as the Bishops, but it is hard for either of them to
do it.

CHAP. V.
Of the Rookes, Queen, and King.
THe Rocks, Rookes or Dukes walk forward, backward, and side-wayes in any rank
and file (but not aslope as the Bishops do) unto any place; so also do they
guard, take, and check, which check, if not avoided the game is lost: Now a
Rookes worth is as great as both a Bishops and a Knights, because he goes over
all the board which the Bishop cannot, and though the Knight may, yet his
remove is confined to a certain distance, when the Rookes is unlimited where
there is no interposition, and although he guards no more places then the
Bishop does, yet he can give mate with the King alone, which no piece else
beside the Queen can do; his Privilege is to change with the King as you
shall see in the Kings Prerogative.

But the Queen is in value equal to any two pieces: Her remove being forward,
backward, side-waye, and aslope, but not as the Knight does as far as she will
if she meet no opposition, she in like manner does guard the pieces of her own
side, take the enemy and check his King which unavoided is Mate: She guardeth
five houses in her first place, and eight when she is from the side of the file.

The King removes but one house at a time forward, backward, side-wayes, and
aslope to any place not possessed by his own men, or guarded by the enemy
where he may take any piece of the enemies; but there must be always the
distance of one house between the two Kings, for they can neither check nor
take one another, he guardeth as many places as the Queen does. His Prerogative
is

First, that no piece can take him, but must only salute him with the word
check.

Secondly, whereas his draught is but one house at a time, yet for his greater
safety, if neither he nor either of the Rookes have as yet stirred out of their
places, and there is no piece standing between them, he may change (or Castle)
with this Rooke, that is, he may go two draughts at once toward this Rooke on
which hand soever he stands, causing the Rooke to stand next to him on either
side; this may he do at any time before check, or after check, In France the
Rook when the King changes, goes into the Kings house.

CHAP. VI.
Observations in playing the game.
HAving now discovered the places, removes, guards, worth and Prerogative of
each piece, I will now show you some observations in the removal of them: but
whereas there is 64 houses in the Chesse-board, there may be consequently as
many varieties of games as 64 can be altered which are more then there have
been minutes since the Creation, therefore there is no such rule found out at
this game, as who shall play according to it, must necessarily win the game:
however there may be such precepts and directions given, that whosoever shall
carefully observe and remember upon occasion to put them in use, shall have
great advantage against him that has them not, so that the following advises
and Gambetts well studied will be instead of a rule to direct you how to
advance and retire, how to take opportunities, as also how to design upon your
adversary to foresee and prevent his stratagemes, with a return upon himself:
For certainly he that has before his eyes and in his memory many games well
played shall be able to make such observations upon them, as may stand him in
great stead when ever the enemy shall fall into such a posture of game as he
has formerly seen, and remembers the disadvantage he is liable to.

The first thing therefore you are to endeavor is, to get the first remove,
for it is of great advantage: for which gamesters strive several ways
according to their agreement between themselves, but when a game is ended he is
to have it, who wins it, unless you make it otherwise. Now for the first
draught it is generally esteemed best to remove the Kings pawn two houses,
because if not prevented (by the like play) you may still move that pawn
forward with good guard, which will be very prejudicial to the adversary.

The second thing observable is to play your men in good guard of one another,
that if any man you advance be taken, the adverse piece may be taken again by
the piece which guardeth yours: and to this purpose be (of all things) sure to
have as many guards upon one of your pieces, as thou see the enemy does
advance of his upon it.

Thirdly, that thy guardes be of less value then the pieces he assaileth
withal, for then if either he or you begin to take you shall gain something,
if you find you cannot well guard your piece, see whether you can advance some
piece, of yours in guard to take a better piece for so you may many times save
your endangered piece.

Fourthly, never change piece for piece until you get the advantage either by
taking a Pawn or Nobleman of his for nothing, or disordering a pawn or two
of his which is of very material consequence.

Fifthly, take great heed that you do not choke up your own passage from
advancing your men, and retiring on all occasions, but endeavor by all means
to take that liberty from your adversary.

Sixthly, never play any man until you have examined whether you your self are
free from danger, and to that end upon every remove of your adversary, consider
of what consequence the advancing and retreating of your adversary may prove,
and endeavor (if it may be hurtful) to prevent it before it be too late.

Seventhly, consider the maine design of the game, which is as suddenly as can
be to give check mate, that is as I said before, so to check the adversary
King, as that he can neither take the piece checking because it is guarded, nor
cause it to be taken, nor cover the check, nor remove out of check, which may
be done several ways, so that sometimes by the loss of one or two of your
great men, yea, sometimes of your Queen you may give an unexpected mate, as you
may often observe in the following Gambetts: I shall therefore omit to discover
unto you the manner of the surprising the Rookes, or a Queen, or the making a
new Queen, of which you shall have plentiful examples in the Gambetts.

Lastly, never let your Queen stand so before your King, as that your adversary
may bring a Rooke or Bishop to check your King if she were not there, for then
you will hardly be able to save your Queen, nor let his Knight come so safely,
that he cannot be taken up to check your Queen and King or your Rooke, and King
at one time, for then you will loose your Queen or Rooke, since the King must
be forced to remove out of check.

CHAP. VII.
Of some particular things to be observed, with the laws of Chesse-play.
BEfore I come to the Gambetts, I will tell you what a Forke, a stale, a blind
Mate and a dead Game is.

A Forke is, that when you see two of the enemies Noblemen standing in the
same rank, and but one house betwixt them, advance a pawn, guarded with an
other, unto the middle house before them both, and you may commonly take one of
them.

A stale is given when one King has lost all his men, and has but one place
left to fly into, if then the adversary bar him of that place without checking
him, so that he being now out of check cannot remove but into check, it is then
a stale, and he that gives it to the distressed King loses the Game.

A blind Mate is, when one gives check mate but sees it not, yet it is
nevertheless a Mate, though a disgraceful one.

A dead Game is when only the two Kings are left: yea most Gamesters will draw
the stakes, when they have but a Knight or Bishop left with their King, and the
enemy only his King: For it is not possible then to give a Mate by force.

depiction of chess board His
Queens Rookes house. Queens Knights house. Queens Bishops house. Queens house.
Kings house. Kings Bishops house. Kings Knights house. Kings Rooks house.
4. House. 3. House. 2. House. 1. House.
Your
Kings Rooks house. Kings Knights house. Kings Bishops house. Kings house.
Queens house. Queens Bishops house. Queens Knights house. Queens Rooks house.
4. House. 3. House. 2. House. 1. House.




The Laws of Chesse are,
1. If you touch your man you must play it, and if you set it down any where
you must let it stand.

2. If your adversary play a false draught, and you spy it not before you play
the next draught, it is then too late to challenge him.

3. If by mistake you play a false draught, and your adversary let it alone for
his advantage till he has played his next draught, you nor he cannot then
recall it.

4. If at first you misplace your men, and play two or three draughts, it lies
in your adversaries choice whether you shall play out the game or begin it
again.

5. The King in changing may not go into check, nor at any time remove into
check.

6. If your adversary plays or discovers a check to your King, and gives
you no notice of it, you may let him stand so for that draught if you please.

7. If your King stands in check and you remove a draught or two, the
adversary may not give check when he pleases, unless he removes the piece
checking, or some other.

Having now finished all those rules and instructions that are necessary for a
Learner, I shall for the increase of his farther benefit refer him to these
Gambets which follow, by which not only he that is a beginner, but also an
experienced Gamester may receive such satisfaction, as that he will find it
worth his labor and study to be perfect in them, and cause him by seeing the
mysterious passages therein, to take far more delight then hitherto he has
done in this most excellent and delightful game of Chesse-play.

The Fools Mate.
BBlack Kings Bishops pawn one house.
White Kings pawn one house.
Black kings knights pawn two houses
White Queen gives Mate at the contrary
kings Rookes fourth house.
The Scholars Mate.
WHite kings pawn one house.
Black kings pawn the same.
White Queen to the contrary kings Rookes fourth house.
Black Queens knight to her Bishops third house
White kings Bishop to the queens Bishops fourth house
Black kings knight to the kings Bishops third house
White queen takes the contrary kings Bishops pawn gives mate.
Gambett. I.
WHite kings pawn two houses
Black kings pawn the same
White kings Bishop to the queens Bishops fourth house
Black kings Bishop the same.
White queen to the kings second house.
Black queen to the same
White kings bishops pawn two houses
Black kings bishop takes the contrary kings knight
White rook takes the contrary kings bishop
Black kings pawn takes the contrary bishops pawn
White queens pawn two houses
Black queen checks at the contrary rookes fourth house
White kings knights pawn one house and covers
Black kings pawn takes contrary pawn
White rooks takes the contrary pawn
Black kings knight to the kings bishops third house
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Black kings knight to the kings rookes fourth house
White kings bishop takes the contrary kings bishops pawn and checks
Black king takes the contrary kings bishop
White queens bishop to the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black kings knight takes the contrary kings rook
White queen checks at the kings bishops third house
Black king to his knights third house
White bishop takes the contrary queen
Black knight to his kings rooks fourth house
White queen checks at the kings bishops fourth house.
Black king to his kings third house
White queen or Bishop gives mate.
Gambett. II.
WHite kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
Black the same
White queen to the kings second house
Black the same
White kings bishops pawn two houses
Black pawn takes the contrary pawn
White kings knight to his bishops third house o
Black kings knight pawn two houses
Wl
White kings rooks pawn two houses
Black kings bishops pawn one house
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Black queens bishops pawn first house
White kings rooks pawn takes the contrary pawn
Black pawn takes the contrary pawn
White queens pawn two houses
Black kings knight pawn one house
White kings knight to the kings rooks fourth house
Black kings bishop takes the contrary pawn
White knight to the contrary kings bishops fourth house
Black bishop takes the contrary knight and checks
White pawn takes the contrary kings bishop
Black queen to her kings bishops third house
White bishop takes the contrary pawn
Black queen takes the contrary pawn and checks
White king to his bishops second house
Black queens knights pawn two houses
White kings bishops to the queens knights third house
Black queens rooks pawn two houses
White knight checks at the contrary queens third house
Black king to his bishops house
White queen takes the contrary pawn
Black queens bishop to her rooks third house
White queen checks at the contrary kings bishops fouth house
Black queen covers at her kings bishops third house
White queens bishops checks at the contrary kings rooks third house
Black king to his second house
White queens bishops to the contrary kings
Knights fourth house
Black king takes the contrary knight
White bishop takes the contrary queen and shall win the game.
Gambett. III.
Play the second to this mark, o and then as follows.
BLack kings knight to his bishops third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black kings bishop checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house
White queens bishops pawn one house and covers
Black kings bishops to the queens rooks fourth house
White kings pawn one house
Black kings knight to his rookes fourth house
White king changes
Black king changes
White kings knight to the kings house
Black queen to the contrary kings rooks 4th house
White kings knight to the queens third house
Black kings knight pawn two houses
White queens knight to the queens second house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White queens knight to the kings fourth house
Black kings knight to his second house
White knight takes the contrary kings pawn
Black kings knights pawn takes the contrary knight
White rook takes the contrary pawn
Black queen to the kings second house
White knight checks at the contrary kings bishops third house
Black king to his rooks house
White queen to her Kings fourth house, etc.
Gambet IV.
Play the second to this mark. Wl
WHite queen pawn two houses
Black kings bishop checks
White queens bishop pawn one house covers
Black bishop to his queens rooks fourth house
White Kings rooks pawn two houses
Wl
Black Kings bishops pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn, takes the contrary pawn
Black pawn takes the contrary pawn
White Kings Knight pawn one house
Black Kings Knight pawn one house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house
Black pawn one house, to the contrary Kings bishops third house
White queen to her Kings third house
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings
Knights third house
Black queen to her Kings Knights second house
White Knight takes the contrary Rook
Black queen takes the contrary Knight
White Kings pawn one house
Black Kings Knight to his house
White queen to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black Kings Knight to the Kings second house
White queen checks at the contrary rooks fourth house
Black King to the queens house
White queen takes the contrary Kings Rooks pawn
Black queen takes the contrary queen
White rook takes the contrary queen
Black queens pawn one house
White Kings pawn one house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black queens pawn one house
White bishop takes the contrary Knight, and checks
Black King to his house
White Kings Bishop to the quens third house
Black bishops takes the contrary pawn
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house
Black King to the queens second house
White queens bishop to the queens Knights fourth house, and checks with the
Kings Rook
Black King to his queens bishops house
White bishop takes the contrary bishop etc.
Gambett. V.
Play the last to this mark W
BLack kings knights pawn one house
White kings knight to the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black kings knight to his rooks third house
White queens bishop takes the contrary pawn
Black kings bishops pawn one house
White king changes
Black pawn takes the contrary knight
White bishop takes the contrary pawn
Black queen to the kings knights second house
White queen to the kings third house
Black kings knight to his house
White rook to the contrary kings bishops second house
Black queen to the kings knights third house
White queen to the kings bishops fourth house
Black queens pawn one house
White rook checks at the contrary kings bishops house
Black king to the queens second house
White kings bishop to the contrary kings bishops second house
Black queen to the kings knights second house
White kings bishop checks at the contrary kings house
Black king to his third house
White queens pawn gives mate.
Gambett. VI.
WHite king pawns two houses
Black the same
White kings knight to his bishops third house
Black queens knight to her bishops third house
White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
Black the same
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White queens pawn two house
W
Black pawn takes the contrary pawn
White pawn takes the contrary pawn
Black kings bishop checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house
White queens knight covers at her bishops third house
Black kings knight take the contrary pawn
White king changes
Black kings knight takes the contrary queens knight
White pawn takes the contrary knight
Black Kings bishop takes the contrary pawn
White queen to her Knights third house
Black bishop takes the contrary queens rook
White Kings bishop takes the contrary Kings bishops pawn and checks
Black King to his Bishops house
White queens bishop to the contrary Kings
Knights fourth house
Black Knight to his Kings second house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house
Wl
Black Kings bishop takes the contrary queens pawn
White Kings Bishop to the contrary Kings
Knights third house
Black queen pawn two houses
White queen checks at her Kings bishops third house
Black queens bishop covers
White Kings bishop takes the contrary queens bishop
Black Kings bishop takes the contrary Knight
White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings third house, and checks by discovery
with the queen
Black Kings bishop covers
White queens bishop takes the contrary Kings bishop
Black Kings Knights pawn, takes the contrary bishop
White queen takes the contrary pawn and checks
Black King to his house
White queen gives mate.
Gambet VII.
Play the sixth to this mark. Wl
BLack Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house
White queens pawn takes the contrary Kings pawn
Black Kings Knight takes the contrary Kings pawn
White queen to the contrary queen fourth house.
Gambet VIII.
Play the sixth to this mark. Wl
BLack queen pawn two houses
White queen to the Kings bishops 3d. house
Black queens bishop to the Kings bishops fourth house
White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings third house
Black Kings Knight pawn one house
White queens bishop checks at the contrary Kings Rooks third house
Black King to his house
White Kings bishop gives mate.
Gambett. IX.
WHite King pawns two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishop pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black queen pawns one house
White queens bishop pawn one house
Black queen to the Kings second house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn takes the contrary queens pawn
White pawn takes the contrary pawn
Black queen takes the contrary pawn, and checks
White King to his bishops second house
Black Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house
Black King to his queen or bishops house
White rook to the Kings house
Black queen to the Kings bishops fourth house
White rook gives mate.
Gambett. X.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black queens Knight to her bishops third house
White Kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
Black the same
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black queen to the Kings second house
White King changes
Black queens pawn one house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop to his queens Knights third house
White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black Kings bishop pawn one house
White queens bishop to the Kings rooks fourth house
Black Kings Knight pawn two houses
White Kings Knight takes the contrary Kings Knights pawn
Black Kings bishops pawn takes the contrary Knight
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Wl
Black King to his queens second house
White queens bishop takes the contrary pawn
Wl
Black queen to the Kings Knights second house
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary Kings third house
Black King takes the contrary bishop
White queen checks at the contrary Kings house
Black Kings Knight covers at the Kings second house
White Queens pawn gives mate.
Gambett. XI.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack king to his queens house
White queens* bishop takes the contrary pawn
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White queen to the contrary kings rooks third house
Black kings rooks to his bishops house
WHite kings bishops pawn two houses
Black kings pawn takes the contrary queens pawn
White kings pawn one house
Black kings pawn takes the contrary queens bishops pawn and checks by
discovery with the bishop
White king to his rooks house
Black pawn takes the contrary queens knights pawn
White kings pawn takes the contrary queens knight
Black rook takes the contrary pawn
White queen takes the contrary rook
Black pawn takes the contrary rook
White queen takes the contrary pawn at her rooks house
Black kings bishop to the contrary queens fourth house
White bishop takes the queen and checks
Black king takes the bishop
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black queens bishop to the kings bishops fourth house
White knight checks at the contrary queens fourth house
Black king to his bishops house
White queen to the Kings house
Black rook to the Kings house
White queen to the Kings rooks fourth house, etc.
Gambett. XII.
Play the tenth to this mark Wl
BLack King to his bishops house
White queens bishop takes the contrary pawn
Black queen to her kings house
White queen checks at the Kings bishops third house
Black king to his knights second house
White kings bishop takes the Kings Knight
Black King takes the bishop
White queens pawn one house
Black queens knight to the Kings second house
White queens bishop to the contrar Kings bishops third house
Black queen to the Kings bishops second house
White queens knight to the queens second house
Black Kings rooks pawn one house
White bishop takes the rook
Black queen takes the queen
White knight takes the queen
Black King takes the bishop
White Kings rookes pawn one house
Black queens bishop to the queens second house
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black Kings bishop to the contrary queens fourth house
White Knight takes the contrary Kings bishop
Black pawn takes the Kings Knight
White kings rook to the queens house
Black queens bishops pawn two house
White queens bishops pawn two houses
Black rook to the Kings bishops house
White Kings pawn one house
Black pawn takes the pawn
White pawn takes the pawn
Black rook takes the rooke and checks
White rook takes the rook
Black King to his Knights house
White pawn to the contrary Kings third house
Black bishop to his house
White queens pawn one house
Black Knight to the Queens Bishops third house
White queens pawn one house
Black Bishop takes the pawn
White pawn takes the queens Bishop
Black Queens pawn one house
White rook to the Kings house
Black queens pawn to the contrary queens second house
White rook checks at the contrary Kings house
Black King to his Knights second house
White pawn is made a queen
Black Knight takes the Queen
White Rooke takes the Knight
Black King to his bishops second house
White Rooke takes the pawn, etc.
Gambett. XIII.
Play the tenth to this mark Wl
BLack queen to her Kings bishops house
White Kings bishop to the contrary kings bishops second house
Black queens Knight to the Kings second house
White Queens pawn takes the Kings pawn
Black pawn takes the pawn Wl
White rook checks at the queens house
Black King to the queens bishops third house
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary kings house
Black king to his queens bishops fourth house
White queens bishop checks at the Kings third house
Black king to the contrary queens bishops fourth house
White queens Knights pawn gives mates.
Gambett. XIV.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack Kings rooks pawn one house
White Kings bishop to the kings rookes fourth house
Black kings rook to his second house
White pawn to the contrary Kings third house and checks
Black King to the queens house
White Kings pawn one house
Black queens pawn one house
White queen to the Kings bishops third house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black King to the queens bishops second house
White queen to her rooks third house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White pawn takes the queens pawn
Black queens Knight to the Kings bishops fourth house
White queens bishop to the Kings knihts third house
Black Knight takes the bishop
White queen takes the Knight
Black rook to the Kings Knights second house
White queen to her Knights third house
Black Kings rooks pawn one house
White pawn to the contrary Kings second house
Black queen takes the bishop
White pawn checks at the contrary queens third house
Black King to the queens second house
White pawn checks at the contrary Kings third house
Black queen takes the pawn
White queen takes the queen and checks
Black King takes the queen
White pawn is made a queen and checks, etc.
Gambett. XV.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White kings knight to his bishops third house
Black queens knight to her bishops third house
White kings bishop to his queens bishops fourth house
Black the same
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black queens pawn one house
White queens pawn two houses
Black kings pawn takes the pawn
White pawn takes the pawn
Black bishop checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house
White queens knight covers at her bishops third house
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White king changes
Black kings bishop takes the queens knight
White pawn takes the kings bishop
Black kings knight takes the kings pawn
White rook to his kings house
Black queens pawn one house
White rook takes the contrary knght
Black pawn takes the contrary rook
White knight to the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black king changes
White queen to the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black kings rooks pawn one house
White kings knight takes the kings bishops pawn
Wl
Black queen to the kings second house
White knight takes the kings rookes pawn and checks double
Black king to his rooks house
White knight checks double at the contrary kings bishops second house
Black king to his knights house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XVI.
Play the last to this mark W
BLack rook takes the contrary knight
White bishop takes the rook and checks
Black king to his bishops house
White queens bishop checks at the queens rooks third house
Black queens knight covers at the kings second house
White kings bishop to the queens knights third house
Black queen to the kings house
White queen to the contrary queens fourth house
Black queens bishops pawn two houses
White queens Bishops takes the pawn
Black queens rooks pawn one house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XVII.
Play the 15th. to this mark Wl
BLack rook takes the contrary Kings Knight
White bishop takes the rook and checks
Black king to his rooks second house
White queens bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn
Black pawn takes the bishop
White queen checks at the contrary Kings
Knights third house
Black King to his rooks house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XVIII.
Play the 15th. to this mark Wl
BLack rook takes the Kings knight
White bishop takes the rook and checks
Black King to his rooks house
White queens bishop takes the kings rookes pawn
Black queens bishop to the contrary kings knights fourth house
White bishop takes the kings knights pawn and checks
Black king takes the queens bishop
White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house
Black King to his bishops house
White Kings bishop to his queens Knights third house
Black queen to the Kings house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights house
Black Kings to his second house
White queen takes the bishop.
Black King to the queens house
White rook to the Kings house
Black queens rooks pawn one house
White queen takes the pawn, etc.
Gambett. XIX.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black the same
White knight takes the contrary pawn
Black knight takes the contrary pawn
White queen to the kings second house
Black the same
White queen takes the Kings Knight
Black queens pawn one house
White queens pawn two houses
Black kings bishops pawn one house
White kings bishops pawn two houses
Black queens knight to her second house
Whtie queens kinght to her bishops third house
Black queens pawn takes the knight
White Kings bishops pawn takes the pawn
Black bishops pawn taks the pawn
White queens knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black queen to her third house
White queens pawn takes the pawn
Black queen to her bishops third house
White kings bishop to the contrary queens knights fourth house
Black queen to her bishops fourth house
White queens bishop to the kings third house
Black queen takes the kings bishop
White queens knight takes the queens bishops pawn and checks
Black king to his queens house
White knight takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. XX.
WHite kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings knight to his bishops third house
Black queens pawn one house
White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
Black queens bishop to the contrary kings knights fourth house
White kings rooks pawn one house
Black queens bishop to the kings rooks fourth house
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White queens pawn one house
Black kings bishop to his kings second house
White queens bishop to his kings third house
Black king changes
White kings knights pawn two houses
Black queens bishop to the kings knights third house
White kings knight to his kings rooks fourth house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White knight takes the queens bishop
Black kings rooks pawn takes the kings knight
White kings rook pawns one house
Black queens knight pawns two houses
White kings bishop to the queens kn. 3d. h.
Black queens rook pawns two houses
White queens rook pawns one house
Black queens rook pawns one house
White kings bishop to the queens rooks 2d. h.
Black queens kn to her rooks third house
White kings rook paws one house
Black pawn takes the pawn
White Kings knight pawns one house
Black kings knight to the contrary kings kn: fourth house.
White kings rooke takes the pawn
Black kings knight takes the queens bishop
White rooke checks
Black king takes the rook
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black king to his Knights house
White kings knight pawns one house
Black kings knight checks at the contrary
queens bishops second house
White king to his queens house
Black knight takes the queens rook
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXI.
WHite kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White kings knight to his bishops third house
Black queens pawn one house
White Kings bishop to the queens bishop fourth house
Black queens bishop to the contrary king knights fourth house
White kings rooks pawn one house
Black queens bishop takes the kings knight
White queen takes the queens bishop
Wl
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White queen to her knights third house
Wl
Black kings knight takes the kings pawn
White kings bishop takes the kings Bishops pawn and checks
Black kings to his queens second house
White queen checks at the contrary kings third house
Black king to his queens bishop third house
White queen checks at the contrary queen fourth house
Black king to his queens knights third house
White queen takes the kings knight etc.
Gambett. XXII.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack queen to her kings bishops third house
White queen to her knights third house
Black queens knights pawn one house
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Wl
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White queens knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black queen to her house
White queens knight takes the queens knights pawn
Black Queen takes the queens knight
Whitekings bishop takes the kings bishops pawn and checks
Black king to his queens second house
White kings bishop takes the kings Knight
Black Queens pawn one house
White kings pawn takes the queens pawn
Black queen takes the queen
White kings pawn takes the queens bishop pawn and checks
Black queens knight takes the pawn
White Kings bishop takes the queen etc.
Gambett. XXIII.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack kings knight to the Kings second house
White queens knight to the contrary queens Knights fourth house
Black queens Knight to the queens Rooks third house
White queen to her rooks fourth house
Black queens Knight to the queens bishops fourth house
White queens knight takes the queens pawn and gives double checks
Black King to his queens house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXIV.
Play the 21 to this mark Wl
BLack queen to her second house
White queen take the queens knights pawn
Black queen to her bishops third house
White Kings bishop to the contrary queens
Knights fourth house
Black queen takes the queens bishop
White queen takes the Queens etc.
Gambett. XXV.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White kings knight to his bishops third house
Black queens Knight to her bishops third house
White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
Black Kings Knight to his Bishops third house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings
Knights fourth house
Black queens pawn two houses
White kings pawn takes the pawn
Black Knight takes the Kings pawn
White Kings knight takes the contrary kings
Bishop pawn
Black King takes the Kings knight
White queens checks at the Kings bishops third house
Black King to his third house
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Black queens Knight to her kings second house
White King changes
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White rook to his kings house
Black queens bishop to the queens second house
White queens pawn two houses
Black King to his queens third house
White rook takes the pawn
Black queens knight to the Kings Knights third house
White queens Knight takes the Knight
Black knight takes the rook
White pawn takes the knight and checks
Wl
Black king to the queens bishops fourth house
White queen checks at her kings third house
Black king takes the kings bishop
White queen checks at her third house
Black King to his queens bishops fourth house
White queens knights pawn gives mate.
Gambett. XXVI.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack king takes the pawn
White queen checks at the kings bishops fourth house
Black King to his third house
White Knight checks double at the contrary queens bishop second house
Black King to his second house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings
Knight fourth house
Black King to his queens third house
White queens bishop gives mate.
Gambett. XXVII.
Play the 25 to this mark Wl
BLack king to his third house
White knight checks double at the contrary queens bishop second house
Black king takes the pawn
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXVIII.
Play the 25th to this mark Wl
BLack king to his third house
White knight checks double at the contrary queens bishops second house
Black King to his second house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXIX.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishop pawns two houses
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Black kings pawn takes the Kings bishops pawn
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop to the contrary queens knights fourth house
White kings bishop to the queens third house
Black queen to the kings second house
White queen to the kings second house
Black queens knight to her bishops third house
White Kings pawn one house.
Wl
Black queens knight takes the queens pawn
White Kings pawn takes the Kings knight
Black Knight takes the queen
White pawn takes the queen
Black Knight takes the queens Knight
White queens rooks pawn one house
Black Kings bishop to the queens rooks fourth house
White queens bishop to the queens second house
Black King takes the pawn
White bishop take the Knight etc.
Gambett. XXX.
Play the last to this mark. Wl
BLack Kings Knight to the queens fourth house
White queens bishop to the queens second house
Black queens Knight takes the queens pawn
White queens Knight takes the Kings Knight
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White kings Knight pawns one house Covers
Black pawn takes the pawn
White queen to the Kings knights second house
Black pawn takes the pawn and gives check with the queen
White King to his bishops house
Black Kings bishop takes the queens bishop
White rook takes the pawn
Black queen to her house
White queen takes the Kings Knight pawn
Black Kings rook to the Kings bishop house
White rook takes the Kings bishop
Black Knight to the Knigs third house
White Knight checks at the contrary Kings bishops third house
Black King to his second house
White queen takes Kings rooks pawn
Black Kings rook to his house
White knight checks at the contrary queens fourth house
Black king to his house
White queen takes the rook and checks etc.
Gambett. XXXI.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings knight to his bishops third house
Black Kings bishop pawn one house
White Kings knight takes the Kings pawn
Black Kings bishops pawn takes the Knight
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Black King to his second house
White queen takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
Black King to his bishops second house
White Kings bishop checks at the queens fourth house
Wl
Black queens pawn two houses covers
White Kings bishop takes the pawn and checks
Black King to his knights third house
White kings rook pawn two houses
VVl
Black kings took pawn one house
White bishop takes the Queens Knights pawn
Black queens bishop takes the kings bishop
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXXII.
Play the last to this mark. Wl
BLack King to his knights third house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops fourth house
Black King to his rooks third house
White queen pawns two houses and checks with the queens bishop
Black kings Knight pawn two house covers
White Kings rook pawn two houses
Black King to to his Knights second house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house
Black king to his rooks third house
White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn and gives mate.
Gambett. XXXIII.
Play the 31 to this mark VVl
BLack queen to her Kings bishops third house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings house
Black King to his rooks third house
White queens pawn two houses and checks with her bishop
Black Kings Knight pawn two houses covers
White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn and checks
Black King to his Knights second house
White pawn takes the queen and checks
Black Kings Knight takes the pawn
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXXIV.
Play the 31, to this make vvl
BLack Kings bishop to the queens third house
White King rooks pawn checks
Black King to his rook third house
White queens pawn two houses and checks with her bishop
Black Kings Knight pawns two houses covers
White queen takes the Kings rook
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight
Black queen to the Kings second house
White Kings bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn
Black queen takes the Kings bishop
White queen checks at the contrary Kings Bishops third house
Black queen covers at the Kings Knights third house
White queen or pawn takes the queen and gives mate.
Gambett. XXXV.
Play the 31. to this mark Wl
BLack Kings rooke pawns two houses
White Kings bishop takes the queens Knights pawn
Black queens Bishop takes the bishop
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops fourth house
Black King to his rooks third house
White queens pawn two houses and checks with the bishop
Black Kings Knights pawn two houses covers
White queens bishop takes the contrary Kings
Knights pawn and checks
Black King to his Knights second house
White queens bishop takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. XXXVI.
BLack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Black Kings bishop to his queens bishops fourth house
White the same
Black King changes
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black Kings rook to the Kings house
White king changes
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White rook to his kings house
Black queens pawns two houses
White kings pawn takes the queens pawn
Black kings pawn one house
White kings knight to the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black pawn takes the kings pawn
White queens knight takes the pawn
Black kings knight takes the queens knight
White queen to the contrary kings rooks fourth house
VV
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White queen takes the kings bishops pawn and checks
Black king to his rookes house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights house
Black knight or rook takes the queen
White queens Knight gives mate.
Gambett. XXXVIJ.
Play the last to this mark VVl
BLack Kings rooks pawn one house
White queen takes the Kings bishops pawn and check:
Black King to his rook's house
White queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house
Black pawn takes the Kings Knight
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black King to his Knights house
White Kings bishop takes the knight and checks
Black queens bishop covers at the Kings third house
White rook takes the pawn at the Kings fourth house
Black queen to her second house
White queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house
Black queens Bishop to the Kings bishops second house
White bishop takes the bishop and checks
Black queen takes the bishop
White rook takes the rook and checks
Black Kings bishop covers at his house
White queen takes the queen and checks
Black King takes the queen
White rook to the Kings fourth house, etc.
Gambett. XXXVIII.
Play the 36. to this mark. vv
Black queens Bishop to the kings third house
White queen takes the Kings rooks pawn and checks
Black King to his bishops house
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks house
Black King to his second house
White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn
Black rook to the Kings Knights house
White Knight takes the queens bishop
Black King takes the Knight
White rook takes the pawn and checks
Black King to his queens third house
White queen takes the Kings bishops pawn
Black King to his queens bishops third house
White bishop takes the Knight and checks
Black queen takes the bishop
White rook checks at the contrary Kings third house
Black Kings bishops cover
White queen takes the Rook, etc.
Gambett. xxxix.
BLack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black Kings Knight to his Bishops third house
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings Knight takes the Kings pawn
White queen to the Kings second house
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White Kings Knights pawn one house and covers
White Kings Knight takes the Kings Knights pawn
White queen takes the Kings pawn and checks
vv
Black Kings bishop covers at the Kings second house
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black queen to her Kings rooks fourth house
White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn
vvv
Black Knight takes the Kings rook
White queen takes the Kings rook and checks
Black Kings bishop covers
White queen checks at the contrary Kings 4th. house
Black queen takes the queen
White pawn takes the queen
Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop to the queens Knights 3d. house
White Kings bishop to the Kings Knights second house, etc.
Gambett. XL.
Play the last to 39. mark. vv
BLack King to his queens house
White King Knight to his bishops third house
Black queen to the Kings rooks fourth house
White Kings rookes pawn takes the Kings Knight
Black queen takes the Kings rook
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black queen to the Kings rooks fourth house
White Knight checks at the contrary Kings 3d. house
Black queens pawn takes the Kings Knight
White queen takes the queen etc.
Gambett. XLI.
Play the 39. to this mark. vvv
WHite Kings rooks pawn takes the Kings Knight
Black queen takes the Kings rook
White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn
Black rook to his Kings bishops house
White King to his bishops second house
Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th house and checks
White queens pawn two houses covers
Black Kings bishop to the Kings second h.
White queens Knight to her third house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White queens bishop to the queens second h.
Black queens pawn two houses
White queens Knight takes the queens pawn
Black pawn takes the queens Knight
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary
queens Knights fourth house
Black queens bishop covers at the queens 2d. house
White bishop takes the queens bishops and checks
Black queens Knight takes the bishop
White rook takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. XLII.
BKack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn takes the pawn
White Kings pawn one house
Black Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black Kings Knights pawn two houses
White queens pawn one house
Black Kings Knight to his queens bishops 4th. house
White queens Knights pawn two houses
Black Kings Knight to his queens rooks 3d. h
White queens rooks pawn one house
Black Kings bishop to the Kings Knights 2d. house
White queens pawn one house
Black queens pawn one house
White queens Bishop to her Knights second house
Black pawn takes the pawn
White Knight takes the pawn
Black Kings rooks pawn one house
White queens pawn one house
Black queens Knight to her second house
White Kings bishop to the contrary queens Knights fourth house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White pawn takes the pawn
Black Knight takes the Kings Knight
White pawn takes the queens Knights pawn and checks
Black bishop covers
White bishop takes the bishop and checks
Black Knight takes the bishop
White bishop takes the Kings bishop
Black rook to his Kings Knights house
White pawn takes the rook
Black queen takes the pawn
White Kings changes
Black rook takes the queens bishop
White queen checks at the Kings second house
Black King to his Bishops house
White queen takes the Knight
Black Kings Knights pawn one house
White queen checks at the contrary queens 3d. house
Black King to his house
White rook checks at his Kings house
Black King to his queens house
White rook to his queens house
Black Kings bishops pawn two houses
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops third house
Black King to his house
White queen takes the Kings rook, etc.
Gambett. XLIII.
BLack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
White the same
Black King changes
White Kings Knight to his bishops 3d. house
Black Kings rook to his Kings house
White King changes
Black queens bishps pawn one house
White Kings rook to the Kings house
Black queens pawn two houses
White Kings pawn takes the queens pawn
Black Kings pawn one house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black queens bishop to the contrary Knights fourth house
White Knight takes the Kings bishops pawn
vv
Black queen to her Knights third house
White pawn takes the queens bishops pawn
vv
Black bishop takes the queen
White pawn takes the queens Knights pawn
vvv
Black queen takes the pawn
White Knight to the contrary queens 3d. house and checks with the Kings bishop
Black King to his bishops house
White Knight takes his queen
Black queens bishop takes the queens bishops pawn
White Knight takes the queens bishop, etc.
Gambett. XLIV.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack King takes the Knight
White pawn takes the queens bishops pawn checks with the Kings bishop
Black King to his bishops house
White pawn takes the queens Knigts pawn
Black bishop takes the queen
White pawn takes the rook and is made a qu.
Black queen to her bishops seccond house
White queens Knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black Kings Knight takes the queens Knight
White queen takes the Knight
Black queens Knight to her bishops third house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights house
Black King to his second house
White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn and checks
Black King to his queens house
White queen takes the queen and checks
Black King takes the queen
White queens bishops pawn one house, etc.
Gambett. XLV.
Play the 43. to this mark vv
BLack queens Knight takes the pawn
White Knight gives double check at the contrary Kings rookes third house
Black king to his bishops house
White knight takes the queens bishop
Black Knight takes the Kings Knight
White queen takes the Kings Knight
Black Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
White King to his bishops house
Black bishop takes the Kings rook
White queen checks at the contary Kings bishops fourth house
Black King to his second house
White Knight checks
Black King to his queens third house
White Knight takes the queen
Black Kings rook to the Kings bishops house
White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings bishops second house
Black pawn takes the contrary Knight
NVhite King takes the bishop
Black Knight to his queens house
White queen checks at the contrary queens 4th. house
Black King to the ^ueenes bishops second house
White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings rooks 4th. house, etc.
Gambett. xlvj.
Play the 43. to this mark vvv
BLack Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
White King to his rooks house
Black queen Knight to her bishops third h.
White Knight to the contrary queens house and checks with the bishop
Black King to his bishops house
White pawn takes the queens rook and is made a queen
Black rook takes the Kings Knight
White queen takes the rook and checks
Black Knight takes the queen
White rook takes the queens bishop, etc.
Gambett. xlvij.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn one house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings Knight to the Bishops third h.
White Kings bishop to the queens 3d. house
Black queens Knight to the bishops 3d. house
White Kings Knight to the bishops third house
Black Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house
White queens bishops pawn covers
Black Kings bishop to the Kings second house
White Kings rooks pawn two houses
Black King changes
White Kings pawn one house
Black Kings Knight to the queen 4th. house
White Kings bishop takes the Kings rookes pawn and checks
Black King takes the bishop
White Kings Knight checks at the contrary
Kings Knights fourth house vv
Black King to his Knights house
White qu. to the cont. Kings rooks 4th. house
Black Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight
White Kings rooks pawn takes the bishop
Black Kings bishops pawn two houses
White Kings rooks pawn one house
Black rook to the Kings house
White queen gives mate,
Gambett. XLviij.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight
White Kings rooks pawn takes the bishop and checks with the Kings rook
Black King to the Knights third house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooke fourth house
Black King to his bishops fourth house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks second house
Black Kings Knight pawn one house covers
White queen checks at the Kings rooks 3d. house
Black King to the contrary Kings fourth house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XLIX.
Play the 47. to this mark vv
BLack King to his Knights third house
White Kings rooks pawn one house and checks
Black King to his rooks third house
White Kings Knight takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks double
Black King to his rooks second house
White Knight takes the queen etc.
Or thus
Black King to his Knights third house
White Kings rooks pawn one house and checks
Black King to his bishops fourth house
White Kings Knights pawn gives mate
Gambett. L.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black queen pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn one house
Black Kings knight to his bishops third house
White queens bishops pawn one house
vvl
Black kings knight takes the kings pawn
White queen checks at her rooks fourth house
Black queens bishop pawn one house
White queen takes the kings knights etc.
Gambett. LI.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack queens knight to her bishops third house
White queen pawn two houses
Black kings knight takes the kings pawn
White queen pawn one house
Black queens knight to the kings second house
White queen checks at her rooks fourth house
Black queens bishop covers
White queen takes the kings knight etc.
Gambetts composed by Giochim, Graecotalian, Calabresse in the Kingdom of
Naples.
Gambett. lij.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black kings pawn takes the kings bishops pawn
White kings knight to his bishops third house
Black kings knight pawn two houses
White Kings bishop to his queens bishop fourth house vv
Black kings knight pawn one house
White kings knight to the contrary kings fourth house
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White King to his bishops house
Black kings Knight to his rooks third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black queen pawn one house
White kings knight to his queens third houses
Black king pawn one house to contrary kings bishops third house
White kings knight pawn one house
Black queen checks at the contrary kings rooks third house
vv
White king to his house vvv
Black queen to the contrary kings knights second house
White kings knight to his bishops second house
Black queens knight to her bishops third house
White kings bishop to his house
Black queen takes the Kings rook
White knight takes the queen etc.
Gambett. LIII.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack kings rook pawn one house
White kings rook pawn two houses
Black kings bishops pawn one house
White Kings knight to the contrary kings fourth house vv
Black pawn takes the kings knight
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black king to his second house
White queen checks at the contrary kings bishops second house
Black king to his queens third house
White queen checks at the contrary queens fourth house
Black king to his second house
White queen takes the contrary pawn and gives mate.
Gambett. LIVE.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack queen to her Kings second house
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black king to his queens house
White knight checks at the contrary kings Bishops second house
Black king to his house
White knight takes the contrary rooks and checks with the queen
Black king to his queen house
White knight checks
Black king to his house
White knight takes the contrary kings knights pawn and checks with the queen
Black king to his queens house
White knight checkes
Black king to his house
White knight takes the contrary kings rooks pawn and checks with the queen
Black King to his queen house
White knight takes the contrary Kings Knight etc.
Gambett. LV.
Play the 52d to this mark Wl
BLack Kings bishop to the Kings knights second house
VVl
White queens pawn two houses
Black queens pawn one house
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn two houses
Black Kings rooks pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn takes the Kings Knight pawn
Black pawn takes the pawn
White rook takes the rook
Black bishop takes the rook
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings 4th house
Black queens pawn takes the Knight
White queen to the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Black queen to her Kings bishops third h.
White queens pawn takes the pawn
Black queen to her Kings Knights second house
White pawn to the contrary Kings third house
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White pawn takes the contray pawn and checks vvv
Black King to his bishops house
White queens bishop takes the pawn at the Kings bishops fourth house
Black Kings Knight takes the queen
White queens bishop gives mate.
Gambett. LVj.
Play the last to this mark vv
WHite Kings rooks pawn two houses
Black Kings Knights pawn one house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black Kings Knight to his rooks third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bishops pawn one house
White queens bishop takes the pawn at the Kings bishops fourth house
Black Kings bishops pawn takes the Kings Knight
White queens bishop takes the pawn
Black Kings bishop to his third house
White queens bishop takes the Kings Knight
Black queens bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn and checks
White King to his second house
Black queen to her Kings bishops third house
White queens bishop to the Kings third house
Black queens Knight to her bishops third house
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black Kings bishop to the contrary King Knights third house
White queens Knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black queen to the Kings Knights third house
White Kings pawn one house
Black King to his queens house
White Kings bishop to his queens third house
Black queen to the Kings bishops second h.
White queens bishop checks at the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black King to his house
White Knights takes the queens bishops pawn and checks
Black King to his bishops house
White Kings rook to the Kings bishops house
Black queens Knight takes the queens pawn and checks
White King to his third house
Black Knight to the contrary Kings bishops third house
White pawn takes the Knight
Black queen to the Kings Knights house
White pawn takes the pawn and checks
Black King to his Knights second house
White queens bishop checks at the contrary King bishops third house
Black King to his rooks third house
White Rook gives Mate.
Gambett. lvij.
Play the 55. to this mark. vvv
BLack King to his second house
White queen to her Kings second house
Black queens Bishops to the Kings third h.
White Kings bishop takes the queens bishop
Black King takes the Kings bishop
White queen checks at her bishops fourth h.
Black King to his second house
White queen checks at her Knights fourth house
Black King takes the pawn
White queen takes the queens Knights pawn and checks
Black queens Knight covers at the queens second house
White queen takes the queens rook, etc.
Gambett. lviij.
Play the 52d. to this mark vv
WHite King to his bishops second house
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights second house
White King to his third house
Black Kings Knight to his house
White Kings Knight to the Kings bishops 4th. house
Black Kings bishop to the Kings rooks third house
White Kings bishop to his house
Black queen takes the Kings rook
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house
Black queens bishops pawn covers
White Kings bishop takes the pawn and checks
Black Knight takes the Kings bishop
White rook takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. lix.
Play the 52d. to this mark vvv
BLack queen to her Kings rooks fourth house
White Kings Knight to the Kings bishops fourth house
Black queen checks at her rooks fourth house
White queens bishops covers at her second house
vv
Black queen to the contrary queens rooks 4th. house
White queens Knight to her rooks third house
vvv
Black queen to her second house
White Kings Knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black Kings bishop to the Kings Knights second house
White queens bishop takes the Kings Knight
Black Kings bishop takes the queens bishop
White Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings bishops third house
Black King to his queen
White kings knight takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. LX.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack queen to her Knights third house
White Kings Knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black queen takes the queens pawn
White Kings bishop to her queens third house
Black queen to her bishops fourth house
White queens bishop to her Kings third house
Black queen to her bishops third house
White Kings bishop to the contrary queens Knights fourth house
Black queen takes the Kings bishop
White Knight takes the queens bishops pawn and checks
Black King to his queens house
White Knight takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. LXI.
Play the 59. to this mark vvv
BLack queens bishops pawn one house
White Kings Knight to the contrary queens fourth house
Black queens Knight pawn two houses
White queens Knights pawn one house
Black queen takes the queens Knight
White queens bishop to her Knights fourth h.
Black queen to the contrary queens Knights second house
White queens rook to the queens Knights h.
Black queen takes the queens rooks pawn
White queens rook to his house
Black queen to the contrary queens Knights second house
White queens bishop to her third house
Black queen takes the queens rook
White queen takes the queen
Black pawn takes the Kings Knight
White Kings bishop takes the pawn
Black queens Knight to her second house
White Kings bishop takes the queens rook, etc.
Gambett. LXij.
Play the 52. to this mark vv
BLack Kings Knights pawn one house
White Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
Black King takes the bishop
White Kings knight checks at the contrary kings fourth house vv
Black king to his house
White queen takes the kings knights pawn
vvv
Black queens pawn one house
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black King to his second house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. LXIII.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack king to his third house
White qu. takes the contrary p. and checks
Black king takes the kings knight
White queen checks at the contrary kings bishops fourth house
Black king to his queens third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black kings bish. to the kings knight 2d. h.
White queens bish. takes the pawn and checks
Black king to his second house
White queens bishop checks at the contrary king Knights fourth house
Black kings bishop covers at his third house
White kings pawn one house
Black Kings bishop takes the queens bishop
White queen takes the bishop and checks
Black king to his house
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black king to his second house
White king changes
Black queen to her kings house
White queen checks at the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black king to his third house
White rook checks at the contrary kings bishops third house
Black knight takes the contrary kings rook
White queen takes the knight and checks
Black king to his queens fourth house
White queens knight checks at the bishops 3d. h
Black king to the contrary queens bishops fourth house
White queen checks at her kings bishops house
Black king takes the pawn
White queen checks at the bishops fourth house
Black king to his queens bishops fourth h.
White queens knights pawn checks
Black king to his queens knights third house
White queen checks at her fourth house
Black king to the queens bishops third house
White queen gives Mate.
Gambett. lxiv.
Play the 62. to this mark vvv
BLack queen to her kings second house
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black king to his queens house
White knight checks at the contrary kings bishops second house
Black king to his house
White knight takes the kings rook and checks with the queen
Black king to his queens house
White knight checks
Black king to his house
White knight to the contrary kings rooks third house, and checks with the queen
Black king to his queens house
White knight takes the kings knight
Black queen takes the kings pawn and checks
White king to his bishops house
Black queen takes the queens bishops pawn
White queen checks at the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black king to his house
White knights checks
Black King to his bishops second house
White queens Knight to her bishops 3d. house
Black queen checks
White King to his
Black pawn to the contrary Kings bishops third house
White pawn takes the pawn
Black queen takes the pawn
White rook to his Kings bishops house, etc.
Gambett. lXV.
Play the 62. to this mark vvv
BLack Kings Knight to his bishops third h.
White queen takes the pawn at the Kings bishops fourth house
Black queen to the Kings second house
White queens pawn one house, etc.
Gambett. LXVj.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn takes the pawn
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black Kings Knight to his Kings second house
White Kings rooks pawn two houses
Black Kings rooks pawn two houses
White Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. house
Black Kings Knight to his third house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings
Knights fourth house
Black Kings Knight to the fourth house of his King
White Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house
Black Kings bishops pawn one house
White Kings Knight to the Rooks third house
vv
Black Kings Knights pawn two houses.
White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn
Black pawn takes the pawn
White queens pawn two houses
vv
Black Kings Knight to his bishops second house
White Kings Knights pawn one house
Black pawn takes the Kings Knights pawn
White Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight and checks
Black King takes the Kings bishop
White Knight takes the pawn and checks at the contrary Kings Knights fourth
house
Black King to his Knights second house
White queen to her Kings bishops third house
Black queen to her Kings bishop third house
White queen takes the pawn at the kings knights third house
Black queens pawn one house
White Kings Knight checks at the contrary
Kings third house double check
Black King to his bishops second house
White rook to the Kings bishops house
Black queen takes the rook and checks
White King takes the queen
Black queens bishop takes the Knight
White queens bishop to the contrary Kings
Knights fourth house, etc.
Gambett. lxvij.
Play the last to this mark. vv
BLack Kings Knight to his third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings Knight takes the Kings rookes pawn
White Kings Knight takes the pawn at the kings bishops fourth house
Black Kings Knights pawn two houses
White rook takes the Kings Knight
Black pawn takes the rook
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights third house
Black rook to his second house
White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings Knights house
Black Kings rook to the Kings Knight 2d. house
White queen takes the pawn at the contrary
Kings rooks fourth house
Black rook takes the Kings bishop
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings 4th. house and checks with the queen
Black King to his second house
White queen checks at contrary Kings second house
Black Kings to his queens third house
White Kings Knight checks at the queens bibishhps fourth house
Black King to the queens bishops third house
White queen gives mate:
Gambett. lxviij.
Play the 66. to this mark vvv
BLack Kings Knight to his third house
White Kings Knights pawn one house
Black pawn takes the pawn
White Knight takes the pawn at the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black Kings Knights pawn one house
White Kings bishop checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house
Black King to his second house
White rook to the Knights house
Black Knight to the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White kings bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn
Black Kings bishop to his Knights second h.
White queen to the Kings knights fourth house
Black bishop take the queens pawn
White queen takes the knight
Black rook takes the bishop
White queen takes the Kings rook
Black bishop takes the Kings rook
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house
Black King to his queens third house
White queen checks at the contrary queens fourth house
Black King to his second house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings 4th house
Black Kings to his bishops house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks house
Black King to his second house
White queen checks at the contrary King Knights second house
Black King to his queens third house
White Knight checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house
Black King to his second house
White Knight takes the queen and checks with the queen
Black King takes the Knight
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. lxix.
WHite kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White kings bishops pawn two houses
Black queens pawn two houses
White kings pawn take the queens pawn
Black queen takes the pawn
White queens knight to her bishops third house
Black queen to her kings third house
White kings knight to his bishops 3d. house
Black kings pawn takes the pawn and checks with the queen
White kings to his bishops second house
Black kings bishop checks at the fourth house of the queens bishop
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop to the queens 3d. house
White kings bishop checks at the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black kings to his queen or bishops house
White kings rook to his kings house
Black queen to her kings bishops 4th. house
White rook gives mate.
Gambett. lxx.
BLack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black Kings bishops pawn two houses
White Kings pawn takes the pawn
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third h.
White Kings Knights pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. house
White Kings Knights pawn two houses
Black Knight to the contrary kings* fourth house
White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house
Black king to his bishops house
White Kings Knight to his bishops 3d house
vv
Black Kings Knight takes the contrary Kings bishops pawn
White queens pawn two houses
Black bishops takes the pawn
White Knight takes the bishop
Black Kings Knight takes the Kings rook
White Kings Knight to the Kings bishops third (...)
Black Kings pawn one house
White Kings Knight to the Kings rooks fourth house
Black queen to her Kings house
White queen takes the queen and checks
Black King takes the queen
White Kings bishop to the Kings Knights second house, etc.
Gambett. lxxj
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
White king to his queens house
Black Kings Bishop to his queens knights 3d. house
White kings knight to his rooks fourth house
Black knight checks at the contrary kings bishops second house
White King to his house
Black knight takes the Kings rook
White knight checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house
vv
Black Kings rooks pawn takes the Knight
White queen takes the rook and checks
Black King to his second house
White pawn one house and checks at the contrary Kings bishops third house
Black pawn takes the pawn
White pawn takes the pawn and checks
Black King to his bishops second house
White queen takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. lxxij.
Play the last to this mark Wl
BLack to his Knights house
White Kings bishop checks at the queens bishops fourth house
Black queen pawn two houses covers
White kings bishop takes the pawn and checks
Black queen takes the bishop
White knight checks at the contrary kings second house
Black king to his bishops house
White knight takes queen, etc.
Gambett. lxxiij.
BLack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black kings bishops pawn two houses
White Kings pawn takes the pawn
Black kings knight to his bishops third house
White kings knights pawn two houses
Black kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house
White kings knights pawn one house
Black kings knight to the contrary Kings fourth house
White Kings knight to his rooks third house
Black Kings Knight takes the Kings knights pawn
vv
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Black Kings Knight covers
White queens pawn two houses
vvv
Black Kings bishop takes the queens pawn
White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black Kings Knights pawn one house
White pawn takes the pawn
Black Knight takes the bishop
White pawn one house and checks with the queen
Black King to his second house
White queen taks the Knight and checks
Black King to his bishops second house
White pawn takes the Kings rook
Black queen takes the pawn at the rookes h.
White queens bishops pawn one house
Black Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house
VLhite queens Knight to her second house
Black queens pawn one house
White king changes with the queens rook
Black queens bishop takes the knight
White bishop takes the queens bishop, etc.
Gambett. lxxiv.
Play the last to this mark. vv
WHite Knight takes the Kings Knight
Black queen takes the Kings Knight
White queens pawn two houses
Black qu. takes the p at the Kings bish. 4th. h.
White pawn takes the Kings bishop
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings fourth house
White queens bishop cove^s at the Kings third h.
Black queen takes the Kings rook
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Black King to his bishops house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops fourth house
Black King to his Knights house
White queen takes the Kings pawn
Black Kings rooks pawn one house
White queens bishop to the queens fourth house
Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights h*
White Kings bishop pawn two houses
Black queen to the Kings Knights third house
White Kings bishop to the queens third house
Black queen to the Kings bishops second h.
White Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. h.
Black queen takes the bishop
White queen gives mate:
Gambett. lxxv.
Play the 73 to this mark vvv
BLack Kings pawn takes the queens pawn
White Kings pawn to the contrary Kings
Bishops third house
Black Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens bishops fourth house
White queens bishops pawn one house covers
Black Kings pawn takes the queens bishops p.
White queen checks at her Kings second house
Black King to his bishops house
White pawn takes the Kings Knights pawn and checks
Black King takes the pawn
White queen checks at the Kings Knights fourth house
Black King to his bishops house
White queen takes the Kings bishop and checks
Black queens pawn covers
White queens Knight takes the pawn, etc.
Gambett. LXXVI.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black pawn takes the pawn
White Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. h.
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White King to his bishops house
Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. h.
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bish. to the queens Knights 3d. h.
White Kings Knight to the bishops third house
vv
Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
White Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
vvv
Black King takes the bishop
White Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings fourth house
Black King to his bishops house
White Knight takes the queen, etc.
Gambett. LXXVII.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack queen to the Kings rooks third house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house
Black queens pawn two houses
White bishop takes the pawn
Black queens bishop to the Kings third house
White Kings bishop takes the contrary queens Knights pawn, etc.
Gambett. lxxviij.
Play the 76. to this mark vv
BLack queen to the Kings bishops third house
White Kings pawn one house
Black queen to the Kings bishops fourth h.
White Kings bishop to the queens third house
Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
White Kings rooks pawn one house
Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house
White queens bishop to the queens second house
Black queens Knight to her bishops third h.
White queens bishops to the Kings house, etc.
Gambett. lxxix.
Play the 72. to this mark vv
BLack queen to the Kings second house
White queens bishop takes the pawn
Black queen takes the Kings pawn
White Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
Blac King to his bishops house
White queens bishop to the Kings Knights 3 d. h.
Black Kings Knight. to the Kings rooks third house
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black queen to her Kings second house
White Kings bish, to the queens Knights 3 d. h.
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White queen to her third house
Black queens pawn two houses
White rook to his Kings house
vv
Black queen to the Kings bishops third house
White queens bish* the Kings rooks fourth house
Black queen to the Kings Knights third house
White queens bishop checks at the contrary
Kings second house
Black King to his Knights house
White queen takes the queen
Black Kings rooks pawn takes the queen
White queens Knight takes the queens pawn
Black pawn takes the queens Knight
White Kings bishop takes the pawn and checks
Black King to his rooks second house
White Kings Knight gives mate.
Gambett. lxxx.
Play the last to this mark. vv
BLack queen to the Kings bishops second h.
White queens bishops checks at the contrary queens third house
Black King to his Knights house
Wh^te queens rook to the contrary Kings 2d. h.
Black queen to the Kings bishops third house
White queens Knight takes the queens pawn
vv
Black queen takes the queens bishop
White queens Knight checks double at the contrary Kings bishops third house
Black King to his bishops house
White Rook gives mate.
Gambett. lxxxj.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack queens bishops pawn takes the qu. Knight.
White Kings bish, takes the pawn and checks
vv
Black Kings Knight covers at the Kings bishop second house
White Rook gives mate.
Gambett. lxxxij.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack King to his bishops house
White rook to the contrary Kings bishops second house and checks with the
bishop
Black King to his house
White rook takes the queen
Black Kings Knights pawn takes the rook
White queen checks at the Kings fourth house
Black King to the queens second house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. lxxxiij.
Play the 76. to this mark vvv
BLack King to his bishops house
White Kings rooks pawn one house
Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house
White queens Knight to her bishops third h.
Black King takes the Kings bishop
White queens Knight to the Kings second house
Black queen to the Kings Knights third h.
White Kings Knight checks at the contrary
Kings fourth house
Black King to his bishops house
White Knight takes the queen and checks
Black pawn takes the Knight
White Knight takes the pawn at Kings bishops fourth house, etc.
Gambett. lxxxiv.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn takes the pawn
White queens bish. to the queens bishops 4th. h.
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White King to his bishops house
Black queens pawn one house
White Kings Knight to his bishops third house
Black queen bishops to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
White queens pawn two houses
Black queen to the Kings rooks third house
White Kings Knights pawn one house
vv
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks third house
White King to his bishops second house
Black pawn takes the pawn and checks
White pawn takes the pawn
Black queens bishop takes the Kings Knight
White kings bish* takes the kings bishops pawn and checks
Black King to his queens house
White queen takes the queens bishop
Black queen to her second house
White rook takes the cont. Kings rooks pawn
Black rook takes the contrarary rook
White Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight
Black rook checks at the contry Kings rooks second house
White King to his Knights house
vvv
Black rook the queens bishops pawn
White queen takes the Kings bishop and checks
Black queen covers at the Kings house
White queens bishop checks at the contrary K Knights fourth house
Black King to his queens second house
White Kings bishops checks at the contrary kings third house
Black queen takes the Kings bishop
White quee checks at the contrary queens house
Black King to the queens bishop third house
White queen pawn one house and checks
Black queen takes the pawn
White pawn takes the queen and checks
Black King takes the pawn
White queens knight checks at her bishop third house
Black King to the queens bishops third house
White queen checks at the Kings house
Black King to the queens bishops fourth house
White queen checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house
Black king to the contrary queens fourth house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. lxxxv.
Play the last* to this mark vv
BLack queen to the Kings bishops third house
White kings pawn one h.
Black queens pawn takes the Kings pawn
White queens pawn takes the queens pawn
vv
Black bishop takes the Kings Knight
White queen takes the bishop
Black qu. takes the p. at the Kings fourth h.
White qu. takes the queens Knights pawn, etc.
Gambett. lxxxvj.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack qu. takes the pawn at the Kings fourth house
White Kings Knight takes the queen
Black queens bishop takes the queen
White Kings Knight takes the Kings bishops p.
Black queens bish. takes the queens bishops p.
White Kings Knight tak^s the Kings rook
Black Kings Knight to the rooks third house
White queens bishop takes the pawn
Black Kings Knights pawn one house
White bishop takes the Knight
Black bishop takes the bishop
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black Kings bishop to his Knights second h.
White rook checks at the Kings house
Black King to his bishops house
White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings bishops second house, etc.
Gambett. lxxxvij.
Play the 84. to this mark vv
BLack Kings Knights pawn two houses
White Kings Rooks pawn two houses
Black Kings bishops pawn one house
White Kings pawn one house
Black queens pawn takes the pawn
White queens pawn takes the pawn
Black bishops pawn takes the pawn
White qu. to the contrary queens fourth house
Black bishop takes the Kings Knight
White queen takes the bishop
Black queens bishops pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn
Black queen takes the pawn
White Kings Knights pawn takes the pawn
Black pawn takes the pawn
White queens bishop takes the pawn
Black queen to the Kings bishops third house
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
vv
Black Kings bishop to his rooks third house
White queens rook checks at the Kings house
Black King to his bishops house
White qu. bish. checks at the contr. queens 3d. h.
Black King to his Knights second house
White Kings rook checks at the Kings Knights h.
Black Kings bish. covers at the Kings Kts 4th. h
White rook takes the bishop and checks
Black qu. takes the rook
White qu. checks at the cont. Kings bishops 2d. h.
Black King to his rooks third house
vvv
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops house, etc.
Gambett. lxxxviij.
Play the last to this mark vv
BLack Kings bishop to the queens third h.
White queens rook checks at the Kings h.
Black Kings Knight covers at his Kings second h.
White queens Knight to the Kings fourth house
Black queen takes the queens bishop
White queens Knight takes the queens by. and checks
Black queen takes the Knight
White Kings R. to the cont. Kings rooks third h.
Black queen takes the rook
White qu. checks at the cont. Kings bishops 2d. h.
Black King to his queens house
White queen takes the Knight and checks
Black King to his queens bishops house
White Kings B. checks at the cont. Kings third h.
Black queens Knight. covers at the queens 2d. h.
White queen takes the Kings Knight and checks
Black King to the queens Knights house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. lxxxix.
Play the last to this marks. vvv
WHite Rook to the contrary Kings 4th. h.
Black qu. to the cont. kings rooks 4th. h.
White rook checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Black queen takes the rook
White qu. checks at the contr. Kings bishops h.
Black King to his Knight, third house
White Kings Bish. checks at the queens third h.
Black King to his Knights fourth house
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. xc.
Play the 84. to this mark vvv
BLack rook to his house
White qu. takes the Kings bishop and checks
Black queen covers at the Kings house
White qu. B. checks at the cont. kings Kts. 4th. h.
Black King to the queens second house
White qu. takes the Kings Knights pawn and checks
Black King to his queens bishops third house
White queen takes the Kings rook
Black queens Knight to her rooks third house
White Kings B. checks at the cont. queens 4th. h.
Black King to the queens Knights third huse
White queen takes the queen
Black rook takes the queen
White queens Knight to the queens 2d. h. etc.
Gambett. xcj.
Play the 84. to this mark vvv
BLack queen to the contrary Kings rooks 3d. h.
White queen takes the Kings bish. and checks
Black King to the queens second house
White qu. checks at the cont. Kings bishops 3d. h
Black King to the queens bishops third house
White queen checks at her bishops fourth house
Black King to the queens second house
White queens B. checks at the cont. Kings 2d. h.
Black queen takes the Kings bishop
White queen takes the queen and checks
Black King takes the queen.
White King takes the rook etc.
Gambett. xcij.
WHite Kings pawn two houses
Black the same
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn takes the pawn
White kings bish. to the queens bishops fourth h.
Black Kings bishop to the Kings second house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings bishop check* at the contrary
Kings rooks fourth house
White King to his bishops house
Black Kings Knights pawn two houses
White Kings Knights pawn one house
Black pawn takes the pawn
White pawn takes the pawn
Black Kings bishop takes the pawn
White queen to the cont. kings rook. fourth h.
Black queen checks at the Kings bishops 3d. h.
White Kings Knight covers at the Kings bishops third house
Black queens pawn one house
White queens bishop takes the Kings Knights p.
Black queen to the Kings Knights third h.
White queen takes the queen
Black Kings bishops pawn takes the queen
White King to his Knights second house, etc.
Gambett. xciij.
BLack Kings pawn two houses
White the same
Black Kings bishops pawn two houses
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn takes the pawn
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
Black Kings Knights pawn one house covers
White queen to the Kings second house
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White King to the queens house
Black Kings bishops pawn takes the Kings p.
White queen takes the pawn and checks
Black Kings bishop covers at the Kings 2d. h.
White Kings Knight to his bishops third h.
Black queen to the Kings bishops third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black Kings Knights pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn two houses
Black Kings rooks pawn one house
White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn
Black Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn
White rook takes the rook
Black queen takes the rook
White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house
Black King to the queens house
White Kings Knight takes the Kings Knights pawn
Black queen takes the queens pawn and checks
White queens bishop covers at her second h.
Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house
White Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house
Black King to his house
White Kings Knight to the contrary queens third house, and checks double
Black King to the queens house
White queen checks at the contrary Kings house
Black Knight takes the queen
White queen gives mate.
Gambett. xciv.
White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black Kings pawn two houses
White pawn takes the pawn
Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house
White Kings Knights pawn one house covers Black queen to the contrary Kings
fourth h.
White Kings Knight to the bishops third house
Black queens Knight to her bishops third house
White queens Knight to her bishops third house
Black queen to the Kings bishops fourth house
White Kings pawn two houses
Black qveen to the Kings third house
White queens pawn two houses
Black queen to the Kings second house
White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house
Black queen to the contrary queens Knights fourth house
White queens rooks pawn one house
Black queen takes the queens Knights pawn
White queens Knight to her Rooks fourth house
FINIS.
The Stationer to the Ingenious Chesse-player.
Gentlemen,
FOr few else will buy this Book, I entreat you to correct these Errors, which
the Printer has let pass, by reason of the unusual manner of the writing of
the Gambets; the Litterall faults are of no consequence, and therefore omitted,
and these being corrected, will render the book as useful as is desired by

Your Servant, H: Herringman.

ERRATA.
IN the first verses line the last, blot out wisely, p. 5. 1. 22. before it
read else. p. 6. l. 6. p. 7. l. the last, for file r. board, p. 8. l. 9. for
her r. (...) p. 13. l. the last, blot out by force. p 19. l. 13. r. contrary.
ib. l. 15. r. rooks for kings. p. 23. l. 17. for first r. one p. 36. l. 9. for
kings r. queens, ib. l. 11. for queens r. kings, p. 42. l. 7. for second r.
bishops third, p. 36. l. 1. r. contrary queens bishops paw t, p. 67. l. 11. for
39 read this, p. 68. l. 13. r. her bishops, p. 86. 1. the last, read White
knight, p. 93. l. 12. r. his house, p. 100 l. 10. r. one house p. 107. l. 19.
r. 76, p. 111. l. 3. r. White kings, p. 112, l. 2. r. takes, p. 28. l. 12. p.
32. l. 6. p. 50. l. 16. p. 58. l. 26. p. 72. l. 4, and at the beginning of
Gambett. viiij, xxiv, xxxiij, xxxiv. xxxv, lviij. make this mark vvv p. 72. l.
7. and Gambett. xlvj. lix make this mark vvvv.


