THE PROPHECY OF GRETNERUS Concerning these Times.
GRetnerus was here in England with Queen Elizabeth, and presented her with a
fair manuscript in Latin, describing therein the whole future History of
Europe; here and there limning in water colors, some principal passages, for
touches in the world of after ages. Doctor Nevell then Deane, or Clerk of the
Closet, and very intimate with the Queen, got this Book of Her, and bestowed it
on the Library of Trinity College in Cambridge; where that has been public
to the eye of all persons eversince, till about five years since it was much
defaced.

The Library keeper has it almost all by heart, who resorting (after his
expulsion) to this City, and keeping company with some Sequestered Reverend
Fellows of that House, have refreshed their memories so well concerning what
they had seen and read before, that they as well as he, were confident of what
follows.

1. In his predictions he describes the troubles of Russia, and the Election
of the Swedish King, Sigismond by name, to be King of Polonia; by which he
should irrecoverably loose his own Inheritance.

2. That of the Swedish usurpers race, there should be one Gustavus Adolpus by
name, that should take an hint from the distractions in Germany, to enter the
Empire with a small Army, and there roll into a mighty force, and fight many
Battles prosperously, but at the last in a pitched field he should perish.

3. That about that time should reign another Rex Septentrionalis nomine
Carolus, qui ducet in uxorem Mariam Papisticam ex qua evadet Regnum omnium
infaelicissimus. Tunc Populus ipsius ditionis eliget alium sibi Regem Comitem
qui durabit in imperio tres annos aut eo circiter S. X. F. A. X.
and postea idem populus eliget alium Regem Equitem non ejusdem familiae nec
honoris, qui detrudet omnia sub pedibus suis aliquanto longiore tempore, and
post hunc nullum.

Paulo post apparebit quidam Carolus ex Carolo descendens ab immensa class in
litus ditionis patris sui, and cum auxiliariis Danencis, Swedicis, Holandicis,
Francicis, and Hispanicis prosternabit adversarios suos, and administrabit
imperium suum perfaelicissime and erit Carolo magno major.

Quod faxit Deus.
FINIS.

