GREAT SATISFACTION CONCERNING The Death of the Earl of Strafford, in a
Discourse between a Scottishman and a Jesuit.
With a serious consideration of certain Conclusions observed from his last
Speech upon the Scaffold.
I Follow the last Speech published, appealed to the Lord Primate of Jreland,
Earl of Cleveland, Earl of Newport, Lord Rich, etc. observing the heads
according to the paper by himself left upon the Scaffold:

Scot. Jesuit.
Scot. I pray you Sir, what is the matter, from whence come all these people so
fast?


Jes. Do thou not know, every Child can tell through the whole City, that
they came from the execution of the Earl of Strafford.


Scot. Why, is the Earl of Strafford dead?


Jes. He is beheaded upon the Scaffold at Tower Hill: he is dead sure enough,
God comfort him.


Scot. A my saul I am glad out with all my heart, the Earl of Strafford is
dead? the best news that ever I heard in my life: I Will away into Scotland, ham^
as fast as I can, and tell my Grannum this news. I Will toss my Cap for joy.


Ies. Why do you Scottishmen so envy the Lord Strafford?


Scot. We do not, nor never did envy his person; but he was one of the
troublers of the 3. Kingdoms: which could never be well settled for him, and
such as he. But I pray you sir, tell me one thing. Did he dye well, and make a
good end?


Ies. He made an excellent Speech, and left us a worthy pattern against we dye.


Scot. I pray you what said he?


Jes. He first made a short Preface to the Lord Primate of Ireland, but the
people made a noise and interrupted him.


Scot. But what said he? Did he repent: and confess his just deserved death,
to be inflicted upon him, for offending God?


Jes. The first ^ead of his Speech was, concerning his Coming to pay the last
debt we owe to sin, according to St. Paul's saying, we are all subject to death.
1. Cor. 15.22. Now he did confess, that he came thither by the goodwill and
pleasure of A^mighty God, to dye, as it is, Heb. 9.27.


Scot. But I pray you tell me, did he yield up his spirit in the faith of
Christ, under the hope of salvation by him, with repentance, for all his sins?
Revel. 14.13. did he fall a sleep in Christ? 1 Thessalonians. p. 13. What was the rest
of his Speech?


Jes. 2. He spoke concerning his rising to Righteousness. There is a glorified
Righteousness, through Christ in the world to come both perfect and inherent,
Psalm. 73.24. And the Earl of Strafford did declare himself, that he was
confident, by the blessing of God, to rise again through the merits of Jesus
Christ, to Righteousness, and life eternal.


Scot. But did he before his Death profit in true righteousness and holiness,
by means of those chastisements that God laid upon him: or if you will, that
his sins brought upon him in this life? Did he behold the Majesty of the Lord
in the sentence of his death? Isay. 26.9, 10. etc. It is not a flourishing
vapor that brings a man to Heaven, but I pray you proceed in his Speech.


Jes. In the 3. head, he did express that he did dye willingly. Now there is
such a power in the Resurrection of Christ which has loosed the sorrows and
discontents of death, and makes a man to dye willingly, Acts 2.24. And thus did
he declare himself to be loosed from the sorrows of death, insomuch, that he
submitted himself to it, with a very quiet, and contented mind.


Scot. Now here is the matter. Was he first wounded for the offense, then
Reconciled to God, by the death of Christ, before he died, and rejoicing before
the Lord did he receive the Atonement through Christ? Romans 5.10.11.


Ies. Jn the 4. place, he forgave all, which is the property of Gods Children,
they forgive all, and of an humble mind, forbearing, and long suffering.
Coloss. 3.12.13. Thus did the Earl of Strafford freely forgive all the world,
and that he expressed he did, not from the teeth outward, but from the very
heart, protesting before Almighty God, that there was not a displeasing thought
in him, toward any creature.


Scot. That was very good, but did he find true testimony from Gods Spirit, in
the forgiveness of his own offenses, against God, and against his people,
Confessing his sins humbly, and without guile, and pouring out his soul before
the Lord, till God sealed him a pardon? Psalm. 32. I pray you proceed in his
Speech.


Ies. He wished in the 5. place, nothing but prosperity to King and people;
upon which particular he was something large. The 1. part whereof concerned his
place, as he was Deputy. Now as the Scripture says; fidelity to the King, and
true Judgment to the people, are weighty matters of the Law, which concerned
his place, and ought by him to be done. Mat. 23, 23. And herein he glorified,
and thanked God, that he could say from his Conscience, that he (in his place)
never had any thing in the purpose of his heart, but what tended to the joint,
and individual prosperity of King and people.


Scot. Well, well. All is not Gold that glisters, nor are all Saints that have
sine tongues: Rhetoric and policy will not justify a man before God. Had he
sought the public tranquillity of the King and people, in peace, and truth,
and the quiet state of the Church of God, he would not have labored to bring
in, but to have freed it from both, foreign and Civil wars. 2 Kings 20.19.
It is a strange and unwarrantable way for any that profess themselves
Christians to seek the joining of King, and people together, and the
prosperity of both, by confirming errors in the Church, and by persecuting
tyranny, slaughters, and bloody wars to force the people to obey by
constraint, Psalm. 23.1.


Ies. The 2. place, He declared himself to be misunderstood, and Moses Law
shows, that Judges ought to keep themselves from false matters, and from
putting to death the innocent and righteous. Exodus 23.7. Now the Earl of
Strafford conceived himself to be mis-judged, imputing it to the Error of
misundersta^dsting him.


S^ot. I am very sorry to hear that he was no more p^nitent, having so many
heinous crimes proved against him, as to overthrow the right of Law by
exorbitant power, to take away men's estates by force, to proceed against the
Lord Mount-norris without all course of Law or Justice, with diverse other
Articles proved at large against him, alas! alas! that he should be so blinded
to speak such a peremptory word! Will he make his own unjust proceedings
contrary to law, to be justifiable, and condemn the sentence so justly
denounced against him: so justly, and true? Surely he thought all was but in
jest, or that his golden mouthed language would save his life, or some end he
had best known to himself, for he could not be ignorant of his just deserved
censure, according both to Common Law, Statute Law, and Parliament: but indeed,
every one almost held him an enemy to all these.


Jes. He showed himself in the 3. place To approve of Parliaments. There is
one thing, says he, I desire to free my self of, and I am very confident that
I shall be believed: I did always think the Parliaments of England were the
happiest constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived under, and next under
God, the best means to make the King and his people happy, so far have I
been from being against Parliaments.


Scot. So far, that is as much as nothing, he thought so, and he said so, and
he knew so. David thought Vriah happy in having so fair a Wife, he knew and
was sensible of the delight that was to be found in her, but what did that make
for Vriah? He lost his wife by David's taking notice of it: and his life too: so
what is it that the Earl of Strafford know how happy the Parliaments of
England were for the King and people, and upon such his knowledge to hinder,
and stop them, and to labor to deprive the Land of them: using means to have
the strife ended by War, and Blood: rather then by Parliament and peace? But
I pray you sir, will you be pleased to proceed to the rest of his Speech.


Ies. 6. He submitted to justice, being in his intentions Innocent. We read,
that when Stephen was stoned he kneeled down, and cried, Lord lay not this sin
to their charge. Acts. 7.60. Thus the Lord of Strafford imitated holy Stephen;
saying, that he acquitted all the world, and heartily forgave them; pleading
his intentions to be innocent.


Scot. Was he not in a trance when he pleaded Innocence, or was his wit too
high to stoop to Justice? What condemned of treason by so fair a trial?
Search and see, if all Histories can parallel with it? He whose Judgment and
wit is admired to plead Innocence in so clear a censure?

To practice with another Governor of another Country to invade this Realm,
is high Treason, although such practices be not put in the Dyer. 248. Is it not
then treason too, to tell the King that he had an Army in Ireland, should
reduce this Kingdom to obedience, to encounter, and fight, and kill, such as
are the Kings soldiers, or assisting the King in his wars, is high Treason.
45. Edw. 3.25. Br. treason. 7.21. E. 23. Stamf. 1.1. Is it not then Treason to
be the willing cause of the loss of New Castle of purpose to engage the 2.
Kingdoms in a war?

To maintain the extollers or maintainers of the Sea of Rome? The first offense
does incur ye danger of a praemunine: the second offense is high treason. 5.
El. 1. D. Conce. 1. what then was the Lord Straffords fact, that to oblige them
the more, compounded with Recusants at so low a rate?

Such as shall do or procure any thing, ad seditionem domini Regis, vel
exercitus su^ i^ t^eason, says Mr. Andrew Horns book, Speculum
Iustitiariorum so says he, is falsifying the Kings Seals, etc. In a word,
because many like cases of treason might happen etc. it was (by the statute 25.
Edw. 3. chapter 2.) accorded, that if any other case supposed treason, which is not
as that Statute specified, does happen, that it should be declared before the
King and his Parliament, etc. These things I pass over ore fly, giving but a
touch of them: by which we may perceive how great those offenses were, whereby
the Earl of Strafford expulsed ^^ople out of their Families by men in Arms,
his treachery against the ^t^te and division betwixt the King and People by him
wrought, as may appear in his Articles. But I will not interrupt you too long;
I pray you sir, will you be pleased to go on with the rest of his Speech?


Ies. He acquitted the King constrained to, etc it was a great praise to the
Kings of Israel, that they were merciful Kings, 1 Kings 20.31. And this was a
great comfort to the Earl of Straf that the King was so full of pity and
mercy to him, and he infinitely rejoiced therein.


Scot. It is our comfort that we have a gracious King, but let not us therefore
abuse his mercy. Did the L. Strafford make the God of Heaven his salvation and
pray unto him, and praise his name, forsaking his humane policy, and lying
vanities, if he did not, I can assure you he forsook his own mercy and
refused the true felicity. Jonah. 2.8.


Ies. He besought to repent. The Lord himself admonishes all men every where
to repent, Acts 17.30. So did this Earl; he having wished to this Kingdom all
the prosperity and happiness in the world, desired that they would repent, yt
they would lay their hands upon their hearts.


Scot. I thought rather that he had been extremely humbled with the sight of
his sins, and said. Oh how many glorious stars shine in the Parliament, and
my glory is Eclipsed. I will therefore turn unto the Lord, and confess my
sins, that so J be not clouded in darkness (in the world to come) but through
my Savior Christ may be a bright-shining star in Heaven, against thee Lord
have I sinned, and do now most justly suffer. Luke 15.17. etc. But I pray you
go on.


Ies. He showed in the 9. place. That it was a strange way to write the
beginning of Reformation, and settlement of a Kingdom in blood. The Lord
denounces a woe against them that build a Town with blood. Haba. 2, 12. And
the Earl of Strafford desired the people to consider whether the Reformation
of the happiness of a Kingdom should be written in Letters of blood.


Scot. By Blood, there is meant bloodshed by iniquity and not by the Sword of
Justice. The Blood of Zimri and Cosby was shed by Phineas, which wrought a
Reformation of happiness to the people, the wrath of God was thereby appeased,
and the Plague then amongst them was stayed, Numbers, 25. and thus J hope will
it now so be with us,


Ies. He did beseech that demands might rest there which was the 10 head of his
Speech. St. Paul would have every man to prove his own work, to see whether he
can rejoice in it, Gal. 6.4. And thus would the Earl of Strafford have his
death to be considered of in our Houses.


Scot, Jn my conceit, it concerned him to have been more diligent to search
into his own heart. Oh of what concernment was it of to himself, a then dying
man, to have bent his heart diligently, to have purged his own heart, and
conscience from those sins in which he had lived, and for which he was then to
suffer death, Hag. 1, 5, 7. J pray you how did he proceed after?


Ies. He prayed, that they might not call blood upon themselves; Lord lay not
this sin to their charge, says innocent Stephen, when they stoned him. Acts
7.60. And thus the Lord Strafford prayed, that his blood might not rise up
aginst any one of this Land.


Scot. I am sorry to hear that he was so obstinate, that he would not
acknowledge, that he was justly executed for his deserving sins, Romans 6.23. I
pity him, it is now too late to pray for him, for his condition is settled upon
him; as he must abide, either to eternal joy, or perpetual woe.


Ies. He dyed in the faith of the Church. St John says, writing to Gajus: I
have no greater joy then these (says he) that is to hear that my sons walk
in verity, 3. John 4. I profess says the Earl of Strafford, that J do dye a
true and faithful Son to the Church of England.


Scot. But here lies the question, did he dye a converted man, did he die a
true Christian, that as one who having the sense, and feeling of his own
baseness, and profaneness being a vessel to Satan, and servant to sin, did
he repent, and receive of the spiritual anointing from the Lord? Was he
endowed through grace with faith, and the Holy Ghost? Did he become a person
dedicated to Christ? Romans 5 6. 1. Pet. 2.9. Ephesians. 2, 3.


Ies. We leave that to God: He loved the Church of England and prayed for it
which was the 13 head of his Speech. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, says
holy David, they shall prosper that love her peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces, Psalm, 22, 6 7. Thus the good Earl prayed, that
peace and prosperity might be to the Church of England.


Scot. I wonder what Church he meant, did he mean the Papisticall Church, the
Jesuits and their crew, which has too much increased amongst us, or the
Prelaticall Church of England, as it stands governed by Bishops, Archbishops,
etc. is it their Hierarchy and temporal glories and dignities, that he desires
to prosper. Or does he mean the distressed Church, which has bin by them long
subdued and kept in bondage, Does he pray for those distressed souls, the
faithful members of Jesus Christ whose souls have bin filled full of the
mocking of the wealthy, and the despitefulnesse of the proud Prelates, Psalm.
13, 24.


Ies. He answered (such as shall object that he was inclining to popery) that
since he was 21 years of age he never doubted of the Religion of the Church of
England.


Scot. Belike then he took all upon trust, what the Church did, that it seems
he believed is not this Popery to believe so, and so because the Church
believes it, and so take all upon trust?


Jesuit. How would you have men to believe?


Scot. To believe in God, and to search and try the Scriptures, but I pray you
what was the rest of the Speech?


Jesuit. So he concluded his Speech,


Scot. J pray you what was his Conclusion, was that better then the rest of his
speech?


Ies. In his Conclusion 1 He reconcileth himself to God through Christ Jesus,
Levit. 23.27. 2. His hope is in heaven, Rom, 5, 2, 3. He desires the
forgiveness of every man, Psalm. 32, 1. 4 He confessed his rash and unadvised
words, and evil deeds, John 1, 20. 5 He bids all earthly things farewell,
Psalm. 7, 6 He falls to prayer, Acts 10, 9. 7 His Faith is on God, on whom alone
he trusts, Romans 3, 28. 8 He counsels his friends, Zach, 6.13, 9 He dies
patiently, Acts 21, 13. And I trust he is ascended into heaven joyfully, Ephesians.
4.


Scot. I can assure you if this was all done heartily: he made a good
Conclusion indeed, and I can tell you this indeed may give us some satisfaction
to hope well of him.


Ies. Even now you condemned him for making such a speech, and do you yet like
his Conclusion, do you think it possible, that a change could be wrought in
him on such a sudden?


Scot. Though it is not common to find such presidents, yet we find that whilst
Christ, and the two Thieves did suffer even at the place of execution, not one
but both the Thieves, which were crucified with him Reviled him at the first:
Matthew. 27.44. But by and by even at the same hour we find one of those
Thieves rebuking the other, 1. Reconciling himself to God, fear thou not
God (says he) 2. His hope was in peace seeing nothing to belong to him on
Earth, but present condemnation he desires forgiveness, confessing his sin,
we are indeed righteously here, and bids all earthly thing farewell: 6 He falls
to prayer: Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom: 7. By which
expression, he showed that his faith was in God, in whom alone he trusted, 8.
He counsels the Thief, 9. He dies patiently: then Jesus said unto him,
Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Luke
23.39.40, 41, 42, 43. And who knows that if not before yet even at this
instant might the time be of his conversion; Gods m^^^^ might fall upon him,
even at the last gasp.

Let us leave him to Gods Tribunal, and judge charitably of him: for God is
merciful, if he were not; woe would be for us all:

In a word, let us be thankful to God that he is removed from troubling our
Church and States Laus Deo.


FINIS.

