Great news from IRELAND, Being Motives of Encouragement for the Officers and
Soldiers who shall Serve in the Present War of Ireland.
Licensed April 9th, 1689.

James Fraser.

Drawn from the Heads following,
I. THE General Inability and Incapacity of the Irish to Manage Employs of
Trust and Power. II. The Necessity of a standing Army and Garrisons in that
Kingdom in times of Peace. III. The Ecclesiastical, Civil and Millitary,
Employs; that must be in the hands of Protestants. IV. The Number and Vallew of
the said Employs. V. The Advantages may be made by Officers and Soldiers in
that Service, over and above what those had in the last War. VI. The Cheapness
of Land and Provisions, and Improvements to be made in that Kingdom.
All which demonstrates the Irish War to be the most advantageous promising
Service in Europe.

1. HE that Reads the Ancient and Modern Histories of that Kingdom, will there
find the Irreconcilable Hatred the Irish have, and ever had, to the British,
and will also find that as often as they have had Power, they have Exerted that
Power, as much as in them lay, to the destruction of the British Persons and
Plantations.

2. That when the Religion of the Crown and People of England was the same with
that of the Native Irish, yet their Hatred was the same then as now, as appears
by Giraldus Cambrensis, by Spencer, by Paccata Hibernia, and in diverse Acts of
Parliaments before the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

3. More Sevear Laws were made against the Irish in those times then since the
Reformation, as may be seen in the said Statutes.

4. Both before the Reformation of Religion, and since, it appears, that
whatever was the persuasion of the Crown of England in matters of Religion,
they still found it their Interest, to Lessen and Discourage the Irish
Interest, and to Enlarge and Encourage the British Interest in that Kingdom.

5. King Henry the Eighth, his Son King Edward the Sixth, his two Daughters
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, though of different Interests in matters of
Church and State, still persued that End, as by the Laws made in those times is
Evident.

6. Queen Mary who was a professed Papist, and Persecuted Protestants in England,
persued the same End, and Encouraged Protestants in that Kingdom, as by the
Statutes then made may appear.

7. Those Governors who have most effectually persued those Ends have been
ever Celebrated as the best Governors of that Kingdom, and the best Servants
to the Crown of England.

8. The Crown of England, and the respective Governors of that Kingdom,
knowing it Natural for a Conquered People to hate their Conquerours, and as
well knowing that the Numbers of the Irish were much Superior to the British,
They

First, Made several Laws to put the Chief Places of Trust and Power in that
Kingdom into British Hands, as the Laws themselves Testify, and

Secondly, But finding this too weak a Balance, they then Settled and
Established a standing British Army for the British further Security.

9. Since the Reformation of Religion the Romish Clergy have Improved that
Innate Hatred of the Irish to the British, to a higher Elevation than before,
as was too Evident in their last Rebellion in 1641, of which the Acts of
Settlement and Acts of Attainder in the Reigns of Charles the First, and
Charles the Second, are Records to future Ages.

The said Clergy having assumed to themselves an Absolute Sovereignty over the
Consciences, Lives and Estates, of the Natives of their Communion, have most
Zealously Imposed and Infused such Principles, as are most suitable and
conducing to their own Ends, and to the Ignorance and Barbarity of the deluded
Natives. As

1. That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. 2. That there is but one Church,
and that is the Roman Catholic Church, 3. That the said Church, like Noah's
Ark, those only are saved that are in it, and all lost that are without it. 4.
That they must believe as the Church believes. 5. That the Priests are this
Church. 6. That the Priests have the Keys of Heaven, Hell and Purgatory, and
they shut and open them as they please. 7. That the Priest's Absolution is
God's Absolution. 8. That Obedience to the Church, viz. the Priests, is better
then Sacrifice to God. 9. That Disobedience is worse then the Sin of
Witchcraft, and was the Sin of Corah, Dathan and Abiram. 10. That the
Protestants are all Excomunicated Heretics. 11. That they are all Secluded
Heaven. 12. That Dominion and Propriety are founded in Grace, and that
Protestants having not Grace, have no Right to Either. 13. That Protestants are
all Workers of Iniquity, and ought to be destroyed, and that it is no more Sin
to Kill a Heretic, ( viz. a Protestant,) then to Kill a Mischievous Dog. 14.
That an Oath taken on a Protestant Bible, is no more obliging, than if taken on
AEsop's Fables. 15. That Private Christians are not to Dispute Matters of
Religion, but are to receive that Knowledge from their Priests. 16. That the
Priests and not the People, are accountable to God for the Peoples Mistakes in
matters of Religion. 17. That the Priests Pronouncing the Words of Consecration
make a piece of Bread to be a God.
And lastly, That Private Christians ought not to have, read or keep, a Bible.

These and many other as Dangerous and Destructive Principles, appears not only
to be held and believed by these Ignorant and Barbarous People, but are proved,
and that by a Reverend and no less Learned a Prelate then the present Bishop of
Lincoln, to be the Doctrines and Practices of the Papists, and Cannons of
their Church, and are very suitable to Urbanus Octavus his Bull for,
Consecrating the Horrid and Bloody Rebellion in 1641.

As is the Fountain, such must be the Streams,
As is the Tree, such must be the Fruit.
A Learned Subtle and United Clergy, Imposing and Improving these and the like
Principles into an Illerate, Immoral, Loose and Barbarous, People, Biased with
Prejudice and Malice against the Persons, Professions and Laws, of the Crown
of England, as they must needs advance the Irish Papists, as aforesaid, to the
highest Elevation of Biggotry, so it must needs render them unable and
incapable to receive any Places of Trust and Power from a Protestant Prince, or
to Exercise it over a Protestant People.

From whence it Naturally follows, 1. That all Places of Trust and Power in the
Kingdom of Ireland must be put into the hands of Protestants, and 2. That the
Numbers of these Biggotted Irish Papists being so disproportionable, and their
Hatred against the British Protestants so Irreconcilable, it further appears,
as aforesaid, that the British cannot be safe in Ireland without a good
standing Protestant Army for their constant Security. 3. That this Army put
into the hands of Sober, Virtuous, Discreet and Experienced, Officers, will not
only be a Security to the Protestants there, but a Seminary to the Crown of
England, whence, as occasion offers, may be drawn good Officers and Soldiers.
4. That in the Kingdom of Ireland are many fixed and Established Garrisons,
which the Government usually granted for Life, with considerable Revenues,
Fees, and other Perquisits, over and above the Establishment of their Pay. 5.
That the Officers of the Army have usually had the Addition of Civil Employs,
which are many times more Beneficial then their Military Offices, and given
them to make their Persons and Employs the more Considerable in their
respective Stations, which said Employs upon Enquiry will be found to be many
in Number, as well as Considerable in point of Profit, and may be Reduceable to
these following Heads, 1. Officers or Dependants on the Chief Governor and
State. 2. Officers or Dependants on the Courts of Judicature. 3. Officers or
Dependants on the Army. 4. Officers or Dependants on the King's Revenue. 5.
Officers or Dependants on the Church. 6. Officers or Dependants on the
respective Counties, Cities, Towns Corporate and Buroughs.



1. As to the Officers and Dependants on the Chief Governor and State in
Ireland, they are in a great measure the same with those of the King and State
in England, and at a moderate Calculation cannot be less than two hundred.

2. Tke Officers and Dependants on the Courts of Judicature, are also much the
same with those of England, and are more than four hundred.

3. The Officers and Dependants on the standing Army, Garrisons, Train of
Artillery, and Stores, are not less than five hundred.

4. The Officers and Dependants on the Kings certain and casual Revenue,
including the P^rrogative, Admiralty, and Post Office, are best computed from
the Annual Charge of the Crown, which is to them more than forty thousand
pounds per Annum, and are not less in number than 400 Employs.

5. As to the Officers and Dependants on the Church, it is well known that the
whole Kingdom is divided into 22 Diocesses, each Diocese has his Bishopric;
the 4 Provinces have each of them an Archbishop, with about 2508 Parishes,
with their respective Dignitaries, which though inferior in number to those in
England, yet what they have is near equal in value, and settled by Law as in
England, and cannot have less than Employs for 3000 Persons, who must be all
Protestants.

6. The number of the respective Counties, Cities, Towns Corporate, and
Buroughs, Employs, are best known by the Survey of the whole Kingdom, which is
near equal to England, ( Wales excepted) and consists of 32 Counties, beside
the Counties of the respective Cities, each County having several Towns
Corporate, and all Judicial and Ministerial Employments with several distinct
Revenues of Houses, Lands, Fees, and other Perquisites to support the Dignities
of their respective Communities and their Officers, which being the highest and
only places of Trust, and Power in the said respective Counties, Cities, Towns
Corporate and Buroughs, of the Kingdom, must be presumed to have a suitable
Support, and cannot be in Number less then Eight Hundred.

So that the whole Number of the said Employs in Church and State appears to be
more then 5300 Places of Reputation, Trust. Power, and plentiful Support, viz.
to the Church 3000, and to the State 2300, which must be all put into the hands
of Protestants, though the Irish Papists should be so wise as to submit on the
10th of April, 1689, to the Terms held forth in the King and Queens Declaration
to all their Loving Subjects in that Kingdom, bearing Date at White Hall the
22d of February, 1688.

But in case of their Refusal, there will be a much greater Encouragement to
the Protestant Officers and Soldiers who are or shall be Engaged in the War,
as appears by the following particulars,

1. The Irish Papists having had the favor of the two last Kings, by Donations
and Restaurations, are much Richer now, then in the Year 1641. 2. The greatest
part of their Lands, having been Improved by the British, and when so
Improved, taken from them and given the Irish, were lately of much greater
Vallew then in 1641 3. The said Irish are now in possession as of their own
Right, of near Four Millions of Acres of the best Land, and best Improved, in
that Kingdom. 4. The said Lands with the Improvements cannot be of less Vallew
then 8 Millions of Pounds. 5. The Forces agreed on by the House of Commons the
19th of March, 1688. to be forthwith Raised, being put into Sober and
Experienced Officers Hands, and that Army well Paid and Governed, may with
God's Blessing, in all probability, in Twelve Months time Reduce and Recover
that Kingdom. 6. The whole Charge of that Army in Twelve Months cannot amount
unto half a Million of Pounds, which is ^ot a 16th of what will be got by the
said Conquest, which is less then the Protestants have already lost, and the
Irish Papists got, by plundering Houses and Stock off of Lands, besides the
fall of Rents and Devastation of Plantations. 7. The Kings Majesty, whose Word
is as Sacred as his Office, has by the Declaration, aforementioned, assured to
all such Officers and Soldiers as shall be Aiding and Assisting in the
Reducing the said Kingdom, that all Lands and Estates that by Law shall by that
Rebellion be forfeited to Him, shall be distributed and disposed unto the said
Army.
So that the Soldiery having good Pay, a Prospect of these Lands, and an
Assurance of the aforesaid Civil Employs, let a Scrutiny be make into all the
Military Services in Christendom, and see it thence can be Extracted one
Instance of Parallel, or equal Encouragement to this War of Reducing Ireland.

It is too sadly known that the British received all Imaginable
Discouragement, and the Irish all Imaginable Favor, since the Year 1660, the
respective Chief Governors public Instructions being to favor the English,
but their private and more effectual Instructions was still to favor the
Irish; yet not withstanding those Varieties of Discouragements it is well
known, that such has been the Sobriety and Industry even of many of the
private Soldiers both of Horse and Foot in the late General Cromwells Army,
that they were before the present Popish Government under Tyrconnell possessed
of Considerable Estates real personal, and also in Considerable Public Employs
in that Kingdom; and that which is yet more Remarkable, and as equally True,
is, That when some of the late Governors in Compliance with their private
Instructions put several English out and Irish into Places of Trust and Power,
they found the said Irish so unable and incapable to manage them that they were
forced, against their Wills, as well as their private Instructions, to return
them into the British or English hands, from whence they took them. Such of
the Irish as were Sober, Industrious, and Men of Estates, were much better
satisfied that those Imploys were returned into English hands, then to have had
them continued in the Irish. And that which is more Remarkable, is, That our
present Gracious Sovereign King William, Acting his own Principles, by making a
Law for Ease of Tender Consciences, and an (...) of Registry to Secure
Property, and frequently Inspecting the Execution of the Judicial and
Ministerial Officers, Examining the Records of the Respective Offices,
Moderating and Asserting their Respective Fees, and placing all, as ought by
Law, in British Protestants Hands, receiving and reinforcing the Laws made
against Vagabonds and Idle Persons, and requiring Justices of Peace, persuant
to Law, to put forth to Trades such of the Natives Children as are unable to
put them forth themselves, and thereby Encouraging Trade and Manufactury in the
respective Counties, Cities and Towns, of that Kingdom, and not suffer the
Trade of the Three Kingdoms for to Interfere or Oppress each other, the wide
Breaches now made upon the Protestants will soon be repaired in that Kingdom,
the Expensive Charge of the War soon repaid, and Ireland which h^^^ hitherto
been a Charge and Bu^then to England, may for the future be made a place of
great Advantage both to the British Crown, and British People, and afford
better Encouragements to Industrious and Sober Persons then any of our Foreign
Plantations, it being Demonstrable, That as little Encouragement as was
received under the Government of the Two last Kings, it is clear, that Cent per
Cent profit with ease has been made of Money in that Kingdom, and that by the
common and commonly known ways of Graseing Cattle, he that would but disburse
100 l in Lean Cattle about the Month of May, might well raise that 100 l to a
150 l in November following, though Beef the bell, and Mutton, were both
ordinarily then Sold in the public Markets for one Halfpenny a Pound, and
sometimes less; and in case the said Grasier would keep the said Cattle in
House, and feed them well Winter, his Money with ease might be doubled before
the May following, it being frequently known that the very Hides and Tallow
would clear the Price of Buying in, and the Charge of Feeding, the said Cattle.

To which may be added, as a further Encouragement, the great Plenty of
Provisions, and the Cheapness thereof, for Support of Life, etc. for, that in
Ireland a much better Table may be kept for 100 l a Year, then in England for
300 l To which also may be sub-joined, as a further Encouragement, that should
Ireland be recovered by another Conquest, it might probably make for the
greater Advantage of the British Interest, Estimating the Vallew of Forfeited
Lands by the Acts of Decimo Septimo, and Decimo Octavo, Caroli Primi and
Secundi, its manifest that the highest Vallew of Inheritance was 500 l (by
those Acts,) for 1000 Irish Acres, which is 50 l each 100 Acres, and each 100
Acres Irish contains about 160 English Measure; which having the Addition of
one Third more of Lands given in as unprofitable, makes the whole near 200
Acres English Measure, which if commonly Pasturable may well Feed 100 Head of
Cattle every Year. And they being Grased and Fed as aforesaid, may at the Years
end well yield 200 l and in case the Land be commonly Arable, the advantage may
be demonstrated to be much higher, so that half the Years Profit of 100 Acres
of Pasturable Land may Purchase the Inheritance, and pay the Grasier one Moiety
of his principle Money. Besides all which it is well known, That Thousands of
Acres of Bog-Land, set forth to Soldiers and Adventurers as unprofitable, and
without any Consideration allowed, or Rent reserved, was Included in their
several Lots; that since, with an inconsiderable Charge in Draining thereof,
are become the best and most valuable Land in the Kingdom, and there are yet
many Thousand Acres of Land now capable of the same Improvement.

And Lastly, Though the last Rebellion continued Thirteen Years in that
Kingdom, cost and lost many Millions of Pounds, (as appears by a 6 d Book
lately Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old Baily, and Entitled, The State of the
Papist and Protestant Proprieties in the Kingdom of Ireland, etc.) and Reduced
the Lands not to a Moiety of the aforesaid Vallew, yet it is rationally
presumed, that with the aforesaid Forces, Managed as aforesaid, and under that
sober strict Discipline as the late General Cromwell's Army was in that
Kingdom, its not way doubted but the same Conduct will have the same Success,
and the Lands left in a much better Condition by this, then by the former
Rebellion, especially, if one Principle can be but effectually persued,
observed and believed, now, as was then, That no Sober nor Serious Person could
be a Coward, and no Vain or Frothy Hector Truly Valiant, which did not only
appear True by the Success of that Army, but by the differing Conduct, and
differing Success, of Two Armies of a later Date.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by T. Moore in White-Fryers, 1689.


