Great STRAFFORDS FAREVVELL To the World: Or his VLTIMVM VALE To all earthly
Glory.

Written by his own Hand in the Tower, and left behind him for his friends or
foes to peruse and consider.

Thomas Earl of Strafford L Leutenant of Ireland.
depiction of Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford

Printed in the year 1641.

Great Straffords farewell to the world: Or, his Vltimum Vale to all earthly
GLORY.
YOu whose great birth, and favor with your Prince,
May make you dream you can all truth convince;
You whose ambitious thoughts do still aspire,
And being at the highest, would be higher:
Observe my life and death, I pray you all,
And shun my folly to avoid my fall.
I once was great and greatly in esteem,
But time misspent I cannot now redeem;
I had preferment, learning, wit and Law,
These did advance me, but withal withdraw
My native goodness from me, so that I
Grew worse and worse, by growing dignity.
The Be and Spider have a different power,
For note their nature, from the self same flower
The one sucks honey, the other poison draws,
And thus men fare in Gods or humane Laws;
Good wits judge well, the bad make ill construction,
The latter turns to many a man's destruction.
I knew enough, less would have been more fit,
Unless I Would had more grace to govern it;
My wit and learning made me too too proud,
And under greatness many sins to shroud;
I have (although it gave not all content)
Long time contested with a Parliament.
I have been long under Sir Williams hands,
Troublesome to the Guard and the train Bands;
Times ancient Chronicles read over and see,
You Will hardly find a president like me;
But what is become of all my wit and skill?
I must bid all farewell at Tower hill.
And I must die in open public show,
That discontented people all may know,
When I am gone and being once appeased,
Hevens grant they may of all their grief be eased;
The author I have been of many a fault,
But some will yet survive, that made me hault.
He that my light and lantern should have bin,
To lead me from, did draw me unto sin;
His promises and protestations large,
Made me forget my God, my self, my charge;
My greatness wanting goodness now is come,
Unto a heavy, headless mortal doom.
Ah! why should great men greater wish to be?
As if they thirsted all for Majesty?
Is not a Princes grace, a grace proficient?
Is not a Princes favor held sufficient?
Yes next to Gods, but here is the counter-buffe,
Some great ones think they never have enough.
Some lately placed very near the King,
Have had such honor time and chance did bring,
Such dignities on them have been conferred,
As that no subjects have been more preferred;
But what of that? if they had yet had more,
They that are never content, are still most poor.
How woeful now am I? once one of them
Who dreamt of something like a Diadem.
How wretched is that man that late did hope,
Perhaps to wear the Miter, and be Pope?
Where are those other two that were so great?
They scarce could have a more Majesticke seat.
Some of them are escaped (God knows whither)
So far men judge, they will never return back hither;
Some of them are in hold, my self am one,
Who have just cause to grieve, lament and moan;
I often have been tossed from post to pillar,
It Is hard when as the fore horse must go thiller.
Proud Haman deemed himself much more then man
But Hester of the King such favor wan,
That all the devilish plots by Ham^n laid,
Were found, discovered, frustrate, and made void;
The fatal tree for Mordecay set up,
Proud Hamans death, he tasted first that cup.
This Haman doubtless was a favorite,
Did sway the King sometimes against the right,
He did intend and had commissions sent,
To cut believers off incontinent;
But God by Hester did prevent the same,
And Hamans project, turned to his shame.
Achitophell was likewise held so dear,
That David's Court did hardly yield his Peer;
He was a privy Councellor, and sat
Where matters always handled were of state;
Nevertheless this great man did conspire
Against David's throne, selfe-hanging was his hire.
The fall of many favorites in times past,
Does not one jot make some men now aghast;
When once they are advanced and in great place,
They quickly slight their God and Princes grace;
When they have power to do even what they will,
They Will do small good, yet would be greater still.
I wonder and admire men should forget
Their God, their King, themselves, and that same net
Which truth has laid to catch all falsehood in,
This blind stupidity does cause much sin:
This was my fault, this caused all my error,
This filled me first with pride, but now with terror.
What have the Minions of all former times
Gained with their honors, but a clog of crimes?
Has not their policy and vain ambition,
Brought them at last unto a low condition?
Yes, and their dignities had better far
Bin given unto some Swain that drives the car.
Why then should men so often wish in vain?
Why should men plod, project and spend their brain?
Why should men fill their hearts so full of care?
And all to build up Castles in the air?
What are vain hopes? but like a blast of wind,
Only conceived to perplex the mind.
Our hopes and haps, do for the most part vary,
Our wishes and the events, prove quite contrary;
Our thoughts run most on that which most we crave,
Which peradventure we shall never have;
This proverb old is written in Times hall,
Proud men may rise, but pride will have a fall.
This I have tried and found true in my self,
For notwithstanding all my worldly pelf,
Yet I perceive there is no trust in man,
The life even of a King is but a span:
What is man's love, when God in anger frowns?
Subjects should never dream of earthly Crowns.
When Lucifer was placed up on high,
Almost above Angellique Majesty;
When he amongst all Angels was the prime,
He then would needs above his Maker climb;
But how did God his proud presumption quell?
He cast him down to be a devil in hell.
Give unto Alexander Kingdoms store,
Give him even all the world, he will wish for more;
Give Midas his own wish, that all he touch
May turn to gold, yet he has never too much;
No dignity, no earthly riches can,
Content or please the avaritious man.
I had (I do confess) at least in part,
Knowledge of Tongues, the ground of every Art;
I was my Kings I ieutenant or Viceroy,
I^ arms and arts I did my self employ:
I was indeed advanced too too high,
I reigned, I ruled, I raged in tyranny.
I daily did endeavor to subvert
The fundamental Laws; I did pervert
Justice and equity, by fines and tax
I sought to make the Law a nose of wax;
My power was great, even reaching to a Crown,
But want of thankfulness has brought me down.
Men's highest fortunes like a watery bubble,
At biggest break, mean while most full of trouble;
But now in full assurance, I rely,
Upon the alsufficient Majesty
Of God above, there lies my faith and hope,
Living and dying, I defy the Pope.
God bless the King my sovereign Lord and Master,
His Queen and offspring heavens keep from disaster;
God bless both houses of the Parliament,
Give them united hearts with full content;
God bless their counsels and proceedings all,
That virtue may be raised, vice may fall.
I do confess I have deserved death,
And willingly submit to lose my breath;
The world I freely with my heart forgive,
Since all must die, why should I wish to live?
I justly die by the Law, fame ring my knell,
Earths fading pomp adieu, vain world farewell.
FINIS.

