MEMENTO's TO THE WORLD; OR, An Historical Collection of diverse Wonderful
Comets and Prodigious Signs in Heaven, that have been seen, some long before
the Birth of Christ, and many since that time in diverse Countries, with their
wonderful and dreadful Effects.

Together, with ample Discourses, and profitable Observations, upon that
admirable Star which appeared at the Birth of Christ, to the Eastern MAGI.

As also upon that Comet which appeared in the Constellation of Cassiopea,
after the horrid Massacre of the French-Protestants, Anno 1572. And several
other Comets, with their Effects to this present time.

By W. G. Minister of the Gospel.

LIKEWISE, STELLA NOVA; OR, The New STAR, Or, An Account of the Natural
Signification of the COMET, or Blazing-Star, That has so long been Visible in
ENGLAND, and other Countries, and is yet hanging over our Heads.

By William Knight, Student in Astrology.

Men in vain did never gaze,
When a Comet in the Heavens blaze.
Printed by T. Haly, for T. Passinger, at the Three Bibles, on London Bridge,
1680.

To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
My Lord,
IDedicate unto you this Historical Collection, or Catalogue of Comets, and
other prodigious Appearances and Signs in Heaven: These are the Torches and
Voices of God speaking and Preaching out of Heaven: for not only his Majesty is
in a lively manner set forth unto us, in the Generation, Magnitude, Figure, and
Motion of these Bodies, but also something is propounded to be further learned
by them; for whatsoever does not come to pass after the usual manner, although
it has Natural causes, yet it altogether portendeth something or other, and is
put for a Sign of certain Events.

Therefore let us neither despise nor deride these fore-Messengers of the Lord;
neither let us imitate Vespasian the Emperor, of whom Suetonius relates in his
Life, That when a Comet had been showed unto him, he answered jestingly, that
That Hairy Comet, or Prodigy, did belong to the King of the Parthians, who
nourished long Hair: As if he had said, It appears not to me, because I am
not Hairy; But he was suddenly punished for his Insolence, for he dyed shortly
after; admonishing us by his Example, That it is better sporting with any thing
than with the Works of God.

It is a great contempt of an Artificer, if he set before us an admirable piece
of Work, and we will not behold nor regard it, the contempt of the Creature
redoundeth unto the Creator. Let us therefore imitate the Emperor Ludovious
Pius, Son of Charles the Great; for when he had beheld a great Comet, and
Egmundus the Astrologer being unwilling to make him sad, alleged those words
of Jeremiah, Be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are
dismayed at them, Jerem. 10. 2. He devoutly Answered, Let us fear the maker of
this Comet, not the Comet it self; and let us praise his clemency, who seeing
we are sinners, reproves our sluggishness by these signs.

It is Gods clemency before he punishes us, to send some Messengers to fore
warn us. Herodotus says, When God is about to punish a City or Nation, he is
wont first of all to signify it by Signs and wonders. And a certain famous
Astronomer thus writes; As God is affected toward us, the Stars in his stead
do shine as the Face and Eyes of God, that in them, as in a Glass, we may be
able to see what shall come to pass. Moreover, these Signs are Looking-Glasses
of Gods wrath, who speaks to us not only by Man's Tongue, by Prophets,
Apostles, and Ministers, but sometimes also by the Elements themselves,
composed into diverse forms and Images for the terror of Men: That the Name of
God is near, (that is the Wisdom, Power, Goodness of God) his wondrous Works do
declare to all judicious beholders; better it were for us not to see the works
of God, than not to have a sight of God in them: Now that all Gods Works may
lead us unto God himself, is the Prayer of

Your Lordships most Affectionate Servant, VV. G.

Memento's to the world.
IN the year of the world 3854 upon Demetrius his death, there appeared a Comet
no less in show than the Sun. At first the Orb was fiery and ruddy, and casting
a clear light, whereby the night was enlightened. Senec. nature. quest. l. 7.
ca. 15.
Afterward it began to lessen in bigness, and it is brightness vanished, and at
last quite disappeared. This was a little before the Achauk war.

In the same year that Mithridates was born there appeared a great Comet. The
very same does Seneca speak of.

In the time of Attlus his reign, there appeared a Comet at first but small;
but afterward it elevated and spread it self, Justin. lib. 37. (...).
and came as far as the Equinoctial Circle: so that its extent equalized that
Region of the heaven which we call the milky way. There also appeared another
Comet in the first year of the Reign of Mithridates, which shined so bright
night and day for LXX days together, that the whole heaven seemed to be all on
fire. For, both the Tail of it covered the fourth part of the Heaven (or 45
degrees of the upper Hemisphere) and outvyed the Sun in brightness: and also
it is rising took up the space of four hours, This happened in the year of the
world, 3881.

In the year from the building of the City of Rome, 480 blood was seen to issue
from the earth, and milk to slow from heaven in the likeness of rain. A great
Pestilence followed in the City; and the number of those that perished was more
than those that remained alive.

Three Suns appeared the next day after the death of Julius Caesar, which by
little and little were brought back into one solar body.

In the year of the world 3960, on the 14 Kalends of May, Octavianus having
heard of Caesar's death, came to Naples, and as he was coming to Rome, a vast
company of his friends met him, and when he entered the City, the Globe of the
Sun seemed upon his head equally bent, and Vellieus lib. 2. ca. 59.
rounded like a bow (as it were putting a Crown upon the head of him that
hereafter was to be so great a man. And Julius Obsequens de prodigiis, says;
when he entered the City with a great multitude about him, the Sun being
included in the round of a pure and unclouded sky, comp^ssed about with the
utmost part of the Circle (as the Rainbow is wont to be bent in the Clouds)
namely, a Circle of diverse Senec. nature. quaest. lib. 2. ca. 28.
Colors, as is wont to be in the Rainbow, did at that time compass about the
Sun, as it is in Seneca.

In the year of the world 3960, on the VI Kalends of October, Octovianus, to
gain the peoples favor, made those plays that were instituted for the
finishing of Venus's Temple, at his own charges, as pertaining to him, by
reason he came from that stock, and which some during Caesar's Dio. lib. 45
lifetime had undertook that they should solemnize, but yet neglected them.
Which whilst he was setting forth, Seneca shows. That a Comet suddenly brak
forth, where Senec. nature. quaest. lib. 7. ca. 17.
he relates these words of Octavianus himself. In the very days of my Plays
(says he) there was a Comet seen seven days together in the North-part of the
heaven: it arose about the eleventh hour of the day, it was clear and
conspicuous S^^ton. in Julio. ca. 88.
in all lands. The people then generally thought, that by this Star was
signified Caesar's soul to be received into the number of the Gods. And under
that notion was that mark added to the Image of his head, that we (says he)
newly consecrated in the market place; which is also to be seen in some Coyns
that were stamped after his death, with the Inscription. DJVL JULII, and
signified in that Aemed. 8.
of Virgil, Thy fathers Star appeared in the North.

Dio reports, that many Prodiges fore-ran the bondage of Egypt under the
Romans; for it rained (as he says) in Dio. lib. 51. page 445.
those places, in which before there never any drop had fallen, and that not
only with water, but with blood also; neither did water alone drop from the
clouds, but there appeared Armies there also. A Dragon of an huge vastness was
suddenly seen among the Egyptians, which hissed horribly: there appeared also
Comets, and the images of the dead: the Statues seemed to be sorrowful, and
Apis made a mournful lowing, and shed tears.

Of the Star that appeared to the Eastern Magi after the birth of Christ.
One notable consequent of Christ's birth was the apparition of a Star unto the
wise men of the East, the Magi of Persia; whereby it was manifested unto them,
that there was born a king of the Jews; which, (doubtless) the Spirit of God
did reveal unto them by his inward light, without which this starlight had not
been sufficient. These wise men were such as had knowledge in Astronomy, and
such profound Sciences, which the ordinary sort were unacquainted with. But
they had as much need of Christ as the poor Shepherds of Bethlehem. Hereupon
they take an exceeding long journey to visit, yea to worship an infant, which
to the eye of the world was of a poor despised estate; for now at his birth
there was no room for him in the Inn. These Eastern Magi, or
Privy-Counsellours to the King of Persia, (as is probable) come to the Court of
the king of Judah, and there they ask the Question; Where is he that is born
king of the Jews; for we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to
worship him, Math. 2. Strange news in a Princes Court, that men of that dignity
of a Country so far distant, and of that wisdom and learning, should come to
worship a Child that was born king of the Jews, a people sometime in Captivity
under the Persian State, and now in likelihood despised by them, and that his
Star should appear unto them in their own Country.

The Gentile Prophet Balaam Prophesied, that there should arise a Star out of
Jacob, etc. Numb. 24. 17. and Zoroastres Justin. lib. 1.
king of the Bactrians, a man excellent in all learning, left this as a
Tradition among the Gentiles. And afterward it was was more plainly published
by the Sybiles, that a Day Star should appear before the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness, This was fresh among the Gentiles until the coming of Christ;
for Virgil (though misapplying the same) says, Ecce Dionaei praec^ss^t
Caesaris astrum. Rightly applied thus; That the glorious Star long expected
should precede, and foreshew the coming of the Messiah, Yet Fulgentius says,
Puer natus novam Stell^m fabricav^t, Christ being born did of nothing frame
this new Star. Fulgent. (...). 2. oper. imperfect. in Math. ^ 2.
His Star, because he made it, and his Star because it bare witness of him; for
the Magi being upon the mountain Victorialis worshipping their God (as
Chrysostom says) a Star did appear unto them in the similitude of a little
Child, and so showed unto them and to all others, that this Child, even the Son
of God was born. And as the Poet says,

This Star still shining through the heavens does glide,
And to the Sun which never sets does guide.
This star was no common star, For,

1. All stars (as we see) are carried from the East into the West, but this
went from the East into the South, for Palestine stands Southward from Persia.

2. A star loses his light in the daytime, the Sun a greater light obscuring
it but this star was seen night and day, becoming the more bright in the midst
of the Sun's bright shining.

3. This Star shined not continually; but intermiting for a certain time
appears again. They saw it all the way till they came to Palestine, as the
guide of their journey. But when they were come to Herod, it was hidden, and
then it appeared again: when they stood still, it stood still, being ordered
for the best benefit of them in their journey. And being instructed at
Jerusalem, that Bethlehem was the place where Christ should be born; the
wisemen hereupon go to Bethlehem, and there by the conduct of the star they
find the Babe and his mother, and down they fall and worship him, and forth
they bring their presents, or gifts, of Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

When they had heard the king (who charged them to go, and bring him word when
they had sound the young Child, (...)
etc.) they departed, and Lo the star which they saw in the East, went before
them, and stood over where the young Child lay. Either (it seems) this star
appeared unto them being in the East, and then vanished out of their sight
(which is probable) because it is said, The star which they saw in the East, or
else, it ceased to be seen when they came to Jerusalem, when they saw the star,
they rejoiced with exceeding great joy, Math. 2. 10. The star did but appear
before, now it goes leisurely (as it were) and directs them in their way to
the house where the Babe lay. This star (as one observes) was not placed where
the rest of the stars are, but in the lower Region of the Air, for otherwise
they could not have known by it the place where Christ was, seeing that a star
by reason of the great height, seems to be over one house as well as another
within a great Compass. Moreover it is noted, that this star went and stood
over the place where Christ was.

One observes, To Bethlehem the Magi come to make enquiry after Christ, whom
none ever sincerely sought but Fullers Pisgah sight. lib. 2 cap. 14.
they found him.

This star by moving (probably in the low Region of the Air,) shows them
their way, by standing still at the end of their journey; Coming into the house
they find the Royal Babe, and present him with gifts.

Of other great Lights, Comets, and Ominous Stars, etc. appearing after the
birth of Christ.
Saul breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, obtains of the High Priest Annas, (as it is Act. 4. 6.) and the Council,
of which he was then President, letters to the Synagogue of Damascus, that if
he found any that were Christians, he should bring them bound to Jerusalem,
that they might be punished. And as he came nigh to Damascus, at midday a light
from heaven, above the brightness of the Sun, shined round about him, and them
that journeyed with him: and when they were all fallen to the earth, he heard a
voice speaking to him in the Hebrew Tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? it is hard for Thee to kick against the pricks, etc..

But the men that journeyed with Saul, were so amazed, that they were
speechless, seeing indeed a light, and hearing a sound of words, but neither
seeing Christ which spoke, nor understanding any thing that he spoke, Act. 9.
1, 7. XXII. 5. 14. XXVI. 12. 18.

Saul arose from the earth, and being blinded with the glory of the light,
being led by the hand, he comes to Damascus, Act. 9. 8. and 22. 11. And he was
three days without sight, and did neither eat nor drink. Ananias being sent
unto Saul, entered into the house, and laying his hands on him, said, Brother
Saul, the Lord Jesus which appeared unto thee in the way as thou came, has
sent me that thou may receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost,
and presently there fell from his eyes as it were scales, and he received his
eye sight forthwith, Act. 9. 9. 18. And Ananias said, The God of our fathers
has chosen Thee, that Thou should know his will, and see that Just one, and
should hear the voice from his mouth; for Thou shall be a witness before all
men of those things that Thou have heard and seen, etc. And Saul arose, and was
baptized, and when he had received meat he was strengthened.

But what was revealed from the Lord to Saul at Damascus that he should do, St.
Luke shows not in the Acts; but out of those things which in the Epistle to
the Galathians he says happened to him immediately after his conversion, it
appears, that among other things it was commanded him that he should not confer
with flesh and blood, nor return to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles
before him, but that he should go for some time into Arabia, or places near
Damascus, where he should receive the knowledge of the Gospel: Not being taught
of men, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 12, 16, 17. Saul then
returns to Damascus, verse 17. and tarries with the Disciples there a few days,
and straitway in the Sinagogue he preached that Christ is the son of God.

Of the Signs that appeared before the destruction of the City and Temple of
Jerusalem by the Romans.
Eusebius says, that Seducers and authors of lies Eusib. Eccles. hist. lib.
3. ca. 8. Joseph. de bello Judaic. lib. 7. ca. 12.
against God, deceived that wretched people of the Jews before the destruction
of the City and Temple at Jerusalem; so that they neither marked those
Prodigious signs foreshewing the desolations to come, nor gave any credit
thereunto; but as astonished, both blind and senseless contemned the divine
demonstrations.

A star stood over the City like a sword, and a Comet enduring the space of a
whole year. Again, at the feast of unleavened bread, on the eighth day of the
month of April (a little before their rebellion and warlike tumult) in the
night at nine of the Clock, so great a light overspread the Altar and the
Temple, that it seemed to be clear day, continuing the space of half an hour.
At the same feast the East gate of the inner Temple, though of brass, and most
strong, so that in the evening twenty men could scarce shut it, being bolted
with iron bars, and strengthened with long posts and pillars: in the nightime
about the sixth hour was seen to have opened voluntarily of it self.

A few days after the feast (viz. May 21.) there was seen the figure and shape
of the Devil. Before Sunset there were seen in the air throughout the
Country, Chariots and armed Soldiers marching in the Clouds, and encompassing
the City round about.

In the feast of Pentecost, when the Priests (after their manner) went into the
Temple in the night season to offer sacrifice; they reported that they heard a
commotion, and a rattling sound with this voice, Migremus hinc, let us go hence.
The afflictions which followed hereupon were correspondent to the signs. Eleven
hundred thousand of the Jews perished in the six months siege of Jerusalem.
But for those that perished out of Jerusalem, Lipsius has made Just. Lips.
lib. 2. de Constant. cap. 21.
a large Catalogue out of Josephus the Jew, who was a commander in that war,
and wrote the History of it, which number of the dead being added to the eleven
hnndred thousand that perished at the siege of Jerusalem, makes up the number
of 1337490. an innumerable company, being ommitted, that perished through
famine, banishment, and other miseries.

Whilst diverse men were plotting and conspiring against the Emperor Domitian;
among other signs which then were seen, there appeared for many days together
round Pedocot. Mexio. histor. Roman. Imperat.
about the Sun a great bright shining Crown, that did compass it about, which
resembled the Rainbow against foul weather, but that was a whole Crown that
did environ the Sun in such manner, as it bereaved and Eclipsed the same of its
brightness. Which signal, men did interpret to signify a change and alteration
in the Empire, with the death of Domitian. And in as much as Stephanus in Greek
signifies a Crown, there were some which conceived, that Stephanus who was
Steward to his wife and Empress Domicilla should kill him, notwithstanding thev
knew nothing of the Conspiracy of Stephanus and others then against him, by
whom he was shortly after slain.

When Constantine the Emperor prepared to sight with Maxentius, and stood in
fear and doubt of the issue of the Battle, as well for the great number of the
Enemies, as for Maxentius his enchantments, wherewith he amazed the World, he
was in great care and perplexity. And as he gave credit to the Christians, and
was their Protector and Defender, (albeit, he was not yet baptized) but had a
firm steadfast hope in Jesus Christ.) Eusebius Cassiodorus, and others write,
That he saw in the Heavens a Lightsome Pillar, of a Fiery Color, in form of a
Cross, and therewith he heard this voice, In hoc signo vinces, ^n, or by virtue
of this sign thou shall overcome. The which Vision so amazed the Emperor, that
he mistrusting his own sight, demanded of them that were present, whether they
perceived the Vision, which when all with one consent had assirmed, the
wavering mind of the Emperor was settled with that wonderful sight, so as he
presently assured himself of Victory, and therefore caused the sign of the
Cross to be made in his Imperial Standard; and joining with the Enemy right
over against Rome, near to a Bridge over the River Tiber, called Pons Milvius,
at the beginning of the fight Maxentius was overcharged by Constamius his
Vantgard, and fled: and entering upon the Bridge which he had made of Barks and
Boats near to the other; both he and his Horse fell into the River, where he
was drowned, which Bridge himself had caused to be made; to the end therewith,
to have deceived his Enemy.

In the days of Sigebert, Chitperic, and Gunthran, Kings of France, certain
Comets and prodigious signs were seen in the Heavens. A fire falling from
Heaven, consumed the City of Orleans (whereof, and the Territory about it,
Gunthran was King) and the City of Bourdeaux, together with the fruits of the
Earth. There followed atmost throughout all France a malignant Cough and bloody
Flux, which destroyed multitudes of men and Women; by which means that evil
Woman Austigildis, Wife of King Gunthran, perished. The said King Gunthran died
within a year following.

After the death of Theodoricus, who had made himself Lord of all Italy, there
appeared many signs in Heaven: In the North the Heaven seemed fiery, and
certain shining Spears were seen, and the Moon was much obscured. And a Comet
appeared at Toulouse.

Terrible signs were seen by Night in Italy in the year of our Lord 570. For
fiery swords appeared in the Heavens, and blood distilled from the Clouds,
which signified the effusion of much blood, which happened afterward, and many
great storms continuing many days. The River Tiber was increased with so great
a force of waters, that many people that lived in low places were drowned. Two
Animals appeared in the form of a Man and Woman, from the Morning till Nine of
the Clock, with long hair hanging down to the Loins. The Water covered their
other parts. And they write, That a Mountain in France, with a great Noise was
cleft asunder.

In the time of the Emperor Justinian the first, (as Procopius writes,) for
the greatest part of one whole year, the Sun gave so little Light, that it was
but equal to, or little more then the Light of the Moon, the Sky being clear,
and without Clouds, or any other thing to shadow the same. And so without any
apparent occasion it was obscured all that time; which (as it was afterward
conjectured) was the Prognostic of the Famine and want of grain, which
generally ensued throughout all the World, and of the Wars and effusion of
Blood which followed in Italy; and of the taking, burning, and destruction of
Rome by Totila.

In the time of the Emperor Heraclius, (who took upon him the Government of
the Empire in the year of our Lord 611.) at Constantinople Fire fell from
Heaven, and there appeared a great Bow in the Heavens, so that Men thought that
the end of the World was at hand, by reason of the great Thundrings and
Lightnings. There followed a most grievous Pestilence, which consumed many in
the Summer Months. And many Prodigies, and dreadful things appeared at this
time in Greece, which seemed to portend the future Calamities under Mahomet.
And in one and the same year a very bright Comet was seen at Constantinople,
and a Child was born with four Feet. And in the Isle Delon, two very great
Monsters were seen, having altogether humane shape. And many other things here
and there like unto this did appear.

In the Reign of the Emperor Constantine IV. an hairy Comet appeared three
Months, which was the forerunner of great Slaughters: And there happened so
many, and so great Tempests and alterations in the air, as it seemed, that the
four Elements had conspired against Mankind; for the Winds were so furious and
violent, as that they overthrew many buildings, and rent up many Trees by the
roots, and the rain likewise was so great, and tempestuous, as it destroyed all
their Tillage, as well for Bread-Corn as all other kinds of Herbs and Seeds.
And therewith fell an infinite number of Thunderbolts, and Fires from Heave,
which slew a great number of Men and Cattle, especially on this side of the
Alps. And after a great Eclipse of the Sun and Moon, the City of Papia was
almost utterly destroyed by a raging Pestilence, so that the People which
survived, fled to the Mountains, and grass grew in the City.

About the time of King Luitprand King of the Lombards, two Comets appeared in
the Month of January, and the Sun was darkened, and lost his light for fifteen
days, whereof one went before the Sun, the other followed it in the Evening.

About the Death of Pope Leo tho third, who crowned and declared Charles the
Great, King of France to be Emperor, a Comet appeared, and the Sun lost his
light for Fifteen days. This Pope died, Anno 816.

In the second year of Lotharius, Son of the Emperor Ludovicus Pius, and
Grandson to Charles the great, there appeared a Comet; Hail of great bigness
fell in France, which slew many men, and much Cattle. There was also seen in
those Hailstones Corn of a wonderful Length; and of an hard substance. An
Earthquake also shook Italy, and in certain places diverse Mountains were
overwhelmed, and diverse Cities perished. Lotharius warred against his brethren
Jews, and Charles; and a great Battle being fought, the Flower of the French
Nobility was slain, and in number more men died, than in any other Battle had
happened in France ever since the Battle which was fought between Ecius and
Attila, King of the Hunnes in the Fields of Catalonia.

About this time, an innumerable Company of Locusts, having six Wings, and two
Teeth harder than stones, covered the Earth in France like Snow. At length
being cast into the Sea, and upon Land by the Shore, there followed great
putrefaction; which infecting the Air, caused a general destruction of men.

In the beginning of the Reign of the Emperor Jews the Second, for three
days it rained Blood at the City of Brescia in Lombardy so fresh, and so
perfect, as if it had been of a Bull, or of some other Beast lately killed.

In the time of Edward the Son of Edgar King of England appeared a Comet, after
which followed a great Dearth and Mortality to men, and murrain upon Beasts,
and there arose a great contention between the Priests and Monks.

In the days of Pope Leo, VII. the Sun seemed to reign blood, as Masseus
writes. and after it followed a great Pestilence among men.

In the first year of Pope Martin III. a great Blazing Star appeared in Italy,
after which followed an extreme Famine. And again, the Sun appeared very
dreadful. Martin died, Anno 947.

A little before the death of the Emperor Otho the Second, many Prodigies
appeared in Italy; for a Stone of wonderful bigness fell from Heaven in the
midst of a great storm and tempest. And the sign of the Cross appeared on the
Garments of many; and some of them were of a bloody color; which many did
interpret to portend great Slaughters, and the Calamity of the Church. In Italy
a Comet of wonderful bigness appeared, presaging the Famine which followed.

In the time of Pope John XVI. appeared a Comet, after which followed both
Famine and Pestilence, with terrible Earthquakes, which shook both Benevent and
Capua. John died Anno 985.

In the third year of the Emperor Henry the Second, a Comet appeared dreadful
to behold, dispersing his Flames hither and thither. And in the seventh year of
his Reign there was a great Eclipse of the Sun, and the Moon seemee to be
turned into Blood; and there was a great Earthquake, and a burning Torch like a
Bow fell from Heaven with great noise; there suddenly followed a great Famine,
and a little after a great Pestilence raged almost all the World over, but
chiefly in Italy, so that the dead were accounted more than the living; And in
Lorrain there was a Fountain turned into Blood.

Henry the Third came to the Empire, Anno 1040* and in his time there was seen
a Fiery Beam of wonderful greatness between the South and the East, running
upon the Sun, which at the Sun setting fell upon the Earth.

In the Reign of Herold King of England, a fearful Comet appeared, which lasted
seven days, the English being now ready for a War.

In the time of King William the Conqueror, a Blazing Star appeared upon Palm
Sunday, being the 16th. of Holinsheds Chronicle in Will. Conqueror.
April, 1076. about six of the Clock, when the Air was fair and clear. About
the same time was a general Earthquake in England, and in the Winter following,
a Frost that continued from the first of November, until the middle of April.

In the time of Baldwin the Second, King of Jerusalem, an unusual Star appeared
the first week in Lent, in the Evening in the South West, and shined at one and
the same hour for Twenty Five days. After this, were seen two Moons a little
before day, one in the East, and the other in the West; and not long after a
Comet putting forth long and flaming Hairs, appeared, which Elmerus the Monk
beholding, said, did threaten the destruction of that Country.

In the year 1094* in the Reign of William Refus, King of England, many hideous
sights were seen in England, as Hosts of Men fighting in the Air, flashes of
Fire, Comets, and falling Stars, and such like Prodigies. And the same year
both England and Normandy were sore vexed with Mortality both of Men and
Beasts, insomuch that Tillage of the Ground was laid aside in diverse places, by
reason whereof there followed great Dearth and Famine.

About the year of our Lord 1100. Fiery Swords appeared in Heaven, which being
dispersed through the whole Heaven, were seen the greatest part of the Night,
and very many Stars seemed to fall from Heaven upon the Earth. And the smoke
went out with an hissing, as by Waters poured upon it. A most sharp Winter
followed, and a great Famine followed it, and a Mortality of Men, and murrain
of Beasts, both Wild and Tame; and Birds fighting together in great Numbers,
destroyed one another; Moreover, a great Earthquake in Italy lasted the space
of Forty days; so that diverse Towns and Villages were overthrown. And the Moon
being in an Eclipse, was turned into a bloody color. And a Woman brought forth
a Monster, having a double Body, having also before the Face of a Man, and
behind the Face of a Dog. About this time died Johannes de Temporibus, who had
been an Esquire to the Emperor Charles the Great, having lived 361 Years.

In the Seventh year of Henry the First, King of England, upon a Friday night
in the first week in Lent, there was seen a strange Star between the South and
the West, which appeared every Night at an hour, and so continued for the space
of Twenty Five days; and over against that Star out of the East appeared a
great and bright Beam, which stretched it self toward the said Star. And not
long after were seen two Moons, one in the East, the other in the West.

In the Thirteenth year of the same Kings Reign, at Fabian. Chronicle.
Shrewsbury was a great Earthquake, and at Nottingham from Morning until
Evening. The River of Trent was so dried up, that men went over on foot dry.
Thereupon followed an hard VVinter, great Mortality of People, and scarcity of
Victuals by reason of the great murrain of Beasts. A Comet, or Blazing Star
appeared in a strange form, for rising in the East, when once it came aloft in
the Firmament, it kept not its course forward, but seemed to go backward, as if
it had been retrograde.

About the year 1157 three Suns appeared together in the West; after two hours
the other sailing, that which was in the middle did also set. After the same
manner in the next year three Moons appeared, and in the middle of one the sign
of the Cross. These signs were interpreted by some to be a token of the
grievous discord of the Cardinals in the Election of the Pope; and of the
Princes in the Election of the Emperor. Earthquakes about this time where
almost every where, and did shake some Provinces many years, especially Syria,
and Silicia* in which many Cities did long shake, and some of them were
overwhelmed with great destruction of People.

In the third year of John, King of England, there were seen in Yorkshire five
Moons; one in the East, the second in the West, the third in the North, the
fourth in the South, and the fifth (as it were) set in the midst of the other,
having many Blazing Stars about it, and went five or six times encompassing the
other, as it were the space of one hour, and shortly after vanished away. The
following VVinter was extremely cold, more than the natural course had been
aforetime; and in the Spring time there fell such abundance of Rain, as caused
the Rivers to swell with higher floods then they had been accustomed, which
caused great inundations. This Kings Reign was full of troubles; Pope Innocent
III. Excommunicated and deposed him, and put England in interdict, bestowed it
upon Philip August, King of France, upon condition of Conquering it, and
afterward takes off the Interdict, receives homage from King John, and makes
England a fee of the Roman See, and that King his Vassal.

In the year of our Lord 1256* in the Reign of King Henry III. many wonders
happened. A Comet appeared; the Sea rose with most high Tides; Rivers were so
filled with abundance of water by reason of the great and continued Rain, that
wonderful Floods followed therethereupon; and many high Buildings were beaten
down by the force of Tempests.

In the same Kings Reign, there appeared a Comet very dreadful to behold, for
the space of 30 days together. Moreover on the Coast of England, there was a
great Battle among the Fishes of the Sea, so that there were eleven Whales cast
on Land, beside other huge and monstrous Fishes, which appeared to be dead of
some hurts received: And one of those mighty Fishes coming into the Thames
alive, was pursued by the Fisher men, and it could scarce pass through the
Arches of London Bridge. At length with Darts and other such Weapons, they slew
him before the Kings Manor at Mortlack whither they followed him. There was
also a great sound heard the same Year in sundry parts of England at one and
the same time, as if it had been the noise of some mighty Mountain that had
fallen into the Sea.

A Comet of notable magnitude appeared in the Heavens in the Year 1263, rising
from the East, above three Months with great brightness, and did send forth his
rays to the midst of Heaven, setting toward the West: When he first appeared
Pope Urban IV* began to be Sick, but in the same Night that Urban Dyed, he
began to disappear.

Soon after the Corronation of Edward I. King of England, there happened such an
Earthquake with Lightning and Thunder, and therewithal the appearing of a
Burning-Drake, and a Blazing-Star, or Comet, that the people were filled with
great fear and astonishment.

In the time of Wenceslaus the Third, King of Bohemia, there Appeared in the
Heaven a large Comet, which did presage the great Destruction which followed;
in which Year upon Saint Andrew's Day there happened a great Earthquake, which
lasting diverse Days by Intervals, overthrew many Buildings.

In the Year 1314, Three Moons Appeared together in the Heaven, and a Comet was
seen in the North, which lasted Three Months: It vanishing, in the same Year in
the Month of November, Phillip King of France dyed, a Boar breaking the Legs of
his Horse as he was Hunting, he fell from his Horse, of which fall he dyed
shortly after.

In the Ninth Year of King Edward the Second, before Christmas, a blazing-Star,
or Comet, Appeared in the North part of the Firmament, for the space of a Month
together: After it followed a woeful Famine, for Victuals was so scant and dear,
and other Grain raised to so high a price, that the poor people were
constrained through Famine, to eat the Flesh of Horses, Dogs, and other wild
Beasts, and many starved, having nothing to feed upon throughout the Land.
After this Dearth and scarcity of Victuals, ensued a great Mortality of people;
so that what with the War with the Scots, and with the Famine and Pestilence,
the people of England were wonderfully wasted and consumed.

In the Year 1337, in the Tenth Year of the Reign of King Edward III. a Comet,
or Blazing-Star Appeared with long and terrible Streams passing from it, which
continued thirty Days. Soon after the French burnt South-hampton, which they
almost wholly consumed to Ashes, and did many other mischiefs with their Ships
on the Coasts of England.

In the Year 1351, in the North there Appeared a Comet in the Month of
December, which being extinct, violent Winds followed, and a Celestial Beam
was seen to glide along the Heavens, the former part of it burning. And they
write, that before the Death of Pope Innocent VI. there was so great a
refection of the Sun, as the like had not been before seen.

In the Month of March, in the Year of our Lord 1402, and third Year of Henry
IV. King of England, there Appeared a Blazing-Star, first between the Eastern
part of the Firmament, and the North flashing forth Fire and flames round
about, and lastly, shooting forth Fiery streams toward the North, foreshewing
(as was thought) the great effusion of Blood which followed about the parts of
Wales and Northumberland.

In the Year 1438, there was a great Eclipse of the Sun, and diverse Wars and
Dissentions followed. A Comet also Appeared, and there followed a slaughter of
Men in Liege.

In the Three and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of Henry VI. King of England,
during the Civil Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York, a Comet
Appeared in the Month of June, the Beams whereof extended it self into the
South, of which King Henry and his Son felt the sad effects.

In the Year 1456, a Comet was seen in the East in the month of June, in the
Fifteenth degree of Cancer, a very great Earthquake followed on the 5th Day of
December, at Eleven a Clock at Night; And another on the Thirtieth Day of the
same Month, such as in the memory of Man there had not any where been seen the
like for vehemence; especially in Apulia, Naples, Beneventum, and many other
Cities and Towns round about, many Temples and Palaces, and other Houses, were
overwhelmed, with the Destruction of many Men and Cattle. The like happened at
Cajeta, Capua, Aversa, and the rest of the Cities of old Campania.

In the Year 1457. another followed, which they called a black Comet, in the
Month of June, in the 20 degree of Pisces, which was seen for the space of a
month, and did variously affect the minds of Men.

A great Comet Appeared throughout the month of January, in the beginning of
the Year 1472, in a Fiery color, with long and black hairs bending toward the
West, whose body was about the entrance of Libra; afterward it bended it self
only in the North, that it might be judged that it went out without the
Zodiac, and it continued Fourscore days. But this Comet being scarce
dissolved, another Appeared, of a fiery hair, which seemed to be seated in the
Sign of Aries, and its Tail stretched out it self toward the East: A grievous
Drought followed, and a Pestilence, and most cruel and bloody Wars in many
places.

There were Two Comets seen before the Battle of Crescy in France, where though
the English got a great Victory over the French by the Sword, so it seems (as
our Chronicles do relate) that the Sword of the Destroying Angel slew a
multitude of the English at home.

Phillip the first, King of Spain, and Father to the Emperor Charles V. being
at Tudele of Duero, there Appeared a strange Comet in the Firmament,
foreshewing (as they said afterward) the Approaching Death of King Phillip,
which happened soon after in the City of Burgos, to the general grief of all
his Subjects; the Comet still Appearing, whereunto he did Attribute his Death,
saying often in his pains and agonies, Ha Cometa, ha Cometa. He dyed in the
Year of our Lord, 1506, having Reigned one Year and Ten Months: His Body was
laid many Years after by his Son Charles in the Royal Chapel of Granado,
having remained in diverse places.

In Queen Mary's Reign, in the Year of our Lord, 1556, a Blazing-Star was seen
at all times of the Night, on the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth of
March, a little before the Burning of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Horrid Massacre of the Protestants in France, being Acted August 24, etc.
1572, a Grave Writer relates, That about a quarter of a Year after, Viz.
November 17. there Appeared a Star in the Constellation of Cassiopea, Mirae
magnitudinis, and perspicua luce praefulgida, of Wonderful bigness, and very
resplendent with a perspicuous light; He says, That many Men passed their
Judgments upon it, Eruditorumque hac dear jactati versus; Beza has diverse
Verses upon it, I take it the last was this, Tuvero Herodes Sangui notente cave.
And thou bloody Herod beware.
Pointing (I suppose) to the French King, Charles the IX. and others, Authors
of and Actors in that Barbarous and Bloody Tragedy. He adds, Illa totos novem
menses in coeto Emicait. That Star shined clearly for the space of nine whole
Months in the Heaven. The King himself Dyed May 30. 1574. about one year and
three quarters after the Massacre; and one year and an half after the appearing
of the Comet. Of whom my Author says; Profluvio sanguinis illum laborasse
certum est. Constans vero fert fama, illum dum evarijs corporis partibus
sanguis emanaret, in lecto saepe volutatum, inter horribilium blasphemiarum
diras, quibus ab ineunte aetate assuetus erat, Monmoren ciorum nomen saepe
concitata excandescentia solitum appelare. Quum vero magna erat veneni
suspitiorut vomitus facilior esset, ajunt pulvinaribus impositum, cernuo
capite, and Paulo erectoribus sursum pedibus, tantam sanguinis vim projecesse,
ut paucas post horas Mortuus fuerit: inter ultimas autem voces meras
Blasphemias auditas fuisse.

It seems before he died he laid Siege to Rochel, because the Protestants
there stood upon their Guard, and would not put themselves into the Butchers
hands; where the Duke of Aumerle, Uncle to the Duke of Guise, was slain, and
about twenty thousand others; whereof many (not most of them) were Actors in
that prodigious Cruelty: and the rest seemed to have made themselves accessory
to it by this after Act, in joining with the Murderers to root out the
remainders of the Protestants.

Henry Duke of Anjou, and King of Poland, succeeded his Brother Charles, by the
Name of Henry the Third, and became very despicable; the Duke of Guise giving
him Check-mate, his Subjects slighting him, and adhering to Guise. The King
finding him too strong for him, took a course to Entrap him, sending for him to
Blois, under pretense of making him Governor over the Kingdom under him, and
caused him there to be Stabbed with his Brother the Cardinal. And thus fell
another principal Contriver of, and Agent in the Massacre; and it is thought in
the same Chamber where that Cockatrice-Egg was hatched. But upon this Execution
the French were more enraged against their King then ever, taking the
Government of the Kingdom out of his Hands, as if he had been already dead, and
setting up the Duke of Mayenne, Brother to Guise, as their Chief, who by the
help of the Spaniard, headed the Faction, and carried on the Design. The King
reduced to great extremity, was constrained to desire aid from the King of
Navar, and his Protestant followers, whom he had so cruelly persecuted; who
proved faithful to him, being in a likely way to have reestablished him: But
one James Clement a Jacobine Monk, stabbed him about the year 1589.

His younger Brother the Duke of Alenzon, being chosen by the Netherlanders for
their Governor, and Protector against the Spaniards, and most unworthily
taking advantage of that trust, they reposed in him to oppose their Liberty,
and Tyrannize over them: the Plot being discovered, and both his design and
Honor being lost, he Dyed in the flower of his Age, as was thought, of Grief,
before his Elder Brother. Thus these three Sons of King Henry the Second, were
taken away in the space of seventeen years after the Massacre, or thereabout,
without Issue Male, besides an Elder Brother Francis the Second, who Dyed very
young before that Tragedy: And the Crown was Translated to another Family,
namely, that of Bourbon. Henry of Navar being called by his Predecessor from
the remote parts of the Kindom (Providence so ordering it) as it were to
receive the Royal Diadem on the other side the Protestants, who seemed almost
extinguished (diverse of the Popish Nobility joining with them for Politic
ends, and Aid coming in from Germany, especially under Castmire of the Palatine
Family) they obtained better Conditions, and enjoyed their Liberty in a more
settled way than formerly.

Upon the 8th. day of October, in the Two and twentieth year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1580, immediately after the New Moon, there appeared a
Blazing-Star in the South, pointing toward the East with its Streams; which
was seen every night (the Air being clear) more than two Months: Shortly after
there arrived upon the West-Coast of Ireland, a certain company of Italians and
Spaniards, sent by the Pope to the aid of the Earl of Dasmond in his Rebellion,
which were defeated by the Lord Gray of Wilton, Deputy of Ireland.

In the Reign of King James, in the Year of our Lord, 1618. there appeared a
Comet with a very long Tail, seen here in England, and in other Countries, for
almost two months together. After it followed the dreadful Calamity of Germany;
Prague was taken in the year 1620. and the Palatinate was lost. And the Edicts
of the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, were published in Bohemia and Moravia, in
the Year 1624, against all the Gospel Ministers, commanding, That whosoever
refused to forsake their Heresy (as their Gospel-profession was called) and
come into the Bosom of the Church (namely of Rome) should depart from their
Native Country, and never return more. Of the Comet that appeared in the year
1618 aforesaid, Antonius de Dominis, Bishop of Spalato, who saw it, says thus:
Cometes qui his diebus pobis fulget, est unum xe phenomenis Spalat. de
Ecclesiast. Repub. li 5. P. 166.
Astronomicis, ex ijs quae Phenomena vera sunt, non Phantastica, et Oculum
fallentia: et tamen res est vera et realis, Exhalatio nempe acc^nsa et ardens.

A terrible Comet appeared in the Year 1652. which the Mother princess, the
Mother of Racoci, prince of Transylvania, saw with her Court, living, and being
then in the Castle of Munkary, there came forth the debates of diverse
Astrologers, describing his Pale face, and the Compasses of his most swift
course, as scarce was ever of any Comet before. Comenius tells us, that himself
happened to see the Judgments of four diverse Comen. Histor. German. Prophet.
Authors, not disagreeing in the Event; Michael Guller the Silesian very near
touching the Mark. This proved Ominous to the House of Prince Racoci. In the
Year 1657 and 1658. the Prince going with an Army into Poland, and not entering
into an agreement with the Turk and Tartar, but hiding his Enterprise from the
Turk he conceiving a suspicion of Rebellion, sent the Tartar upon his back; and
shortly after came Letters in a threefold course from C. S. the Secretary of
the Prince of Transylvania, Historically relating the Ruin of his Prince.

And for the two Comets that appeared in the Year 1664. diverse Astrologers then
gave their Judgments, conceiving, That that in the Morning being Red and
Fiery, portended War; That in the Evening being of a Pale and Melancholic
color, signified Death and Mortality; and some of them did shake their heads,
fearing sad Consequents upon the appearance of two such Stars so suddenly after
each other; and ye know what sad Effects followed the next Summer ensuing, Viz.
In the Year 1665. namely, the of the English with the War Dutch, and that
Devouring Plague that swept away above an Hundred Thousand Persons in the City
of London and many Hundreds also in diverse other places of this Kingdom.

Anno 1677. A Comet appeared in April, the next Year the Hellish Popish-Plot,
was by the mercy of God happily discovered.

And now again, God has showed us other Signs in Heaven, by the appearance of
two New Prodigies, one appeared in the South-East in the Morning, the other in
the Evening. What else (I pray) does God by these Signs seek to show, than his
Wrath to an Impenitent World? He is the God that makes Signs and Wonders in
Heaven and in Earth, Dan. 6. 28. Therefore whosoever fears God, let him say
with David, Come, and see the Works of the Lord, how Terrible he is in his
Doings toward the Children of Men.

Now seeing these Signs in the Heavens are of God, let us take heed that we do
not despise God in his Works. Among the Romans, when the General caused a
Purple Coat to be hung out over his Pavilion, and the Trumpet to sound, what
Soldier in the Camp durst to Neglect it, and not take notice of it as a Sign
of Battle? How much more when the Lord of Hosts holds forth his Flagg, and
displayeth his Ensigns, signifying what he is about to do; and if not making
it known what it is in particular, yet showing, that he has some special Work
in hand, how carefully should we observe these things, and prepare for the
worst that may happen. But the blindness of Carnal Reason darkens the minds of
many worldly-wise persons, that they cannot see far off, as the Apostle speaks
in another case. Carnal Reason is of too low a stature in this case, our
thoughts must climb the Sycamore-Tree like Zacheus; or we must get up into our
Watchtower like the Prophet Habakkuk; we must take our standing higher, and
look above the whole Creation, and seriously think of the Creator, God
himself, the first mover and Principal Worker in all these things.

Moreover, Men and Women are so generally in love with the World, and do so
earnestly desire, mind, seek, and affect earthly things, either their
Pleasures, Profits, or Earthly hopes, etc. that they have no leisure to mind
the special works of God, which are Signs of the times, and give Warning of
things at hand. Therefore, says Solomon, Eccl. 9. 12. Man knows not his
time; As the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds that are
caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon them. As the Bird wholly minding the Bait, is taken in the
Snare which it minded not: So the Sons of Men wholly minding the profits or
pleasures, or other things of this World, heed not the Signs of the times, and
so are snared in an evil time.

The love of Sin also possessing the Hearts of Men, keeps many from discerning
the Works of God: It is Wonderful to consider, how the people of Israel were
besotted this way, so as not to see the visible and apparent signs of the
times, as they had before their Eyes; The Thunderings and Lightenings upon
Mount Sinai, the sound of the Trumpet exceeding loud, the Voice of God striking
an awful Terror into their Hearts, the Cloudy Pillar every Day, the Pillar of
Fire every Night was continually as a shining light before their Faces; the
Glory of the Lord often Appearing: Bread sent them down all the Six Days of the
Week from Heaven; the Rock becoming as a Fountain of Water to them in the
Wilderness, which Water followed them in their several stations: Were not these
Signs to them of an extraordinary time, wherein God was more than in an
ordinary manner present with them, and would be sanctified in them, si^h he had
brought them so near unto himself: And yet, as if it had been but an ordinary
time, and as if they had had no more to do with the only true God than other
people; nor any more special relation to him, as if he had done no more for
them than for the Egyptians; they gave themselves over to diverse sins, as to
foul Idolatry (it seems) in the sight of Mount Sinai, to lusting after Quails
and Delicates, to commit Fornication with the Daughters of Idolaters, and then
also to join with them in spiritual Whoredom and Service of their Idols: Some
of them to Ambition, contending with Aaron for the Priesthood, whom God had
called and consecrated to that Office; so strangely had the love of Sin
bewitched and blinded their minds, that without regarding the Signs of the
times, they ran into the Snare, and oftentimes brought many strokes upon
themselves.

Great also is the security of Men and Women: This is a general Disease to
which the World is subject, and as the old World was in a dead Sleep of
Wretched security, until the Floodgates of Heaven, with the noise of an
unresistable Judgment Awakened them, when they Awoke to see themselves perish;
neither Noah's Preaching, nor the knocking about the Ark before, could Awaken
them; so there are many who lie slumbering and sleeping in deep security, and
no loud cries from the Word do Awaken them to make them open their Eyes, to see
the signs of the times, that they might either avoid the evil which the time is
about to bring forth, or embrace the Good which the opportunity of the time
offers to them.

Gods Judgments are there most heavy, where his greatest mercies are most
Abused: Jerusalem had had such mercies, as no City under Heaven since the
beginning of the World in some respect; and these she most grievously Abused,
and was most unthankful to the Giver; and therefore the Lord brought on her
such misery as no City ever felt: No City had sinned like Jerusalem, none had
such mercies against which they could sin; no City suffered like to her, when
once the Lords Abused patience turned into Anger and heavy displeasure: This
should Awaken England, which is the Field which God has Sowed in his Love, but
through our unthankfulness seems to have buried or lost a multitude of
mercies: No Nation under Heaven at this present, has so many mercies to reckon
for as we: If the Lord should deal in Justice with us, what people since the
beginning of the World has deserved greater punishments? If every Parish,
every Family, every Person, would look into themselves, and see what mercies,
what means they have had, or might have had for Soul or Body, what Catalogues
might they make, and what wrath might they think they had deserved? Let us all
look home, and know, that nothing shall plead more strongly against impenitent
and unthankful persons at the last day, than mercies themselves.

The Great God of Heaven and Earth does not only speak to Men with the Tongues
of Prophets, Apostles, and Teachers; but sometimes also by the Elements,
Composed or wrought into diverse Forms and Shapes. if we will believe what is
Credibly reported, the Heavens have been of late Chequered with Strange and
Prodigious Sights: but what is most Remarkable, is, That a Comet or
Blazing-Star, for many Weeks have been Visible to all, or most parts of Europe,
and other places, as the Gazettes testify; and there is so many people in
England, nay in London, that by Occular Experience can Subscribe to the truth
of it, that there needs no further Narrative.

When God intends to punish a Nation, Country, or City, he is first pleased to
give them notice thereof by Apparitions or Prodigies; and there has never been
any notable Apparition or Prodigy seen in the Heavens, but it has been
attended in the Sequel with some more then ordinary Troubles, or Change here on
Earth, according to this Illustration of Dubartas: Viz.

Here in the Night appears a Flaming Spire,
There a Fierce Dragon, folded all in Fire:
Here a Bright Cornet, there a Fiery Stream,
Here Flying Lances, there a Burning Beam:
Here seems a Horned Goat, Environed round
With Fiery Flakes, about the Air to bound;
There with Long Bloody Hair, a Blazing-Star,
Threatening the World with Famine, Plague, and War:
To Princes Death, to Kingdoms many Crosses,
To all Estates, Inevitable Losses:
To Herds-men Rot, to Plow-men Hopless Seasons,
To Saylors Storms, to Cities Civil Treasons.
Thus much of Prodigies in general, now to know the Signification of each
particular Comet, for they have not all one and the same portences; we must,
according to the Documents of Astrologers, observe their Colors, place, and
motion in the Heavens, etc. And that I may be well understood by those for
whose sakes I undertook this Task, viz. the Vulgar or Common people of this
Kingdom; I shall not strive to use any Cramp words or Quaint Language, but in a
homely and plain Style, deliver unto them, the Signification of this
Blazing-Star, according to the Rules of Art; as follows.

By the account we had of this Comet first from Falmous, in the West of
England; it was then of a Bright and clear Color, but its Tail was of a pale
color toward the end. So then we may conclude, the Star was then of a Jovial
nature, but its Tail of a Saturnian Hue; and by the said account, it was then
in the Caelestial Sign Scorpio, but is now in the Sign Aries, and the Star
really Saturnian so well as its Tail: it is true, when it had but newly past
the Conjunction of the Sun, and first became Occidental, its Tail was very Red,
and at least Sixty Degrees long; but there was then a Tincture, or mixture of
the aforesaid Colors in it. Its Tail is not Forty Degrees long now, and will
be shorter as the Star gets further from the Sun. Now it being since its first
appearance, of the Color of the Planets before Nominated, and likewise of the
Color of Mars and Mercury, for Mars claims the Redness of its Tail, and
Mercury will put in for a share, by reason of its various Colors; therefore we
may expect, that according to the nature of those four Planets, will the
effects of this new Star be: which is as follows.

A Comet of the nature of Saturn, signifies many Frights and Fears among
people, Trouble, Vexation, Murmuring, and Repining; Exile or Banishment to
many: scarcity of Food, Penury, grievous Sicknesses, Plague, Consumptions,
Agues, and other Lingering Distempers: Tempestuous Winds, Shipwracks,
Inundations, great Frosts and Snows; a destruction of Fruits by Worms or
Catterpillars.

A Comet of the Nature of Jupiter, as this was at its first appearance, denotes
much struggling among Men for matters of Religion, Laws and Privileges,
strivings, Wrestling and encountering each other: it signifies a plentiful and
Fertile time, pleasant Salubrious Air, Seasonable Winds and Showers; and truly
it is well we have some Significations of good, to buoy us up under the many
mischiefs portended.

Now its Tail being sometimes Red, viz. of the Nature of Mars, signifies Wars,
Quarrels, Sea Fights, Slaughters, Bloodshed, Tumults, Massacres, in some places
change of Governors and Governments; pestiferous Winds, terrible Thunder and
Lightnings; Tempests, Shipwacks, Thieves and Robbers will abound on the Land,
and Pirates at Sea; excessive Hot Weather at sometimes, drying up Rivers and
Fountains: scarcity of the Fruits of the Earth, Firing or Burning of Houses,
and violent Fevers among Men.

It being of Various Colors for sometime, as I told you before, Mercury will
have a share in its Effects, and then it denotes much Wit and Policy among Men,
and as much business to employ it about: Astrologers say, that it signifies the
Death of Great Men, Wars, Sicknesses and scarcity of Food: many men will employ
their Wits about Vild and Treacherous things, and when they have done, if
questioned for the same, pretend to be as Innocent as Lambs; and truly so they
may, as Romish Lambs, which are always of a more Infernal quality, than
Heretick-Lyons, as they call them.

In the next place I shall give you the signification of this Star, in relation
to the Signs of Heaven it has already past through, which is, Scorpio,
Sagitarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, and is now in Aries; but how much
farther it will go, time must be the Informer.

A Comet or Blazing-Star in Scorpio, signifies Wars, Contentions,
Controversies, alterations and Changes in the world, and chiefly among men of
Martial Discipline; Trouble and Animosities among Princes; a scarcity of
Waters, and fruits of the Earth, Damage to Merchants by pirates, and much grief
to Teeming Women.

In Sagitary, it denotes Evil to Great Men, Controversies about Religion and
Laws, Fevers and other dangerous Infirmities.

In Capricorn, a Comet does signify many Wicked Actions among Men, Murders,
Thefts, Robberies, Wars, Plague and Famine in many places; Troubles and
Calamities to most sort of People; the Death of Great men by Poison, or other
violent means: Persecution of many for Religion, and Contempt of Religion it
self; great Frosts, Snows, Hails, etc.

In Aquary, it denotes long lasting Wars, terrible slaughters, many kinds of
Crosses and Cruelties; and in some places a sweeping Plague or Pestilence; dark
obscure Air, great Winds, Thunder and Lightnings.

When a Comet appears in Pisces, it signifies Eminent strife and Contentions
about Religion, Devisions, Seperations, and Alienations of Relations, and
former Friends: Strange and Prodigious Apparitions in the Air; scarcity of
Fish, losses and crosses in Sea-Voyages, much troubles amongst great and Potent
Persons.

Lastly, This Comet being in Aries, is the forerunner of much mischief,
troubles, Warlike preparations; the Death of some Eminent Person, which will
cause or occasion great Consternation in the Country where it shall happen:
sharp Diseases in the Head and Eyes of people, and a Rot or Murrain among small
Cattle.

Stella Barbata, or Caudata; A Star with a Beard, or long Tail, as this Comet
has, denotes the Death of Great and Noble Men, and Wars in those Countries
unto which it points its Tail: and we may conclude, that in regard from its
first appearance, it took its progress toward the Sun, its Effects will be
manifested in a great measure on Eminent persons, and Ineminent Actions; and I
need not go about to tell where, or in what Countries the significations of
this Star will appear; but in short acquaint you, That it has already taken up
a large part of Europe, so well as other parts, for its Theater.

Thus far have I adventured to speak of this Blazing-Star unto the World, and
in so doing I well hope I have Offended none that I ought not to have Offended.
I would have none to be constartned or affrightned at those Presages, though
they be according to the true and experienced Rules of Art; but observe the
Prudent and Wise saying of Charles the Great, when he was beholding the New
Star that presaged and preceeded his Death, he was very Inquisitous and
desirous to know what it signified; One who stood by answers him in the Words
of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 10. ver. 2. Fear not the Signs of Heaven, though
the Heathen be afraid of them; Unto which the Emperor replied, That he did not
indeed fear any Signs of that Nature, but the Maker or cause of those Signs. A
Wise Saying, and deserves to be Written in Letters of Gold.

I know some Critical Persons will be ready to say, that I have given no
Mathematical, or Astronomical accout of this Star; to which I answer, neither
can it reasonably be expected that I should, any more than I have, considering
the streightness of my Limits: I leave that therefore to those that shall Write
a more Large Discourse hereof, to certisfie the Learned.

To conclude this Discourse, my Prayer shall be,
That Venus and Jupiter in the Heavens may agree.
FINIS.

