THE GREAT SIN, AND CHIEF GUILTINES OF SCOTLAND, In the contempt of the GOSPEL.

As it was branched out in particulars, by the Commission of the General
Assembly, in the Year, 1650.

Now Reprinted at the desire of the Synod of Lothian, for the Fast appointed
by them in the Year, 1654.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1654.

At Edinburgh, the seventh Day of May, 1654.
THe Synod of Lothian and Tweddail, considering the continuing evidences and
effects of Gods wrath, and his Hand still stretched out against the Land, Do
find it their duty, to stir up themselves, and these under their charge, to
accept the punishment of our iniquities, and to turn to him that smites us: And
therefore do seriously recommend to the several Presbyteries within their
bounds, that, from time to time, as they shall have occasion, they appoint and
keep Solemn Fasts for stirring up the people to be humbled in the sense of
their iniquities, and to repent for the same; And specially for the contempt of
the Glorious Gospel of the Son of GOD, and not employing of Him in His
Mediation and Offices, for reconciliation and amendment: Which, as it is the
chief cause of the LORDS controversy against us: so, unless this be reformed,
we cannot expect that our other iniquities shall be amended, or that the LORD
will turn from the fierceness of his anger against us. And albeit this has
been recommended in many former Causes of Humiliation, and particularly
insisted on in a Printed Paper of the Commission, 1650. Yet their is cause to
fear, that the people do either little understand or lay to heart the
heinousness of this sin: And therefore the Synod seriously recommends, that
Ministers be the more careful in their Doctrine to lay it out before them.
Extracted.

SINS Relating to the GOSPEL ORDINANCES.
FIrst: To the Word. Neglecting to come and attend on the Preaching of the
Word, both on the LORDS Day, and on week days, in these places where such
exercises are on these days.

2. Not coming to the Preaching of the Word, for the right end, viz. to find
communion with Christ, and a taste of his goodness and excellency, and to be
built up in the most holy faith: but either out of custom, or to eschew
censures, or to satisfy and hold off the challenges of a natural conscience,
or some by-respect; And not preparing the heart before hand in secret, to come
with Godly fear and reverence, humility, spiritual hungring and thirsting
after the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and desiring as new
born babes the sincere milk of the Word, to grow thereby.

3. That when the people are at the Preaching of the Word, besides great
carelessness, overlinesse, sleeping, wandering of the heart, and in advertency
to what is Preached; the Word is not heard as an Ordinance and mean appointed
of God to work upon, and carry in grace and comfort unto the heart, but is only
regarded as other discourses proceeding from men's ability and parts, and is
accordingly esteemed by the most part, or at most is only made use of, as a
mean of informing the judgment.

4. That in the Preaching of the Word, neither do Ministers speak the same as
the Oracles of God, not remembering themselves to be the ambassadors of Christ,
speaking in Gods stead: nor do the people present themselves in so immediate a
way before God himself, as to receive the Word not as the word of man, but as
the true Word of God; Whence it comes to pass that there is little trembling
at the Word, and so little rejoicing in it.

5. That people in the hearing of the Word, content themselves with man's
teaching, and do not, in the conviction of their own blindness, and utter
inability of themselves to perceive the things of the Spirit, and of the
insufficiency of the outward means without Gods immediate work therewith upon
the heart, employ himself to teach them inwardly by his Spirit, joining with
the outward means, according to the promise of the Covenant, They shall be all
taught of God. Whence it comes to pass that there is so much Preaching, and
so little profiting, so much learning, and so little speed coming in the
knowledge of God.

6. The not mixing of the Word Preached with faith, while as in the hearing
thereof, even these who seem to give most heed thereunto do for the most part,
rather employ the judgment, to consider and judge of the pertinency,
coherence, the way of uttering of the Doctrine delivered; or in a mere
speculative way to apprehend the matter and truth of what is spoken, than they
do labor with the heart to close with, embrace and apply to themselves the
truth Preached.

7. No care to lay up, and hide the Words of Christ in the heart, to remember
the same for use making: But letting them slip and run through; which the
Apostle accounts a neglecting of the great Salvation of God, ( Heb. 2.1.3.)
Nor employing the Spirit to bring the Word that has been heard, but forgotten,
to remembrance: Not making conscience to confer on the Word Preached, and to
whet it one upon another. Not taking pains, nor delighting in it in private, to
read, and meditate on it.

2. IN relation to the Sacraments. And first in general and common: Not making
use of them as Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and promises thereof made to us
in Christ; but laying all the weight of confidence upon themselves, and being
content with the deed done, which was the ordinary sin of the Jews in the use
of Circumcision, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, so often charged
upon them in Scripture. Then particularly,

In Baptism. I. In Parents bringing their Children thereunto, either out of
mere fashion and custom, as merely to have a difference put between them and
unchristned people, or in effect as unto a mere Ceremony: and not from any
sense that they are unclean from unclean, born dead in sins, and children of
wrath of themselves, defiled with Original guilt and corruption; nor from a
desire that they may be spiritually regenerated, incorporated unto Christ, to
be made partakers of the virtue of His Death and Resurrection, to be washed
from their filthiness in the blood of Christ, and to get interest in the
Covenant of Grace, and promises thereof, sealed up unto them. 2. Not setting
themselves in the Administration of this Sacrament to consider and prize the
free love and grace of God, which has prevented us, and our seed, in providing
such a fountain for sin and uncleanness in Christ, making such a Covenant with
us, so well ordered in all things, and sure, preventing us and our seed with
the Seal thereof; nor to apply the Covenant and the promises thereof for our
selves and our seed, and this Sacrament as the Seal of the same. 3. The great
and evident slighting of the Administration of the Sacrament, while as few in
the Congregation joineth therein either for their own edification, or to hold
up the baptized to God, that he might bless his own Ordinance to them, and
receive them in amongst his Children in Christ: And many withdraw themselves
from the Administration thereof, as if it did not concern them, and only the
Minister and Presenter were to be actors in it. 4. Parents not making
conscience, to make known unto their Children, when they come to years of
Capacity, their Baptism, the ends and use thereof, and the obligation thereby
lies upon them as consecrated to Christ. 5. The not making use of this
Sacrament all along the course of our life, for renewing and strengthening our
comfort in the faith and assurance of our Regeneration and Adoption; and of our
interest in God, as our God and Father in Christ, and for strengthening through
Christ our resolutions and endeavors of Mortification, and newness of life:
Which is a great despising of this Ordinance.

In the Lords Supper; 1. The great profanation thereof, by the coming and
admitting thereunto, of many gross ignorants, who cannot discern the Lords
Body, nor knows how to examine themselves: many profane Ones, godless
Livers, without the Worship of God in private, and into many places, all sorts
of persons promiscuously, without making a difference between the precious and
the vile, whereby the Blood of Christ is much profaned (although the
constitutions of our Kirk, were they well observed, does sufficiently guard
against these evils) which no doubt is one of the main sins, for which God has
been provoked to suffer so much of our blood to be shed: See 1 Cor. 11.30.

2. The little or no care or pains that is taken for preparation to so high and
holy an Ordinance, wherein we are called to the nearest and most familiar
Communion with Christ that is here upon earth: most part contenting themselves
giving their presence at a Preparation Sermon, many not making conscience of so
much as this. Very few separating themselves as is needful, to Examine
themselves; that, being sensible of their guiltiness, spiritual inlacks, etc.
they might come with humble, broken, and contrite spirits, with spiritual
hunger and thirst for Christ Crucified: And sincere purposes of heart to
forsake their former sinful courses, and to renew their Covenant with God, in
the strength of Christ's Grace.

3. The great and lamentable blockishnesse of the most part, in the
participation of this Ordinance, who, may be, have some kind of amazement at
the Solemnities thereof, but do no ways therein exercise themselves in
remembering the Lords Death till he come again; to apply the same to themselves,
for peace with God, and mortifying the body of sin, for working deep
Repentance, and Gospel-sorrow for sin, and getting the Love of Christ more
kindled in them, and their hearts enlarged with greater thankfulness toward
him, who loved us, and gave himself for us. And on the other hand, the great
heartlesse sinful dejection or many sensible souls, who at no time are readier
to be plunged in legal heaviness, and feeding as it were on Gall and
Wormwood, then at this Ordinance, wherein they ought to be most rejoicing
through faith on the propitiation in the Death of Christ, so familiarly set
forth therein to them.

4. That the time and occasion of this Sacrament, is used by the most part,
only for some outward restraint of grosser sins, for a day or two before and
after; but all such goodness being as a morning Cloud, no constancy nor real
Reformation, but presently turning to wonted, natural, worldly, and carnal
courses; Notwithstanding renewed remembering of the Death of Christ, and
Profession of renewing Covenants with God.

3. IN relation to the Ordinance of Discipline.

1. Much partiality in the administration thereof, with respect of persons, and
according to affection; which appears in that, While as Offenses and Scandals
in meaner persons are taken notice of, challenged and censued: There is not the
like Christian Freedom, faithfulness and zeal used toward such as are more
eminent for wealth, place or dignity in the world.

2. Want of a Spirit of Meekness, sometimes in the administration thereof;
whereby men, if GOD peradventure would give them Repentance, might be recovered
out of the snares of Satan. And, on the other hand, want of zeal often times,
to save others with fear, plucking them out of the fire.

3. Much vilifying, contemning of the Censures and Exercise of Discipline; yea,
hating, thereof, and the Officers of the Kirk for it.

4. Not making use of it as a spiritual Medicine and Means of Salvation: but
as a mere Punishment, which as it is in it self a mis-apprehension and abuse of
this Ordinance so is (no doubt) the cause of so much impatience and indignation
against it in people, and of so much inequality and mixture of selfish
affection in the administration thereof.

5. The great formality that is every where in the use thereof, while as, so be
it that persons under censure continue out their set time and days of Censure,
little care or respect is had of the effects for which it was instituted, to
wit, humiliation of heart and godly sorrow, bringing forth Repentance not to be
repented of, which makes the administration thereof to look too like the way
of Popish Penance.

4. IN relation to Prayer: 1. Great neglect thereof by most part of persons and
Families throughout. the Land in private and secret.

2. Many, more eminent persons in the world, accounting the performance thereof
in their Families (although this be incumbent to them by their place and
station) a disparagement; and therefore turning it over upon others, as a
Service below them.

3. In the public Prayers of the Kirk, Peoples lying by from joining therein
all along with their Spirits, which should be striving together with the
Minister: either muttering words of their own, or taking liberty to themselves
to be idle in the Work, and roaving in their thoughts, as if the Minister only
were to be an Actor in that Service.

4. Not using this Ordinance as a mean of communion with God, and of obtaining
blessings from Him: But using it merely as a duty, and many as a matter of mere
task. Whereof many may be convinced by this, That they do not make conscience,
nor set themselves to observe what comes of their Prayers. how they are taken
of their hand, what speed they have come, and what answer they get.

5. The little care that is had either by Ministers or others to pray in the
Spirit, or to employ the Spirit of Grace and Supplication for this Service: The
most part in their performances thereof too evidently acting merely their own
memory, invention, wit, etc. and that often times with apparent affectation.

5. RElating more immediately to Christ Himself and the free grace of God in
him, which is the Matter and Object of the Gospel: As,

1. Gross ignorance in the most part, and great shortcoming of the best in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ His Person, Offices, His blessings and benefits, of
the Covenant of Grace established in Him, and the way of making use of Christ
and the Covenant of Grace.

2. Undervaluing and misprysing of Christ, communion with Him, and His
spiritual graces and blessings; Which appears most evidently, by the great
neglect of the use of these means and exercises, public, private and secret,
wherein He offers Himself to be sought and found: the great wearying of them,
greater willingness and readiness to bestow time and pains upon things.
worldly, even vanity and trifles, than on these: preferring the interests of
creatures to the interests of Christ, and not giving him the pre-eminence above
all: by the readiness which appears in people, in times of try all, to comply
with sinful courses, to the prejudice of Christ's Cause, and the hazarding of
their own peace with God, for maintaining their ease, temporary safety and
worldly commodities, rather then to deny themselves, take up their cross and
follow Him.

3. Not receiving of Christ; nor making use of him as he is held forth in the
Gospel, in his fullness of grace, nor living by faith in him, more especially
in not receiving and making use of his Free Grace and imputed Righteousness
for Justification, acceptance before God, and for peace of conscience: while
as most part securely rest on mere outward Church Priviledges: many confide in
their own Moral Honesty performances and duties; So going about to establish
their own righteousness, and following duties this way to make their Peace and
Reconciliation thereby with God. And even the best Professors do not so purely
and entirely rest on his Righteousness as the Gospel requires: as well appear
by these things amongst many others: heartlesse fears, misbelief, fearring to
apply Christ, and to make use of the promises, not rejoicing in Christ and his
propitiation with humility, when there is a discovery, challenges and
apprehensions of want, short coming and failing of duties, which in effect is
in a degree, and in part, an establishing our own righteousness, and not
submitting to the Righteousness of God. Not making use of Christ, for
Sanctification, according to the promises of the Covenant, and not acting in a
way of dependence on him, in all the performances of our common Christian
calling, and of particular lawful vocations, for direction, quickening,
strength to mortify corruptions, to every duty, and to carry us through
against discouragements, and tentations: but acting only, or most part by the
strength of our own wits, abilities, and pains.

In not making use of the Mediation and Intercession of Christ, in approaching
to the Throne of Grace, in Prayers, Supplications, and Thanksgivings (while as
many do neglect Prayer altogether) albeit they have some course of performance
of this duty, yet know not what it is to put their Prayers up to God through
the Mediator, though they may perhaps name His Name, but do as that Uzziah, who
would offer Incense himself, neglecting the High Priest: And even Believers
themselves does not directly, distinctly, and steadfastly in their approaches to
God, eye Christ, to offer all their service through him; nor do come with that
humble boldness and full assurance of faith in God as a Father, wherewith the
intercession of Christ warrandeth them to come, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

4. Not walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ, in Righteousness,
Godliness, and Sobriety: many notwithstanding their Profession of the Gospel,
and claiming interest in Christ and his Grace, yet living loose, profane,
godless, carnal and earthly in their way; in effect, turning the Grace of God
unto wantonness and security, and taking liberty to sin, because Grace does
abound. And even the best not so constrained with the love of Christ, to live
to him who died for them, nor striving to keep the thoughts of the love of
Christ, and the Free Grace of God in him, upon their hearts, so fresh and
constant, as they should be, to keep them watchful, tender, zealous, and
enlarged for God, and his honor.

6. IN relation to the operations of the Spirit, wherein the Gospel is the
Ministration, and makes it effetuall: As,

1. Profane mocking, miscalling, and mis-interpreting the tender and accurate
walking of the Godly in the ways of God, as unnecessary and proud
preciseness, and their spiritual exercises, as fantasticknesse, melancholy,
or madness: Which is a horrible sin, sib to that which is unpardonable; yet,
very frequent amongst carnal and natural people.

2. The mere natural and moral way of living in a civil honesty, and sitting
down contented therewith, of the most part of people, not laboring in their
conversation to walk after the Spirit, i. e. upon Spiritual Principles,
according to the Spiritual Rule (of Gods revealed Will in his Word) nor for
Spiritual ends, the Honor of God, Glory, and Immortality.

3. Not observing and yielding unto the knockings of the Spirit, whereby Christ
makes tender to come in to hearts, that he may sup with them, and they with
him; resisting and quenching his motions, whereby he stirs up to duties,
stiffling or putting by his challenges, whether in public or secret, which
tend to Repentance, Humiliation, or withdrawing from sin; not being tender of
his Presence and consolations, to intertain the same; but grieving him, by
misprizing them, refusing them, careless walking, in not attending on his
direction and guiding, in giving way to known sinful thoughts, and lustings in
a continued tract, although not growing up to a full accomplishing of them; and
sometimes in giving way even to grosser out-breakings, and in not watching
against predominant corruptions, whereof even the best are much guilty.

4. Not delighting in, nor improving spiritual company and spiritual
exercises.

5. OF Ministers, in relation to their Preaching of the Gospel: As,

1. Many not laboring to set forth the Excellency of Christ, in his Person,
Offices, and the unsearchable Riches of his Grace, the New Covenant, and the
way of living by Faith in him: nor making this the main and chief Theme and
matter of their Preaching, as did the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.2. 2 Cor. 4.5. Col.
1.28. Nor Preaching other things with a relation to Christ; to wit, Not
Preaching convictions, reproofs, discoveries of sin, and of short comings in
duties, and threatenings, to lead to Christ, to prize him the more highly, and
to embrace him the more earnestly; especially for Justification, and pressing
duties in a mere legal way; not urging them, as by the Authority of Gods
Commandments* so from the love of Christ, and the grace of the Gospel, nor
pointing and directing people to their furniture for them in Christ: Oftentimes
craving hard, but giving nothing wherewith to pay.

2. What they Preach of Christ, and the matters of the Gospel, not Preaching
the same in a Gospel-way: Whereof see, 1 Cor. 3. from the beginning, at length.

3. Not commending, as they ought, neither their own work, whether of
meditation, or delivery: nor their hearts to Christ, that He might give the
increase: but going about the work, either altogether in their own strength, or
much that way.

4. Often times not speaking, because they believe and many not seeking for
communion with Christ, in their own personal estate: and to feel the power of
the Word upon their own hearts, that they might speak so.

These branches of contemning and abusing of the Gospel, are thought fit, for
the better information of all, to be held forth at this time, as being most
obvious, recommending withal to Ministers, to apply themselves to make a more,
full and particular discovery thereof; As is not doubted but they will do,
according to their wisdom and understanding in the Gospel, and the experience
they have by observation of their own hearts, and of the ways and consciences
of People.

FINIS.

