Great News from the West of England.
Being a True Account of Two Young Persons lately Bewitched in the Town of
Beckenton in Somersetshire: Showing the sad Condition they are in, by
Vomiting, or Throwing out of their Bodies, the Abundance of Pins, Nails,
Pewter, Brass, Lead, Iron, and Tin, to the Admiration of all Beholders.

And of the old Witch being carried several Times to a great River; into which,
her Legs being tied, she was Thrice thrown in; but each Time, she Swam like a
Cork.

AFTERWARD,

By Order from a Justice of Peace, she was Searched by a Jury of Women, and
such Signs and Marks being found about her, positive Oath was given in against
her; so that she is Committed to Jayl, until the next Assizes.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.
I Know there be Persons in the World, who will not believe there are Witches;
that is, such Persons, who, by a League and Confederacy with the Devil, do get
him to enter, possess, and torment the Bodies of Children, and others: But
whosoever shall read this ensuing Narrative, if he be not an Atheist in his
Heart, as well as in his Practice, may be easily Convinced; and see the
Necessity of keeping close to GOD, in a constant Performance of his Duty; that
GOD may keep close to him in his daily Preservation and Safety.

IN the Town of Beckenton, about Two Miles from Froom, and Seven from Bath, in
Somersetshire, lives one William Spicer, a young Man about eighteen Years of
Age; as he was wont to pass by the Almshouse (where lived an Old Woman, about
Fourscore) he would call her Witch, and tell her of her Buns; which did so
enrage the Old Woman, that she threatened him with a Warrant; and accordingly
did fetch one from a Neighboring Justice of the Peace; at which he was so
frightened, that he humbled himself to her, and promised never to call her so
again. Within a few days after this Young Man fell into the strangest Fits that
ever Mortal beheld with Eyes, and these, by turns, held him about a Fortnight:
When the Fits were upon him, he would often say, That he did see this Old Woman
against the Wall in the same Room of the House where he was, and that sometimes
she did knock her Fist at him; sometimes grin her Teeth, and sometimes laugh at
him in his Fits. He was so strong, that three or four Men could scarce hold
him; and when he did* call for Small Beer to drink, he would be sure to bring
up some Crooked Pins; first and last, to the Number of Thirty, and upwards.

In the same Town lives one Mary Hill, about the same Age of this Young Man;
who meeting with this Old Woman, demanded the Ring she borrowed of her; and
through her Importunity, she prevailed to get the Ring (with this Threatening)
from the Old Woman, That she had been better to have let her kept it longer.
About a Week before the said Mary was taken with Fits, she met this Old Woman
in the Street; who taking her by the hand, desired her to go with her to
Froom, to look after some Spinning Work; for none in the Town would suffer her
to have any: The said Mary being afraid, refused to go with her: About four
days after she met the Old Woman again, who would have begged an Apple of her,
having newly bought some, which she refused to give her.

The Sunday following, she complained of a pricking in her Stomach; but on
Monday, as she was Eating her Dinner, something arose in her Throat, which was
like to have Choked her; and at the same time fell into Violent Fits, which
held her till Nine or Ten a Clock at Night; the Fits were so strong and
violent, that Four or Five Persons were scarce able to hold her, and in the
midst of them, she would tell how she saw this old Woman against the Wall,
grinning at her, and being struck at, would step aside to avoid the blows. The
day after, she was taken with the like Fits, and would tell how she did see her
as before, and that she was the Person that had bewitched her.

The Wednesday following, she began to throw up Crooked Pins, and so continued
for the space of a Fortnight: After this, she began to throw up Nails and Pins;
and then she ceased for the space of Eight Days: And then she began to throw up
Nails again, and Handles of Spoons, both of Pewter and Brass; several pieces of
Iron, Lead, and Tin, with several clusters of Crooked Pins; some tied with
Yarn, and some with Thread, with abundance of Blood between while; and so she
continued to do for some considerable time: She threw up in all, above Two
Hundred Crooked Pins, besides several clusters of Crooked Pins, Sixteen or
Seventeen in a cluster, Seven Pieces of Pewter, Four Pieces of Brass, being
Handles of Spoons, Six Pieces of Lead; some whereof were Handles of Spoons, and
some, the Lead of a Window, besides one solid Piece of Lead, which weighed full
two Ounces; Six long Pieces of Latten, with Wire belonging to them; Five-Pieces
of Iron, one whereof was round, but hollow, and very big; and Two and Twenty
Nails, some whereof were Board-Nails, above three Inches and a Quarter long.

The People of the Town seeing the sad and deplorable Condition of the said
Mary, and being much concerned for her, did cause this old Woman to be brought
near the House where the said Mary Lived, unknown to her; and being gathered
together above an Hundred People, the said Mary was brought forth into the open
Air, who immediately fell into such strong Fits, that two or three men were
scarce able to hold her: And being brought upon the Hill by the Church; and the
old Woman brought near her (notwithstanding there were four men to hold the
said Mary in a Chair) she mounted up over their Heads into the Air; but the
men, and others standing by, caught hold of her Legs, and pulled her down again.

This Woman was ordered by a Justice of the Peace, to be searched by a Jury of
Women, who found about her several purple Spots, which they pricked with a sharp
Needle, but she felt no pain: She had about her other Marks and Tokens of a
Witch, of which the Women upon Oath, gave an Account to the Justice; and some
Swearing possitively against her, she was sent to the County Iayle, where she
is remaining to be Tried the next Assizes.

This old Woman was had to a great River near the Town, to see whether she
could sink under Water; her Legs being tied, she was put in, and though she did
endeavor to the uttermost (by her Hands) to get her self under, yet she could
not, but would lie upon her Back, and did Swim like a piece of Cork: There were
present above Twenty Persons to Attest the Truth of this, yet could not gain
Credit in the minds of People: Therefore, she was had to the Water a second
time, and being put in, she swam as at first; and though there were present above
Two Hundred People to see this Sight, yet it could not be believed by many. At
the same time, also, there was put into the Water, a Lusty young Woman, who
sunk immediately, and had been drowned, had it not been for the help that was
at hand. To satisfy the World, and to leave no Room for doubting, the old Woman
was had down to the Water the third time, and being put in as before, she did
still Swim. At this Swimming of her, were present, such a Company of People of
the Town and Country, and many of them, Persons of Quality, as could not well
be Numbered; so that now, there is scarce one Person that doubts of the Truth of
this thing.

It is full Ten Weeks ago (from the Twenty Eight of October last past) that
this young Woman was first seized with these Terrible Fits: And though she had
been Visited by the Minister of the place, who for sometime Prayed with her
Twice a Day; and by a Non-co^ (...) that Lives in the same Parish, that Twice
performed the like Office, yet she continues to be often seized with terrible
Fits, and to bring up both Nails and Handles of Spoons, and is still remaining
an Object of great Pity, and to be remembered at the Throne of Grace daily.

The Truth of this is be Attested by Us, October, 26th. 1689. May Hill, Rector
of Beckenton, Churchwardens.
Francis Iesse, Pollidore Moss,
Overseers of the Poor.
Christo. Brewer, Francis Francke,
Constables.
Will. Minterne, Will. Cowherd,



LONDON, Printed by T. M. in Iewen-street, 1689.


