REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Johnsons NOTES ON THE Pastoral Letter.

REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Johnson's NOTES ON THE Pastoral Letter.

By WILLIAM GALLAWAY, A. M. Chaplain to the Officers of their MAJESTY'S Sea
Train.



LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers Hall. MDCX IV.

THE INTRODUCTION.
HE who enters the Lists with the Famous Mr Johnson (tho he has no Lords and
Commons to Patronize his Book) may justly expect a Clear Stage and Fair Play,
and cannot be denied to Arm himself, and fight with the same Weapons his Enemy
makes use of, tho they should be Impudence and Vanity. I have been long
convinced, that lofty, promising Titles, or prefixing the Names of Great
Patrons, add nothing to the intrinsic Value of any book. Nay, I have seen the
King's Arms flourished on a Quack Doctors Bill, which has been scarcely read
through before applied to its proper use. Nor am I fond of presenting these
following Reflections to Mr. Iohnson's Patrons, because it looks so like Mrs.
James, whose crasie Example my waspish Adversary has so often imitated. I am
sure, had he left out his own often repeated Merits, scurrilous Reflections,
and impertinent Stories, they would have been obliged to him; and might have
read the empty, swelled Book, with as little trouble as her Half-Sheet^ Who
has not seen, or heard, A Killing, noisy Bombastus, make a great figure in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, speak mighty things of himself, but at the same time to
amuse his gaping Admirers, he always provides a Zany, who is to be plaguey
satirical and witty, ^^is no matter on whom, or what subject, so it pleases,
and by that means the Powder of Post goes off the better. Be it known unto all
men, that I am an English Freeman as well as Mr. Johnson, and will assume the
liberty of being as dogmatically proud and Fantastical in my following
Reflections, as he in his Notes.

The different conceptions of other men's reasonings, are as moulds to Metal,
the self same Ore run into the mould of an Angel, shapes an Angel, or into the
mould of a Devil, represents a Devil. As for my own part, I can see nothing in
the Pastoral Letter, with my Politic Spectacles, but what is rational, and
tends to promote the public good, by persuading an Universal compliance to tbe
present Government. Mr. Johnson, in his own, distorted, and forced Sense,
represents it as a Vial of mischief poured forth on the Nation. Upon which
account I Will examine how far his rambling Notes make good the Charge. But by
the way, when our waggish Noter had luckily thought on the word, Bewitched, I
wonder he did not think himself so, because, whilst only fighting with the
Windmils of his own brain, he wildly fancies that at the same time he mauls the
Bishop. Perhaps I have mixed some sharp reflections with my private thoughts,
for which I have only this to say, Is there not Just Cause?

REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Johnsons NOTES ON THE Pastoral Letter.
IT IS the Usual, but plausible way of some men, when they have expressed their
utmost malice, dipped their pens in the blackest Ink, just to wipe their
mouths, and then write and miscall themselves Civil, and good natured to a
fault. Mr. Johnson of all men in the world might have spared himself that
Hypocritical pains Because His Notes plainly speak his own true Character. Our
Noter in his first line seems to insinuate, as if his bare touch were as fatal
as the Devils, nothing follows it, but Leprosy or Death: But the Doctrine in
the Pastoral Letter will live, because his Impotent efforts and weak Notes,
have not power sufficient to destroy it. His sulphurou^ stinking Ammunition, is
but like the Chemical Pulvis fulminans, which makes a roaring noise, but
without doing the least execution But I advise you as your Friend Mr. Johnson,
I would by no means have you take a With into your hands, least, when I have
reflected your Mountanous Rhodomontadoes into nothing but mere noisy boasting^
you should employ it to A particular use not at first designed: Besides it is A
dangerous weapon in any man's hands, who is generally supposed to be, Non Compos
Mentis.

Who could have Imagined that the topping Mr. Johnson, the All destroying Mr.
Johnson, should condescend so low as to have A controversy with, or to rake in
the Ashes of A senseless Book, without Station, or Cardinals Horse top knots
But by your favor amongst all your law, let us have no Abindon Law, don't hang
the book first, and then Judge it afterward.

He proceeds now to tell us, and without blushing, too, that The design of it
was to make men swear to the Government at any rate, and because only the
Iacobites stood out against the Oath of Allegiance, and were dissatisfied with
it, the Government is made Iacobite, or what they will, that these men may
swear upon their own terms.

I begin to perceive our Noters cloven foot already, I mean, Ex pede Herculem,
The Bishops de^ign (if we, may believe his own words in the Pastoral Letter,
page the 2d) was, to offer such motives and reasons to his Clergy, as might
Answer and satisfy all scruples and objections that might arise concerning your
Allegiance which was due to the King and Queen, lest by their Example of
Nonswearing, the minds of the people should be distracted, and so consequently
alienated from the Government. So that Mr. Johnson has either ignorantly but I
rather believe wilfully misrepresented the plain design of the Bishop, which
was to make the Government all Williamite, and that it was the duty both of
Clergy and Laity to comply with it. What is nothing to the purpose, needs no
answer; Neither am I at leisure, having so many pages before me to follow Mr.
Johnson in his wild goose chase. I don't know Dr. Sandcrofts Heirs, and the
Late Bishop of Ely's Letter, is not the Pastoral Letter.

Now Oracle. To bring men into this Government with their Iacobite Principles
along with them, is to let so many Vipers into its bosom. p. 3.


The Bishop was Expelling these Poisonous Principles; he was persuading their
Compliance^ But how could they comply without Conviction? Unless Mr. Johnson
would have them, though unconvinced, swear at any rate, and so be perjured.
When Men swear, it is presumed they are convinced; If so, then their former
Principles are quitted, they are no longer Iacobites. The Bishop would have all
Men swear to the Government; and if Men will act contrary to its Interest after
they have taken the Oaths, they are to be censured as guilty both of Perjury
and Treachery. It Is my Opinion, that the Jews, who Crucified our Savior, were
not so highly guilty as Judas, who kissed, and at the same time betrayed him.

I Will assure you Mr. Johnson, the Bishop only designs to catch the good Fish in
his Drag-Net, notwithstanding you modestly tell us, he is resolved to catch
them all, good and bad, and to make them swear at any rate; to effect which, he
endeavors to fright them into his Net, with a Venient Romani, The French, the
Irish, and Popish Tyranny will be upon you, if you do not take the Oath.

The Bishop, in his Pastoral Letter, page the 3 d and 4 th, informs his
Clergy,;That by ref^sing the Oath, they might do a considerable Prejudice to
the Public Peace, and shake, as far as in them lay, the present Settlement of
the Nation; and therefore they ought to consider well the Grounds of their
Noncompliance, before they adventured against a Wo^k which in the whole
Progress of it has had so many signal Characters of a Favorable Providence:
and then he adds the Advantages we have reaped by it, and the mischievous
Consequences that might ensue in case they did not take the Oaths; which were,
Popish Tyranny, An Irish Conquest and Massacre, and French Barbarity and
Cruelty. To which he subjoyns, A Man that adventures on so dangerous a Thing as
refusing the Oaths, had need be very sure that he is in all this matter in the
Right, Otherwise he runs a Risque of sighting against God, if he should happen
to be in the wrong.

Upon the whole matter the Bishop makes use of the Topic of Divine Providence
to persuade their Compliance; and the great Miseries we might bring on our own
Heads, after so great a Deliverance, if there were not an Unanimous agreement
amongst us. Gamaliel, I presume, must be acknowledged as Wise a Doctor as Mr.
Johnson can be thought by any of our great Council; and as a Proof of it, the
whole body of the People o^ Israel were concluded by his Advice, in the great
Sanhedrim purposely conveened to determine that Important Affair, in Relation
to those Doctrines and Miracles which were wrought and preached by the
Apostles, and which they were so zealous to oppose. You may at your leisure
read the whole Transaction in the 5 th of the Acts of the Apostles; but because
it is pertinent to my present purpose, I will recite Gamaliel's Advice in the
great Council, contained in the 38 th and 39 th Verses; And now I say unto you,
Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this Counsel, or this Work,
be of Men, it will come to naught: But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. So that as that great
Revolution in Religion, and the New Face of Affairs in the World, was brought
to pass by the powerful Hand of God, and could not be resisted: So also there
are many Instances to be given of the Visible Providence which attended and
procured our happy Settlement, and preserved that Faith of Christ which we
profess in its P^imitive Purity, and against which the utmost Ef^orts and
Artifi^es of a Resolved, and Attempted Power, could not prevail. We might still
have enjoyed an uninterrupted continuance of its kind Influences, had not our
Ingratitude, Divisions as well as Treachery and Malice to each other, those
most provoking sins, loudly called for Judgments to fall on us.

Now; I am the Fairest Adversary in the World, tho I, say it my self. You have
le^t out, Who should not ay it? But I will no more believe you, than if you
should say you were a Saint, or that your Gall did not lie in your Scull;
because you have almost in every Particular throughout your Notes, vented your
ungoverned Passion more than Reason.

One of the things, he says, we ought to fear and tremble at, is, Popish
Tyranny. I would fain know whether the word Popish added to Tyranny, makes it
better or worse?

In this Note Mr. Johnson thinks himself safe; but I Will inform him, that the
Word Tyranny may be made Blacker, that there is no false Heraldry in it, That
Popish and Protestant Tyranny are not alike, and that their Effects are not the
same. Popish Tyranny is the worst of Tyrannies, it attempts to enslave men's
Consciences, their Religion as well as Liberties and Properties: And because I
will be beforehand with him in Instances, French Tyranny is Popish Tyranny,
and a late Author tells us, that Danish is Protestant. I have nothing to say
against your Story of Sir Ellis Leighton, and that the late King's Design was
to subvert the Government; The Papists do not deny it: And as for those
Imprudent Discourses (if there were any such) let the guilty answer for
themselves.

He may please himself with his several Descants on the Word King. Our King
makes the Laws of the Kingdom his Rule to govern by, and desires no more Power
than to be able to do all the good he can to his People.

;I go therefore in the next place to set before you those Reasons that seem
convincing to me, even tho there were no more to be said for the present
Settlement, but that we have a Throne filled, and a King and Queen in
Possession.

After Mr. Johnson has made a Flourish, he tells us, I shall take the pains of
examining them One by One, and find out, if I can, their power of Conviction;
which I am afraid is like an Estate left in Diego's Will.

He is so merry a Gentleman, and has such an Overflowing of frothy Conceits,
that I am afraid he will not live long.

But to the Reasons; The Bishop never designed, nor ever hopes to convince you
with his Reasons. Instead of being as good as your Word in examining the
Bishop's Reasons, a fancy comes in to your Head, that the Throne is widened;
and then you tell us (for wha^ Reason I know not,) That you believe that a King
and Queen in possession alone, or a King and Queen de Facto together, in
Opposition to de Jure, would have frighted Cook, Littleton, etc.

I will repeat no more of what is nothing to the purpose; and I thought you had
loved the great Dead Lawyers better than to contrive any Scare-crows to fright
them. The Bishop, in his Pastoral Letter, page 21 st. Declares the King and
Queens Right to the;Crown from the Determina^ion and Declaration of the Peers
and People of England, chosen and Assembled together with all possible Freedom.
So that he has nothing to do with the Distinction of de Facto and de Iure.

Possession is a very good Title, till a better appears; and the Bishop tells
us, the King and Queen have a Lawful Title and a Right to our Allegiance for
several Reasons; And there is no need of the Bishop's naming the Cause, or how
they came into the Throne; because this Reason is pressed only on Supposition
of their bare Possession of it.

But to the following part of the Paragraph: The;bringing the State of the
Question so low, may seem at first View not to be of so much Advantage to Their
Majesty's Title; but since I intend to carry the matter further before I leave
it, I hope it may be no incongruous method to begin at that which will take in
the greatest Numbers, since there is no dispute in this, that they are actually
in possession of the Throne; that they protect us; and that we by living under
their Protection, and enjoying the benefit of it, are therefore bound to make
some returns for it.

Our No^er in the page and (...) following answers not to the Point in debate;
but ^^^ly insinuates as if the Bishop were starting new Titles, and then talks
of Chemical Drops; for which we ^an^ a Comment.

Well, but now he comes to mind the Process.;Possession of the Throne infers
Protection, and the benefit of Protection infers a Reciprocal Duty. To which he
answers; I will wait for better Arguments; for as for this, it will never
convince. It is no Dispute indeed amongst the Non-Swearers; but is their great
grievance, that there is an actual possession of Kingship, where there is not a
legal Right first proved, and made out.

The Bishop is convincing the Non-Iurors; and we know you are already
convinced. There are Babes in Politics as well as Religion, who cannot digest
strong Meats. Prithee, Dear Mr. Johnson (if thou have not bestowed all thy good
Nature on Sir Roger, Page 92.
) suffer the Bishop to be so charitable as to feed them with Milk. The Bishop
has proved their Legal Right, as I have already observed: But though they will
not own them to have any Right, yet the Bishop urges them to pay their
Allegiance to the King in Possession, because they are protected by him; and in
that they have virtually given their Consent by their Representatives, that he
should be King: Besides, their Allegiance is due, and must be paid to the King
in Possession, because the Late King not being here, it is impossible to be
paid to him. Protection supposes, and implies a Right to Allegiance; for which
Reason the Bishop argues in his next Paragraph: A Man may;Lawfully promise to
do every thing that he may Lawfully do: So that if it is Lawful to Obey the
King, it is also Lawful to promise to do it. And therefore since it does not
appear that any persons do doubt of the Lawfulness of Obeying, it cannot
without any color of Reason be said to be Unlawful to promise it: And if it is
Lawful to promise it, it is also Lawful to Swear it; for an Oath being only the
sacred Confirmation of a Promise, we may Lawfully Swear Every Thing that we may
Lawfully Promise.

After he has diverted himself with his Mouse-Trap Jest, he tells us, That he
will allow the Axiom, or Postu^atum in the first Sentence, at the present, and
talk with it anon. But what he subsumes in the next Sentence, is begging the
Question, and Absolutely False, in these words.;And therefore since it does not
appear, that any persons do doubt of the Law^ulness of Obeying^ it cannot with
any Color of Reason be said to be Unlawful to promise it. For I will
demonstrate on the contrary, that it does appear. That all that ref^se the
Oath, and Ten Thousand Men more, do doubt of the Lawfulness of Obeying. But by
the way, Mr Johnson, to call Ten Thousand Men Knaves at once, is something too
reflecting; for as sharp sighted as you are, I am sure you cannot see their
Hearts. Now follows our Demonstration: If the Non Swearers could give thiir
Assent and Consent to Obey, they would certainly give their Oath likewise, and
all that is within them. But by their doubting the Lawfulness of an Oath of
Obedience, they plainly doubt the Lawfulness of simple Obedience, and not the
Lawfulness of an Oath; for unless they be Quakers they cannot do that. To which
I answer; It Is Matter of Fact, That the Non-Swearers do actually obey, and only
doubt the Lawfulness of taking the Oaths. They do Visibly acquiesce, and do not
openly oppose the Government. They pay their Taxes according as the Law
directs; nor do they think it a sin so to do. Upon which account the Bishop
argues, they may promise to do so; and tharefore if promise, then swear; and so
let their Hearts be where they will, the Law is against them; their Persons and
Estates are protected by the Government, and they are wiser than to go and
starve at St. Germans. I am of Opinion, if Mr. Johnson is over and above
Officious on this Point; and (with Humble Submission) I presume, if they, or
any others, pay their Taxes Honestly, the King will not be concerned on what
Principles they pay their Obedience; and double Taxes are as a Mark on those
who disown him as King, that both He and We may be the better aware of them.

Because Mr. Johnson has such ill Fortune in Demonstrations, I Will try mine;
and endeavor from the two Pages following, Sillogistically to demonstrate him,
neither better nor worse than a Beast. He has Liberty to undemonstrate it in
his Second Part.

If Mr. Johnson did not voluntarily submit to his hard Usage, then his
Submission was an involuntary Act. But Mr. Johnson did not voluntarily submit
to his hard Usage, Ergo; this is evident from his 16 th Page, where he tells
us, that he sent the Marshal word, that he had rather be shot than so used.
Now, Secundum te, page the 15 th. All the World knows, that an involuntary Act
is not an Humane Act; and so consequently must be the Act of a Beast. I know no
way he has to evade this Argument, unless he owns himself a Fish or a Fowl. If
he says he is Fish, I Will call him the great Leviathan; if a Fowl, an Owl;
because being all Face and Feathers, he nearly resembles the Bird of Pallas.
But I verily believe, by its description, he is that very Ass he mentions in
his 34 th page, who looks like Wisdom and Gravity, and is not. I always thought
Vnvoluntary Acts, as well as Voluntary, were Humane, and the Acts of Men; but
Mr. Johnson tells us in his 48 th page; If it were not lawful to advance
Paradoxes and Contradictions to common Sense, how could Men show their
Learning? Or wherein would they differ from other Men? Ex Ore tuo Iudico. And
now I am at lei^ure to reflect on his Instances, with which he pretends to
destroy the Bishop's Axiom:;A Man may lawfully promise to do every thing which
he may lawfully do.

Observe our Noter: I will give him an Instance to the contrary. It is
certainly lawful for me, because our Savior commands it; If any man compel me
to go a mile with him to carry his burden, go with him twain. (But by the way,
when he misrepresents our Savior's Words, it is no w^nder he serves the Bishop
so; for the Text does not speak of carrying any burden. But, not to interrupt
his Instance, I will admit of it for once) though all such Precepts are to be
taken with a Grain of Salt. But is it therefore lawful for me to promise this
man to be his Pack horse all my Life, and so starve my Wife and Children in not
providing for them; and in so doing to be worse than an Infidel? I trow not.
It Is a mighty thing to destroy a Bishop's Axiom, and nothing can be more proper
to do it than a Text of Scripture. Observe the Axiom;;A man may lawfully
promise to do every thing he may lawfully do. Now the Instance; Our Savior
commands, If any man compel me to go a mile with him, to carry his burden, to
go with him twain. From which he in^ers; But is it therefore lawful for me to
promise this man to be his Pack horse all my Life, and to starve my Wi^e and
Children? etc. No, no, by no means lawful; Besides, you cannot be a Pack-horse;
and your own Instance will not let you be worse than an Infidel. There is a
great difference between lawfully promising, and being compelled to do any
thing; and therefore your Instance is nothing to the purpose (I can find no
power of Conviction in it, and I am afraid it is like an Estate left in our
late Diego Wickhams' Will) because all Compultion takes away the Liberty of
doing, or not doing; Promises to do, or not do, signify nothing when I am
Forced, or Hindered: Besides, your Inference is an unlawful Action; and you
cannot lawfully promise; therefore you are obliged not to promise any man to be
his Pack horse, and by that means to starve your Wi^e and Children; and
therefore you may not lawfully do it. I may lawfully promise to assist my
Neighbor to carry his Burden; and therefore I may lawfully do it. For any
thing I know, our Noter may be a good Lawyer, but I am sure he is but a Dabbler
at instancing. To proceed to the Second Instance.

It Is as great a Conquest for a Philosopher to refute an Axiom, as a General to
take a strong Town in Flanders; and therefore our Noter brings another
battering Instance against it. I Will assure you Mr. Johnson, I have no prejudice
against your Person; I will neither lessen your Merits nor Sufferings: But I am
in the way of writing, Mr. Johnson; my Controversy is only with your Book; and
though I by my self, I; Page ^he 17 th.
I say that my Motion I was sure was Right, being drawn by my own Hand (which
is more positive perhaps than Old Bracton would have said) so I by my self, I
say that your Instance is wrong; therefore I will mind the Process: Out of this
long and truly impertinent Story, I put this short Case: It was certainly
lawful for me to submit to this Usage, when I could not help it; but I had
deserved to die the Death of a Dog, and had betrayed the Rights of an
Englishman, if I had entered into Engagements to abide by it. Observe the
Consequence; therefore a man may not lawfully promise to do every thing which
he may lawfully do. O profound Logician!

Now I would fain understand how Mr. Johnson will reconcile his lawfully doing
of that which he tells us was compulsorily, wrongfully and illegally inflicted,
and more especially when he declares in his 15 th page, That Forced Obedience
is not the Obedience of Men; It is Passive and Dog-kennel Obedience. If I
should pursue this Point, and prove that he has a Grain of Passive Obedience
about him, he would certainly hang himself; therefore I desist, and will not be
guilty of Murder. This is so pretty an Instance that I cannot choose but repeat
it once more. It was certainly lawful for me to submit to this Usage, when I
could not help it. Ay, ay, it is very true, too true, we must all submit when we
cannot help it; there is no Remedy but Passive Pati^nce: But you know the Old
Saying, Patience per Force is a Medicine for a mad Dog. Now I don`t find by the
Story thar you lawfully promised to submit to this Usage; which you might have
done too, if you had thought it fit; because you tell us, It cost you Two or
Three Fees not to be kept in Acta Custodia. So that our Impregable Axiom holds
out still,;That a Man may lawfully promise to do what he may lawfully do.

Having defeated your first and Second Line, jam ad Triari^s ventum est, I
think I had as good stop here, lest in his Second Part I should be noted on as
a Couquering Clergyman; But the best on it is I fear no Character he can give
me, and therefore will attack him in his third Instance.

At the Parliament at Oxford in 65, when they made the Five Mile Act, there was
the same enslaving Project on foot, as there was afterward in Seventy odd, to
Swear to the Government in Church and State without Alteration. The Wise Lord
Treasurer Southampton was against it, and said, that though he liked
Episcopacy, yet he would not be Sworn to it; Because he might hereafter be of
another Opinion. And perhaps he had been further off from that Oath, if he had
lived till now.

I smell your design in this instance, it is to let us know that you don't like
Episcopacy so well now as formerly, for any story that you could have thought
on, had been as much to the purpose as this.

If the Lord Southampton was satisfied with Episcopacy at that time, he might
have taken an Oath to it, especially if it had been Enacted into a Law so to
do, A Law would have concluded his Opinion, and determined his Compliance, till
it had been repealed; and had he lived till now Episcopacy would have been the
same thing as then: The Virtual Consent of every individual Person is given
when a Law is made; and therefore I must obey when what is commanded is not
undeniably a sin; and my Disobedience is a sin, when the matter is lawful. So
that rebus sic stantibus, a man may lawfully promise to do what he may lawfully
do; and if there be an evident and public Alteration in the Subject Matter,
the Obligation ceases: Neither do I apprehend any Reason from the Law of God or
Men, but that every Man may swear Allegiance, or to be quiet under our present
Government (though they would have had things otherwise settled) because a
private Opinion is not to be opposed against the general Determination of the
Body of the Nation; And to me it appears Imprudence and Mockery, that after the
Non-Iuring, Passive Men have beat King James out of the Kingdom (as far as
their Principles allowed) with their Primitive Weapons, Prayers and Tears; That
is, that now we are delivered by Providence, and Second Causes, from Popery and
Slavery, that the very same men (some of which put their Helping Hand too) are
praying it back again; for the French Court is the worst in the World to
instruct Princes to govern according to Laws; and I don't hear Father Peter's is
turned Protestant.

Now to the part of the Bishops Paragraph, which follows in these words.;And as
it appears that there lies no just Objection to the swearing Obedience, so
there arises none from the word Allegiance; for that being in its Original
Signification, nothing but the Service that a Vassal owed to the Chief Lord of
the Fee. If the King, is owned in Fact to be our King, then he is the Lord of
the Fee, and by Consequence Allegiance is due to him; Allegiance being also now
in our present Acceptance, An Obedience according to Law, that is to say, not
a Blind nor absolute Obedience, but such an Obedience as is defined and limited
by the Law, then the Scruple that arises out of the Word Allegiance vanishes.

In this short Remnant, our Noter tells us, there are abundance of things
liable to Exception.

First, That he out-runs the Constable, in taking for granted an Oath of
Obedience, where he has neither proved bare Obedience, much less a promise of
Obedience onwardly to be due; for which I refer my self to what passed on the
former part of the Paragraph.

There was no need of a Promise of bare Obedience, because they did actually
Obey; and therefore the Bishop argues, as I before observed; That ^or that
Reason they might Promise to Obey; and if Promise, then Swear. The Bishop
always owned them to have the Point of Right, and how they came by it, in his
21 st page; which I have already taken notice of.

Secondly, He here gives us a Notion of Allegiance by the halves; for he
says,;It is in its Original signification nothing but the Service due to the
Chief Lord of the Fee. You only give the Bishop's Sense by halves; therefore I
will recite his own Words contained at large in the 24 th and 25 th pages of
the Pastoral Letter.;The very Term of Allegiance rises out of the Feudal Law;
by which the Chief Lord of a Fee, when he made any Grants to his Vassals, took
them bound in consideration of these Grants, to adhere to him, to defend his
Person, and to assist him in his Wars; but all this being done by the Vassals,
in consideration of the Fee that was granted, an Original Contract is plainly
implied in it; so that if the Lord of the Fee should go to take away the Fee it
self, or to change the Nature of the Subjection in which the Vassals were put
by the first Grant, then the Oath which was grounded on it could not be
supposed to bind them any longer. So that the Bishop supposes a Reciprocal Duty
between the Lord of the Fee and the Vassal, because if the former violated his
Contract, the Obligation of Allegiance ceased.

Thirdly, He makes the King the Lord of the Fee; to entitle him to our Oath of
Allegiance. It is nothing so, for the people of England do not hold of the
King, what Holy Church does I know not; they may be his Vassals for ought I
know; I am sure I am none.

It Is fixing your own private Construction upon the Bishop's Words, when you
write as if he should suppose the King to be Landlord of all England, or as if
Holy Church (as you are pleased to express your self) owned or paid any
Allegiance different from other people. The Bishop tells us plainly,;Our
Allegiance in general is an Obedience according to Law; which he explains; Not
a Blind nor Absolute Obedience, but such an Obedience as is defined and limited
by the Law. Which imports, that we owe no other Obedience, and therefore if we
are commanded to do or suffer any thing that is contrary to Law, the Obligation
of our Obedience ceases, and we may refuse it. And here I will insert what the
Bishop affirms to this purpose, in his Measures of Submission to the Supreme
Authority; which may serve to clear him from the unjust and malicious
Imputations of ignorant as well as prejudicial Men. Page 9.;There is nothing
more evident than that England is a Free Nation, that has its Liberties and
Properties reserved to it, by many positive and express Laws: If then we have a
Right to our Property, we must likewise be supposed to have a Right to preserve
it: for those Rights are by the Law secured against the Invasions of the
Prerogative; and by consequence we must have a Right to preserve them against
those Invasions. It is also evidently declared by our Law, that all Orders and
Warrants that are issued out in Opposition to them, are null of themselves; and
by consequence, any that pretend to have Commissions from the King, for those
Ends, are to be considered as if they had none at all, since those Commissions
being void of themselves, are indeed no Commissions in the construction of the
Law; and therefore they who act in virtue of them, are still to be considered
as private persons, who come to invade and disturb us.

Fourthly, He makes a King in Fact to be Lord of the Fee. We have been too long
haunted with this word Fact, and therefore I will try to lay the Goblin.

The Bishop has nothing to do with your Goblin^ Fact; He always owned the
King's Right to the Crown to be Legal, and by the Virtual Consent of the
People. If the Bishop chances to write any word, though in the Application of
it, it relates to other persons, without ever weighing, or considering the
intention or d^sign of it, He runs away with his whymsical mis-apprehension of
the ma^ter, and from his own mistake makes and forces the Bishop to say or
write any thing to his squinting purpose. The Bishop applies himself to the Non
jurors, because, as they could not deny him to be King in Fact; that is, to be
in possession of the Throne, so they ought to swear Allegiance to him in
consideration of the Protection he gave them, and that they lived under his
Government, whether they did or would own him Rightful King or not. Your
Supposition of Forcible Entry, which ^ollows, is altogether impertinent, as to
the Bishop; because he has told you over and over, that the King has a Right
to possess the Throne, by that Legal Possession of it, which was given him by
the Lords and Commons.

Fifthly, He would have people swear an Obedience according to Law, in
Opposition to a Blind and Absolute Obedience, though they are still to retain
their Passive Obedience, which is certainly Blind and Absolute Obedience, or
else there is no such thing in the World.

In this place more particularly, I appeal to Mr. Iohnson's greatest A^mirers
(if they have but common Justice for Truth) whether any Jesuit could have
perverted the Intention, or Sense of any Author more Villainously and
Barefaced than he has the Bishop's in this Note: Is here the least shadow of
an Insinuation of Passive Obedience, when our Allegiance is declared an
Obedience only according to Law; that is to say, Not a Blind or Absolute
Obedience; but such an Obedience as is defined and limited by the Laws. Now
what could have been expressed more opposite to Passive Obedience? Nor can
they, or any others, retain their Passive Obedience if they keep to the Laws,
because Passive Obedience is a tame submission to those illegal Commands of a
King that are evidently against, and tend to destroy all Law. No Man has
asserted the Laws, and Public Liberty with more Reason, nor more Nervously
enforced than the Bishop of Salisbury (which appears from the Quotation I made
out of his Measures of Submission to the Supreme Authority.) And it is a base
Imputation to say, That he would have any body retain the mistaken Notion of
Passive Obedience, or shows how it should not hurt them; when at the same time
he so plainly and positively declares the contrary. But it is enough for Mr.
Johnson to make the Bishop enter a Salvo for, or to be an high Asserter of the
mistaken Doctrine, when he only mentions the word Obedience, as in this place;
and much more when he repeats the Highest Principles of Passive Obedience, in
the 20 th page. Tho at the same time it is impossible, if a Man be but honest,
or has but a mean Judgment to apprehend them any bodies (as the Bishop
supposes) but the Non-Iurors; which will evidently appear, if you will take the
trouble to read part of the 19 th and 20 th pages of the Pastoral Lettter;
where it is as apparent also that the Bishop argues from other Principles, That
the Non-Iurors ought to swear to the present Government, even though they
should retain, or according to their Highest Principles of Passive Obedience. I
will only repeat a Line or two in the beginning of that Paragraph, to inform
you of the Bishop's design.;But I will in the last place carry this matter
further, to justify the present Settlement, as a thing Right and Lawful in it
self. Should I have said, that I was the Fairest Adversary in the World, and
should have had so many plain Instances of misrepresenting plainly proved upon
me, I should have expected but little Credit to be given to me: But I Will
warrant you, Face and Feathers will stare it out. And now I Will leave our Noter
to roll and tumble in his own wit, and divert himself with his story of the
Welchman, his Bow-string and Black-Box, his Thebaean Legion, his Mine-take-it
and Your-take-it. And because I will be sure to win his Favor, I do own that I
have, and always had as great an Aversion to the mistaken Notion of Passive
Obedience, as he has to Maxims. But by the way, he must let me be convinced by
my own following Reasons, though he will not let the Bishop by his; To which I
will only premise, That it is the Nature of Mankind to be easier persuaded and
convinced by modest and plain Reasonings from their Errors and Mistakes, than
banter'd and hectored; and that it is more Christian and Generous rather to lend
an helping Hand to a Blind Man, who has mistaken his way, than rail at his
Imperfection. I wonder how this Doctrine of the Cross came to be called the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and I much more wonder how it should obtain so
much Credit in a Country where the Christian Religion is the Established
Religion, and the Laws are the Rule and Standard of all Obedience. I think
moreover, that Passive Obedience is as great a Bull in Terms as Roman
Catholic, Universal Particular; for all Obedience is Active, and to Obey is to
do the thing commanded; and Passive Non-obedience would have sounded much
better, because the Design of the Doctrine is to suffer rather than obey, or
when I will not obey; and the Primitive Christians were under an Obligation to
suffer even to Death rather than deny the Faith they had confessed, and so
become Apostates. What I apprehend to be the proper and true meaning of the
Doctrine, is, to suffer rather than Apostatize. But to reflect on the practice
of it amongst us. As where the Grand Seignior's Horse once sets his Foot, no
Grass grows, so where this mistaken Notion of the Doctrine takes place, all
Laws must be trod under Foot: The Doctrine of the Cross was, and is a true
Doctrine; but not calculated for the Year 1688. in a Christian legally
established Government, and is altogether impracticable amongst us; because if
any man, upon what account soever, or from whomsoever commissioned, shall
attempt to take away my Goods or Life by force, or in an illegal manner, I may
lawfully resist them, by the Laws of God, Nature, and my Country; Otherwise
that which should be my Rule, would be my Snare; So that it can be no sin in me
to do what the Laws of God, Nature, and my Country direct. Were I in Turkey,
and the Grand Seignior should send an Express to acquaint me, That I must
either turn Mohammedan, or kiss the Bow string; it is my Duty, and I hope God
would enable me rather to suffer Death than deny and renounce the true Faith of
Christ. But there is a great difference between a Turkish, Arbitrary and
Mohammedan, and an English, Limited, and Christian Government. Theory and
Practice are two different things, and the latter many times discovers the
Absurdity of the former; and I am sure, though I should have preach^d my Lungs
out in the Neighborhood where I lived, not one thick^skull'd Miner or Collier
would have been persuaded that 'twas his Duty to sit tamely with his Hands in
his Pockets, whilst an Irish Dragoon trimmed his Ears and Nose off. Nature,
Humane Nature will struggle.

Thus having stated this Point, I think it will not be improper in this place
to offer my Sentiments to those who do not take the Oaths, in relation to the
Oath of Allegiance which they have already taken, and by which they account
themselves bound up. It Is allowed, that a Law is to be obeyed, and an Oath to
be taken according to the sense and intention of the Legislators. In the late
times there was a distinction between the Kings Person and his Authority, upon
which account there was an Oath framed to obviate and take away any such
Mischeivous Distinction, And tho it extended to secure the King as to his
person and legal rights, yet it was never designed as a foundation of an
arbitrary and irresistible power, or that the subject might not resist any
violent and illegal proceedings, and more especially when the whole rights of
the Community were struct at, and a subversion of the Government undeniably put
in practice. It Is Rebellion to invade the Kings right, but not so, to preserve
and defend what the Laws and constitution of the Government have given me a
just and legal right and title to. There is a latitude implied in this Oath,
Unless when we take it we swear to be slaves from that day forward, for if
taken in a strict sense it cancels all our natural and positive rights and Laws
at once; we are bound hand and foot, and only left at the mercy of an Absolute
King, and contrary to all reason and justice, the Impostumated and unnatural
Power and will of one, is superior and preferrable to the good and
preservation of all the rest of the body Politic: the Original Government was
by the consent of the people, as also the form and kind, and the good and
welfare of Mankind is the undoubted end of it. Salus Populi, Suprema Lex. To
which purpose I will only add the Opinion of the Judicious and Ingenious Author
of the Character of a Trimmer page the 7th; When all is said, There is a
natural reason of State, an undefinable thing, grounded upon the Common good of
Mankind, which is Immortal and in all Changes and Revolutions, still preserves
its Original Right of saving a Nation, when a Letter of the Law perhaps would
destroy it; And by whatsoever means it moves, carries a power with it that
admits of no Opposition, being supported by Nature, which inspireth an
immediate consent at so critical times into every individual Member, to that
which vi^ibly tends to the preservation of the whole: And this being so, a
wise Prince, instead of controverting the Right of this Reason of State, will
by all means endeavor it may be on his side, and then he will be secure.

But to return to my Noter, who would have done but honestly to have cleared
the Bishop from this false Imputation, by informing the World with what he says
in his 26 th page of the Pastoral Letter; where he presumes those Men to have
been very much mistaken, who have taken up an Opinion,;That there is an
uncontrollable and Supreme Power lodged with our Kings by a Divine Deputation,
which exempts them from being called to an account, or resisted by their
people, let their Violations of the Law be never so many, or so Eminent. And in
the next page, he proves it from the Original Articles granted by King John,
which he there repeats with this Inference^;And the Subjects are not only
warranted, but r^quir'd to enter into Associations and Oaths for that Effect.
This is an Evidence, that by the Ancient Constitution of England, there was no
such irresistible Authority in our Kings. as some have been inclined ^o
imagine. To which the Bishop subjoyns this wise and seasonable Caution:;But
after all, if there are any who are so possessed with their pre-conceited
Opinions, that they either cannot lay them down, or will not confess that they
have been mistaken in their Notions of Politics, these ought to be very sure
that they are in the right, before they will adventure, as far as in them lies,
to undermine and shake the present Constitution. To what base shifts is
impotent Malice put, to compass its wicked, but unsuccessful designs?

But to proceed to the Bishop's 4 th Paragraph:;This is either true, or those
who live upon a Continent, and that are subject to the Conquests and Inva^ions
of their Neighbors, must be miserable: For tho our happy Situation has
exempted us for a whole Age from falling under any such difficulties, yet this
is a Case that falls often out in all different States which are on the same
Continent. Upon which our Noter observes; This is shifting the Scene; for he
knows that we are a World by our selves, and have nothing to do with the
Continent. It is a Land-loping Argument, and till we are in the Condition of
the Flanderkin Towns^ he need not urge us with their Practice and Example. And
he is wholly out of the way in every word he utters. For we are not deserted or
forsaken, nor conquer`d or subdued, nor under the power of an Enemy, nor
treated as Enemies, nor cudgelled into an Oath of Allegiance, nor ever will be.

Our Noter in this place is cudgelling and conquering his own shadow; for the
Bishop has not affirm`d that we are so barbarously used, but knows that we are
in profound peace. What is Reason in England, is Reason in Flanders, and all
the world over; The Bishop is only comparing and stating the Point and Case of
the Non jurors with that of the Subjects on the Continent, who are often
subject to Conquests. He is not come as yet to the Merits of the Cause, but
argues, That a bare possession, which gives protection, obliges those who live
under it to swear Allegiance; and it is matter of Fact, that the Flanderkins do
swear Allegiance to the French when he is Master of a Town, and so in like
manner to the Spaniard; so that he infers the lawfulness and reasonableness of
so doing; and offers it as a Reason and Argument to the Non-jurors; and the
inevitable destruction of Cities and Societies if they did not; and so by
consequence, that Allegiance is a diffeasable thing, and may be transferred
when there is a pressing necessity for it. If I should say, Mr. Johnson was
wonderfully subject to error and mistakes, and that he was no more Infallible
in his Notes than the Pope of Rome, we should have him call it a Land-loping
Argument in his Second Part; but I am sure what he has noted on the Bishop's
Argument, by way of Comparison is Foreign and Outlandish to the purpose.

But our weak Noter proceeds in his mistake, and tells us; If I were hired to
write against the Oath of Allegiance, I would use such Arguments as this is.

I verily believe you would, because I find by Experience you are very apt to
write what is altogether impertinent to the matter in hand, and in most places
your Notes are quite contrary to the Point.

Are we in the Case of those that are slaves under the Spaniard, and slaves
under the French, that often change their Master, but never their Condition,
that are Prize, and re-taken, and Prize still? Let him answer me that.

I will answer for the Bishop: No, we are not. Nor has the Bishop mentioned
one word of Slavery, or compar`d our condition with theirs. We have indeed
changed our Master some time since, and I think much bettered our condition.

But in all his Travels, could he find no Copy for us to write after, nor no
body to match us with, but a conquered People?

The Bishop has unluckily made use of the word Conquest and Invasions; tho
applied to the Continent, and our Misrepresenter will have it, that the Bishop
is matching our Condition with a conquered people. But I think any man who has
a Grain of Sense, must own the Bishop intended nothing like it; but only as he
evidently tries to prove the Absurdity and Falseness of Indiffeasable
Allegiance.

Mr. Johnson tells us; I love to talk with Maxims as I do the sight of an Ass,
who looks like Gravity and Wisdom, and is not. I know the Reason of it, a Jest
upon an Ass is thrown away, and Maxims are such wise and grave things, that
they are above the short reach of your Understanding and then you lose an
Opportunity of showing your dogrel parts. But to the other part of our
Paragraph.;For if subjects owe their natural Prince such an Obstinate
Allegiance that neither desertion nor conquest can dissolve it, then in what a
miserable condition must they be, when they fall under the power of their
Enemy, that never thinks himself secure of them, but treats them still as
Enemies till they swear Allegiance to him; upon which observe our Noter.

I can tell him (And that is all, I know you cannot prove it, and I am sure the
Bishop is not apt to believe every thing you say) that Allegiance is so
Obstinate a thing that neither desertion nor conquest, nor any thing in the
World but what is intrinsical to it (that is breach of Covenant or consent of
both parties) dissolve it: It is a moral duty, and Heaven and Earth may pass
away before Allegiance can pass away.

Sincerely, Mr. Johnson, I thought you had been a better Lawyer than to tell us
that Allegiance is a Moral duty, I always apprehended it to be a Legal Duty,
and Having a Good Memory I remember you tell us in the 21 st page, that besides
the service due to the Lord of Fee, as it was the Duty that the Liege Lord owed
to his Liegeman. I must confess I never met with Lord in Fee, Liege Lord, or
Liegeman in any book of Morality, or that treated on Moral Duties, that I ever
read. But Mr. Johnson is a great Scholard, and has conversed with old musty
Books which I never saw.

Now, for want of judgment you are profaning Scripture with your Heaven and
Earth may pass away before Allegiance can pass away. I suppose I shall have a
convenient opportunity to prove, that Allegiance may pass away, in this page,
or the next; therefore I Will defer it.

Our Noter is now upon his Queries, which I will answer. As for Desertion, we
must first know what it is, before we can know whether it will affect our
Allegiance. A Soldier^s deserting, nnd running away from his Colors, we know;
but what is this to deserting a Crown or a Kingdom? It Is just like a Soldiers
running away from his Colors; it is running away from his Kingdom. You ask, Did
the King desert willingly or unwillingly? I believe unwillingly, because he
would have willingly staid and set up Popery and Arbitrary Power: Besides, I am
sure he had no such Kingdom to go to. Did not his people desert him first? No;
he deserted his people first, in that he dissolved our Allegiance, and
destroyed our Laws with his Dispensing Prerogative, and by employing Papists,
who were incapable by Law to act in the Government; and then because we were
such foolish Passive Rebels, who would not help the Irish Dragoons to cut our
own Throats, he withdrew, and left us in a state of Anarchy; but we took care
not to continue so long.

The matter of Fact in truth is this, K. James resolved to bring in Popery and
Slavery upon us. The generality of the Nobility, Gentry, and Common People,
were resolved neither to be Papists or Slaves. Our desperate Circumstances were
represented to the P. of Orange, who readily engaged to attempt our Rescue. He
came; The unconcerned Nation did not think it an Invasion, but were rather glad
of an opportunity to free themselves from those imminent and real dangers they
were surrounded with. Upon which account some joined with the Prince, others
expected the Event. The Officers of the Army ^hought themselves under no
Obligation by K. James's Favors, to betray their Country, or draw their Swords
more effectually to destroy their Liberties and Legal Rights; (which would have
been the consequence of their success) and therefore would not sacrifice these
for any future precarious Interest, when 'twas vi^ible their former
Advancements were only designed for sinister ends; and they who would not
promise to do every thing they were Closeted about, or what Father Peter's
thought necessary to carry on their designs, were either frowned on, or
displaced. The King's trusty darling Subjects, the Papists, who would live and
die with him, they threw down their Arms, deserted, and were ready to run into
Awger-holes, when a Sham-Declaration threatened to leave them to the mercy of
the Army, Fin-landers in Bear-skins; and Mirmidons with broad Swords, and
bright Armor. As for what followed, K. James may thank himself, his Bigottry,
and Prince-destroying Caterpillars. Experience has always verified what Seneca
the Tragedian has observed, speaking in the Person of K. Agamemnon: Violentum
nemo unquam Imperium continuit diu, Moderata durant.

Well, now we are coming to the Merits of the Cause; Had the people reason to
forsake K. James or no? Had he ^or^eited? Had he broke his Allegiance (let it
be some other Law-word; for I never heard that the King owed Allegiance to his
People) first; Was he the aggressor? Yes. The Bishop owns all this that I have
answered, in his Pastoral Letter, and was one of those who actually came with
the Prince to rescue us, and to re-settle and preserve our Government according
to its Legal Constitution. But the Argument the Bishop employs to persuade the
Non-jurors to take the Oaths, is, from the mischiefs that attend Indefeasible
Allegiance; and that it is no true Maxim, that the bare desertion of K. James,
without considering the Cause, was a sufficient ground for the Non Jurors to
comply, and take the Oaths.

I am indebted to you a Proof, that Allegiance may pass away, page 37.
and I will discharge it with five of your own words (which you little dreamed
would do it) What is impracticable is void. Our Allegiance to K. James is
impracticable; therefore it is void. For if we are here, and K. James is I know
not where, we cannot pay our Allegiance to him; and therefore must transfer it
to the King in possession, who protects us. In the next Page you say, If he
deserted, he was forced to desert; for the very ground he stood upon fell from
under him. But what wicked Rogues do you think undermined the ground he stood
on? Why, Father Peter's, and the rest of the Jesuits and Monks, who worked night
and day to undermine and subvert the Government: The very Spawn of those who
undermined, and laid Powder, with a design to blow up your Patrons Predecessors.

So much ^or Desertion (and so much for nothing to the purpose); Now for
Conquest. Tho there is a great difference between ^aying what could and might
be done, and what is actually done; yet Mr. Johnson, I must beg your excuse for
a page or two on this Point; and tho you have taken the liberty to reflect on
Kings, Marquisses and Bishops, with several other of the Nobility; yet I have
so great a deference to, and must be concluded by all Decisions of the great
Council of the Nation; and I am convinced it would be a great piece of
Imp^udence, as well as Impudence, to offer any thing on this Point, tho it were
agreeable with my private Sentiments; and therefore as you have been bantering
upon partial^ I Will endeavor to repay you in your own Coin, in your supposition
of a true Conquest. The Point you propose, is, Whether a true Conquest
dissolves Allegiance?

Suppose a King and his people (who are all of a piece, till either of them
break Faith with the other) are both run down, and fall under the Chance of
War. It is no matter which of them is in the Conquerors hands, because they are
all as one. If their King have that hard fate, they must either rescue or
ransom him, tho their private Money and their Church Plate go for it. And if
any of his people fall into the Enemies hands, he must do the same by them.

I perceive already we are like to have a rare Quixotian Conquest. Our Noter
supposes a King and his people (of one iudividual and indivisible piece) to be
conquered. Well, what then must be done? Why, i^ their King have the hard fate,
they must either rescue or ransom him, tho their private money and their
Church^Plate go for it. Why not their own House^Plate, Mr. Johnson? But I
presume he supposes the Conqueror, or his Soldiers, had secured that before, or
that the Church Plate might be better spared. No, no, the poor solitary King is
only conquered; and in this part o^ the supp^sition, the people are in a pretty
good condition. But, Mr. Johnson, in my Opinion this was a cleaver Tip of this
Co^queror too, only to tip the King down. By the story, this King of yours did
no more carry the Government in his Pocket than K. James. page 40.
But it is an improper time, Mr. Johnson, to rescue a King, when he is truly and
wholly conquered; and what should he be ransomed for, when his Country was
lost, and in the Conquerors possession. To proceed: And if any of his people
fall into the Enemies hands^ he must do the same by them. Very true, One good
turn deserves another. I thought, Mr. Johnson, you had set aside partial
Conquest, and were come to that which was true and total; and if so, you would
have outdone all our Conquering Bishops, which you tell us, meant that K.
James was conquered, and not the Nation, because you now suppose the people ^o
be conquered, and your Eutopian King unconquered. But the truth o^'t is, you
run away from the Point here^ as you have done all along in your Notes; and we
find only a few Prisoners taken, and no true Conquest, according to the
supposition. If neither of them can do this, but they are over power'd, and
unable, the next thing is to advise the party that is in the Briars, to make
the best terms they can; Redime te captum quam queas Minimo.

If neither of them can do this, but they are overpowered, and unable. Oh hard
fate! page 27.
What a Fervor would such a Conquest leave upon this King and peoples minds!
Prithee, Mr. Johnson, page 35.
(I know your Soul pitied the Case of the miserable Flanderkins) give this
distressed King and People your sage advice. And in return of your kindness,
I Will advise you to get clear of this Briary Supposition upon very easy Terms;
Own you did not write it in one of your lucid Intervals.

We must not forget the Inference which follows: But how then does Conquest
dissolve Allegiance, when it is plainly the agreement of the parties
themselves, which sets them ^ree from one another. I am of Opinion, the
soberest man in Bedlam cannot imagine how, from your Supposition, which is
partial, total, and all the while No Conquest at all -- Risum teneatis.

But to proceed to the last part of this Paragraph:;Now all the true Maxims of
Government being such, that they must tend to the preservation, and not to the
ruin of Mankind, it is certain that all those are false which tend to the
inevitable destruction of Cities and Societies; and therefore this of an
indiffeasible Allegiance must be reckoned among these, since the fatal
Consequences that must attend upon it are evident; and this is the Opinion in
which all who have considered this matter, either as Lawyers or Casuists do
agree.

I have ever had a great aversion to all Maxims of Government, true or false;
for there always lies lurking this Deceit in Generals and niversals, that tho
they be true for the most part, yet they are conceived in Terms large enough to
be falsely applied; and then they become false, and are usually the ^ools that
dishonest men go to work with: And I never saw a man deal in transcendental
Politics, which are over our Heads, and avoid coming down to particulars, and
to the point, but with a purpose to deceive.

But why an Aversiou to true Maxims, Mr. Johnson? Maxims are Truths of Quality,
and ought to be respected and loved as well as meaner Truths: If I had not
proved your Maxim of Indiffeasible Allegiance no true one, you would have
thought me very simple and unmannerly, if I had any ways expressed my hatred to
it, only because it was a Maxim. What is true, and of use, ought not to be
rejected, because it may be abused and perverted by ignorant and malicious men.
And by what I find in your Notes, you have avoided coming down to Particulars,
and the Point, either for want of Judgment, or to deceive your Readers. But the
Bishop of Salsbury may thank your roaving Brain, in that you have only
tran^crib'd his Oracular Maxim, and passed it by unnoted on at present. Our
Noter has such an Exalted Imagination, that no meaner a Ghost can enter into
it, than that of a Duke or Bishop. But I will offer my presumed advice, that
for the future you be not too witty and severe on the Remains of so Judicious
and Learned a Prelate as Bishop Sanderson, (tho at the same time the greatest
Men are but Men, and subject to mistakes as well as the most inconsiderable)
lest when the Renowned Mr. Johnson shall be no more, his Notes shall be
trampled on like common dust.

I have been credibly informed a matter, not unknown to a Lady of great Honor,
that Mr. Johnson has been offered very good Preferments (by the means of the
Bishop of Salisbury too) since the Revolution; but what is a Deanary to a
Mouth-watring Bishopric or Archbishopric? Now to speak with the Freedom of an
honest Englishman, I am glad that I am engaged with Mr. Johnson, and not Your
Grace; because, if we may believe your own envious Remarks on Episcopacy and
Bishops, tam vivos quam mortuos, dead and alive, I am apt to conj^cture, we
should have had a Wolf in Sheeps clothing. Well, but as Monsieur Montaigne
says, since we cannot all be great, let us have the pleasure of railing at
Greatness.

Our Noter has spared the Bishop's Maxim at present, and has brought a
Volunteer to the stake. Necessity has no Law, is another Maxim, but it is pity
there is no Law for it; for it has always been on the Court side, and never on
the Countries, tho one would think the Maxim lay equally betwixt them both; but
the truth of it is, they either are, or should be all one.

Try your Interest, Mr. Johnson, the next S^ssion, and procure a Law to be made
against all Maxims but your own. I warrant, we have some Old Story of K.
Charles the first's time, or of some dead Lord Chief Justice to be hooked in,
which signifies nothing to the Maxim, which all Mankind have a Right and Title
to. A pretended Necessity is no Necessity; and a Real Necessity supercedes, and
is superior to all Law. The Court and Country agree very well together, and
may equally make use of the Maxim. So that the Subject of these Two Pages, as
of diverse others, are but as feathers to stuff out our Noter's bulky book.

And now I leave it to the Judgment of the impartial and unprejudiced Reader,
whether Mr. Johnson has either answered or destroyed the Bishop's Reasons and
Topics offered to the Non-Iurors; He has posi^ively affirmed many things, but
proposed no one Argument to prove, That bare Possession does not entitl^ a King
to our Allegiance, or that Desertion is not a suffi^ient Argument to transfer
it; or that Allegiance is indi^feasible: So that upon the whole matter, he has
only forced and misrepresented the Bishop's D^sign and Sense, and has
endeavored to confirm and continue the Non-Iurors in their Opinions, if they
will not come up to his own.

As to the remaining part of his book, which is a kind of confused Narrative,
or Invective against former mistakes and mismanagements, and of scurrilous
R^fl^ctions of his own, I do not see any good can be intended or proceed from
it. Nor is this, or any other, a proper time to rake into, and revive the
expiring Differences and Divisions that have been amongst us: Nor can it any
ways promote, but visibly tends to obstruct the public good. Come, come, Mr.
Johnson, we complain of our fore fathers, and censure former Transactions; and
succeeding Generations will do the same by us, in that we have been too much
addicted to our own private humors and Interests, instead of laying aside all
foolish Animosities, and joining hand in hand to act seasonably as well as
vigorously against the common Enemy. But there always was, and is, and ever
will be, Fools, and Knaves, and Madmen, who did not, do not, and will not see
the true Interest of their Country. Some Men who prefer their own ungodly gain,
private Revenges and Picks, who don't care whether the floating Island sink or
swim, if they do not sit at Helm, tho unable and incapable to steer the least
Cockboat: But notwithstanding all this, Men had always different Sentiments of
things; and 'twill be for the most part found as equally impossible to persuade
a considerable number of men, tho the matter be in a manner obvious and plain,
unanimously to assent to the how, and what is to be done, as to do it. Mr.
Iohnson's angry and peevish, because all Men did not see with his Eyes, and
judge by his Sentiments; when at the same time they know him to be subject to
Error and Passions as well as others; and they who are imperious and
supercilious in their Positions and Dictates, must expect to meet with
Opposition and Reflections. No mere Man was ever in the Right in every thing he
did or said, unless we will be so Phantastically credulous as to believe him to
be possessed with an Almighty Attribute of Infallibility; yet humane Nature
apologizes for all that is mistaken through weakness and misapprehension,
without Perversity and Obstinacy. Let Mankind jar and quarrel, the World rubs
on in its Old Course; One Generation passes away, and another comes, and there
is nothing New under the Sun. In our late Reigns the Bullet has had its swing
both ways; but in all Reigns, the Moderate Men have preserved ^his Nation on
its true Basis, and defeated the designs of all Achitophels, whilst Whig and
Tory have been managed and outwitted by those, who were Enemies to both, and
laughed behind the Curtain (as the French did formerly at the Dutch and us, who
were both bubbled by the same methods) to behold their designs carried on by
turns with a bitter, but imprudent Zeal. 'Twas the Observation of that great
Statesman and Soldier, the Duke of Rohan, That England was a great Beast, and
could not be destroyed but by its self; and therefore the French King, being no
Fool in Politics, thinks he can do nothing so much to his own advantage and
our prejudice, as to divide us, and has sent over these following Instructions
with his Lewidores to his Emissaries here amongst us, and all under the
disguise of Pity and Compassion for the miserable condition we labor under.

The first thing they buz in your Ears is, The Church, the Church; Oh the
Church! Now I would know of any man, in what danger the Church is at this time,
when it has the same Laws to support it, the King and Queen, Zealous Professors
of its Doctrine and Discipline, and in a manner the whole Body of the Nation,
(especially all those in Employments) of its Communion. It Is true, the Law has
given the Dissenters Liberty of Conscience, and it is the Opinion of Wise Men,
'twill less^n their Number; howsoever, their Mouths are stopped, and by this
means we are more united, and our Chari^y is more enlarged toward each other:
I dare be bold to affirm, that were our Lives as generally sound and good as
our Doctrines, few of the wise and sober amongst them would dissent from us;
and I have observed in those Parishes where the Ministers honestly and
conscientiously discharge their Duties, there are but few Dissenters. But we
have some amongst us so wise, as to think the way to rescue the Church out of
its contrived danger, is to bring Father Peter's back with French Dragoons, to
be Shepherds to take care of our English Flocks, which is the true meaning of
their conceal`d design.

The next doleful Topic is, the Taxes, the Taxes: But commonly they complain
most, who pay none. It Is true, the Taxes are great; but was there ever more
occasion than now? Is our Religion, our Liberties, our Properties dear at any
price? No Miser but will part with some of his Money to Purchase these, because
it gives him a sure Title to the remaining part, and makes him live easy.
Compare our Condition with that of the French; our Taxes are given by our own
Consents; no forced Impositions; no grinding Arbitrary Gabells; our Money is
not called into the Exchequer at a low rate, New-coin'd, and Paid out for more
than it is Current: New Offices and Officers are no^ Established to Oppress the
poor People; these are pre^sing Miseries we only hear of, and our Enemies
endure. We are told the Nation's Impoverish^d^ our Money is all Transported
abroad: But how does this appear? Is the Luxury visibly less than formerly?
There is little sign of Poverty, when Buildings, Furniture, Equipage, Clothes,
all things that are Costly and Expensive are to be seen every where; Land keeps
up its Price, notwithstanding its Taxes, and there is nothing to be Sold a
Bargain, but there is a ready penny for it. Nor is it an Indication of Scarcity
of Money, when above a Million is subcrib'd to the India Company in some short
time; and almost a Million Voluntarily Advanced in two Months on a Lottery
Fund. What a prodigious quantity of Plate and Jewels is there in the Nation at
this time, which is of no more use to the Public than if it were Ear^h? But,
tho all this is true in Fact, and every where Evident; yet our noisy French
Schreech-Owls are whining, Poverty, Poverty; I believe their own Pensions are
not so well paid as fo^merly, and that France is the more proper place at
present for their croaking Notes. But they subtly intend that we should hoard
up our Money, with other Riches, till such time as they have taken Flanders,
and conquered the r^st of the Confederates, and then they will be at more
leisure to come and dispose of it.

They tell us too, that all our Ships are taken, and that we have no Trade. I^
is not to be denied but that we have sustained g^ea^ L^sses; but then our
Merchants, to make amends, have had considerable Gains by the good Markets they
have found for their Commodities, both abroad and at home: We have never had
greater Exportations, and it is not to be wondered at, that many Ships are lost,
when our Enemies Ports lie so obnoxious, and their whole Force is converted
into Privateering: Nor is all our Naval Force sufficient to secure us in every
part of our Trade, tho our Enemy were not near so strong as he is. But our
Trade still goes on, and the benefit accrues to every part of the Nation; when
our Losses only enrich a few Maritime Towns, and the main Continent at the same
time suffers extremely, occasioned by a total decay of Trade, which wi^h their
other insupportable Oppressions, will in some short time reduce them to the
utmost miseries.

But I hope a little time will discover who are in the better condition, the
French who take all, or we who lose all; I am apt to believe all is not Gold
that glisters; and had our Lewisites such Extraordinary Accounts from France,
we should not be long troubled with their Company here; but they have showed
themselves such unthinking creatures, that the Mobb begin to laugh at them and
their Politics, which are but Skin-deep, and are like to do but little
mischief for the future.

Another Instruction is to traduce, and rail at the Parliament^men, because
they Vote a vigorous War against France, and Money to carry it on; to call them
Courtiers, and Pensioners: I am apt to believe the Friends of this Government
would think them French Pensioners, if they did not do what necessarily tends
to our preservation; and it is a Malicious and Villainous Imputation to say,
That our Representatives are, or must be pension'd not to destroy us.

I might instance several other of their little Artifices to amuse the weak and
unsteddy Minds of those who are frighted with their own shadows; but they have
found so little success, that it is as little worth my pains to reflect on, as
theirs to publish them. But I will suppose the worst, and what these Men boast,
That the French King is strong, powerful, and Rich, and that there is no
prospect that the War will end in 2 or 3 years. What then? Shall we tamely and
foolishly submit to his intolerable Yoke? Shall we sneak for a Peace to him,
whom neither Oaths, Sacraments, Treaties, Articles or Edicts can bind? No, no,
let those who are for Slavery and Wooden Shoes, go flatter their Grand
Monarch, lick and live on Dionysius's Spittle, whilst every true Englishman,
with our united Confederates, will resolve to pursue Nobler and greater Ends,
vigorously endeavor to the utmost Extremity, either to lower and force the
Disturber of Mankind to such a Peace as shall prey on, and vex his ambitious
humbled Soul, and make us all secure beyond the Humane Probability of a
Relapse, or bravely perish in the Attempt.

'Twas a brave Genius that exerted it self amongst the Romans of Old, when two
Great Men Voluntarily embraced Death, the one to preserve; the other, because
he would not outlive the Liberties of his Country. Let England once more hold
the Balance of Europe, retreive that Envy`d Power, which will make us both a
Safe and a Great People. We have a Noble Example to imitate, who exposes
himself to, and undergoes Herculean Labo^rs and Dangers, to support and rescue
the Miserable and Oppressed, who attempts to break the Fetters designed for
Europe, and to chain up that insulting Power which has been too long employed
in devastations, and the destruction of Mankind. Whilst our King shines with
his own unsullied and unborrow'd Glory, and like the Sun, with his kindly
dispers`d Influences, warms and cherishes every Confederate and Ally; The
flattered Grand Monarch, with his false Light and weak Beams, visits only Turks
and Tartars, and his own Slaves, and like the Moon with her borrowed gloomy
Light, and comfortless Heat, instead of refreshing, only shines on Bats and
Owls, and Beasts of Prey.

I will not positively affirm, whether I am in the right or wrong, in what I
have offered in this Digression; Neither do I impose my private Opinions on any
Man, or will be concerned whether they gain Assent. But this I will say, my Pen
writes my real Thoughts and unbrib`d Sentiments, and as my intention is neither
to please or displease, so neither am I afraid to expose any Truths that may be
useful and serviceable to the Public; and one would think the meanest Reasons
and Motives should be of force to persuade Men it is their Duty to omit no
Opportunity to do what may tend to the advantage of their Native Country, and
not foolishly and treacherously to betray it.

But to return to my Noter, who should not have heard of me, if his
unseasonable, mistaken, and malicious Notes had not appeared; I know no End
they can be designed for, unless to divide us; and I am sure it is the Judgment
of others, that they chiefly publish his own Ill Nature and Indiscretion. It Is
our bu^iness at present to look forward, and let past Miscarriages and
Mis-managements be as so many L^ght-Houses or Buoys to steer our Course so as
to preserve us from a total Shipwreck. I know of no G^iev^nces, N^ Arbitrary
Power, N^ Illeg^l Practices now on Foot; most m^n h^ve q^^r^e^ and are
c^^vinc'd of their former M^^takes, and ^o believe tha^ we have Laws, and
Rights, and Liberties, and that they may be preserved and defended, so that M^^
Johnson might have spared, or employed his pain^ to a better p^rpose. It Is
true, the Ill^Natur'd World are pleased with sharp and bitter Satyr, whether
the Subject of it be true or false, and some men's Notes are read much to the
same purpose, as the Mobb Listen, and are tickled with the Humors and Wit of a
I^ck-Pudding; they laugh all the while they stay, but are not a D^am the wiser
when^ they g^ ^w^y for his impertinent Stories, and scurrilous J^^t^. What
relates to your following M^xim, p. 46. (it being privately transacted, and
delivered as a private Opinion to my Lord Russel by way of Letter) I am
altogether a stranger to that matter how it was stated, and therefore have
nothing more to offer about it, but that I am persuaded it was designed with a
good intention, and that the publishing of it at this tim^ is insignificant,
and can serve to no other end, than to discover your own inveterate spleen.

If it be an Honor and Reputation to a man of Learning (as certainly it is) to
own and retract an Error and to embrace the truth, by what Motives, or at what
time soever he Apprehends it, Why then should the Learned Dean of St. Paul's lie
under an Imputation for owning his mistakes. The greatest men sometimes err,
misconceive, and are easily carried away with a current, tho mistaken Opinion.
Some indeed are so obstinate, and proud that they rather persist to eat sour
grapes, than discover a weakness in their choice; but it shows a man has a
true relish for truth, when being convinced of his former Error, He readily
embraces her. The same Principles and reasons which convince me, have not
perhaps the same force with another man, occasioned by our different
conceptions and Judgments, therefore we must bear with, and believe the best of
each other. Could we suppose an equal capacity to Judge, we might conclude that
most men would have the same sentiments of things, presuming they were alike
Impartial. But there are weak Judgments, Prejudices, Prepossessions, Interests
and Passions, which like so many strong Biasses draw and incline us from truth.
It Is a Censorious and uncharitable opinion positively to affirm, that Interest
without any conviction has changed a man's sentiments, And the Deans Works
express so deep and Noble a sense of Religion, that I should think it a ^in in
me, to harbor the least thought, that he should make shipwreck of his
conscience for any advantage whatsoever. If the Dean has been mistaken in his
case of R^sistance, I am sure Mr. Johnson has misrepresented his sense
(^^cording to custom) in his case of Allegiance, for the Dean has not
Authorized Tyranny in Title or Usurpation, Page 55.
but only endeavored to prove how far our Allegiance is due upon supposition,
or even tho we were under a Tyrant o^ u^urper, which misapprehension he
obviates in the preface to his case of Allegiance, and de^lares ou^ pr^sent
King to have a different title from that of Usu^pation. I will not trouble my
self to repeat or r^fl^ct on his confused medly of stories and transactions in
the late Re^g^s, we all very well remember the Illegal and Arbitrary
proceedings^ from which we have had a happy deliverance, and for which an act
o^ Oblivion is past, And I see no Reason why any man should peevishly v^x
himself for what is past and cannot be recalled; If men had been Honest and for
the public good of the Nation, things would not have been managed as they
were; but at present we have no full^om Addresses with false names no Oxford
Plot, Irish Court Witnesses, Noli Prosequi's, No dispensing power, Nor are New
C^^rters sent into the Country to establish a n^w ki^^ of Government, but all
things go on in their proper C^annels, the Laws take place and the seat^ of
J^dicature are filled with Men of Integri^y and A^ilities^ who will not be made
State tools, nor bri^'d or f^ight^d from what is Law. If M^. Johnson had looked
behind the Curtain too, He might have seen several new actors, who were thought
too Honest to have any part in the administration of Affairs in the late
Governments, therefore he might have omitted his foolish and impudent
suggestions as if arbitrary power were forgeing on the Court Anvil. He might
have spared his insolen^ and uncharitable reflections as i^ those who have been
advanced and employed at Court, were for exposing the Kings Person in Flanders,
whilst they Domineer at home. Mr. Johnson because he looks on himself as the
House of Commons Champion, takes a great deal of Liberty to bespatter whom he
pleases. But wise Men always despise the Aspersions of a Crazed Understanding
and an evil tongue, and a Certain Philosopher assures us, that if an Ass should
Kick a Man, He would be the greater Beast of the two, if he should K^ck him
again. But who could have Imagined that Mr. Johnson who conceits himself
qualified to Govern a Kingdom, to direct King, Lords and Commons; should be out
in his politics; and because Aristotle in his politics is severe upon Guards,
therefore He would have no standing Army. There is a great deal of difference
between having Guards, and an Army to protect and secure our liberty and
Properties, and on the contrary to be employed to destroy them; besides times
and seasons Change and vary, And Kingdoms now must Arm to de^end themselves
against a Popish Tyrant, who wi^h a Saracen-like Head, Sawcer Eyes, a wide
throat and insatiable stomach, attempts to devour and swallow up his neighbors
Cities and Territories. Mr. Johnson thinks we have no business in Flanders, but
I presume he may be mistaken, for the preservation of Flanders was always
esteemed the Interest of England, Page 80.
and it is but Common Prudence, that when our neighbors House is on fire to
help to quench it before it comes to our own; who can foresee the ill
consequences of Flanders being entirely in the French Hands? The Dutch will be
obliged to make peace, and p^rhaps Join with the French who make a great figure
at Sea, and then we may want Crutches to support us, and keep the seat of the
war out of our own Country. The rest of the Confederates will soon be
overpowered, and forced to any terms; But so long as we unite our forces to
protect and defend each other, (upon which the ^afe^y of the whole Confederacy
depends) we shall be safe and secure, because in all probabili^y the force and
weight of Confederated Nations is not long to be resisted, and like a bundle of
Arrows, when taken singly, are easily snap'd asunder, but when bound up
together, resist the strongest Power. We know the Sea is our Element, and the
chiefest strength of our Island is shipping. Nor has our Naval force been so
much neglected as Mr. Johnson Insinuates: Page 81.
It Is the opinion of some, that Our maritine affairs have not been so well
managed in some particular cases as they might have been. But I hope our bought
experience will make us wiser for the future, and that the force of our Fleets
may be so employed, as to retreive our los^e^, and give more security to our
trade: But a great many ships miscarry because our Merchants for their private
advantage, trade without Convoys, but in time they will be sensible, that it is
better to come to a late Market at Cales, than an Early one at St. Maloes. The
Refined polities, and the other prevailing Methods of France, had so far
obtained, as to blind the Eyes or lull asleep their impolitick neighbors;
insomuch that they have been so far from opposing, that they have raised them
to their present Grandeur; and it is well, if their la^e discovered mistakes,
and united forces have power to secu^e themselves, and reduce their encroach'd
Enemy within his proper ^ounds. For as in diseases, if timely discovered and
opposed, they are easily cured, but when by neglect, or increasing the causes,
the malady becomes Chronical, it requires time, skill and the utmost
application to restore the body to its former sound Habit. It Is true, we alone
have been an overmatch for France, and so has Spain, what then? Time and
Circumstances alter the unsettled affairs of this world, and France is now too
strong for both, and yet in the reverse of things it may be too weak for
either; but it matters not what a Kingdom was, but what it actually is: Mr.
Johnson tells us, Page 82.
tho such a raw thing as our present Militia does well enough to keep House;
Yet it must be a well trained, if not a Veteran Army that shall do any great
matters abroad. To which he subjoyns What then? shall we have a mercenary Army
to supply this defect, and loose Old England to win France? I hope not, but so
it would be; for a standing Army plainly destroys this Government.

If our Mercenary Army can but win France, Old England will of Consequence be
preserved, and not lost; and then there will be no need of a standing Army; and
I dare engage King William will send his Danes back, as you inform us Knute
did. A standing Army employed against France, Page 83.
tends to preferve our Government. It Is not very Politic to send away our
Forces, when we have most Occasion for them; and it is our true Interest to
employ Foreigners; for it will both preserve our People at home, and when the
Disbanding Time comes, those Officers who have served their Country, may be
easier provided for; and perhaps we may have fewer Theives.

Page 85.
Mr. Johnson tells us, He does not love Digressions; but at the same time he
has taken leave long since of his Point of Defense, Page 59.
and has been only Digressing from one incoherent Story to another, for thirty
Pages together; some men are pleased to reflect on the past Dangers and
Misfortunes they have escaped and out lived, whilst others fret themselves and
lose their present pleasure, because their Thoughts are wholly taken up with
past Oppressions and Plots, and writing Invectives against those who have never
injured them. If it be difficult for those who have deserved well to find
Friends, 'twill be the highest Imprudence to demean themselves so, as to
disoblige those who have Endeavored to serve them. How many Men have lost
their best Friends, nay Created Enemies, rather than conceal or check a sower
unmannerly Humor? Page 95.
What Reason had Mr. Johnson to insinuate as if Kendall (according to his civil
way of Expressing himself toward those who have the Honor of the Kings
Commission for a Government, or as in the 78th page, to confirm themselves in
their ill-gotten Honors) were to serve some evil Court Turn, when it is well
known that Colonel Kendall did neither comply with King James when settled,
and was otherwise very Instrumental in the Revolution, and therefore might very
well deserve the Employment he was advanced to, but Sir Peter Coryton was not
sent, and that was a sufficient Ground for Mr. Iohnsons Reflection. Had he
spared some few Hours from his Old Musty Law Books, and spent them in Reading a
Chapter or two in the Whole Duty of Man against Self-conceit and Backbiting,
though not so good a Noter^ yet I believe he might have been a better Christian.

It Is no Imputation to a Man's Memory or Morals, to forget and forgive Injuries;
and the Man who tells us he is Good Natured to a Fault, need not have
published. Mr. Chiswell's Message. It would be a difficult Q^estion for Mr.
Johnson to Answer, What Wise or Sober Action he has done since the
Reformation, notwithstanding the good Opinion he has of his Intellectuals,
when he has, like a M^dman, been throwing of Dirt at every Body. He tells us
the Reason ( Page 94.) Why he has taken this Freedom, with the Bishop of
Salisbury, because he has taken a greater Latitude with me, and has given me
out for a Madman above these four years.

I am in the way of Writing, Mr. Johnson, and though I must own you to be a
great Man, yet I will Adventure to declare, what I apprehend a great Truth; but
without any design against your proper Person, Pre^erment or Breed, or any Wise
Notes you shall hereafter Wri^e. There are three most Convinceing Reasons
(without enquiring whether the Bishop has said so, or not) which command my
Assent in this matter, which you know are as much as three Thousand. Page 10.
The first, That you have been Fighting with your own shadow, and Writing
whatsoever came uppermost in your disturbed Brain. The Next, That you have been
over and above Witty. You remember the old saying, Nullum Magnum Ingenium sine
Mixtura Dementiae. And last of all, If what Seneca says be true, That, Ira
furor brevis est, it is a Natural and strong Consequence, that he who has been
very Angry for four or ^ive years last past, has been so long very Mad. Note
upon these Reasons the next Lucid Interval. Who but a mad man would have thrown
away a Witty Reflection on Two mere insensible Dutch Elements, Earth and Water?
And 'twas something Ungrateful and Unseasonable too, in respect of the
Catastrophe of my Lord Shaftsbury, as well as in Good Remembrance of the
Protection and Civilities the Worried Peer received at Amsterdam.

Mr. Johnson having already misrepresented the Bishop's Sense, and the
Antipathy he seems to have against all Bishops in General, gives me Good Reason
to suspect he has a little strained his Two Bishops Meanings; And truly I am
afraid that he has either had a Knock in the Cradle, or that having Outdone
some English Herb Woman in her Civil Way of Banter, she has hit him a Rap on
the Skull; Otherwise he would not have used his Fanatical Reflections, Common
Prayer Book Mass Book, or Laudean Religion, Anglice Popery, to prove his Two
Mooted Points. If he pleases, he may talk of Self-Defence, and the Welcome
Assistance of the Prince of Orange, without any Distinction or Contradiction.

Bless us! I am surpised: Is it a Ghost I see, or has our Noter been in the
Third Heavens ever since he wrote his Forty Third Page. Page 2 d.
But to be Serious Threescore and Five Pages together, is an Unusual and
Frantic Digression. But our now Noter tells us the Reason of it in his 97 th
Page, (where he has only made a short Digression of Ten Pages) that it is
occasioned by the Impe^tinencies which continnally cross his Way, meaning
Brains. H^ving a Good Memory, I remember 108 Pages past, he tells us, That the
Doctrine hat is in the Pastoral Letter, shall not live while it pleases God to
let him live.

I verily believe notwithstanding my reflections he will maliciously or
ignorantly pervert the Bishops own meaning and design to his dying day. But to
see the Contagious power of ill Company and bad Example. The two last dying
pages of the Book cannot depar^ in peace without brea^hing out destruction
against the Maxims of the Bishops Book, and therefore I must seriously observe
its dying Nonsense. The Bishops maxim is,;That all which tend to the inevitable
destruction of Cities and Societies, as Indiffeasible Allegiance does, are
false Maxims.

I will not trouble my self with Exclu^ion times, other peoples M^xims, and no
Maxims, are foreign to the Bishops Maxims. Because I am sure what Mr. Johnson
affirms here with Assurance of Indiffeasible Allegiance is not proved,
therefore I desire you will be pleased to look back to his Supposition of a
true and total Conquest, which I have long since de^eated.

I must confess it is a ba^barous thing to take a Coat away from a Man who has
but just two, And I am sure the Bishop would no more take his Allegiance from
King William and Queen Mary, than rob him of an Honest M^xim, but I will make
bold (for his own good) to destroy his darling Maxim of Indiffeasible
Allegiance; because if King William and Queen Mary should chance to slip away
to Lapland, without taking l^ave, and so consequently be Dead in Law, Mr.
Johnson will be obliged to transfer his Allegiance to the next King in
Possession, or take a tedious cold Journey, or if true to his own Principle,
resist himself into a Jayl.

Mr. Johnson having mistaken the point, lays a heavy charge, with a, Now I say
that all his Lawyers and Casuists never said a Word of Truth in their whole
Lives. Now because you may bring an Old House on your Head, I Will take the lie
upon my self, and say, that the true End of Government is the preservation of
Mankind. That Indiffeasible Allegiance is a false Maxim, because it tends to
the destruction of Mankind; For when a King has Abdicated, it is impossible for
me to pay Allegiance to him; and it is an undeniable Maxim, Nemo obligatur ad
Impossibilia; So that where the Duty cannot be performed, the Obligation
necessarily ceases.

Mr. Johnson, if he pleases, may destroy these Maxims in his Second Part. Which
having but named, Oh, how I long! I am impatient to see it.

I must confess, I have been a little too serious with the First Born^ but when
the other Young Master appears in the World, (the Second Offspring of his
Prolifick Brain) perhaps at present only in Embrio, I Will persecute the unlick'd
Cubb whilst I have a Day to live. And because (Kind Reader) I`le make you
amends for the Trouble I have already given you, not having been so Comical in
my Reflectious, as Mr. Johnson in his Bantering Notes, I Will promise to present
you with a pleasant Scene, by way of Dialogue between Mr. Bays and Mr. Johnson.

FINIS.

