THE Great Prophecy OF King William's SUCCESS IN FLANDERS: OR, The Happy Fourth
Year OF HIS MAJESTY's REIGN: Giving several Famous Predictions of the Honor of
England, in His Glorious Actions to be performed this present year, 1692.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed at London; And Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1692.

The Great Prophecy of King William 's Success in Flanders, etc.
THE Great Changes and Revolutions which have happened in the Affairs of the
World have been very often ushered in with some strange Passages and
Predictions. It would be tedious to recount all the prodigious Comets, Visions,
Apparitions and Prophecies, which have in all Ages given occasion of Wonder and
Amazement. ^his is most certain, never was there a more active World than now,
and ^erhaps the mightiest Wheels are now at work that the great Machine ever
set (...)-moving. The long depending Trial of skill between the vast Ambition
of ^rance, and the tugging World engaged against him, affords Mankind no ^ean
Hopes and Fears, and no common Expectation. And if Portents and ^redictions
were ever the Forerunners of extraordinary Revolutions, we have ^ome Reason to
believe, that since the present Ferment of Europe is too violent to ^old long
at a stay, and some great Change must suddenly follow; if all those ^peaking
Oracles are not quite silenced, there may be some Propheticks point^ng to this
present Age. Though Prophecies, it is true, generally meet the ^^me Treatment
from the incredulous World, which Noah's Prophetic Sermon of forty years,
whilst he was building the Ark, received from the insensible Race of mankind
before the universal Deluge.

And as the generality of Prophecies are commonly so wrapped in Disguise and
Riddle, that is very difficult to give 'em an Interpretation; yet without
vanity (...) here present the Reader with some few possibly as free from that
Veil and Obscurity as any he has met with, and perhaps those that speak as
plainly to his Great Fourth Year of our present King William as can be expected.

The First shall be that ancient one going under the Title of Mr. Truswell, the
Recorder of Lincoln's Prophecy; found the best part of a hundred Years ago in
^he Ruins of a Religious House near Lincoln, and possibly first written as long
before, the barbarous Latin in which it was penned giving sufficient assurance
of its Antiquity, being much about the Standart of the Learning of those Times.
And that the Reader may be confident it is no modern Novel or Fiction, it has
been in print these forty Years, in a Treatise called A Voice from Heaven,
printed Anno 1652. And consequently as near as it resembles the present 1692.
can be ^o foisted Sham or Invention.

The PROPHECY.
Lilium manebit in meliori part, and movebitur contra semen Leonis. Et stabit
ex una part inter spinas Regni sui, cujus Regnum est Terra Lunae, per totum
Orbem timendum. Et veniet Filius hominis ferens feras in brachiis, cum
multitudine Populi, transibit multas aquas, and veniet in terram Leonis,
auxilium quarens a bestiis terrae suae. Veniet Aquila ex Orient, aliis
expansis radiis filii Hominis. Et hoc anno Castrasuper Thamesin peribunt, and
magn^^ eris timor in toto Orb, and in quadamparte Terrae. Magna Praelia ernos
inter multos Reges, and in illo die erit Pugna Cruenta in qua Lilium perde^
coronum suam, de qua coronabitur filius hominis. Et quarto anno multa erunt pro
fide certamina; caput mundi erit ad Terram. Filius hominis and Aquila
elevabuntur. and tunc erit Pax in Terris Vniversalis. Et accipiet filius
hominis mirabile signum. Et erit magna frugum abundantia. ibit in Terram Crucis.

In ENGLISH.

The Lilly shall remain upon the better part, and he shall be moved against the
Seed of the Lion. And be shall stand on one part amongst the Thorns of his own
Kingdom, whose Kingdom is the Land of the Moon, which is to be dreaded
throughout the World. And there shall come the Son of Man, bearing the
Wild-beasts in his Arms, with a multitude of People. He shall pass many Waters,
and shall come to the Land of the Lion, looking for help from the Beasts of his
own Country. Then shall there come an Eagle out of the East, and his Wings
spread with the Beams of the Son of Man. And in that year shall be destroyed
Castles upon the Thames, and there shall be great fear over all the World, and
in a part of the Land. There shall be great Battles among many Kings. In that
Day shall be the Bloody Field, in which the Lilly shall lose his Crown,
wherewith the Son of Man shall be crowned: and in the fourth year many Battles
shall be for the Faith. The Head of the World shall be brought to the Earth.
And the Son of Man with the Eagle shall be exalted. And there shall be
Universal Peace over all the World. And the Son of Man shall receive a
wonderful Sign. And there shall be great plenty of all Fruits of the Earth And
he shall go into the Land of the Cross.

[The Lilly shall remain upon the better part.] By the Lilly is plainly meant
France, whose Ensigns are the Lillies [shall remain on the better part] plainly
signifies the long Success and Triumph that France has obtained so many Years
together; the better part being interpreted the Conquering side, the Glory,
Greatness and uninterrupted Prosperity of that encroaching Monarch having
sufficiently hitherto clamed him the Title of Conqueror.

[And be shall be moved against the seed of the Lion.] That is, He shall make
War against the United Provinces and Spanish Netherlands. who are altogether
called the Belgic Lion, and give the Lion for their Ensign, the very Figure of
their Country in the Man being observed to resemble a Lion. (And be shall
stand upon one part amongst the Thorns of his own Kingdom.) His standing upon
Thorns signifies the Uneasiness of his own Kingdom, the Subjects of France,
from the Tyranny and Slavery they groan under, the long Ambition of so Aspiring
a Prince laying no little Yoke and Oppression upon that miserable People. Whose
Kingdom is the Land of the Mon. (And the Land of the Moon must mean France
still, so called from the aforesaid Uneasiness of the French, who only want
some happy and favorable hour, (possibly under the umbrage of some kind
Invasion) to shake off their long Yoke, and change their Fetters for Liberty;
the Moon being always the Emblem of change, as indeed the whole Prophecy, (as
you will find in the sequel) looks that way. (Which is to be dreaded throughout
the World.) Here this dreaded Kingdom plainly points to France, whose Power and
Growth has but too long and too truly been the Ter^our of the World. (And there
shall come the Son of man, who carries the wild Beasts in his arms.) This must
intend the King and Kingdom of England, which (...) so distinguishing a
Difference from all other Princes, that no Arms but those ^f England pretend to
wild Beasts, a part of their Escutcheon. (With a multi^ude of people.) With a
multitude indeed, as Generalissimo of the Confederacy, so many Nations and
People fighting under his Standard.

[He shall pass many waters, and shall come to the Land of the Lion, looking
for help from the Beasts of his own Country] The passing of many Waters can
apply to nothing but our present Sovereign, his first Expedition for ^e
Redemption of England, his Voyage to Ireland, his passing the Boyne, his
^uccesse over the Shanon, his several Expeditions to Flanders, all manifestly
poin^ng at no other Prince. His coming to the Land of the Lion, his Embarquing
or Flanders, looking for help from the Beasts of his Own Country, that is,
^xpecting assistance from the States General of the United Provinces, the
na^^ve Country of our present Sovereign. The word [Beasts] in the Language
(...) a Prophecy meaning [the People.] ['Then shall there come an Eagle ^^out
of the East, and his wings spread with the Beams of the Son of man.] ^^ere is
plainly decypher'd his Imperial Majesty of Germany, whose Ensign is, ^^e Eagle
displayed; and his Wings being being spread with the Beams of the Son (...)
man, denotes the Confederacy between England and the Empire, the spread^^g the
Imperial Wings by the Influence of the English Beams being a Prophe^^ truly so
fulfilled in his Britanick Majesty's vigorous Espusing of the common ^uarrel of
Christendom, and the Dependence the whole Confederacy has upon (...) at Potent
and Leading Hero and Champion of their Cause. ['And in this year shall be
destroyed Castles upon the Thames, and there shall be great ^ear over all the
World, and in a part of the Land.] These Castles upon (...) Thames undoubtedly
can signify nothing but the Naval Preparations: those floating Castles, the
Fleets that shall be engaged in this Quarrel. The ^^ar that shall be over the
World, being no more than the universal Apprehen^^ns on all sides, together
with the Eyes and Concerns of all Nations being ^^t and intent upon the Fortune
and Success of such formidable Preparations. and that Fear that shall be in a
part of the Land, may very reasonably be ap^^ed to the present state of
England, where the Difference of Parties and Divi^^ns since the late
Revolution, have possibly created some particular Fears in ^^gland, more and
above those of the whole World besides so highly (as be^^re said) instructed in
the Common Cause of Christendom. ['There shall ^e great Battles amongst many
Kings.] This still confirms the present Con^^deracy, in which all Europe stands
engaged ['In that day shall be the Bloody Field (...) which the Lilly shall
lose his Crown wherewith the Son of man shall be ^rowned.] Here we come to the
concluding Stroke, that there shall be one ^ore remarkable Great Day, being the
Defensive Blow, in which the Lilly, viz. ^rance, shall be subdued and lose her
Crown, a Victory that shall be the particu^^r Trophy of England, and the
vanquished Diadem of France, the Conque^^ur's Prize and Reward. Nay, the very
next Paragraph assigns the very Year in which this Defeat or Overthrow of
France shall be accomplished; viz. [And in the fourth Year, many Battles shall
be for the Faith, and the Head of 'the World shall be brought to the Earth, and
the Son of man and the Eagle shall be exalted.] Now what can this Fourth Year
in this reasonable Interpretation direct but this very 1692. the Fourth Year of
his Majesty's Reign, when the Son of man and the Eagle, viz. the King of
England and the Emperor shall be so highly exalted, by bringing down the Head
of the World to the earth, viz. The French King, that aspires at least to be
the Head of the World, and indeed who has but too long stood fair for being so.
The only thing tha^ hitherto appears most mystical through the whole Prophecy
is, ['Battles for the 'Faith] as if thereby were intimated some Religious War,
which indeed is not the present Case of Europe. But what [pro fide] the words
in the Original should amount to [pro fide Christiana] is going beyond the
Text; and truly to make this finishing part all of a piece with the foregoing
Discourse, we have all imaginable reason to construct the word Fides more
inclining to Fidelity, in opposition to the Infidelity of France. And so the
construction will run thus: Viz. That these many great Battles in this great
Fourth Year, shall be fought in the Cause of Righteousness, Honor, Justice
and Truth, by the Confederacy, for Recovery of so many Towns, Provinces,
Principalities and Kingdoms, torn from 'em by the Rapine and Violence of the
French King, or rather by his Treachery and Gold. This being the true [pro
fide] for which this just War is waged against that great Infidel of the World,
so notoriously guilty o^ all manner of Breach of Faith, Leagues Covenants, nay
Oaths themselves. ['And 'there shall be Universal Peace over all the World.]
Undoubtedly the subduing of France must soon settle the whole World in Peace,
and Plenty accordingly follow. (And the Son of Man shall receive a marvelous
sign and shall go into the Land of the Cross.) What this wonderful Sign shall
be we must expect from Time, that part of the Prediction being above the Reach
o^ Foresight and Conjecture; nor can we dive so far as to assign any particular
Interpretation to that last part, his going into the Land of the Cross, unless
w^ may for once adventure to give this meaning to the Close of the Prophecy,
viz. That this our Great son of man shall finish his Race of Glory, by
acquiring a ye^ brighter Crown; that is, from the Hand of the Greater Son of
Man, when a^ the last Trophy and Reward of Virtue and Honor, he shall be
received into th^^ Land of the Glorified Sufferer on the Cross, the Kingdom of
Bless.

Thus far our English Prophecy. And now let us hear something from Prophet of
their own, the famous Nostradamus, the great Favorite of thre^ French Kings,
Henry the 2d. Francis the 2d. and Charles the 9th.

Celuy qui la Principaute
Tiendra par grade cruante
Al^ fin, verra grand Phalange
Par Coup defen tres dangereux,
Par accord pourroit fair mieux,
Autrement hotrasue D' Orange.
In ENGLISH.

He we who shall with great Cruelty hold the Principality, in the Conclusion
shall see a great Army ruined by a most dangerous Fire^^low, he might do better
to make an Accord, otherways he shall drink the juice of Orange.

Here is first, a plain Description of the French Dominion, which is certainty
carried on by the greatest Cruelty and Oppression wherever their Arms have made
a Conquest; so great are the Desolations of Germany, especially Alsace, and all
that pleasant, populous and fertile Country along the Rhine, that there is
scarce an Inhabitant or a Village left for many Leagues together, to make
complaint of the barbarous Inhumanity of the French Armies, who have left
behind 'em unexampled Instances of their Cruelty in such unprecedented Spoils
and Ravage.

(And he shall see his Army ruined by the most dangerous blow of Fire.) Not
improbable, Heaven often measures by the Lex talionis. Fire shall destroy those
who have destroyed so many innocent Millions by Fire. But by this Fire he seems
to intimat the Force of Powder, the now common and terrible Fuel of the horrid
Engines of War. (He might do better to make an Accord) Certainly this would be
wholesome Counsel for France, if the Ambition of the Great Lewis would resound
some part of his ill-gotten Victories to purchase that Peace, which indeed is
not agreeing with his Kidney. (Otherways he shall drink the Juice of Orange.)
By this Juice of Orange must be meant, The Arms of our Illustrious Monarch, for
want of which Accord, not made, nor now like to be, he shall seel the Force and
Power of that Victorious Hero designed for Greatness and Wonders.

I shall only add one more of the Prophecies of Nostradamus.

Le grand D' Hongrie ira dans la Nacelle
Le Novean ne fera guerre novelle,
A son voisin qu'il tiendra affiege,
Et le Noire au avec son Altesse,
Ne souffrir a que par trop on le press
Durant Trois ans ses Gens tiendra range.
In ENGLISH.

The great one of Hungary shall go to the Boat, the new one shall not make a
new War against his Neighbor, whom he shall besiege on every side. And the
black one with his Highness, shall not suffer him to be over pressed. During
three Years he shall keep his People in order.

By the Great one of Hungary is meant the Emperor, Hungary being his
Hereditary Kingdom. [Great one] makes it this present Emperor, all his
Imperial P^^decessors from Nostradamus's Time being so far from Great in
Hungary, that the wh^^^ Kingdom till this last Reign was all in the hands of
Infidels, a Province of the Turk Empire. By his going into the boat is meant,
his Embarquing in the Confederation. the new one is meant, a new King of
France, that is, such a one as France never had fore. He shall not make a new
war with his Neighbor, that is, It shall not be (...) War, but the old Game
played out; his continued Ambition of acquiring the Uni^^^sal Empire of Europe;
his short Cessation of Arms in King Charles the Second's Rei^^ and the few
Conquests, he than gave up, being so far from any intended Peace w^^ the
Empire, or any other of the Allies, that on the contrary, 'twas only a Blind
lull his Neighbors for some little time a-sleep, till he could get better
opportun^^ and more strength to cut their Throats. The feeble Nimiguin Treaty,
and all the tended Mediatorship of King Charles (pardon the Epithete, for
though a bold one, a true one) being only that polltick Cobweb lawn. made on
purpose to break throu^^ His Neighbor, whom he shall besiege on every side, is
the Emperor, whom he does (...) only invade on one side, but is likewise the
grand Animator (If not the original Fi^^ brand) of the present Turkish Wars
that attaque the Emperor on the other si^^ And the black one with his
Highness, shall not suffer him to be overpress'd: that is, (...) Spaniard, with
his Highness the Prince of Orange, shall take the Emperor's part, a^^ make
some Check to the Progress of France; for The black one must mean Spain, the
pithete of Black being the vulgar Characteristick of the Spaniard, and His
High^ must mean His present Majesty, more properly called His Highness in the
Prophecy, the young Hannibal against Rome, being an early sworn Foe to France:
and though n^ so Potent a one, yet no less zealous a Champion of the
Confederacy, when only Pri^^ of Orange.

[ During Three Years he shall keep his People in order] Here the English and
Fren^^ Prophet jump, for here we come to the old Prediction of this approaching
92, the ^^mous Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign before mentioned. During
three Years of o^^ Sovereigns Reign France shall hold up his Head against his
Enemies, and make h^^ shift to keep Peace at home. But this great Fourth Year
let him look for Domesil^^ Insurrections and Rebellions from a People overladen
with the intolerable Burden so long a War; and feel the Welght of the
Impending Bolts that hang over him; who Execution perhaps the Justice of
Providence has thus long retarded, to fall at last ^^o home and more heavy.
When both the Eagle and the Son of man shall be exalted, at the Lilly meet the
Fatelt has deserved.

I hope I have here given the Reader a very rational and natural Construction
these several Prophecies. I shall only add one Remark. That these Prophesies
w^^ some others printed about 15 Years since, it was endeavored there to make
the gre^^ Hero foretold of, to do such Wonders against France; ( viz. the Black
one in this Pr^^phecy, and the Son of man in the other) to be meant King
Charles the second. A ve^^ odd sort of an interpretation, to make that
unfortunate, if not infatuated Prince, (...) foredoom'd Scourge of France, when
his Inclinations lay so clearly the contrary way; Prince so strangely riveted
and tied to the French Interest, that both the old E^glish Honor and the
Safety of his People were daily lessened by the exorbitant Grow^^ of France.
(The best Favor England could expect from so insatiate in Ambition, to last
devoured by this hungry Polyphemus.) The Obligation of Trust lodged in him
Arbiter of Europe, nor the Common Justice of ^iding the injured Side, the
Confederas in short, neither, these, nor any other Considerations, were of
Force to wean h^^ from his extravegant Dotage and Fondness to France; but
rather to lend him all Help the strengthening that Horse, whose Foot, if he
would have remembered, had best ( viz. in his Exile) not over kindly spurned him
out of Doors:

FIN^S.

