GALLANTRY A-la-mode, A SATTRICAL POEM, In III PARTS.

Representing the Vanities of several Humors of this present Age.

Semel insanivimus omnes.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for the Author, and are to be Sold by
Booksellers, Anno Domini, 1674.

TO THE READER.
WHo ever thou art if thou dare be so bold (after the Title Page to proceed,
expect nothing of Seriousness in this Discourse, that being altogether as great
a stranger to this Extravagant Age, as Civility and good Manners amongst the
rudest Barbarians. And therefore those Persons that value themselves upon their
own Sobriety, (alias Hypocrisy) who can relish no Discourses but what are writ
against the present Government, are fore-warned that this was never Calculated
for the Meridian of their Brains. With those I have not designed much to
concern myself, accounting them so inconsiderable, that a Jeer is but cast away
upon them: but the brisk aerie Humors of both Sexes in this flourishing Town
shall be constant Subjects of my P^n. ^is for their Diversions that I have
transformed my self, (for I am resolved to put on as many shapes as ever
Proteus did) into the form of a young Gallant raw and unfledged, and newly come
to Town; and no sooner there but entered into a Baudy-house, and one of such an
Inferior Rank that I can make no more Excuse for my self, then he that having a
handsome Wife with all the commendable Qualities that may be required in one of
that Sex, forsakes her Company for the impertinent Conversation of a dirty
Kitchin-Wench. Reader, I believe thy Ears itch to know who it is I mean now;
but no matter for that, I have lately read some where, and I think 'twas in a
Play, that to name a person, (one designs to set forth) is not like a Cavalier.
I am resolved to take that adv^ce, and therefore thou must excuse me if I fail
in the satisfaction of thy Longing; but let it suffice thee that it is not
improbable, but that there may be such a person, and also such a person as I
design in my First Part. In the Second Part I have transformed my self into
One, whose many Extravigancies have proeur'd him a little dear-bought
Experience, and is now arrived at a higher pitch of Gallantry, (or Debauchery,
no great matter which, for at this time they may be Converted without a
Solecism) and briskly attacks a young Girl, that I am resolved to call
Phillis, whose Youth is not only adorned with Beauty, but Wit, ay, and (as
illluck will have it) with Virtis ^ too: which makes the matter very difficult,
and the greater Novel, for had she been one that would have accepted of a Coach
and six Horses, or a House richly furnished with a large Exhibion, etc.
thoul'ts have said this is a common thing, and every day practiced; but to make
a Woman to be Debauched upon the account of pure Love in this Age, I Will assure
thee is a very great Rarity. Yet don't despair Reader, thou may bring such a
thing to pass thy self (if thou have a mind to it) if thou chusest as fit an
Agent for thy purpose as I did, and have as much command of thy passion, and
be'st not overhasty; Ars magni sceleris gradus requirit nec cito fit Magister,
which I might English thus, That it is as difficult to be thoroughly bad, as
it is to be singularly good: There may thou see Virtue tempted in the highest
manner, and at last overcome, which could I with as much probability have found
a Refuge for it in its last Extremity, it had been certainly done; but I Will
assure thee amongst all the Relations which I have lately received (which have
been of no small number) I have not found any Intrigue, (unless it has been
spoiled in the management) but has taken effect, mauger all the resistance of
Wit and Virtue. And least some should take Exception that there should be so
much said of one Vice, and nothing of another (altogether as common) called
Drinking, I have in the Third Part transformed my self into one who commits
those Extravagancies he never intended, wherein all Persons may see that
neither the tie of Friendship, nor the consideration of Age or Sex is able to
restrain the Violence of a Drunken passion; it is the Excess of that which is
the Bane of all good Company, and makes those Sots heither acceptable to
themselves, nor others. And now having thus given thee a brief account of what
is contained in these Parts, thou may expect some Reasons why I Wrote them,
but truly Reader, those things have been altogether discontinu'd by our late
writing Authors, and I am very unwilling to introduce the Custom. And now I
shall speak a Word to those (if there should be any such) that may seem
concerned at any thing in this Poetry: let them first for their satisfaction
know, that they are not certain whether they are the Persons intended, every
Humor being applicable to a great many, though it may so fall out to be applied
to some more particularly; Next (if this will not satisfy them) let them
consider I might have said much more then I did, and as I have spared them
tvvill be but Equity and Justice for them to spare me: Lastly, (if nothing will
satisfy them) let them one turn the buckles of their Girdles behind them,
confess those things whereof they are accused, and then let the whole World be
Judge, and give fools Caps to those that shall best deserve them. Next I should
make an Apology for my self, (and I believe it will be thought by some there is
much need of one) concerning the mean thoughts that I may seem to have of the
Female Sex in General: Let those know that I am not of their Opinion that think
there is, not a Virtuous Woman; my own Experience can testify to the contrary,
and I wish (not withstanding what is here written) their number may be still
increast. If any shall tax me for speaking of Marriage more slightingly then
becomes the dignity of that Condition. I would have those to understand me to
have meant Poeti^ally, that is according to the practice of some of our modern
Poets (for I will not warrant my self to be Armor of proof against such a
Temptation) who as to this may be resembled to Atheists, who seldom Dye before
they have changed their Opinions: so they, after they have drained themselves
dry for Wit and Railery to expose their so much contemned state of Matrimony,
yet nevertheless run themselves headlong into that Trap which they would seem
to forewarn the whole World to avoid. Likewise if any shall be offended at the
Matter herein contained, as being too ^currilous for their nicer Ears; let them
know that I as much contemn and detest as they do, or can, all Discourses which
have nothing else to embellish their wit or Language, but obscene and fill thy
Expressions, which I hope none in direct terms can find here, whatever their
politic understandings may discover to be impli'd, of which to excuse my self,
I might turn Approver to most of our Modern Wits and Writers, repeat something
out of the late Prologues, and Epilogues, that have been received with such
applause from the Public Theaters, were I minded to be so foolishly malicious
(although I might plead Example for it) to think to conceal my own Faults, by
the discovering of other men's. I hope the heartily Ingenious will find nothing
more here then what the Nature of Satirical Drollery may permit, or the
Characters of such like Persons (here intended) may justly require; And I
question not but that they, as well as I, would think that Painter guilty of a
very gross mistake who should produce a Saint, where he first designed a
Devil. Lastly, I fear (notwithstanding what I have hitherto said) some Persons
will Object, That I might have been better employed, then thus to expose my
person (if I should be known) to Obloquie and scandal; The truth of it is,
Reader, I am more concerned at this, then at any thing else that will be said
against my Book, and I do assure thee could I have procur' my self a better
employment, thou had never been troubled with me: as for the scandal, I am
almost of the Opinion of that ingenious Comedian, that infamy is as hard to get
as Preferment; I am sure that hitherto I have found it so, and am resolved to
hold on thy course of Writing till I shall be convinced of my Error one way or
other.

TO THE MEN,
You Would fain be flattered, not one Word,
Nor Dedication to a Lord;
Were not that way of Writing Old,
Yet th 'Author dares not be so bold;
Least that with some the Quaere be,
Who Is more to blame, the Lord, or He.
Expect not here some gaudy Scene,
To tell you what the Book does mean;
But your dear Vices overlook,
And them you will find composed the Book.
'Twas not produced from either House,
Where Mountain groans, and Teems a Mouse;
Where you seem Charmed on Faiery Ground,
With Listening to the thundering Sound
Of Words you catch at the Rebound.
There you'e been told what never was True,
(At least will not be so with You;)
But otherwise you are handled here,
Where you in Uizard Masks appear:
And well you know much Truth is said
Under Disguise of Masquerade.
TO THE LADIES.
LAdy'^ what ever to Men is due,
The Author owes Respect to you;
It Is your fair Sex that he Adores,
On whom he practiced his Amors.
He lay's his Phillis at your Feet,
In hopes your milder Doom to meet;
Pardon her Youth, 'twas but aslip,
The surest Foot may sometimes trip;
At least confer her Punishment
On him your humble Penitent.
Who willingly would for her sake
As great a satisfaction make
As you can possible desire,
Or his Offense might well require.
He hopes by this to set you free,
From your own Sexes Treachery.
Be true amongst your selves; and then
You Are safe beyond the Wit of Men.
If he that Citizen preserved,
Receive a Crown for his Reward;
More to that man must needs be due
Who City saves, in saving you.
GALLANTRY A-la-mode,
PART I.
Oppressed with Cares, involved with Night,
I went to seek a new Delight.
My clouded Eyes could scarcely show
My treacherous Feet which way to go.
At length with Halts and trembling Pace,
Before I wished, th'approacht the Place;
Then troubled Thoughts did make me doubt,
'Twixt going in, and coming out.
But when Desire the Bait had laid,
I willingly my self betrayed;
And boldly I am entered in
The Place accustomed unto Sin.
And well might guess by Farthing light
Those that came There played least in sight.
Next little Volume I did see,
Which There will never practiced be.
Upon a Shelf a Pipkin stood,
That did contain some three days Food;
For Gruel is their chiefest Meat,
Nor better can afford to Eat:
For most of what they get This Day.
Must Constable or Beadle pay
The next, and bribed Law must be
A Pimp to their Debauchery.
At last grave Matron me accosts,
With Looks more sharp than Greenland Frosts,
And like that Earth when Day is done
Neglected by the Half Years Sun,
Methought I looked. Says she you are bold,
My bolted Hatch might make you hold
Your Hand before you it unpin;
I keep no Alehouse, nor no Inn.
Hereafter I will have a Lock,
Then those that come to me must Knock.
I never saw You here before,
Your Token else go out of Door.
I thought when rattl'd at that rate,
She Breeding learnt at Billings-gate.
And answered, 'Twas not my intent
Your Privacy to circumvent,
But thought when in Jack -- Name
I came, you would not boldness blame.
He told me whispering in my Ear,
Convenient boldness was taught here.
He that can such a Token show,
My close Intrigues (says she) shall know
Pleasures I have that Tongue cannot tell
And Courts me to go up to Hell.
Then crazy Staircase we ascend,
Where largly she do'^ Wine commend
And by her Simpring would disclose
That Money first I must depose.
Though Cully was, yet I could scent
The drift of this her Complement.
And humor'd it, and then away
In haste she goes, whilst I Survey
What Furniture above was placed,
Curtains and Vallains so disgraced
With Rags, and Jaggs, and Tatters were,
Ten Thousand Beggars I may swear
Though dressed with Art, and utmost Spite,
Can never show me such a Sight.
If thus the outward case be decked,
What Is hid within I must inspect;
And turned down Sheets e'n covered over
With Plastered Filth, and putrid Gore.
Pandora's box did never compress
Such various kinds of Nastiness.
Next Blankets pinkt with Sally-Ports,
For Lice, and Fleas to manage sports.
I had not yet o're-lookt the Quilt,
But up comes Baud with Wine, and Jilt.
Stone-Bottle then she holds out,
And cries, now let us drink about:
Come here is a Health unto the best.
(And you that please make out the rest)
Once round, and Bottle does depart,
Scarcely so hollow as her Heart.
When such a Cheat did make me stare,
This Wine's so good it is turned to Air.
She smiling says, but hanged, since we
Are now such pleasant Company:
The the other Bottle is not much,
Let ill-bred Clowns their Money grutch.
Then down the Stairs she posts away,
Whilst I above with Tit do stay.
And 'twas a pleasant Sight to see
How with affected Modesty
She wheadel'd, when I did intrude
With Hand, or Foot, pray Sir! you are rude.
Loves Fire did kindle, but not burn,
The old one made so quick return.
When Bottle had gone formers fate,
Then she of Jilt began to prate.
It may be Sir you will think what I
Do now relate, may seem a Lie,
I must confess I Have told a few:
By all that is secret this is true.
This little Rogue that now you see,
From Country came last Week to me.
Methinks I see what pretty Feats
She showed, stroaking of Mullys Teats:
And then a tickling Sonnet sings;
But here she learneth better things.
Look on her well, survey each Part,
This is no Beauty made by Art.
Let painted Bitches boast their stains,
Brisk Blood runs sporting through these Veins.
At Giffords, Creswels and elsewhere
Where precise Damsel does appear,
Perhaps you have bin, no greater Cheat
Is shown, then Lady spruce, and neat.
Lick makes the Corals of her Lips,
And he that Kisses Plaster sips.
I smile to think how often you are mumpt,
In clapping Cheeks with Engines plumpt.
False-Eye-brows, and false-shade of Hair,
When one and t^other Place is bare.
If urgent you be for to know
The occasion of its being so,
Confounded Lie she strait will fain;
How that she Traveled once to Spain:
And large account gives of a Lord
That kept her there at bed, and board,
And by the Custom of that Place,
The smoothest Skin has greatest grace;
Highly praising of that Nation,
For keeping still one constant Fashion:
To show her Travels, Breeding, State,
In this, she them will imitate.
Thus often she Cullys may deceive,
But somewhat else 'twas by your leave:
And though of it she will not be known,
The Clap was got from Spanish Don.
If still you like such a Bald-coot,
Take her with Clap and Pox to boot.
Let my Persuasions make you wise,
Be not Trapan'd with those damned Lies.
Try mine once, then tell me whether
You like best; and go together.
No sooner said, but she is gone,
And I with Tempter left alone.
Whilst I resolved to fly those Eyes,
My Soul was taken by Surprise:
Unusual Flames my Heart had fired,
Nor could I tell what I desired.
As tender Maid that never had known
The effects which from fierce Love have grown
With lingering Sickness pines away,
And makes a Night, before 'twas Day,
Of rosy Beauty: whilst that she
Amazed at her Infirmity,
It Is growing Rage would fain prevent;
But alas poor Soul she is Innocent:
Now longs for this, and now for that,
So I desired I knew not what.
And fearing least she might deny,
Unasked I gave Gratuity:
And said, You guess what it is I want,
Since I do give, it is you must grant
A Favor, which I would conceal,
But Love compels me to reveal:
That Tyrant o'r my Heart does reign,
And only you can swage my pain.
Then with a smile she kisses me,
And off falls vizard Modesty:
If I (says she) can give you ease,
I will be kind, and what you please;
Make no delay, but strait fulfill
Your own Desire: do what you will.
As one that never knew naught but Night,
When suddenly is brought to Light;
Fears for to see, nor dares to wink,
And knows not what to do, or think:
So never before known different sex,
Did strangely then my thoughts perplex.
Nature brute Creatures taught the way,
But I more ignorant then they;
If never had gone to such a School,
Still might have lived, and died a Fool:
For by the kind Nymphs sole direction,
Pleasure was brought to perfection.
But now I slight when it is over,
What I built Altars to before,
Blaming my self, and wondering why
I took this Opportunity;
To run a Tilt at such a Tit:
Who neither Beauty had, nor Wit.
You Will say She never could me infect,
If Reason had my Passion checked.
So Boul of Water if in the way,
A little Flame perhaps may stay;
But raging Lust once t'ane the Field,
Who is so strong that will not yield:
In vain does Reason watch and ward,
For from its blow there is no guard.
So Lady Beauty does display,
To gaudy Fop in St. James' Way;
(Whilst he with boon Grace would set out
His flaxen Wig and ruby Snout,
And seems to cough, and then to spit:
And fain would void something of Wit.)
With ease his Mulb'ry Treat blows off,
And for his Courtship, gives him scoff:
Returned back from whence she came,
On quilted Couch encreast a Flame;
Which with such Fury 'gan to rage,
Discretion was too weak t'asswage:
Stung with Desire, so long denied,
Let Us Butler, or the Coachman ride.
No longer Nymph could me detain,
Her charming Wheadles now are vain.
But Oh Misfortune! Oh hard hap!
When I suspect an after Clap,
And on serious Inquisition
Find a just cause for my Suspicion:
Never She Zealot turned up Eine,
Receiving Brother's Discipline:
Or antic Gestures showed as I,
Reduced to such Extremity.
Faintly to die is Follies part,
Wisdom will seek to Man of Art;
Artist I sought, and quickly found
One that could do; not make a sound
Of mighty Cures: and vainly boast,
More then his Papers on the Post.
Him I resolved should try his Skill,
And after Bolus, then came Pill:
By his Advice so soon 'twas over,
I doubted what I ailed before;
Yet the Artist will not set at naught,
Had I ailed nothing but in thought.
Spark may cause Flame if not withstood,
And from a Twig may come a Wood.
Suspicion then I washed away,
With old Langoon, and cleansing Whey.
And grieved at my Folly past,
For such a Feast, kept Twelve-months Fast.
GALLANTRY A-la-mode,
PART II.
SPring had revealed its long hid store,
The Earth with Flowr's embroidered over.
When Phillis first' began to disclose
The blushing sweets of budding Rose.
Who ever had seen her sparkling Eye,
Dart Innocence with Majesty.
Or from her Lip proceed a smile,
That might an Anchorite beguil.
Would say; Nature designed each grace
A Pattorn in her matchless Face.
Her I behold with winged Desire,
The more I look, still more admire,
This Object of my wondering Eyes,
I vowed should be a Sacrifice
To Loves great God: nor will I doubt,
Arts, Stratagems, shall bring't about.
Dangers and Hazards I Will not fear,
Though terrifying they appear;
Or Death in opposition stood:
For her I Will pass through Seas of Blood.
Acquaintance was my first Design,
And that once gained she is half mine.
A Dancing School I did frequent,
Where to be Scholar she was sent;
In Hopes that once good Breeding may
Advance her to a Wedding Day.
She knew not yet that Place is made
Public Exchange, for private Trade.
Or what fine Madams came to seek,
At those brisk Meetings twice a Week.
Nor could she cast an amorous Glance.
As Prologue for another Dance.
Her small Experience was not come
Toth' Mistry of the retiring Room.
My Flame is smothered whilst I take
Counsel when fittest it is to speak.
At last conclude to win this Mate,
I need a female Advocate.
When long I thought, and none could find,
Despair had seized my troubled Mind.
But half Dead Hopes receive new Life,
When I remember Masters Wife.
None was so fit as that old Sinner,
To seduce this young beginner.
Boldly my Passion I relate,
For she with me was intimate.
Nor could I fear she would not regard,
When I gave Gold for her reward:
And vowed a further thankfulness,
If Fortune crowned her with Success.
No Fire to Stubble e're inclined,
Blown by the Lungs of blustering Wind:
Or Traveller made have to shroud
From pendant Storm of teeming Cloud
More readily then she addressed
Her Heart, and Soul to make me blessed.
Courage (she says) Designs I Have laid,
Have many Maiden-heads betrayed;
Nor shall fair Phillis rest secure,
Whilst I know how for to procure.
You Would think me Courtier should I say,
I understand the rising way:
Fear not (like them that I will fail,)
You in your Wishes shall prevail.
Phillis and I with often meeting,
More familiar were in greeting,
Proud am I of her least Commands;
And softly gripe her lilly Hands:
For yet we caused no fainting Qualmes,
By intermixing melting Palms.
Boldness in bud had just began
To catch at Handkerchief, or Fan.
These were our first fond Fooleries,
Leading to Love's higher Mysteries.
But now my trusty Soul unmasks
Concealed Designs, and Phillis asks,
If such a Gallant she would take,
And him her constant Servant make.
Nature had not been so unkind
TO adorn her Face, and not her Mind;
But in composing thought her fit
For double Beauty treble Wit.
Her Judgment, sharper then her Eye,
Discovers veiled Mystery;
And whilst a Blush her Cheeks does stain,
She from all passion does refrain;
At length no longer she could hold,
But says, Thou that in Vice grow'st old,
Base Wretch, shame of thy sex, and age,
Is it my Ruin must assuage
Thy fond and covetous Desire;
Fit Fuel for Infernal Fire:
What if I him my Servant have,
If I my Honor make his Slave:
No, no, my Virgin Chastity,
The enamel of my Soul shall be.
To which the other smiling said,
Live then a Fool; and dye a Maid.
Did you but know the proffered Prize,
You would not it, and me despise.
The Title of a Mistress Name,
This Age counts Glory, not a Shame.
It is gross Folly to deny
The thing Preferment rises by,
Suppose light Heels, or tempting Face,
Prefers you to an Actress Place:
For that when you have been thus tried,
You Will be the better qualified.
Or if your great Ambition be
To tend on Chamber Drudgery
Of Madam, that will spend the Day
In Dressing, and the Night in Play:
Still never the worse (upon my Life)
You Will serve for Cit', or Chaplains Wife.
Or if with Fop you steal away,
You Will be but on an even lay.
What need you stand upon repute,
Your loss is little to the fruit
You gain; who'd be for such a Fear,
So foolish as to shed a Tear.
Think but how ticklish it is and frail
(Where Beauty's great and Fortune small)
Preserving of a virtuous Name,
Though outward Actions none can blame:
The World will judge the same of You,
And thought' be false, still think it true.
But if (as best) you would wisely deal,
Both may be prudent and conceal.
At this Discourse the keenest Dart
Of Sorrow pierced Phil's tender Heart,
Like Pearls her Tears ran trickling down;
Whose briny Floods Cheeks Rose-buds drown.
Such Weeping had an Artist seen,
From it would copy Magdaleen.
When sobbing Sighs she could refrain,
That might have rent hard Rocks in twain.
Oh Heavens (she said) is this my Fate,
Give me less Love, and more of Hate.
Then from the cursed Calumny
Of Sland'rers Tongues, shall I be free,
Who on my Person miss their aim;
Despair and kill me in my Fame.
But I Will take Courage for one Ray
Of Truth will drive those Fogs away.
Such Darts will then at random fly.
When injured Virtue gives the Lie.
Virtue the best and only thing
That can a true Contentment bring,
Instead of vain, and pompous Toys;
That give inestimable Joys:
The loss of trifles is but small,
What can I want, when I have all.
Now Pardon's begged, and it is confes't
'Twas not in earnest spoke, but jest:
But only offered her to try
How brave, and boldly she would deny.
To gain belief no flattering Smile
She shows, but Weeps like Crocodile:
Then Sighs, and gives a treacherous Kiss;
Swearing by Heavens immortal bliss,
That 'twas her chief and whole Design
That still with Virtue she might shine:
He loves, but with so pure a flame;
Marriage can only quench the same.
(Here when poor Phillis cast her Eyes
As wrapped in a fool's Paradise!)
How long shall I suspected be
To work on your Credulity?
You cannot but believe the thing,
By me he sends this Ruby Ring:
Observe its luster and you will see,
Its Masters blushing Modesty;
Upon your finger let it take
A place; and wear it for his sake.
Could you have hoped a better fate,
Then comely person, fair estate.
Unless (like some) You fain would be
Wedded to foolish property,
Who whilst their Husbands purses share;
Themselves at most but by-words are:
He Will want Estate, as well as Wit,
Whose Wife must govern him and it.
Profuseness he nor Baseness knows,
But what he gives freely bestows.
Long may you then in him rejoice,
Who of his fancy are the choice.
When Love's compelled by needy friends,
That make the Match for private ends:
To patch cracked Fortunes is their care,
And what should most, has the least share.
Hearken to him in his Desire,
That Love, not Portion does require;
Lovers immortalize their Names,
When both do meet with equal flames.
But lest that you should censured be
For acting inconsid'rately,
Consult your Pillow, and you will find
No vvorthier Object to your Mind.
Here could a curious fancy tell
What Diff^rence it is 'tvvixt Heaven and Hell,
Perhaps he then might slubber 'ore
How Phillis changed from what before;
From clouded Anger so serene
Her Countenance who ever had seen,
At such a sight would ravished dye,
Narcissus like with Ecstasy:
Yet still some Grace possessed her Brow,
And Anger did b^come her too:
For now who could not but believe,
Such Oaths a Sibil might deceive.
Then Phillis laying Hand on Breast,
With bashful blushing thus expressed.
If Nature made her first Design
That all things should in Union join,
And caused each Element to be
In disagreeing Harmony:
Love that begins in sighs and tears,
And nourisht is with hopes and fears,
Shows us in such Variety;
Natures great works Epitome:
Thus goes it on with powerful Hand,
For it is a passion few withstand;
Yet to the wise Virtue's a Law,
And Honor keeps fond Love in aw^:
These Paradoxes seem to be
With some, but real truths with me;
Till Honor gives me leave I shall
Still remain deaf, though Nature call.
Discourse at end they friendly part,
Each satisfied of tother's Heart.
Never Cit's Wife with liqu'rish Gums
Longed for stevv'd Pruins, Cake, or Plums,
As does my Agent to express
Her late Intrigues, and strange success;
And I as eager was as she,
And soon found Opportunity.
Amazed she lifts up Hands! and Eyes!
Shall Phillis be my last best Prize?
I Have drove a Trade this Sixteen Year,
And never yet lit of her Peer.
For some I have no sooner set,
But they themselves run in the Net;
With promised Petticoat or Gown,
Like Autumn leaves they tumble down:
Yet Phillis all these to withstand,
Virtue, and Honor has at hand;
Faith I was fain to stand your Friend,
And tell her Marriage you intend,
I thought that You to Swear and Lie;
Would never scruple more then I.
Then said I, Now I plainly see
Despair is double Misery,
If her yourt Art cannot command,
My towering Hopes are built on Sand.
Where Virtue has Foundation laid,
Honor's not easily betrayed,
Both are by her possessed I fear,
And spite of us will still dwell there.
If Cost can gain't, or Diligence,
I Will never grudge Labor, nor Expence';
Horses and Coach I Will get, though they
Run me, and my Estate away.
I always hate to be confined,
My Love's as boundless as my Mind.
Oaths are in fashion as Clothes are,
And graceful some think it is to swear;
My Life for Phillis I would stake,
But Oaths of Marriage none will make.
He that thus thinks his Miss to win,
Makes mortal of a venial Sin:
With help of Stratagem, or Art,
I Will never refuse to act my part,
If possible I Will gain her Heart;
Then promise Marriage with a lie,
Ten Thousand Deaths I Will sooner dye
By this Discourse (said she) will you
Force me (Fool like) to tell what'^ true,
I know not how you will act your part,
But little of a Woman's Heart,
I Am sure as yet you understand,
And therefore well may be trapan'^
Our Resolutions scarce will hold
Longer then Ice a Minute old,
And what you well may much admire,
We shun that most, we most desire,
And when in this believed we be,
Lord how we curse Credulity.
No Burden need we more upon
Our selves, then we our selves lay on,
When Heart must grant, and Tongue deny,
Who can expect less Misery.
Though some will blame the Ages vice,
It Is Dis^ontent has made them nice;
Vexation of some Chance they mist,
Makes them in spite thus still persist.
Others as free as Day you will sind,
Provided they the Worlds Eye blind;
They Will not be virtuous when they know,
'Twill serve their turn if but thought so:
And seeming Virtue with the best,
Is made a Cloak to hide the rest.
So have I known a pure Saint-breeder,
Send for some fat and strong Flockfeeder,
They both pretending Reformation,
From edifying Assignation;
But still preparing to Devotion,
Flesh and Blood raise a Commotion;
And from the Use of Conso^ation,
They strait address to Procreation;
Then she once smitten Hip and Thigh
Religion drowns in Lechery:
Of that she takes a hasty meal,
But shows in this more active Zeal.
Worst Actions have the best Pretense,
All know that Reason know, or Sense;
He that Affairs best manage can,
You will account the craftiest Man:
So her the wisest reckon we,
That those things carries secretly.
I partly guess at Phillis Mind,
It Is not Disdam makes her unkind;
The Reason she does it oppose,
Is Fear l^st that you should disclose:
And those in whom rests such a Fear,
Always the faithful'st Misses are.
She that once Custom has made bold,
At every offer's bought and sold;
Fops Guinny's her decoys away,
And likes him best, that best does pay.
But grant Phil's Cause is real good,
Yet still she is made of Flesh and Blood;
Such pregnant Symptoms leave a scope,
Whereon to build a future Hope.
I do not doubt my new Design,
Her very Thoughts will undermine;
Your Courtship first shall cause Desire,
And leave me to blow up the Fire;
Maugre resistance then my Charms,
Shall make you triumph in her Arms.
Thus have I shown our female State,
But ever that I my ^lot relate,
Since I have been to you so free,
Return the like Civility.
Would you have me (said I) confess,
Our Sexe^ Faults are little less;
Or what is Truth would have me speak,
Though Virtue's strong, our Flesh is weak:
Who ever will search may soon descry,
In us as much Hypocrisy.
Who could imagine one whose Age,
Loves scorching Calenture might swage,
Should every Day prodigious grow,
As if composed of burning Snow;
And yet none more against Lust declaims,
And Youths Exorbitances blames;
Or strains Hyperboles to praise
When he was young those happy days:
Forgets that then like him were such
Whose Tinder fired at every touch,
Yet thus his Thoughts will busied be,
When he himself's the Prodigy.
Himself he had much better take,
And's Admirations Object make;
Why that his Palsy, Ptissick, Gout,
Want strength to keep that Devil out:
Or curse Dame Nature 'cause she sent
The Plague Desire toth' impotent.
Of this old Torch I Have said enough,
Now let him g'out in smoke and snuff,
To tell shall be my next Design
The Humors of two Friends of mine.
One had a Miss, I think but few
The like Accomplishments could show
As she, or had far Countries known
None more, and more had made their own.
Did you affect the Air of France,
Strait her Discourse was all Romance.
Spanish Reserv'dness would you see,
As soon she would change to Gravity.
Wished you for High Dutch, Low Dutch way,
The German Princess she could play.
Italian glance nor did she want,
But for displeasing her Gallant.
Oh Catholic Miss that had a Dart,
For French, Dutch, Spanish, English Heart,
Should now to such Disaster come,
To find Italian here at Home.
One an Italian might outvie
In raging restless Jealousy,
None more in vain did Passion spend,
Suspecting most his dearest Friend;
To steer a course it was my Fate,
Betwixt his Anger and his Hate:
And he no Cause had for the same,
But that I his Distrust did blame.
So Princes always look askew
On Those that tell them what is true.
But now it is time to let him pass.
Though jealous yet my Friend he was.
As none more faithful was than She,
So none deserved her less than He.
My other Friend a Mistress had,
One drowned in Sorrow could make glad.
A Miss for Beauty such a Queen
Mine Eyes before Phillis never had seen.
Whose Visage charming features decked,
From Tyrants would have forced respect;
Features, Proportion may give Law,
And her Apelles well might draw
For ^enus, as in Shape so she
In Actions ap'd that Deity.
Once 'twas my happiness to be
In his and her good Company,
Where I did such Reception find,
As answered to his courteous mind;
The Ceremony of Salute
Pas^ over, her Beauty made me mute;
When he the reason asked why I
Showed Silence, 'stead of Jollity
As soon as I from that blessed pain
My scattered Senses could regain,
And those Obstructions were dismissed,
By Beauty now turned Exorcist.
As the same Wind does light restore,
To Taper ravished just before;
Or Mother charming to prevent,
Restores him she made impotent.
I said no wonder I Am confined,
Silence the language of the mind;
Such Excellence can best express,
Where Words would rather make it less.
The meanest Beauty Nature made,
May be set off by such a Shade;
When she did this perfection pay,
Designed its praise no Natural way.
Thus I his Miss did represent,
When he resolved in Complement
Not to be outvy'd; said since you
Something in her to like make show:
Be free, I give you liberty,
As far as with Civility.
Then on her Lips the Commonwealth
Of Beauty, he begins a Health;
Makes me with him partaker be
Of balmy Sweets, Love's Chimistry:
Each that he gave was bandied back,
We both kept time in every smack.
But he to oblige me more now sought,
By outward Sense, and inward Thought;
Unveiled her Leg above the Knee,
That I Proportion there might see;
There whilst I feast my greedy Eye,
My working Fancy shapes her Thigh;
Viewing her Calf, and slender Shank,
I judged how swelled her ivory Flank;
Like him that finding footsteps print,
Chalk't out the Heroes Bodies mint.
Sleeping or waking she is my Theme,
And all my Life one constant Dream;
But when I Phillis looked upon,
Those drowsy Phantasms strait were gone:
O happy Chance that did intrude,
To save me from Ingratitude.
On none she better could bestow
Her Love, or Heart deserved to know
Then did my Friend, who never shall find
The crok't Maeanders of her mind.
The Sun scarce shined on such a Pair,
Had she been true, as she was fair.
Thus in Extremes our Passions be,
Some too reserved, and some too free;
Rare is that Man whose Life's a Scene,
Can show the World the golden Mean.
If watchful Eyes could faults prevent,
And still preserve Miss innocent;
Then to be jealous is but just,
And Wisdom it is for to distrust:
But when Experience proves it vain,
What boot's to hug that wracking pain;
Miss with her freedom may prove true,
Force, or Constraint will never do.
So Danae though enclosed in Brass
By golden Shower debauched was;
When jealous Father barred Delight,
He did but whet her Appetite.
Thus I some Failings have made known,
Which some perhaps might think their own.
But now my former Thoughts revive,
How you with Phillis will contrive?
How as I Have long desired she shall
A Victim on Love's Altar fall?
Which if to that blessed Sacrifice,
That I as Priest shall Idolize;
My lucky Stars propitious be:
That minute gives Eternity.
I shall no longer now delay
Your Expectation, but the Way
Make known (she says) that you will confess
Leads to desired Happiness.
Shortly the wished for Time will come,
When my Cornuto goes from Home;
Him his Employment will detain,
Whilst you your Phillis Heart may gain.
But pray be cautious how you close,
She Will not be won by down right blows.
Allay rude Courtship with Respect,
Her Wit will else the Cheat detect.
Unless all future hopes you would miss,
But on Occasion steal no Kiss;
Upon her hand prefer your suit,
Take not the rest but by Salute:
He who'd possess her Beauties spoil,
At her own Weapon her must foil.
Treat her with Park, Spring-garden, Play,
Let modest mirth crown every day:
On her you will gain an Influence,
When your Addresses want offense.
No Art or Industry I Will spare,
In managing this grand affair.
If by persuasions it can be,
Her Lodging she shall take with me;
What Opportunity can do,
Shall then be done betwixt us two.
Were there in her all Virtues placed,
Though so miraculously graced;
I would not fear to overreach
Them all: and then betray the breach.
If but some glimmerings I find,
That may presage a coming Mind,
I will appoint one friendly Night,
Shall ease your Soul, and Heart delight.
There shall be then prepared a Treat,
As Prologue of more pleasing Meat:
And you shall with Frontinniack Wine,
From Sorrows dross Phil's Heart refine:
Her Entertainment let it be
Mirth in its choicest Gaiety.
When envious Time your present bliss
Eclipses, with a parting Kiss,
Let sobs, and sighs your speech bereave;
As if an Age you her must leave:
This Ceremony you must fain,
Lest she suspect you come again;
Then do you steal in the back way,
And on the Bed where last you lay;
Without least noise your self repose,
Till I the happy Time disclose.
Mean while what can be done I Will do,
That may make Phillis think of You;
But when in Bed such tricks I Will use,
Into a stone might Love infuse:
I Will wrack Invention but I Will be
Successful in this Sorcery.
As soon as I perceive that sleep
Does on her Temples Gentry keep,
And all her Faculties are found;
Securely in those fetters bound.
With winged Speed my steps I Will trace
And send you to supply my Place,
Then have I done my utmost Art;
It Is You must perfect the last Part:
He that will then successless be,
Deserves no Opportunity.
No slave that was to Gally chained;
When he his liberty has gained;
With such content transported is:
As I was with the Hopes of this.
I hugged her in my Arms, and said
If I to venture be afraid,
Let me for ever bear the Name
Of fool: and perish in my shame.
If with that hour your pains me bless,
I shall not doubt in the least success;
In that Extreme her Wit will fail:
And like a Bark, o'reset with sail,
Sink; if the Wind but puff a Gale.
Her own ambitious Thoughts she will blame
For trusting to this after Game.
My Presents, Treats, she will call to mind,
On what account I them designed;
That 'twill a greater scandal make
If she refuse, then if she take:
If she refuse, she cannot clear
Suspicion, why she lodged here;
I Will say she promised and deceived,
And then I Am sure to be believed:
Reflecting thus her Thoughts, she will see
Necessity may Virtue be;
Then run that Hazard and deny,
She Will think it safest to comply.
Like an Old Statesman verss'd in's way,
Finding his Faction to decay;
In time considers that it is best
To quit what was his Interest:
Those friends whilst they stood him in stead
He kept, when useless them he fled:
Nor scruples so himself he save,
Rather then Fool, to prove a Knave.
So Phillis would the best Course take,
And Virtue, Honor, Patterns make:
But when they fail relyes on this,
To salve up all by proving Miss.
Thus ended my Discourse, says she
To what you say I do agree,
But though I now believe you will speed,
Yet give me leave to say take heed.
The time is come you must address
Your self to Phillis, and caress
Her with such Courtship, that she may
Believe you meant, what I did say:
About it then, and till that Night
My Thoughts shall brood on your Delight.
The Sun had scarce from Thet is Bed
With blushing smiles lift up his head,
But I prepared for Phillis sight,
Her absence makes with me the Night.
Most readily my Feet inclined
Their steps, when unto her designed.
Her Beauty that might Age renew,
With a magnetic Virtue drew
My panting heart; to every sense,
It Is she that gives an Influence.
I soon arrived at the place where
I knew if not, Phil' would be there.
Chance had contrived she is come before,
^ new learnt Jig to practice over.
To a superlative Degree
Beauty by her Activity
Was raised, and she retired
Toth' inner Room as I desired.
When I came in she at the Glass
Some straggling Curles correcting was;
Order her Fingers made: and they
By them but touched seemed proud to obey.
Some Passion sparkled in her Eyes,
So unexpected this surprise.
I made excuse that 'twas unknown,
She had retired there alone;
But if so happy she would make me,
As to permit my Company:
My self so civil I Would behave,
She Would not repent that leave she gave.
Now Roses, Lillies, 'gan to jar,
At this Request with amorous War;
Doubtful her Resolution lies,
What grants this smile, that blush denies.
In a confused Chaos strove
Desire, 'twixt Modesty, and Love.
Like that Distraction all things hurled,
Till Order teemed an infant World.
At last Loves conquering Charms the Field
Had cleared, and Bashfulness did yield.
Then Phillis spoke 'twixt blush and smile,
I cannot think it worth your while;
Since that the advantage of your stay,
Will not the loss of time repay.
I must acknowledge whilst I live,
I am obliged Respect to give
To you; for your Civility:
Though undeserved, bestowed on me.
But your last Present I restore,
My Thanks can never quit that score.
I never intended to receive
Too much for me, or you to give.
You shall not thus me undermine,
It Is Value speaks you have some Design
Off from that Hand (she pulls he Glove)
Whose sight would cause, but touch force Love.
Terrestrial Galaxys it is skin
Set off by clouds of Veins within.
So have I seen a little Fly
Entombed in precious Amber lie;
By the dark shadow giving grace,
Of its own Mummy to that case.
Now might I fear to be thus crossed,
All my Designs ^e'n ripe were lost.
'Twas time to take some speedy way,
I seized her Hand, and thus did say.
(And passionately with a Kiss
Sometimes made a Parenthesis)
Make it with your Acceptance blessed,
It Is Price is paid with Interest.
Why should such fancies intervene,
To think too great, what is too mean.
The richest Present Thought could find,
Falls short to adequate my Mind,
Which scorns to stoop so low to do
That thing, might undervalue you:
Ambitious it is to adore you still,
And wanting act aspires in will.
Then answered Phil' (her looks an air
Showed now of Hope, and then Despair)
Poor is the prize that I shall gain,
Whilst Reputation fears a s^ain;
Things Circumstances censured are
By vulgar Tongues, not as the appear;
It Is Infamy if they so cal't,
When bare Suspicion makes the fault.
Then since such Hazards we may run,
Scandals Occasion let us shun.
This Answer to a timorous Fool,
Would soon have made his Courage cool;
But I resolved to play a Game,
Should never be spoiled through fear, or shame:
Yet careful was what I let fall,
Consid'ring whom I dealt withal.
And thus replied, Madam it is true
To Reputation much is due;
It ought to be our chiefest care,
For to preserve that always fair:
But when we needless scruples make,
Of Things we lawfully may take;
Because the Vulgar those defame,
Our selves for Niceness we may blame.
Little their empty Noddles know,
More then what they to Nature owe;
Such Fears contemns each generous Mind,
Whose Conversation's more refined.
-- Heaven knows my Heart it is true,
For what I have designed on you,
-- If it may deserve that Name,
'Twas friendship: that is my chiefest aim;
If I should call it Love 'twill be,
But Friendship in a high degree.
This my Assertion would you prove,
Stake but your Friendship to my Love;
And when Time makes it truly known,
Give it your favor, or your frown.
I did my Passions Emblem choose
In this poor Pledge, which you refuse,
As a continued Circle this;
So without end my Passion is:
By this supported flaming Heart
With these two Hands on either part,
Is figured mine: Hope and Desire
Supplying fuel to its fire.
Thus he whom Bashfulness confines,
May speak his meaning by dumb signs;
And imitate those Times of Old,
Whose Stories Hieroglyphics told.
And now the last boon I shall crave,
Is it might still your Favor have;
But if Entreaties shall not prevail,
Which with success might Heaven assail:
And you are resolved it to restore,
I beg you would stay but one Month more.
My Lips had scarce those Words let fly,
And Phillis ready to reply;
(Whilst I expect her fatal doom
Should like a clap of Thunder come)
In comes my old contriving Dame,
And luckily retrieves the Game:
Quickly her sight Phil' s Countenance cleared,
And then the Rainbow Mirth appeared.
Her business was that I that Day
Should entertain them with a Play,
As soon as asked I granted this;
Such Assignations who can miss.
Thus far I had performed my Part:
My Agent now must use her Art.
I took my leave, and how she fared,
At our next Meeting was declared.
How Phillis though she seemed unkind,
But faintly shadowed over her Mind.
As by her last Discourse she guest,
Which in this manner was expressed:
As willingly I would not slight
Him whose Deserts might Love invite.
So neither would I shipwrackt be
Upon the Rock Credulity:
Hasty Belief but gild's the Bait,
That trowls us on to gross Deceit.
Whatever Man shall me persuade
To change for Wife the Name of Maid,
Must humbly for my Favor sue,
And wait my Time to grant it too:
When gained I yield he will Master me,
But once I will his Mistress be;
If I but chance to tip a wink
His Soul shall study what I think;
His Heart by mine must motion know,
And its true Counterpoint shall go:
He my Commands will thus regard,
I Will be at last his just Reward.
That Bubble Honor's not my aim,
To cringe to gain an empty Name.
Nor are my Hopes so fondly vain,
To turn an old Fop young again.
The Man that I accept shall be
Youthful, and witty, fanc'yng me;
If rich, I Will in his Fortune share,
If not, that is least of all my care:
My Heart on Wealth was never bent,
True Love is real true Content.
Now Wheedle had I in the way,
That 'twas Discretion to delay;
Most highest Estimation set
On Things they difficultly get,
Nothing that Value ever gained,
Which has been easily obtained.
What Fruit Ambition brings we
May by a late Example see
Of on^, that had as high renown,
As could admired Beauty crown,
And might as happy been, as fair,
Had she for Honor took less care.
Amongst numerous Persons that did woe,
Her Heart stood unresolved 'twixt two;
^or ones Deserts, her self would grant,
He nothing did but Honor want;
The Other (as often blind Chance bestows)
Had Honor, little else God knows:
Whilst doubtful 'twas which should prevail,
Honor steps in and turns the Scale.
^ut see the Event, no sooner ti'd
^y a strict League, and made a Bride,
Fruition Fancy has controlled,
And soon hot Love, as soon grows cold.
His queasie Stomach loathes to take,
For which some would a Crown forsake:
What more on Virtue could entrench,
Her Rival makes a dunghill Wench;
May those like her whose aims high blood,
On empty Honor chew the cud.
But more prodigious seems to me
The late much practiced Foppery:
Many Examples I could call
To mind, but this shall serve for all.
Of one the Picture may be called
Of Time, I Will swear his Pate's as bald
And Brows as wrinkled; for his Eyes,
Spectacles (thank Nose) them supplies.
Look in his Mouth, you will say, if e're,
Some Ages past Teeth did stand there;
No mark remains: and naught appears,
To be erected but his Ears.
Yet will he strut, and look as big
As possible with flaxen Wig.
And thus accoutr'd, hopes to find
Favor in his Carezzas Mind.
Whose blooming Youth not yet Sixteen,
The World will say was overseen,
Its self in Wedlock to engage,
With one that is eunucht by his Age.
But they are mistaken 'twas her choice
To contradict the Vulgar voice:
Unacceptable cannot appear
He that Five-Hundred pound a Year
Can make a Jointure of, and will
For private Purse Desire fulfill.
Gold Contradictions can confute,
And Youth to Age make prostitute.
Let her enjoy that Slavery,
(Till I shall wish she may be free)
Like those wh' in Limbo fear to dwell,
By Penance make themselves a Hell;
And find too late by this their cross,
Uncertain gain, but certain loss.
Forced Virtue she at last may know
Will to its-self a burden grow.
Hell for a Torment did devise,
The longing Soul to Tantalize.
Just such a case will she be in,
Whilst Virtue checks desired Sin.
But should she dare to encroach upon
That Custom hangs those Shackles on,
And by a Chance her burden mend;
(Such Blessings Providence may send)
Then Stratagems her Wit must show,
TO impose upon Amphitrio.
Her best Contentments are but Dreams,
Whilst she thus suffers in Extremes.
Virtue will make her Heart Strings crack,
And Vice must set her Wits oth' Wrack.
Then happy you, (if I may guess
By others wants your Happiness)
Whom neither fickle Honor slights;
Nor Dotage tempts with false Delights:
But Fate officious in its care,
To your own wish does Love prepare,
In him whose worth would mollify
Hearts flinted over with Cruelty,
From whose kind Soul no Thought e're came
Unworthy of so great a Flame;
Nor thinks it Slavery to do
The meanest thing enjoined by you,
That you are unjust the Stones would cry,
Should such Desert regardless dye.
Now trembled Phil' and looked about,
As loath to let her Thoughts slip out.
My dearest Mother whispers she,
But that I trust your Privacy,
(Then Protestations out I sent
You may be sure I never meant
To keep) you should not thus partake
That Secret makes my Heart to ache.
Were I but certain for to find
His Words to correspond to's Mind,
My jealous Thoughts should then be free;
And cease suspecting Treachery:
My lingering Love should mend its Pace,
And last set out, first reach the Race.
But since so many Fools are made
By those that loving make their Trade,
Who for new Faces range the Town,
Till want makes them sit Bankrupts down:
Blame not my still mistrusting Fears,
'Twould melt a Niobe to Tears.
(Now slipped the Floodgates of her Eyes,
And Sorrow seemed to play a Prize;
Tears made in her a comely sight,
As if in Weeping were Delight.
My Pity swag'd this growing pain,
And she proceeded thus again.)
I Would never be at the expense to weep,
My tears should in their Cradles sleep;
But oh fierce Love should I deny,
My Heart for vent would stifled die.
Love that so often I did Despise,
For past faults now does tyrannize;
And I dejected, and forlorn,
Am made the Object of its Scorn.
Just as some little wanton Fly,
Securely passing Tapers Eye;
Rejoices in that dangerous Game,
And through Success contemns the Flame:
But caught at last with singed Wings,
Buzzing for Life its own Dirge sings.
That my Flame's true increases woe,
For fear lest his should not be so;
But though Distrust such thoughts can give,
Weak Hopes by Promises may live:
I Will not be faithless, but believe
He will not, cannot me deceive,
True Love unhappy is in this;
It most suspects where least cause is.
Yet will I still indiff'rent be,
So that he shall not despair of me.
He in whom lasting Love does rest,
Likes an imperious Mistress best;
Tedious Attendance he will wait,
Nor think repulse too rigid Fate.
Those Troubles past our Loves will meet,
As Spices bruised become more sweet.
But though her Mind she thus revealed,
Her looks wished still she had concealed.
Endless 'twill be to tell the course
I took, my Wheadles to enforce;
You may believe much Art was used,
She Is not so easily abused:
My care shall be t'unlock her Breast,
Your Wit must make, or mar the rest.
Words are too weak to express my Sense
Of Joy, at such Intelligence;
If Traitor e're deserved well,
'Twas this my female Machiavel.
I thankt her not with empty Hand,
Her Service might Reward command.
And answered that she nced not fear,
Ought should be wanting of my Care.
Like those whose well contrived Designs,
Their own vain boastings undermines.
Often by Phil's looks her Love I guest,
But never till now knew my self blessed.
If Souls (Philosophers have told)
In Magazines were pil'd of old,
And Love by Simpathy do pay
To those at first they nearest lay:
By this Relation, I descry
Phil's Soul and mine lay very nigh.
And if eternal Fates decree
In Actions a Necessity,
I am encouraged to proceed,
Since Destiny designs the Deed.
Thus did we pass the Time away,
Till Phil' came ready for the Play;
Thither as overjoyed I went,
As him that comes from Banishment.
Sometimes of Phil' I Would steal a look,
And read Success in Beauties Book;
Then doubting she would perceive, and frown:
Mine Eyes through Fear themselves shut down.
Now in a Box was Phillis set,
Like Jewel in a Cabinet;
And by the luster of her Eye
Feasted the greedy Standers by.
At last in the Pit began a Chat,
Sometimes of this, sometimes of that
Rare Beauties which some Fops had known;
And each Man most extolled his own:
In such a strange confused Din,
I thought I Babel was within.
But more Diversion 'twas to me,
To see the starcht Formality
Of one, that there came to be seen,
And acted Fop (...) (...).
First he with simpring does begin,
In hopes the Ladies Smiles to win;
And so he might, for I dare say
'Twas more ridic'lous then the Play:
I mean those Parts the Poet meant
Should perfect Mimmicks represent.
Next had his Comb with his Wigg about,
And huffing that, sets Noddle out;
But there till grown toth' Bench may fit,
If he designs to put in Wit.
But some his Breeding will applaud,
'Cause Traveling has been his Band;
And lately pimpt him out of France,
The affected Crindge, and antic Dance:
Thither Baboon, back Jackanapes,
He went, and came, nothing escapes
His search that is French: if he can get
A new coined Word, it is resin'd Wit.
But stay I almost had forgot
To speak of Miss, that is his chief Plot:
Strange Passion to his Countenance creeps
When through the Curtain Pigsney peeps:
His Eyes pursueher through that hole,
And send a Message from his Soul;
But well he knows Glances cannot do,
It Is Guinys with effect must woe:
Through their Perfwasion Love's allowed,
Else see's as coy, as he is proud;
Then she will his precious parts adore,
Though I believe what often she'as swore,
Some sturdy Groom has pleased her more.
But now with Fopp I must have done,
Already is the Play begun.
It Was the first Time that e're was showed
That Play called Marriage A-la-Mode;
The Name my Fancy did incline
To think C^ncernment in the Design.
I knew that Marriage now was made
But after-Game to bankrupt Trade:
Unwillingly most pay that score,
In Coin that Miss has used before;
Posterity reforms their Lives,
And Interest pins them unto Wives.
My Fortune may perhaps be this,
If so; I am resolved a Miss
TO enjoy, before that Destiny
Condemns me to such Drudgery.
What Is my Design though I Am curs^ for it,
(How e're the Poets) shall not fall short
But whilst such fancy's tickled me,
My Phyllis feigned simpli^ity;
She seemed so innocent, so good,
No Eye perceived she understood.
But when appeared disguised in Dress,
The Sheapheard and his Sheapheardess,
She looked concerned; as if it might be
An Emblem of her Love to me.
The Sheapheardess expressed that grace
With modest blushes in her Face,
That all agreed such tempting Art,
Out-did the Poet in her Part:
And without boasting I might say,
She blushed, and sighed her self away.
^ardon me Nymph if I express
Thou should be truly a Princess,
shall not wish thy rise may be
from common flesh to high degree;
others from those low steps may rise,
^hou do at first deserve the Prize.
Farewell dear Nymph, you are the only She
Show Phillis in Effigy.
But when the Play came to an end,
In Gratitude I did commend
The Poet for his pains that Day,
Though my self acted was in the Play.
And when this Task was undertook,
On him my Copy I did look.
Who at a distance slips his Jeere,
May venture for to be severe,
And nothing need but naming fear,
Which I am sure you have not here.
Let each wh'in this the same fate find,
From my Example prove as kind;
And bear no malice in their Mind.
Your Name^s I Have studied to conceal,
It Is your own faults if you reveal.
The Wise with secrecy yet cure,
And by Discretion Fame secure;
But those that proudly boast their Claps,
May well deserve Bells in their Caps.
Thus much for my Apology:
Now Phillis I return to thee.
Homewards I her conduct again,
And what Invention could attain,
I then did urge; did She but say
She liked, I strait extolled the Play;
Did She but seem to slight some part,
My Censure was to that as tart:
Phillis thou shall command my breath,
Thy smile's my life, thy frown's my death.
Though long delayed at last she is grown
Familiar, and my Love does own,
But in her passion so discreet,
Kindness and Modesty did meet;
Her Actions Envy might survey,
And not find out one Look astay.
Such Entertainments I did give,
As she might civilly receive;
And studied not so much Expense,
'T' express a vain Magnificense:
But rather took a special Care
To get those Cates were choice and rare:
Knowing that proverb seldom fail,
A liqu'rish tongue, a liqu'rish Tail.
Could Art, or Luxury devise
Dishes whose tastes should Love surprise,
I would not want those Rarities:
Did I give Kingdoms for their price,
Spring-Garden now I bid adieu,
Other designs I must pursue.
The Time was come Cornuto went,
Lucky to me his Banishment.
And now my Agent does entice
Phillis (by this time not so nice)
To Lodge with her, who little knows
What Treason with that friendship goes.
She Is innocent and free from guile,
And least suspects her Mothers Wile:
But her Experience will find out
Those projests Women bring about.
In vain might Sons of pleasure bend
Their Wits, and never attain the End
Of their Desires; but that they know
By Female help the Nail will go.
So the Decoy-Birds take the Wing,
And flocks of the same Feather bring;
The Invited Guests have no Distrust
That their own Tribe should prove unjust:
But kindly take the profer'd Meat,
And caught in the Net perceive the Cheat.
Now had she Phillis in her gripe,
And all Designs for Action ripe.
The Night appointed was that We
Should keep our long-wish'd Jubilee.
And that I might each Sense content,
Unto a Ball I with her went.
So ravishing 'twas to my sight,
Of her brisk motion the Delight,
Could I have still that Object by,
I Would wish my self turned all to Eye.
Who'd seen her at the Musicks sound,
With ordered steps to skin the Ground,
Would think she had not stepped, but flew:
So light she past, with Time so true.
By this Time was our Dancing done,
And to the Treat we now are gone.
Where neither cost, nor care was spared,
To get those Dainties there prepared.
Frontiniack, and rich Florence Wine,
Did with their Flavours so combine,
Had envious Cynnick sipt, he must
Have Ecstasies at every Gust.
Jellies and Creams did next appear,
Trembling like bashful Lovers fear,
But it is their Tastes the Effects can do,
In them lies strength, and courage too.
By this time Phillis pleasant was,
So often my Mother filled her Glass.
I took the advantage of that Vein,
And boldly did request a streine.
Phillis (that often had been shie)
Thought now 'twas Rudeness to deny.
Freely begins her Rapsodie,
With such delicious Melody;
That charmed by her harmonious Throat,
I took new Life from every Note.
Say not their's Music in the Spears,
None will beleev't that hers once hears.
Let Phillis feed me with such Breath,
I Will live beyond the power of Death;
Tedious can never be her Song,
Were it Eternal: 'twere not long:
But lasting is no mortal Bliss,
The Time to take the parting Kiss
Approaches now; and when that comes
Arabia with all her Gummes
Such charming sweets could never produce,
Or Fruits repleat with noblest Juice,
To craving Appetite can be
Such full content; as that to me.
Delight it was so great that I
Received not without Ecstasy.
At last revived, with a sad Scene
I let her know what Love does mean.
Numberless sighs express my Moan,
And blame swift Time I must be gone.
But Phillis innocently free,
Relenting with a simpathy;
Pitty's me for my fained Grief,
And by her sighs gives some Relief.
Ask why I vex my self in vain,
As if we never should meet again.
Modestly thanks me for the Treat,
But never dreams her self's my meat.
I thankt her too, and softly swore
I hoped ere long to please her more,
Then Creams or Jellies did before.
Departed now I make no stay,
But soon slip in the the other way.
No Difficulties need I fear,
Wel-known's the Path I traverse there;
But had it Labyrinths about,
My Love would find its passage out.
Now entered in the appointed place,
With Expedition I uncase
My self, and into Bed I go,
And hearken what is done below.
My Mother that was never slack
When her own profit lay at stake,
With double Diligence makes haste;
And sees her doors securely fast.
Then speaks to Phil. My dearest Heart
How loath thy Servant was to part;
How did his sighs entreat his stay:
And every Look beg some Delay:
When Time to Lover's so severe
Was past, I Am sure his heart stayed here:
His restless Soul can never be free,
But busied still with thoughts of thee.
In Charity be then so kind
And let him this poor Favor find:
That you his Passion bear in mind.
Injustice 'twere if you this Night
Don't simpathize with his Delight.
Come let us have to our Repose,
Where in mine arms I Will thee enclose,
And with more freedom there relate,
What Joys attend a married state.
Phillis that Wine had pliant made,
By silence her Consent betrayed:
Follows her up unto that Bed,
So fatal to her M^iden-head:
And there her Garments does divest,
And softly lays her self to rest.
(Our Rooms with Wainscot parted were,
So that I might distinctly hear,
And want of sight supply with Ear.)
My Mother was no sooner in
The Bed, but thus she does begin.
Dear Phil. believe me, (by this Kiss!)
I speak what my Experience is.
If Youth or Beauty could create
A Happiness, 'twas once my Fate
To be so Happy: but alas
Beauty a poor Contentment was,
And Youth you see away must pass:
Something my Fancy did admire,
That Admiration brought Desire;
Which satisfaction never could know,
Till to Enjoyment it did go;
My joys then to perfection came,
When Wedlock had allayed my flame.
It Is that Loves harmony imparts,
And Cements fast the noblest Hearts.
Tell me Dear Phil. ('twixt you and I
Needless is Fear, no Ears are nigh.)
Have you not been with Love oppressed,
And felt its symptoms in your Breast.
A shivering Qualm does first surprise,
With Visage pale, and ghastly Eyes;
The Heart then struggling stops the Breath,
And makes a doubt 'twixt life and death.
Many endure this Agony,
But few can tell the Reason why.
We Matrons it Green Sickness call,
Or Fits of the Mother, that befall
Young Virgins, 'cause they Charcoale eat,
Or Chalk, and nauceate wholesome meat:
And thus we many times disguise
The truth, with such officious Lies.
When we burnt feathers for the Cure
Prescribe; and make them stinks endure.
But oh! -- (and then she made a pause)
We well can tell the certain cause
Of this prevailing Malady,
And what is the surest Remedy.
That dismal paleness is a Tipe,
That Natures fruit was grown full ripe,
Which lingering did for Harvest call;
And pined it should ungather'd fall.
So tender Bud of fragrant Rose,
Does by degrees it self disclose;
As fearing lest it should expire,
And want Spectators to admire:
But when the time approaches nigh,
Of it is desired maturity;
Displays its leaves, and calls forth
Whatever may increase its Worth:
Puts on its smiles, and breaths perfumes,
Then blushing modesty presumes,
It may deserve some courteous hand
To kiss: and not still useless stand;
But when it once perceives neglect,
And Beauty cannot engage Respect,
Impatient with such long delay,
It faints and withers quite away.
But this misfortunes not your fear,
Nature has not been so severe;
But first an Object for Delight,
Provided, e're an Appetite.
In him that well deserves my Place,
With whom you will Happiness embrace
Whose Heart I Am sure is firmly bent
For to consummate your content.
Do thou not wish this were the Night,
That Hymen should his Tapers light:
When each enclosed in others arms,
Might give and take Loves pleasing Charms.
^ know thou do -- and that expressed,
Her amorous actions spoke the rest.
But long that fondness did not hold,
^ill Phillis thus her Story told.
My own Experience is but small
Of those misfortunes Maids befall,
^ bless my Stars for good success,
^ut pity those in such Distress;
Where fond Desire has ruled the Roast,
and modesty its Empire lost.
Loves raging passion I Will deny,
Till Marriage may it justify;
Should I before indulge that flame,
The World it Lust, not Love would name.
But here my Mother was afraid.
Phil' would proceed, and thus she said.
My dearest Child 'twixt thee and me,
What need these Resolutions be,
In public it were well designed
If you had thus expressed your mind.
I have resolved as well as you,
And have performed as Women do.
Though I in Marriage put some stress,
I cannot esteem of Love the less;
Which in its freedom may be blessed,
As well as with that clogg oppressed.
The Ceremoni's but the Shell,
The Kernel is in loving well.
Why should we then be forced to make
A feast for Ostentation's sake,
Since it is not of Necessity;
But may be left at liberty.
Marriage did once fall to my share;
And 'twill to thine Phil' never fear;
And yet my Conscience could dispense
With Love before without Offense.
Which now to tell I cannot refrain,
Those Thoughts e'ne make me Young again.
When first my Deer declared his mind,
I could not be to Love inclined:
Till mutual Vows our Hearts had joined.
But then it chanced one Night that we
Were blessed with Opportunity,
When he his utmost Courtship tried,
And I as much in me denied:
At last (Dear Phil, I must it speak,)
He grew too strong, and I too weak.
But what Delight that Conquest brought,
My Tongue can never express my thought,
At every sigh, and every Kiss,
How we transported were with bliss?
How whilst intranc'd in Love we lay?
Our wandering Souls were fled away.
And if We erred at that blessed time,
Our passion might excuse our Crime.
The most that could our Spirits awe,
Was but a breach of humane Law:
And shall such Edicts that vvithstand,
Which boundless Nature does command,
Their Justice to Oppression's grown,
If Lovers may not use their Own.
But fear not Phil' that I design,
That my Example should be thine;
I think thy Virtue will refuse;
And beg my Weakness thou wilt excuse.
But if it happen so to be
That thou like Opportunity,
Should have, (for certainly none knows
How Fate their Actions may dispose)
And should consent; (I put this case)
The matter's not such great disgrace.
What resolution can avail,
When powerful Love does once assail;,
And pleads for that (which is no more
Then what thy Mother did before)
Virtue it self must be betrayed,
For Morals then aside are laid.
Now all was hushed, and after this
Scarce the faint Echo of a Kiss
Could well be heard; for Phil' compli'd
In Heart, though Fear her Tongue still ti'd.
Virtue that rare but comely Grace,
Which in frail flesh has seldom place;
Had almost gained her tender heart,
No wonder then 'twas loath to part.
When banished Virtue once withdrew
My Mother soon her own strength knew;
And silent Courtship does pursue,
Till sleep my Phillis did surprise,
And drew the Curtains of her Eyes.
No Usurer that long has lent
And rookt an Heir at Ten per Cent.
So nimbly does the forfeit take,
When his last Lordship lies at stake,
As did my Circe post away,
When her Charms had secured the prey.
Nor Aeson when with powerful Art,
Medea did new Life impart,
So actively his Limbs did use;
As I revived with this glad News.
Not a less noise the Air receives,
When morning-dew salutes the leaves,
Then made my steps: so light I went,
As if Loves God his Wings had lent.
As Soon as I the Bed came near,
To Venus thus I made my Prayer.
Great Goddess now to make me blessed,
Vouchsafe me thine own amorous cest,
The same I mean on flowery I Would,
Which lucky was to the Thund'rers Bride;
When Masquerading for a Bout,
At her last shift it helped her out;
And in Joves senses caused such strife,
That he for Miss mistook his Wife:
And briskly struggling in the dark,
The Mountain made St. James' Park.
No sooner this Devotion pai'd,
But in the Bed my self I laid.
Some Hot-spur now would make no stay,
But in his Talons seize the Proy,
But that I thought would rather be
Gross folly, then good Policy;
Needless for that it is to use force,
Which if well managed comes of course.
This made me then resolve to grutch
My self the Indulgence of a Touch,
But wait the time till she should wake;
And first perceive her own mistake.
No whining Brother such a trial,
Er'e had of so much self-denial,
As I: before me having meat,
But awed by prudence durst not eat.
Yet some advantage was that night
The assistance of pale Phebes Light,
Though feeling's bard; I used my sight.
Sol I disclaim thee, thou a Lover
To Cuckold Vulcan did discover;
Who in the manner (by his Art)
Surprised him, that he cold not part:
Then like a limping Villain plods,
And call's to's shame the smiling Gods.
So Citizen that never did hear
The frequent failings of his Dear,
Informed by an officious Friend,
His cheating business cannot tend:
Till he to Guild Hall brings the Jest,
And proves himself a well-horn'd Beast.
But to my Story, I surveyed
(whilst in sweet slumbers drowned she laid.)
The naked Beauties of her Breasts,
Where thousand Cupids make their Nests.
Comparisons I here forgo
Of Alablaster, driven Snow,
Worn out by Poets long ago.
They need no more Hyperholies,
Then their own Native purities.
But whilst I from these Objects pass,
To View what else uncovered was:
A sudden Trembling seized her Heart,
And in her sleep she seemed to start;
Her breath that silently had past,
With sighing murmurs blamed its have.
As if the Air that she drew in,
Unwilling was to go'ut again.
So have I seen a stream that is deep,
With its slow motion lulled asleep;
But when by shallow Rocks denied,
It wakes: and does their Rudeness chide:
Up sprung Her arms, and caught at Air,
Then closed; as if s'had something there:
So strong they claspt, the Bed they shook,
And then with want of breath she wak't.
Her hands could scarce their Office do
To rub her Eyes, mine did so too.
And with her Actions, time did keep,
As if I just had vvak't from sleep.
No Fowler er'e so close did watch,
When that he would a Dot'rel catch.
When Phillis found I was awake,
Mistaking me, she thus did speak.
Dear Mother I no sooner closed
Mine eyes, but in a Dream supposed
My self into a Chamber brought,
Which with rich Furniture was fraught.
Side-boards it had with China pressed,
Those brittle Glories of the East.
Glasses there stood reflecting Light,
And dazel'd the Spectator's sight.
To Hangings next which Persian loom
Had Wove, my wandering eyes did come;
Where a rare Hand had done its part,
That Nature seemed outstript by Art.
I wrong that work should I forget
Those fruits and flowr's in the Border set.
Such multitudes were there expressed,
And those of sight and shape the best:
Had Paradise it self been by,
Twould blush at their Variety.
Here whilst a Bird with greedy beak
A ripened Cherry seems to break,
One might perceive the juice to fill
His Throat so full, he seemed to spill
Pure crystal drops: which at first view;
Descending seemed like pearls of dew.
There whilst I view a full blown Rose,
Its leaves just shatt'ring I suppose;
At least so ticklish seemed their stay,
The smallest breath might blow't away.
But though this Borders work was rare,
With that within it cannot compare;
Ages to come may fetch from thence
A Model for lost Excellence.
The Story was Hypom'nes strife
To win his Love; or loose his life;
Oh! how it did rejoice my heart,
To see the Youth to have got the start,
My pity boiled up to the brim,
And wishes ran along with him:
Viewing At'lanta at his heels,
My heart as much of anguish feels.
Oh Savage Maid! see I a truth?
And can thou hurt that lovely Youth?
Cursed be thy Vow which fierceness took
Beyond the Charms of his sweet look,
Beauties excelling thine would bless
Themselves at thy scorned happiness:
Soon should decided be that Race,
Were I, were I but in thy Place.
Here scarce for weeping could refrain
Mine Eyes till I had viewed again;
Her Visage then seemed to look down,
Half had a smile, and half a frown:
Wondering what power that smile could draw,
A golden Apple then I saw;
Its Beauty seemed to affect her soul,
And as she stoopt, that seemed to roll;
And strivo as much as well it may
TO advantage him, and her delay.
Thus did I think, and more had said
To praise the Youth, and blame the Maid.
But then considered it might be
That I deferv'd much worse than she,
Who pity did to shadow show,
And a substantial Love forgo.
How often have I left him forlorn?
And all his kindness paid with scorn.
If I a Visit did permit,
'T was with intent to scoff at it.
How was I pleased when he was gone
With but a Recollection.
How often he did Addresses make?
How patiently abuses take?
None but a Fool could Rage abridg,
Were not this Female privilege?
When I more freedom did him give,
And would sometimes a Treat receive,
Lord how precise I was and nice,
Entreaties scarce could me entice
^o eat, as if t'ad been his right
^o find me meat, and appetite.
^^ he a Present did bestow,
^^ in acceptance was so slow;
The time and labor that he lost,
Might almost, countervail its cost.
But now blessed shadow warned by thee,
I am resolved to be more free;
Thy sight has since convinced me more
Then all his Courtship did before:
Let Opportunity be kind,
I Will satisfy his longing mind.
Thus whilst I said (and turned my head
To view a stately Damask Bed,
Whose Golden fringe did seem to be
The Indies in Epitomy;
I thought at first seeing so much,
Some Midas turned it with a Touch.)
Entered my Love, and as I feared,
All my discourse had overheard.
Scarce had Di^na when^she spied
Acteon by the Fountains side,
A deeper blush; then my cheeks died:
Only I had the happier fate
To bush for Love, but she for hate.
Love seemed with him to crown the place,
From every motion came a Grace.
Smiling he says, (and takes my hand
Whilst I like Statue ravished stand)
Phillis how long wile thou refuse?
And let thy Conscience still accuse
Thee for Injustice: to hold out
Is against Love; which cannot doubt.
How can thou entertain a Flame?
And not believe I have the same.
The Love that Jealousy can cross,
^s not as yet refined from dross.
Why should me now thus stand in aw?
Since Love is to it self a ^aw;
Both Love and Opportunity,
Design this how'r for thee and me.
Not the bold Falcon takes her flight,
When she the Quarry has in sight,
With Expedition more than he
Seemed in my Dream to seize on me;
Striving to call my Voice I mist,
Beyond my power 'twas to resist:
With the fame force he me beguiled,
With the same force me ^econcil'd;
Never till then me thoughts I found
That Love had Balm to heal its wound,
And was as willing for to be
Pomona, as Vertumnus he.
But thus whilst I repeat Loves charms,
And think him sure within mine arms.
VVishing he might continue there,
I wak't, and found naught else but air.
(Here did she turn, and clipping me)
Dear Mother what should these things be?
Goodness! in what a strange Extreme
I am, sure this was more then Dream.
I find my Resolution halt,
And almost could permit a Fault.
Had I been impotent, or old,
This would have made me young, and bold,
If Ixions blood grew raging mad,
When for a Miss a Cloud he had,
Much more might mine; having a^ good
As Juno, real Flesh and Blood.
No more was said, but Phil' if you
False joys thus please; what then will true?
I sighed, she strove, and in her pain,
By striving echoed sighs again;
But when strength failed she fell away,
And like a stone as Senceless lay,
But then continued was my strife,
Till by that skirmish she took Life,
And by degrees prevailing Charms,
To clasp the Foe compelled her arms:
Then came new Sense to ev^ry part,
And with quick motion spring'd her Heart;
Joy then succeeds in the place of Moan,
Love can dissolve a heart of Stone;
And with its pure Aetherial fire,
Thaw the benumbed and froze Desire.
So was at first Pigmalions Miss,
Vnactive to her profer'd Bliss;
But when inspired from above,
Grew warm with simpathetick love;
She blushed, and knew not what it meant,
Till the amorous God surprised consent.
Conclusion.
So Caesar when his Wars were done,
His Pen ran over what is Sword had Won,
And in that Conquest triumph't more,
Then in his World Subdued before.
GALLANTRY A-la-mode
PART III.
OH Indignation! how I swell,
When but my Thoughts revive that Hell.
Drinking the Vice of this damned Age,
Madness and Fury does engage,
To cause such baseness to be shown,
Which till that time was never known.
A long intended Treachery,
(Mixed with the Dreggs of Lechery)
To act some unsuspected choose
A Time might fit me for Abuse.
A Tavern they design the Stage,
To show this Trajedy of Rage;
Mine the chief Part O misery!
Miss and two more the Actors be.
She with her Mate the first meet there,
Hugging themselves in jumbling chair;
Not long before the Play was out,
And then comes old Companion Pout.
So Dog and Bitch we do deride,
When they their True-Loves Knot have ti'd.
When Mirth was vanished from his eye,
Miss and himself no Company;
He sends for one his heart to cheer,
That might outvy a dancing Bear:
Of Whimsey's, Freaks, a Medrigall,
In all his Actions Comicall.
With his addition they made three,
Yet one more want, and that is me;
When Messenger the News did bring,
My Love strait puts me on the Wing:
But dear Experience proved at last,
I did but then make too much have.
When come, I saw the Nymph arise
Like Morning from the Eastern skies;
In parallel my heart did run,
And Persian like adored that Sun.
Her Humor was an Harmony
Of brisk Discourse, and Repartee;
But O misfortune! in a trice,
We must forsake that Paradise.
One of cross Humor I might well
Ill Omens by his Looks foretell,
Yet unregarded let him go,
Because I often had known him so.
One that to curse an Age I Would spend.
I lie if I should him name friend.
For drinking Brimmers was inclined,
Nor better pleasures there could find;
To Misses mirth dos disagree:
That Surfeits him, that pleases me.
The Wine poured out sent back no Smile.
As conscious of ensuing Guile;
But by its blushing did presage,
Dismal Effects of its own Rage.
When subtle Fumes began to rise,
And I in danger of Surprise;
When Reason came to its last stake,
My Seeming Friends I thus bespake.
If for my own it may not be,
Yet for the Nymphs sake pity me;
Now whilst it is time let us prevent,
That which too late we may repent^
Think but how vain Excuses show,
That say I thought to would not be so:
Which of you now can ign'rant be,
Of mine (I blush) -- Infirmity:
Since thus my humor you have known,
What prove my Faults, you make your own.
Yet still they pressed, but like a Rock
A did resolve to stand their Shock;
As one Plot failed, they new Create,
And Miss at last make Advocate.
Then did the Nymph begin to try.
Charms Resolution cannot deny.
Her Wit and Beauty must prevail;
For those are Weapons never fail;
Now though I had resolved to obey,
Yet by Remonstrance thus did say.
Fair Nymph you might have bid me do
Something would better please us two.
Then had I no Excuse at hand,
For to delay your just Command:
By this I fear what may ensue,
Will neither please my Self, nor you.
So Jove at Semeles Desire,
Came down with his Celestial fire;
And Phaenix-like does Nymph expire.
My Lips that now their Duty pay,
May be Seduced and disobey;
And what is adored as soon may be
Contemned by an Apostasy.
What baseness cannot Wine infuse,
And could you pardon such Abuse*
My Reason by your Will is crossed,
And in that labrinth almost lost:
What Is your Request: no force can want,
Nor can you ask what I cannot grant.
Now does appear in Misses Eye,
The Triumph of a Victory;
That her Desires should be obeyed,
To Sooth my Humor thus she said.
Your self with Scruples don't deceive,
What you can Say; I can forgive:
Words cannot offend in Wine expressed,
For then Abuse is but a Jest.
Then when the Nymph her Work had done,
To see the Event, sits looking on.
Whilst to each Health I brimmer pay,
Unknown my Reason steals away.
My stam'ring Tongue something lets slip,
Displeases Nymp 'twixt Cup and Lip.
She might have pardoned me, when that
I spoke scarce she or I knew what;
I did endeavor what I could,
But none but she me understood:
First Sillables were placed last,
I in that Gibrish made such have,
'T would puzzel Linguist to detect
The Riddle of my Dialect.
Fair Nymph what mean, be not amazed
At Devil thou thy self has raised;
My mumbling cannot do thee harm,
Believe me conning of a Charm
To stir up Love: that word Amor,
Which thou mistak'st, and turn'st to Whore.
Now female Furi's past recall,
Nymph is grown the Devil and all;
And gives me then a small disgrace,
By throwing Wine upon my face.
Could I have spoke, I Would said dear Miss
Rain without thunder wholesome is;
And may be thanked her too for this.
But now to appease her I despair,
Her nimble fingers seize my Hair;
And both fast in that Conflict bound,
Do tumble grovelling on the Ground.
Who'd seen that skirmish would have se'd,
Herodia's had her St. John's head;
Were we hung out no better sign,
Then us could recommend the Wine.
Whilst that she says my Death she sought,
Each Twich her Bodkins stab I thought.
Long was it e're that hold she would part,
But longer did endure the smart;
Though scarce I knew when she let loose,
My Pate like Anvile had such blows
From one that then might well me spare;
And take Revenge upon the square;
When I might do, what he could dare.
Nymph disengaged, a while I stood,
And blushing drops did think my blood
No Welchman at the sight of's Gore,
Enraged with Fury ever swore,
As I for this to swinge that Whore.
As Taper drawing near its End,
In the last flash most light does spend.
So I believing Death drew nigh,
Not unrevenged fain would die.
What Wine can prompt I now begin,
Manhood is out, and Devil in.
That Nymph a Fury seems to me,
Which I adored as Deity.
On drinking tends this cursed Fate,
Each in excess to Love, or Hate;
Like Lightning at the Nymph I flew,
And with my fall down her I drew.
When she of Safety did despair,
Her hideous shrinkings rend the air.
Then 'twas too late to act that part,
When most obdurate was my heart.
That hand that had been welcome bold,
And from that Sex found loving hold;
(To think often does my Grief renew)
Should such a mean Revenge pursue:
Palsy benum't, all can be said;
It Is not the first that Wine betrayed,
But though I do my Self accuse,
Yet will not that the Nymph excuse;
When what ensued I did foretell,
Had she believed all had been well.
So had Cassandra Troy repreiv'd,
But like true Prophet not believed.
Of wretched mortals it is the fate,
To find too soon; they are wise too late.
Could I but half so well have guest,
At what lay smothered in thy breast,
I poison would have quaft, and burst;
Rather then thus have quenched my thirst.
I Am not the first, nor last shall be,
That will be once deceived by thee.
In this thou such a Course did take,
Prudence could scarce prevent mistake.
It Is not impossible to find,
With peerless aspect, peerless mind.
Thy outward shape belief might win,
As mirror of thy heart within.
Which had it been my luck to meet,
Feature and disposition sweet:
That would have pardoned my Mischance,
Considering the circumstance,
When Time had brought me to a Sense
Of my Deserts, for this Offense
Mine Eyes that I can safely swear
For Seven years past han't shed a tear.
Their floodgates then should opened be,
And deluge for that injury.
No tongue could then enough confess
Such favor with its thank fullness.
When thou to this Revenge giv'st place,
Thy Glory's clouded by Disgrace;
Thou do participate my Guilt,
And prov'st thy self at best a Jilt.
Thy pardon never beg will I,
Unless it be by irony.
Pardon me dear and pretty Punk,
T'ad nere been said but I was drunk;
I will begin to practice force
Upon my self in all Discourse;
Lest that my tongues unbridled youth
Should touch the confines of a Truth:
And when invention wants a Lie,
Thenceforth I Will quit thy Company.
But now thou wilt say 'tvvas interest made
Thee to this action me persuade,
And for that amorous Sirs svvet sake,
Thou did this frollick undertake.
If so, then what fell out may be,
A warning both to thee and me:
When we to great attempts consent,
We think of what may prove the event.
So some of thy Profession chance,
Whilst they their profit would advance;
Full often to have the hard mishap,
Of being sped with swinging Clap:
When shower of Guiney's does suspend,
The Trial of a twist, and bend;
And they or^eswai'd by weighty fee,
Against their wills must modest be:
Whilst others less Returns have made,
Wanting convenience of close Trade;
Yet cautious are, and will not do,
Without a sight, and trial too:
(Though small's their Gain, great's their Content,
Whose boldness can such harms prevent.)
Are certain of (ere they lie down)
Security, with half a Crown.
But though it is time to take my leave,
This fault shall not my Love bereave;
What once I purposed must not be,
Thy Sex commands my Charity:
And spite of all I wavering find,
My Resolutions as thy mind;
Therefore dear Nymph before I go,
Some Wispes on thee I Will bestow.
May thou enjoy Prosperity,
In practicing thy Mystery;
And never come to know the want
Of treating Cully, kind Gallant:
That will detest base Avarice,
And value pleasure by its price.
Nor Gallants absence may thou rue,
But Ariadne like find new.
And since this fate thou need'st not dread,
Because so luckily the art sped;
With one propitious Chance has sent,
Whose dotage makes him permanent:
May that old Satyr in desire,
Through his glass Eyes thee still admire;
When thou lie down in wanton play,
To feast his sight seem Milky-way;
When wrapped in Smock without a Gore,
With Network Point placed just before.
He skips, and friskt, and's strangely proud,
To see the Moon peep through a Cloud.
May thou his reverend Age accost,
Like a May morn the rimy Frost;
In a selected happy hour,
To melt him to a golden shower:
The best Content he can bestow,
Or thou from him desir'st to know.
May he so fond and blockish be,
Nere to suspect thy Constancy.
Let Wit thy Jilting so refrain,
That Reputation thou may gain;
Then let Discretion still maintain't,
That thou through Punk mai'st seem a Saint.
FINIS.

