Great News from IRELAND, Being a True ACCOUNT Of the Late King JAMES'S
Quitting that KINGDOM, And going for FRANCE: Accompanied with the Dukes of
Powis and Tyrconnel, etc.
LIKEWISE A true Account of the Surrender of WATERFORD, KILKENNY, LIMERICK, and
several other Places of less Note.
Dublin, July the 15th. 1690. Honored Sir,
I Presume ere this, you have received the Letter I sent you from our Camp near
the Boyne; Since that, you have known by other Hands, that by one Fight we have
frighted and scattered our Enemy, and were presently possessed of the strong
Town of Drohedah, and are now as quietly settled in this City, yet in much
better Condition than was expected. They left Stores filled with Provision of
Mouth and War: They have great Stores likewise in the Country; which are all
open for our Receipt.

Their King is run away, with the Duks of Powis, Tyrconnel, and some few more,
toward Kingsale; their Army all scattered in the Country; so that the War
seems now to be at an end. Galloway, Limerick, and Athlone are, as I hear, the
only places like to stand out against us; and having no hopes of Relief, will,
as its thought be easily surrendered.

His Majesty you see has conquered this Kingdom, with a Venividi-vici, it will
require more of his Trouble to settle than to conquer it: I cannot now further
enlarge, the Express waiting the motion of my Pen, but to tell you, this day by
the Post, if possible, I will send you a more particular Account.

Dublin, July 10th. 1690. Honored Sir.
I Sent you one of this Date by the Express, and have now to add, That we have
sure Advertisement sent us by an Express, That the late King James on
Wednesday-Night last embarked at Duncannon, a Fort that commands
Passage-Harbour, viz. the Harbor of Waterford; and that he, Duke Powis, and
Tyrconnel, and some others, are gone direct for France. Their Army is scattered
in the Country, and are forced to turn T^^i^^ to get them a support; so that
it is believed our King's work will be applied rather to settle than make
further Conquests he^^.

The Protestants of Wexford have seized that Garrison, and declared for King
William and Quen Mary, the other Towns where Protestants are, will we expect,
follow that President, of which we have already some reports, particularly as
to Waterford and Kilkenny.

We cannot learn that there is 5000. of the Enemy in a Body, nor understand
that there are any of them appears within Thirty Miles of this City, what
Forces they late had of the Germans who are Protestants are come into us.

The French are gone with three Fieldpieces near Limerik, but its thought they
will be met in the way, our Horse are now scattering to pick up the scatterers
of the Enemies scattered Army.

We all believe that there will not be struck one stroke more in this War, and
we have many reasons to wish and expect it but none more important, then that
we hope thereby our King may return to you as safe as he came to us.

His active and Invincible Courage gave us horrid frights, finding that he
acted in the Field, rather as a Courageous Captain, then a great King; this
Success may, we may hope justly entitle him to the Character of the greatest
Monarch in the Europe World.

Our Enemy is run in that have, that they have left vaster Stores then we could
have imagined they had, not only of War, but Provision behind them.

Not an hour but we have some News of loss to them, and gain to us. I am under
those straits of time, that I can neither be so full or methodical in Account
of Personr and things as I wish.

London, Printed for Richard Balding, the Old-Bayly.


