Great News from Sea, OR, THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Great and Bloody Fight
Between several of his Majesty's Ship and four Turks Men of War.
And of the Victory obtained by the English.
As also an Account of the Names, Qualities, and Carriage of Guns of those
Turks that were sunk and flain in the Fight: Likewise the number of Christian
Slaves redeemed, and of Turks blown up, and drowned in the Sea.
And each particular, as it was communicated from on Board the Greenwich t^ a
Gentleman here in London.
April 1. 1680.
HAVING received orders for the Conveying of two small Spanish Merchant men
senventy or ninety leagues W. S. W. the one being Bound for the Island of
reneriff and the other (the advice Boat) bound for the West Indies sailed from
Cadiz the last day of the last Month; with the two aforesaid Ships, and having
but little Wind all Day at S. E. and becalmed all Night, till five this
Morning, I was by Esteemation at noon ten leagues W. S. W. from Rota point,
about one of Clock this Afternoon, We saw four sails of Ships to'h Windward of
us, stearing N. W. so they boar downwards upon us with all the Sail they could
make; showing English Colors till they came within a legue of us: which was
about three a Clock then the headmost brought to with his Head to the
Southward; and so lay by and showed his Turks Colors a little while: (but we
showed our Colors) as the rest came up with him, they all came under, his
Steam, and came by the Lee; and so lay about an hour for Consultation, and then
boar away beyond us a little nearer, and came by the Lee again, then our Ships
being in a readyness to Fight: We spread our Colors, and immediately sired a
Gun of Defiance; but they answered us not, neither by Gun, nor Colors but
still lay by, at half an hour past five they bear round upon us then we Tackt
and stood right with them, which they no sooner saw but getting their Larboard
Tack aboard with all the sail they could make; stood to the Eastward from us:
We gave them Chase about an hour, but seeing we could do no ^ood, and night
coming on; fearing to loose our Convoyage; about six we left of all our Chase
and stood in our course with our Convoys; two of of these ships we supposed to
have between thirty and forty Guns; and the other two between twenty four and
thirty Guns, but though we had not the good fortune to come near enough to do
any Execution upon the Rogues. We were accidentally Iustruments in driving them
upon Captain Tiu of the Samphir: who the next Morning came up with them, and
having maintained a ten hours Fight with them all, had so diabled the Calihash,
a ship of eight and twenty Guns: that the Adventure coming to his assistance:
she was taken and is now in Tangere. The Vice Admiral, and other of our
Fr^gats, who were come out of the noise of the Guns: continued in the chase of
the other three: one of which, to wit the Orange a ship of four and twenty
Guns, they stranded and destroyed. It likewise happened that we turned back the
Citrone tree, a Ship of thirty Guns, who was endeavoring to get into the
Streights Mouth as Sir Richard Munden and we were with our Convoyes on Saturday
the seven and twentieth of March to whom we gave Chase: and though she out
striptus, yet she fell in with the Bristol and Adventure of Lapesyratel, who
forced her on shore: and got out of her fifty Christians, and seventy Turks and
there Burnt her.

Thus three of these Pirates have been in a small time destroyed, vvhice is the
most considerable success, we have had for a long season against them.

This Letter showen athe admiralty board this Motning, of which this a true
Copy.

FINIS.


