AYTOKATAKPITOI.

OR, THE Jesuits condemned by their own Witness. Being an Account of the
Jesuits Principles, In the matter of EQUIVOCATION, THE POPES POWER TO DEPOSE
PRINCES, THE KING-KILLING DOCTRINE.

Out of a Book Entitled AN ACCOUNT OF THE Jesuits Life and Doctrine. By M.G.
[a Jesuit] Printed in the Year 1661. And found in possession of one of the five
Jesuits Executed on the 20th of June last past.

Together, with Some Animadversions on those passages, showing, that by the
Account there given of their Doctrine in the three points abovementioned,
those Jesuits lately Executed, were, in probability, guilty of the Treasons for
which they suffered, and died Equivocating.

Impudentissimum est Jesuitas, tantarum veritatum lucem contumeliosam sibi
dicere, quasi alia ratione fama eorum salva esse non possit, nisi omnes homines
caecos faciant, and vel mente vel memoria spolient. LONDON: Printed for Charles
Harper, over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE the Sophistry of the five Jesuits lately executed, in their dying
Speeches, has been already over and over convincingly discovered to the World
by abler hands; and thus the main end of these Papers, which was to disabuse
the credulity of honest well meaning people, is obtained. I take my self
obliged to satisfy the Reader, that it is not without reason that I have
proceeded to make them public.

I had made considerable progress in, and almost finished these remarks, before
the * two last and most satisfactory pieces on this Subject came to my sight.
Animadversions on the last Speeches of the Jesuits, etc. Impartial
considerations on the Speeches of the five Jesuits, etc.
I had no desire to increase the swarm of Pamphlets, which the present
licentious freedom of the Press sends abroad; and therefore upon reading the
Impartial Considerations, etc. I resolved to suppress these Papers, but
heartily wished I had been acquainted with the Learned Author of those
Considerations, and with his intention to publish them, that I might have
imparted my purpose to him, who would have improved this Evidence to better
advantage than I have done, or can do.

Having thus utterly laid aside all thoughts of Printing, or indeed of
finishing what I had gone on so far with, I was pressed by a worthy Friend not
to desist, for that these Papers would not be wholly unnecessary or
unserviceable, in regard my Medium was altogether new, and untouched by all
former Animadverters; and it affords an Argument against the English Jesuits in
general, and Mr. Gawen and his Fellow Sufferers in particular, which concludes,
with great probability, that they were guilty of the Treasons sworn against
them, notwithstanding their obstinate denial, and earnest protestations of
their Innocence at their Execution, might and did die prevaricating.

There is extant in English, a little Book, Entitled, An Account of the
Jesuits Life and Doctrine, by M. G. Printed in the Year 1661. Who ever was the
Author, no doubt it was written by order, and he had the assistance and
direction of the whole body of English Jesuits. The design of the Book was to
vindicate the Jesuits from such hard thoughts of them as both Protestants, and
the more moderate Roman Catholics had not undeservedly entertained; and to
represent them so excellent and useful to Human Society, so innocent and so
little dangerous, either for their principles or practices to Government, that
they might stand fair for an equal share with other Roman Catholics in the
favor and clemency of his Majesty, who retained a kind remembrance of those
good services had been done to his Father and himself by some of that Religion
in the late Civil Wars. Thus much may be fairly collected from the Preface,
where he brags, that many of the Society were in his Majesty's Camp, where some
lost their Lives, others being taken endured Imprisonment, and other hardship.
That there is scarce one Jesuit in England who cannot reckon some of his
nearest Relations that died for his Majesty, and that all that depended on the
Jesuits sided with his Majesty, etc.

Now in order to begetting in other Roman Catholics, as also in his Majesty
and the Government, the desired good opinion of the Jesuits: It must be our
Authors first business to represent to the best advantage the great Piety of
Ignatius Loyola their founder, the excellent design he had in founding their
Society, together with the admirable Rules and Orders of the Society, to show
the blessed fruits of the Institution, and what advantages, both Temporal and
Spiritual, mankind reaps from the Labors of the Jesuits for their good, which
our Author performs with a great deal of Art in the first three Chapters of
this Book.

The remaining part of his task was to evade with as much dexterity those
bloody Objections that are made against the Jesuits Practices and Principles,
for which they are decried, not only by Protestants, but also by all sober
Papists. He must so blanch over both their black and their crimson Actions and
Doctrines, that they may appear never to have offended either in deed or word,
but as innocent of those horrid crimes wherewith all the world charges them, as
is the Child unborn. And really herein, in the remaining four Chapters, he
acquits himself bravely, and like a Jesuit, and has approved himself an Artist
in framing and using Equivocations, and may be turned loose to all the World.

In this brief account of their Life and Doctrine, you find the sum of whatever
can be said either in honor or defense of the Society. And their Emissaries
may furnish themselves here with tools to rivet the affections of their
Votaries and admirers; and to take off the prejudices of such others as are
offended at them.

Among the five Jesuits lately Executed, none played the Orator for himself, and
the Society, like Mr. Gawen, who very handsomely summed up, in a few words, the
most that could be said for the vindication of both. And it is evident he
borrowed that part of his Speech which contains the Apology both for himself
and them from our Author. It cannot be expected that so short a discourse
should afford many Arguments to prove it, and yet I have four to offer for it.

1. Whereas Mr. Gawen cites King Henry the fourth of France, the Royal
Grandfather of our present Gracious King, in a public Oration -- saying, he
was satisfied with the Jesuits Doctrine concerning Kings, as believing it
conformable to what the best Doctors of the Church taught. It is observable,
that our Author has twice quoted the same passage in Answer to the third
Objection, and has cited no other passage out of the whole Speech. He cites it
first with the very same flourish that Mr. Gawen makes. p. 106.
-- I prove, by the Authority of Henry the great, our dear Sovereigns
Grandfather (much stress lies on that Relation) who -- said, I am certain, that
in averring and defending the Popes Authority, they differ not from other
Catholic Divines. And again, within four Pages, This is that which King Henry
the fourth said, p. 110.
that he was sure Jesuits taught nothing in this matter which did differ from
other Catholics. It is one and the same passage, with that cited by Mr. Gawen,
though he varies the Phrase, and words it more pompously in honor of the
Society. 2. Does Mr. Gawen deny that any Jesuit ever taught the Doctrine of
killing Kings, except Mariana the Spanish Jesuit? So did our Author before him,
only Mr. Gawen has out-stript our Apologist, and speaks without Book, in
asserting, That Mr. Gawen learnt out of Philanax Anglicus, p. 94.
that Mariana defended it not absolutely, but only problematically. He says,
all the Authors of the Society, EXCEPTING ONLY MARIANA -- teach the contrary.
And whereas Mr. Gawen says his Book was called in, p. 116.
and the opinion expunged, our Author tells us, p. 115.
the Society would gladly have called it in, and that their General took order
to have the place corrected. 3. As Mr. Gawen complains. Is it not a sad thing,
that for the rashness of ONE MAN -- a whole Religious Order should be
sentenced? So our Author complains of those, p. 116.
who will have it, that the fault of ANY ONE of the Society must, like Original
Sin, infect all for ever, and unpardonably. Both you see take care that the
Society may not suffer upon Mariana's account. 4. Mr. Gawen, and our
Apologists, agree in the use of a word very exotic and unusual, Mr. Gawen
says, I never did in my life MACHINE or contrive the Deposition, or Death of
the King. Our Author tells us, p. 115.
that the Jesuits are prohibited -- advising that it is lawful to kill King or
Princes, or MACHINE their Death. The word MACHINE is commonly, in the English
Tongue, used as a Noun Substanstive, but I am persuaded there cannot be many
instances produced, beside these two, of its being made a Verb.
And I think it not impertinent to add, that the Book whence I transcribed the
following passages, was bought among other Books of one of the Jesuits Executed
with Mr. Gawen, and I am apt to believe not one of the five but had it.

Now in regard Mr. Gawen so far honored this Account of the Jesuits Life and
Doctrine, as to borrow, what he said in vindication of himself and his Order,
thence, and one more, and probably all the rest of his Fellow-Sufferes had it,
there is little reason to doubt their approbation of it. And the nature of the
thing it self, being an Apology, requires, that the Account given of those
scandalous and horrid Doctrines held by the Jesuits, should be as fair,
cautious, and moderate as it could be contrived; nay, that it should (as it is
apparent it does) mince the matter, and extenuate even the common and univer
sally received opinions of the Doctors of the Society. So that we have reason
to believe, that Mr. Gawen and his Brethren held the objected Points to the
height of what this Author owns and allows, and did renounce or disclaim them
no further than he has done: We cannot suppose their Principles more moderate
and innocent than they are here represented.

Hereupon I thought it might be of use for the further satisfaction of such
honest minds, as are apt over-easily to credit whatever any person takes on his
death (measuring others by their own integrity, and never considering how much
their consciences may be debauched by bad Principles, and seared by suitable
practices) to represent the sentiments of the Jesuits in this Authors words,
who is an English Jesuit, and an Apologist for them, and one that seems to have
been in good credit and esteem with these very Persons Executed June the 20th.
That they may see how far one of the most sober and moderate of them, even
while writing on purpose to palliate their dangerous Principles, asserts the
Doctrine of Equivocation and Mental Reservation, and the Poes power to Depose
Princes, and withal how saintly and fallaciously he denies the King-killing
Doctrine.

The Principles of those Executed, so far as we can learn them from their
Speeches, are the very same; however they cannot be reasonably supposed better
than our Authors. Now there being a most Hellish Plot against our King and
Religion, by Gods wonderful mercy, brought to light, and horrid Treasons being
expressly and legally proved against them to the satisfaction of the Court and
all impartial Auditors; when they understand rightly their Principles, these
honest well-meaning Persons, not only Protestants, but even moderate Roman
Catholics, will be more ready to credit the Kings Evidence, and be satisfied
in the Justice of the Kingdom, which is now most impudently traduced. And they
will further see cause to believe that in their confident protestations of
their Innocence, these Jesuits made use of Equivocations and Mental
Reservation, or that fine shift mentioned indeed by Mr. Gawen, but not
renounced by any of the rest, material prolocution, i. e. To speak the words
materially, so as to utter the sound of them without intending that any thing
should be signified by them. It Is apparent from the passages hereafter cited
out of this Account of the Jesuits Life and Doctrine, that the Jesuitical
Principles no way restrain men either from such Treasonable Practices, or from
those vile Arts of concealing them.

The passages cited are all in the VI. Chapter of this Account. In the citation
I have used all possible Fidelity. I have transcribed them entire, and as they
lie in order. I have omitted nothing but the second Objection and its Answer,
as not pertinent to my design, though liable enough to Animadversion, and some
reproaches cast upon other Roman Catholics and Protestants, which serve no way
for the Jesuits vindication.

I thought it was but necessary to add some strictures by way of Animadversion,
on the passages I am forced to cite, for an Antidote against the poisonous
Doctrines which are contained in them. If I had not said all that might be
expected, I have purposely omitted many things, being unwilling, without
necessity, to repeat what has been already said by others; and withal, the
refutation of this Author, is beside the main end and design of making these
Papers public, which is to make use of him as good evidence against the
Jesuits in general, and especially against those five last Executed.

An Advertisement.
THESE Papers were sent to the Press in the beginning of the Vacation, but the
delays they met with thereby have occasioned their late and almost unseasonable
appearance in Public.

You are directed to the Page of the Account of the Jesuits Life and Doctrine,
whence these passages are cited, by the Figure over against them in the Margin.

ERRATA.
PAGE 1. Line 13. in the Paragraph. l. 29. as Statera norum does. p. 172. p. 2.
l. 30. in his VIII, IX. and the following Epistles. l. 37. which are as good.
l. 47. r. silence. p. 3. l. 4. declared her to be. p. 5. l. 42. not out of
dread. l. 52. for which this account. p. 6. l. 42. Chastel. p. 7. l. 37.
Loiola. p. 8. l. 23. for the honor of the renowned. l. 21. blot out, I
passage. p. 9. l. 47. the Jesuits then had. p. 11. l. 47. but they have
politickly. p. 14. l. 7. their. p. 15. l. 18. themselves.

In the Margin, p. 1. dele p. 172. p. 3. l. 7. ubi supra, add ut. l. 36. He
quotes Ofiander, a violent Lutheran, charging the Calvinists with a Doctrine
they all renounce and abhor. p. 8. l. 6. Lincolns Letter in 8. p. 60.

CHAP. VI. Objections made against the Jesuits Doctrine. p. 100.

M. G. FROM these adversaries, not of Learning, but of Truth, proceed the
Objections against the Jesuits Doctrine, which I intend to take notice of in
this Chapter.

Answ. A Casuist of the Society teaches, Tambourin cited in the Jesuits
Morals, p. 345.
That one accused of a Crime which cannot be legally proved by the Accuser, [
i. e. not because falsely Objected, but for want of corroborating evidence] may
not only deny his crime, but also say his Accuser lies and slanders him. Thus
our Author treats the Objectors, and to be beforehand with them, gives his
Reader an Antidote against all their Objections, by saying, they proceed from
the Adversaries of Truth, i. e. as he describes them in paragraph just before,
men who impugn the Jesuits Doctrine by railing, clamors, forging and falsifying
their Books, who deserve no Answer, but in the Ancient Catholic way of
confuting obstinate Heretics, by Fire, and the hand of the Hangman.

M. G. And their first Objection is, That the Jesuits teach the Doctrine of
Equivocation and Mental Reservations, and therefore cannot be trusted.

Answ. The Objection has Truth in its antecedent, and Reason in its
Consequence, which is firm and undeniable. All who teach and practice those
Arts of deceiving, viz. Equivocation and Mental Reservation, are Persons not to
be trusted: Ergo, If the Jesuits teach and practice such Arts (which our Author
denies not, but defends them) the Jesuits are persons not to be trusted.

M. G. I answer, the Jesuits teach nothing in this matter which is not the
common Doctrine of all Schools and Universities, none excepted.

Answ. How, none excepted! I know not what Artifice can bring him off without
downright lying, for Protestant Schools and Universities all expressly condemn
it.

M. G. Nor do I see how it can be denied, unless we will say that it is lawful
to lie, as Statera morum does, for then we may infer as that Book does, p. 101.
That it is clear they are in an error, who scorning the name of a Lie, p. 172.
make use of Equivocation. But that Author will not find any of his opinion,
nor does he lessen but increase the difficulty.

Answ. If the Author of Statera morum maintain the lawfulness of lying he does
ill. But I think he is much in the right, as to the matter of Equivocation,
which is but another and a finer name for the same thing.

M. G. The sum therefore of the Doctrine concerning Equivocation is this: That
it is always ill done to Lie, but not always ill to conceal the Truth by
ambiguous Speech, that is, Equivocation and Mental Reservation.

Answ. That is, in plain English, a simple, plain, old-fashioned Lie, without
either welt or guard is a sin: but a curious, new-fashion'd, artificial Lie,
such as our Author says the Jesuits, and all Catholic Doctors, hold lawful,
and sometimes necessary, is no sin at all.

M. G. when there is a just cause to conceal the Truth, then it is lawful (say
the Divines) to use ambignous Speech; on the contrary, when there is not a just
cause to conceal the Truth, then it is a sin to equivocate. Now when the cause
to conceal the Truth is just, or not, depends on the particular circumstance
of every occurrence, for which there is no rule can be set.

Answ. One will find it a very hard matter to catch a Jesuit without a just
cause to Equivocate or use Mental Reservation, if you consult their Casuists on
the Question, when there is just cause, and when not. But what need of a
Casuist to resolve it? Our Author leaves every man to judge for himself, whether
he have just cause or not; and then no doubt, both themselves and all that
depend on them, will find causes enough to justify the use of ambiguous speech
when ever it may do them service.

M. G. This is the Doctrine of Equivocation, wherein the Society has nothing
particular but teaches that and only that, in which both Catholic and
Protestant Doctors agree.

Answ. Admirable Doctrine! It Is much the Society should have nothing particular
in it. If all Catholic Doctors agree with them herein, the more is their
shame. But sure our honest Country man, Joseph Barns, a Benedictine Monk, who
wrote a Book against Equivocation, was of another opinion: and one would be apt
to think, that the Sorbon Doctors, who approved and commended Barus his Book,
were so too. I am sure he most unconscionably slanders the Protestants in
pretending their consent.

M. G. Among the Catholic Doctors that teach this, p. 102.
are St. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, St. Thomas, and after him a
Torrent of School Divines.

Answer. He had very ill luck to stumble first upon St. Augustine, it is pity
St. Jerome had not lain in that place. Com. lib. 1. in Ep. ad Galat. cap. 2.
Utilem vero simulationem and assamendam in tempore, Jehu regis Israel nos
doceat exemplum.
St. Jerome indeed speaks somewhat favorably out of devotion to the Prince of
Apostles, maintaining that St. Peter was not in earnest reproved by St. Paul,
and in vindication of it wrote an Epistle to St. Augustine, citing seven
Authors for it; but St. Augustine has so baffled him in his VIII, and ^X
Epistles, that he made him weary of the Controversy. It Is true, about St.
Augustines time, some Writers of good account, spoke too favorably of
officious Lies. But St. Augustine Lib. de Mendac. ad Consent. Lib. contra
mendacium: Enchir. ad Laurent. c 22. Com. ad Psalm. 5. and alibi passim.
condemns all Lies without exception, whether Pernicious, Officious, or Jocose,
although he grant the two latter are not so damnable as the first. And that
Father salves the best Arguments that could be urged in favor of Officious
Lies, which as good as any, that Equivocation, or Mental Reservation will bear.
Perhaps a passage in his Book Contra Mendacium, might encourage our Apologists
Author (for he cites at second hand) to abuse that Father as a Patron of the
Jesuitical Doctrine, Aug. contra Mendac. C. 10.
of concealing Truth by Equivocation and Mental reservation; the passage is
this, Non est mendacium cum SILENDO absconditur VERVM, sed cum LOQVEN DO
promitur FALSVM. But this passage makes directly against Mental Reservations
and condemns them as Lies, he says, It is not a Lie, when TRVTH is concealed
by SILENCE, but when FALSEHOOD is vented by Speech. It Is evident that the only
way of concealing Truth allowed by St. Augustine, is silenced, and he esteems
it a Lie to speak any thing that is false. Now in Mental Reservation that which
is uttered is absolutely false, intended to deceive, and in the judgment of the
Jesuits themselves, would be a Lie but for the help of a secret reserve in the
Speakers breast, which can no way alter the real quality of the proposition
uttered.

That this must be that Fathers meaning, will appear by the occasion he had so
to determine in that point; the Priscillianists defended Lying as the Jesuits
do Equivocation by the example of the Holy Patriarchs, particularly of Abraham
in the case of his Wise. Aliquid ergo very tacuit, ron falsi aliq^id dixit,
tac^it ux rem dixit sarorem. Aug. uti sapr.
St. Austin denies that Abraham Lied, he did not deny her to be his Wife, which
had been a Lie, but declared to be his Sister, which was true; he concealed the
Truth, but spoke Truth also.

As he has abused St. Augustine, who held it not lawful to Lie upon any
account, no not to save a Soul; so I am apt to believe he does Aquinas, whom he
calls St. Thomas. For I find Sepulveda de ratione dicendi testim. cap. 17.
Sepulveda impugning the use of ambiguous Speech in giving evidence, says that
none of the ancient and eminent Divines allow it, and before telling whom he
meant by those ancient Divines, expressly says, such was Themas Aquinas. How he
has used St. Chrysostom and St. Ambrose, I have not had opportunities to
examine, I fear ill enough: he cites no place, nor so much as refers to any,
and I believe quotes Fathers as he does Protestants upon trust, and from no
very honest Authors.

M. G. Among the Protestants are diverse mentioned in the Protestants Apology,
as P. Martyr, Zuinglius, Willet, Melancthon, Luther, Musculus, Wieleff, and
diverse others cited at length, in the 7 Section of the 3 Tract, under the
letter M. number 76. and in the 703 page of the Impression. An. Dom. 1608.
Though of the Authors there cited, some will not use the name of Equivocation
or Mental Reservation, but call these doubtful Speeches Officious Lies, which
notwithstanding they say one is sometimes bound to use: So Luther, there cited,
says of Rahab, and concludes, that there is an Officious Lie by which men
provide for the same and safety of their Neighbor. Igitur honestum ac pium
mendacium est, ac potius officium charitatis appellandum. And Osiander there
cited, says of the Calvinists, Hane maximan seu regulam habent Calvinistae,
licere pro gloria Christi mentiri. The Calvinists have this for a ground or
principle, that it is lawful to Lie for the glory of Christ.

Answ. I confess I was at first amazed to find there had been any such
Protestant Apology, taking it for granted (as our Author, whose honesty appears
answerable to those principles he is maintaining, desires his Reader should)
that it was an Apology for the Protestant Religion, and written by some
Protestant, but upon enquiry, I find that his worthy Author is Mr. Breerly, who
has written a Book entitled, The Protestants Apology for the Roman Church; a
Book fraught with many prevarications, one of which cited here by our Author,
gave me enough of the Apologist, and he and our Author may go together for
their veracity.

M. G. Yet Catholics generally do not allow of Lying, but (as many
Protestants) of concealing the Truth by Equivocation.

Answ. Here he stily and maliciously insinuates, that Protestants are more
favorable in the point of the lawfulness of Officious Lies, which he calls
doubtful Speeches, than the Jesuits or other Popish Doctors generally are: but
the malice and falsehood of this insinuation, will readily appear to any man who
is able, and will take the pains to compare the Casuists on both sides.

M. G. Now that this Doctrine may, and sometimes must be allowed, examples will
make manifest. I will instance in one: When His Majesty after Worcester Fight
was constrained to shelter himself in Boscobel, There was, as we all know, very
narrow search made after him. Among the rest, one of the Pendrils, (those Loyal
Subjects ever to be commended in all History) was asked where the King was; he
answered, that he knew not, meaning that he knew not for to tell them: He
thought he might and ought in that case conceal the Truth: And all the Jesuits
in the World are of his opinion. He was bound there under pain of High Treason
to Equivocate. And those that deny Equivocation to be lawful, let them say what
they would have done. Sure I am, that if they would not in that case have used
Equivocation or Mental Reservations, they must have been either Liars or
Traitors.

Answ. Here he triumphs in a cunning instance, and seemingly invicible, A. D.
1661.
which suited very well the time of Publishing his Book. The happiest instance
sure that ever was thought on, which (besides the fair opportunity it gives him
to extol the Papists Loyalty) seems to prove Mental Reservations not only
lawful, but even meritorious. He would make us believe, that we owe the great
blessing of his Majesty's preservation after Worcester Fight to a Mental
Reservation, and to that honest Jesuit Pendrills Confessor, who taught him
dexterously to use it. I am apt to believe Pendrills is a made case, and not a
real fact. Be it how it will, I conceive a Protestant might have as laudably
saved his Majesty by a Lie, as Mr. Pendrill did by a Mental Reservation. I
honor and commend his Loyal affection and zeal for his Majesty's preservation
as much as our Author, and thus far I concur with him and all the Jesuits in
the World, That in this case he ought to conceal the Truth, but that he ought
to do it in that way, by such a Mental Reservation I utterly deny. If we may
not Lie for God, neither may we for the King. And there is not a pin to choose
between Equivocation, Mental Reservation, and a Lie.

But since we will not admit Equivocations, or Mental Reservation, what would
we have done in Pendrils case? he says, we must have been either Liars or
Traitors, there is no avoiding it.

By his leave, I am of opinion, that there is no necessity of either. I think I
can fit him, Aug. lib. de Mendac. ad Consentium. c. 13. Quanto ergo fortius,
quanto excellentius dices, nec prodam, nec mentiar? Fecit hoc Episcopus quondam
Tagastensis Ecclesiae Firmus nomine, firmior voluntate, etc.
with a case very like this, out of St. Augustine, which will make out what I
have said, and withal show, how much that Father was a friend to Equivocation.
He tells us, that Firmus Bishop of Tagasta in Africa, had received a man
(belike some persecuted Christian) and hid him: the Emperor sent his Officers
to search for him, who demanding where he was, he answered, Nec mentiri se
posse, nec hominem prodere, passusque multa tormenta corporis (nondum enim
erant Imperatores Christiani) permansit in sententia, that is, he would be
neither a Liar nor a Traitor; and having endured much torturing (for Emperors
were not as yet Christians) he persevered in that resolution. It is a plain
case, this good old Bishop never dreamt what service a Mental Reservation might
have done him; and it is further evident, that if St. Augustine (who so highly
magnified his Heroic constancy) had approved this Doctrine of Equivocation, he
would rather have pitied the poor Bishops simplicity, than have commended his
example to imitation. So that it appears, our Authors dilemma has not so
perilous and unavoidable horns as he imagins.

To conclude, though the forementioned be an example of veracity in gradu
heroico, and perhaps constancy would often fail good men in the same
circumstances, yet I am sure that as strict conscience would not have permitted
any man to betray his Majesty, so neither would it have allowed him to make use
of a Lie, either plain, or artificial for his Majesty's preservation. In such a
strait he must have put on a resolution, to suffer any thing rather than be a
Liar or a Traitor, and to have committed the keeping of himself and his
Sovereign to the all-wise providence of a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. iv. 19.
who knew how to provide for the security of both, without the help of such
indirect means and unworthy shifts.

M. G. The Doctrine therefore of Equivocation teaches only this, that when
there is a just necessity of concealing the Truth, then you may Equivocate; but
when there is not a just reason to conceal the Truth, then it is a sin to
Equivocate, because such Equivocation contains fraud and double dealing,
contrary to Christian Charity, and that candor and sincerity, which is
necessary for commerce among men.

Answ. If our Author seem to have a more tender conscience than his brethren,
and will admit that it is sometime a sin to Equivocate; you must consider, that
he is an Apologist for the Society, and must very warily unfold this Mystery of
Jesuitism: But if you please to consult Op. mor l. 3. c. 6. number. 22.
Sanchez, and some other less rigid Casuists, you will find very slight causes
may serve to justify Equivocation, even sport it self, if a man do not swear
to it.

M. G. And in this the Jesuits be no way singular, they teach but what all
teach.

Answ. If the Jesuits are no way singular herein, or as he says above, p. 101.
herein the Society has nothing particular, but all Roman Catholics agree
with them in this point, then they are even all to be trusted alike. But I will
do our Author and the Society thus much right, they have above all other
Writers obliged the World with these fine new Names for Officious Lies, unknown
till Navarrus read Casuistical Divinity to the Jesuits College at Rome; and
further, by communicating the art of framing and using Equivocations and Mental
Reservations with the greatest dexterity imaginable.

M. G. The third and main objection against the Jesuits Doctrine is, p. 105.
that they maintain the Popes Authority in prejudice to Sovereignty, teaching
that the Pope has power to depose Kings. This is the objection with which the
Jesuits are every where cried down: And because it is so much made of by the
adversaries of the Society, p. 106.
I shall humbly entreat the Reader to give me leave to be a little more large
in my Answer.

Answ. The Objection is very considerable, and such as, after all his
shuffling, he cannot get clear of: For what he says does not so much justify
the Jesuits, as impeach all other Romanists of the same Traitorous Tenant.

M G. I say therefore as to matter of fact, for I mean not to meddle with the
Question otherwise, that the Jesuits never did at any time teach in this matter
otherwise than what was the common Doctrine of other Doctors in the Catholic
Church, and for the present they are less chargeable with this Doctrine than
any others.

Answ. There needs no extraordinary measure of sagacity to Divine why our
Author balks the Question, and will not meddle with it otherwise than as matter
of Fact. It is not of dread of Damnation for disobedience to Father Mutius his
precept: But the true reason is, because he cannot meddle with it, without
spoiling the design of his whole Book. He is an Apologist for the Jesuits, and
is obliged to give such an account of their Doctrine as may represent their
Principles honest, and no way dangerous to the rights of Princes. Now should he
have undertaken the Question, this design were utterly defeated. All the world
knows, our Author being a Jesuit, one of the Popes Janissaries, he must maintain
the Popes power to depose Kings, and determine the Question in such a way,
England, and A. D. 1661.
as considering the time and place for this account of the Jesuits Doctrine was
calculated, would have proved of dangerous consequence to the Society. But that
the Society is never a jot the less chargeable with this Doctrine than other
Papists, notwithstanding F. Mutius Vitelleschi's precept of obedience, I will
show when I come to consider it by and by.

M. G. The first part of this Assertion I prove by Authority of Henry the
Great, our dear Sovereigns Grandfather, who (when the Doctrine of the Popes
deposing Kings was objected against the Jesuits, as an Argument why they ought
to continue banished out of France) said to the Parliament these words, I am
certain that in averring and defending the Popes Authority they differ not from
other Catholic Divines. This the French Stories aver, this the Speech of that
great King makes appear, This Speech is Printed at the end of this Book. p. 137.
this the Actions of the same King (if his words were not extant) would make
plain to all the world: For how can it be imagined, that he who was in the
account of all a very wise man, should admit into his Kingdom men that held
Treasonable Doctrine? p. 107.
How should he possibly be supposed so forgetful of his own good, and the
safety of his own posterity, as that he should plead for men charged to hold
Doctrine prejudicial to Monarchy, without examining whether their accusations
were true? No, no, he was not so weak as to become the Orator for his own ruin.
He would never have made it his business to plead for the Jesuits, and command
their admission; nay, further to take them into his familiar acquaintance, make
them his Confessors, and build them Colleges, and bequeath his heart to them,
if he had not been fully satisfied that their Doctrine contained nothing
singular to the prejudice of Sovereignty.

Answ. He makes a great flourish with the Authority of King Henry the fourth of
France, our dear Sovereign's Grandfather, in an Oration, which Mr. Gawen in his
Speech at Execution tells us, he pronounced himself (and he says well, for few
believe it was composed by himself, but by the Jesuits for him) in defense of
the Jesuits. It is very well known, that when the King made that Speech to the
Parliament of Paris, he came resolved to gratify the Pope (who had long, and
with great earnestness pressed the revocation of Jesuits from banishment) and
not to take advice of that Assembly what was fit to be done. Had he admitted a
fair debate of things, and suffered the weightier reasons to preponderate,
Harlay, one of the Presidents of that Parliament gave reasons unanswerable
against their revocation. But the truth of the matter was plainly thus;

The same necessity of affairs, which at first enforced that great King to
embrace the Romish Religion, now also constrained him to re-call the Jesuits
from banishment. While he was a Protestant he saw, there was no hope of sitting
quiet upon his throne, so long as the Leaguers (with whom the Oration Harlai
apud Thuanum, lib. 130. ad An. 1604.
Jesuits unanimously sided, and not so much as one single man of the Society
took part with the King) could have the pretense of Heresy to excite his
Subjects to Rebellion. When he was turned Roman Catholic, one Chaste, a
Scholar of the Jesuits, attempted to kill him, and confessing that he had
learnt that Doctrine, which animated him to this attempt, among them, whom he
had often heard, call the King Tyrant, saying, it was lawful to kill him, and
that he was out of the pale of the Church, etc. and upon searching Father
Guinart's Chamber, having found several papers owned by himself to be his
writing, which contained that dangerous Doctrine; the Jesuits were, at the
Petition of the Universities of France, banished the Kingdom, and Guinart was
hanged. During their exile, he saw himself in continual danger of Assassination
by their Friends: He was plied with earnest solicitations from the Pope on
their behalf, Rivet. Jes. Vapulans. cap. 12. n. 5.
as may be seen in Cardinal d' Ossat's Letters, and at last saw he should never
make any interest in the Court of Rome, unless he would comply with the Pope in
their Revocation. He therefore thought it good policy to make necessity a
virtue, and try if by an unexampled piece of Clemency he might at once oblige
the Pope, and appease their restless malice. Hereupon he repeals the Sentence
of their Banishment, receives them into more than ordinary favor, admits one
of the Society for a Confessor, bequeaths his heart to them, and by all Arts
endeavors firmly to oblige them to his Interests, hoping he might find them as
serviceable to him for the future as formerly they had been to the Spaniard
against him. Otherwise it is notorious to all the World, that this great King
retained too much kindness for his old Religion, to be Bigot enough for the
Jesuits: It was fear made him Court them, and after all the flourishes our
Author makes, it is more than probable he was their Orator for his own Ruin. And
when the Jesuits found him not for their turn, they soon sent him after his
Predecessor, having hopes of playing their Cards to better advantage with a
King in minority, and an Italian Queen Regent.

M. G. I easily believe that those who have already calumned the Society in
this matter will endeavor some sleeveless answer to this Authority of the
words and actions of so great a King, but withal I confide, that his Majesty
will give more credit to the single Assertion of his Grandfather, p. 108.
than to ten thousand detractions, and all wise men will join in his Majesty's
opinion.

If so much stress lie on the Authority of his Majesty's Grandfather, why
should not the Authority of King James be as valid against the Jesuits, as that
of King Henry the 4th of France for them. But if you would understand truly the
sentiments of King Henry the 4th: See the instructions given to Villeroy his
Anbassador at Rome, where he paints them out in their proper Colors.
Answ. This, or whatever else shall be offered, may be pre-judged and called a
sleeveless answer, but I am sure it is as considerable as the Argument, which is
an Authority of more pomp than strength. And methinks the Jesuits have little
reason to triumph over the Protestants upon account of the Testimony of King
Henry the fourth, [That their Doctrine concerning the Popes Authority over
Kings differs not from that of other Catholic Divines] which if true, is
really, though not intentionally, rather an accusation of the Popish Religion
in general, than any Apology for the Jesuits.

M. G. But to go on and prove both first and second part of what I asserted.
Nothing else need be said to make all my Assertion evidently clear, but only to
give a true Historical account of what has been done in this matter, which I
will do sincerely and faithfully. The opinion then of the Popes Authority in
deposing of Princes, was held by many Religous, and Clergy men, before any of
the Society writ of it.

Answ. That other Orders, and that before Ignatius Loyala had founded the
Society of Jesus, were Assertors of the Popes Authority in deposing Kings I
deny not. And I further acknowledge that the Jesuits have not maintained the
Hildebrandine Doctrine at that extravagant rate as many of the Canonists have
done: They have too much Learning, too much Wit, and I wish I might add Honesty
to boot, but I must not ascribe too much to that. No, they have as much
affection for the cause as any Canonist of them all, but they are fallen into
too knowing an Age to bear it. Their Order was Erected and Confirmed by Pope
Paul the III. A. D. 1540. at a time when Learning was much retrieved, and when
those trifling proofs, would not satisfy, nor would those Arguments convince
which had passed for demonstration, uncontrolled for four or five hundred years
before.

M. G. For example, there were ordinarily cited for this opinion, of the
renowned Order of the Benedictines, Gregory the VII. and other Abbots that
joined with him ( as Desiderius Abbot of Mont Cassin, Anselmus Lucensis did)
and Panormitanus, etc. of the Order of St. Augustine, Aegidius Romanus,
Augustinus Triumphus, etc. of St. Dominicks Order, St. Thomas, St. Antoninus,
Cajetan, etc. of the Franciscans, St. Bonaventure, Joannes de Capistrano,
Relagius Alvarius, Alexander Ales, etc. of the Carmelites, Waldensis and Bacon;
of the That is, Seculars. p 109.
Clergy, very many Priests, and Bishops and Cardinals, as Gerson, Doctor of
Paris, etc. of the Lawyers, Bartolus and Baldus, etc. these and many more were
cuted in Schools for this Doctrine, which Barclay rightly calls the common
Doctrine of both Canonists and Divines.

Answ. All this plainly discovers that the Popish Religion as Popish, is
dangerous to the rights of Princes; all Orders, by reason of their immediate
dependence on the Pope, are injurious to them, but yet more than any, or indeed
all the rest the Jesuits. Pursuant to this Doctrine, there has been for
several years carried on an Hellish Plot for the subversion of our Government
and Religion; and in order to the ruin of both, for the Assassination of His
Sacred Majesty. There were engaged in it, as has been sworn, of the renowned
Order of the Benedictines; Corker, Howard, etc. of St. Domincks Order, Keimash
Dominick, Collins, etc. of the Franciscans, Armstrong and Napper. of the
Carmelites, Hanson, Trevers, etc. of the Clergy, many Priests, Bishops and some
Cardinals. But it was first hatched by the Jesuits, and there are more of the
Society accused than of all Orders besides. But yet I must not forget, or omit,
one passage I passage I remember I have read (in a French Book, Entitled,
Traite de la Politic de France) for the Renowned Order of St. Benedict. In a
Chapter, where, among other things, he prescribes methods for the utter ruin of
the English Nation, the Author advises, that a promise should be made to the
Benedictines, that they should be re-established in all their Ancient
Possessions according to the Monasticon, which, says he, will make those Monks
move Heaven and Earth to bring all into confusion. So that you see the
Benedictines, of how good repute soever they have been, are none of the most
quiet Spirits. As the Jesuits are the Popes Janissaries, so are the Benedictines
his Spahi.

M G. Though not withstanding it is to be observed, that none of these, nor no
Catholic Divine, ever gave the Pope an Arbitrary Power to depose at his lest,
as now some, though very falsely presume; Their opinions were modified, so that
their Books stood in esteem, and were not thought to have deserved so ill at
Princes hands as now some would make them seem.

Answ. In the Paragraph before, he has given them such a wound, as the
Plaster he lays upon it in this, will neither cover nor cure. It is well
known, See my Lord Bishop of Lincoln. 8. page 60.
that very small reasons, have been thought by the Pope cause enough for the
deposing of Kings. And by accusing all Protestant Prindes of Heresy, these
Authors plainly give the Pope power to depose them at his list.

M. G. All which I do not say to defend their opinions as good, but only a
declaring matter of Fact. I say, these and many more were cited in Schools for
this Doctrine, as a common opinion, before the Society was in the World: as
beside what I have said, is manifestly proved, in the Oration which Cardinal
Perron made to the third Estate in France.

Answ. Having made a fair Apology, to little purpose, for others, he now makes
another with as little success for himself, All which I do not say to defend
their opinions as good. Well said, but what then Sir? Dare you condemn these
opinions? Do you any where so much as insinuate that they are bad? much less do
you any where profess to disown them as traitorous and false.

M. G. Whilst then this was the opinion of the Schools, Bellarmine writ his
Controversies, and in the matter De summo Pontifice; p. 110.
he taught this Doctrine, and he took his Arguments, as be professes himself,
out of Sanders a Secular Priest.

Answ. It seems the common opinion of all their Divines and Canonists, with a
Pope at the head of them, amounts to no more than a School point. He
insinuates, that though this Doctrine formerly was the opinion of the Schools,
it is otherwise now. I should be glad to hear that this point is at present
determined otherwise than it was formerly wont in Popish Schools; But I doubt I
may expect till I am a weary before I hear so good news: For ought appears to
the contrary, our Author, and the rest of the Society, are still of Bellarmines
opinion.

But to serve the present design, an Apology must be made for Bellarmine, and
what is it? Why alas unhappy man! It was his ill luck to write in a time when
this Doctrine was commonly received. And was it so? It had been worthy
Bellarmines great Learning, to have rectified that vulgar error, to have
disabused the World, and answered Sanders his Arguments rather than to have
urged them further, and confirmed so dangerous a Doctrine by his Authority.
Those virtues for which Silvester de Petra Sancta celebrates him, would have
inclined him to this, but it is apparent the Genius and Interest of the Society
swaid him the contrary way.

M. G. After Bellarmine, partly to vindicate him, and partly upon other
accounts, four or five Jesuits more writ on the same matter, alleging Authors
who had writ before them, taking for the most part their reason out of former
writers, that stood in Libraries, and were read without control in Schools: And
this is that which Henry the fourth said, That he was sure Jesuits taught
nothing in this matter which did differ from the other Catholics. But it was
not enough for the Society to be as wary as others.

Answ. If those four of five Jesuits have been misled by Bellarmine and former
Writers, the Society ought to have censured both him and them, and should have
obliged those Authors to recant. Till the Society set some public brand upon
them for this scandalous Doctrine, that its Authors may be no more in a
capicity to mis-lead others, the Society is justly charged with that Doctrine,
and all those ill consequences thereof, which it has in its power so easily to
redress.

M.G. their Doctrine therefore after the death of Henry the fourth, their great
Protector, was highly contradicted, especially in France, and much noise there
was. The Jesuits them seeing that this Doctrine was Lapis offensionis, and bred
disgust because they taught it, to take away all complaint of the Society,
resolved never to say more of that matter. So F. Claudius Aquaviva the fifth
General of the Society made a Prohibition concerning this matter on the 5th of
Jan. 1616. p. 111.


Answ. Observe, I pray you, the reason of these Prohibitions which he thinks
make the Society less chagerable with this Doctrine than others. It is no
dislike of it, but rather the contrary that occasioned their silence. It seems
the Jesuits had (as they still have) a very ill name, and Doctrine, that was
ever a whit suspicious, if taught by them was the worse received for the
teachers sake. Now it grieved them to see this Darling Doctrine, and
consequently the Papal Power lose ground, and themselves hated and reviled for
teaching it: therefore to stop those mouths which were every where open against
them, and because the Doctrine was likely to be propagated with better success,
by more acceptable persons, they resolved for the future to be silent in that
point.

M. G. But because that Prohibition seemed not efficacious enough to prevent
all inconveniences, and give the World full satisfaction, Father Mutius
Vateleschi, the sixth General of the Society, in the Year 1626. or the 13th of
August, made a precept of obedience, by which all Jesuits are obliged, upon
pain of damnation, never to write, dispute, teach or print any thing concerning
that matter: The Precept is extant in an Epistle of Father Mutius, and from
thence inserted as a perpetual Precept into the eighth Congregation, in fine it
runs thus, Ordinamus in virtute Sanctae Obedientiae nequis in posterum
materiam de Potestate summi Pontificis super Principes, eos deponendi, etc.
tractet aut libris editis, aut scriptis quibuscunque nec public disputet aut
doceat in Scholis, ut occasiones omnis offensionis and querelarum praecidantur.
This is the Precept which has now steed this 35 years, and never was infringed
by any one; since the year 26 nothing has been said of this Question in
Schools or Sermons, p. 112.
or public discourses, nothing has been Printed of it in the Society. This
care the Society has had to avoid all offensive Questions, etc.

Answ. How little effect Aquaviva's precept had, or how little it was regarded,
may be plainly seen by the Publishing of Sanctarellus his Book, in the year
1625. and that approved by Father Mutius the self same General of the Jesuits,
who Published the Precept of August the 13th 1626. This Precept, upon pain of
Damnation, was but necessary to a tone for approving Sanctarellus's Book, and
manifestly appears to have been intended merely to prevent clamor, and maintain
the reputation of the Society, more than the Authority of Princes. It provides
but slenderly for securing their rights; for though it prohibits writing Books,
public Disputations, and Lectures on that Subject, yet it leaves them at
liberty to instill that Doctrine in private, wheresoever they see it likely to
find a favorable reception. Nay, for ought appears, Libris editis out scriptis
quibuseunque nec public disputet out doceat in Schuli. --
it may be still vented in Sermons, (we have only our Authors bare word that
nothing has been said in Sermons for 35 years) for the Prohibition extends
only to Writing public ^isputations and Lectures in the Schools, if they
forbear it in the Pulpit, their obedience outgoes the precept. Since the
publishing of this Account. we have reason to believe, (as we are informed upon
Oath) that this Doctrine has been preached by some Fathers of the Society in
Spain.

And if we observe the 0151 0146 V 2 consideration upon which F. Mutius was
induced to prohibit the publishing of this Doctrine, Ut occasiones omnis
offensionis and quirel exam praecidantar.
viz. To take away all occasions of offense and quarrel, we shall not find the
Princes of Europe much obliged to him for this precept. For first, hereby, if
there ever should be any of the Society so honest as to assert the rights of
Princes against the Popes Usurpations, they are prohibited doing it under pain
of Damnation. And Secondly, there is no regard had to their Interests, but
merely to the credit of the Society.

M. G. p. 113.
The fourth Objection against the Jesuits Doctrine is that they teach the
killing of Kings, p. 114.
though under the name of Tyrants. So Mariana the Spanish Jesuit teaches, and
therefore had his books burnt at Paris.

Answ. This fourth Objection he propounds very blindly, and not in those terms
we make it. That we charge them with is plainly this. That they hold that
Princes excommunicated by the Pope may be deposed and murdered by their
Subjects. This we put them to renounce in the Oath of Allegiance. And upon
Trial we find more Patrons of the King-killing Doctrine than a single Mariana
whom they so freely give up.

M. G. I answer that Mariana did in the year 1599. print a book entitled de
Rege and Regis institutione, which he dedicated to Philip the second King of
Spain; in this Book he did teach a Doctrine ( after Dominicus Soto l. 5. de
Justitia and Jure qu. 2. Art. 3.) contrary to the Judgment of the Society, of
killing, not Kings, but Tyrants; which Doctrine the Society condemned and
forbid, and the other Doctors of the Society all unanimously impugned it.

Answ. There is a great deal of craft in thus frankly giving up Mariana. 1. As
Bellarmine was excused before, he borrowed his Arguments from Sanders, a
Secular Priest, so here Mariana is not the first Author of this Doctrine, he
learned it of Soto. 2. It is represented as a small slip, a single Proposition
that is saulty. 3. They give him in composition for the whole Society, and
pretend that all the other Doctor Etors of the Society unanimously impugned it.
Whereas besides that it discovers the Authors passion for Mariana, it shows
that it is not the King-killing Doctrine they disavow, but have politickly
picked out a single Proposition, that they may have somewhat to condemn for
their credit: Whereas no less than two whole Chapters are hable to exception
for that scandalous Doctrine. And the King-killing Doctrine in the terms we
charge them with it, is as much the Doctrine of all Jesuits who have written on
that Subject, as it is Mariana's.


M. G. That you may know the truth, I must do as in the last Objection, that
is, give you a Narrative of the passage. When then the General of the Society,
Claudius Aquaviva, understood that Mariana had put out an opinion of so
dangerous consequence, he writ to the Fathers of the Society in France, who had
acquainted him with the whole matter, in these words, as Father Coton sets them
down in a Letter to the Queen Regent of France. p. 115.
We have been very sorry that no body perceived the fault until the Books were
Printed, the which notwithstanding we have presently commanded to be corrected,
and will use great care hereafter that such things happen no more. This passed
in the Year 1606. four years before the Sorbou condemned Mariana's Book, which
was An Dom 1610. July the 4.

Answ Clandius Aquaviva's Epistle to the Fathers of the Society in France is
Apocryphal, it is extant no where save in Father Cotons letter to the Queen
Regent, and he who consulted an Astrologer teaching the Death of the King, and
betrayed his Confessions to the Spamard, as Father Coton did, would not stick
to sorge a Letter from Clandius aquaviva to the Fathers of the Society in
France, at a time of need, as that was, when Father Coton wrote to the Queen
Regent, after the Murder of Henry the 4th by Ravilliack, who was said to have
been animated to commit that Parricide by reading Mariana. But admit Clandius
Aquaviva did write such an Epistle, and at the time pretended, is it credible,
(considering that strict correspondence the Provincials of all Order throughout
the world keep with their General at Rome) that a Book which made so much
noise, should sell off a whole Impression, and be Reprinted twice, pass seven
years, and yet the General of the Order know nothing of that scandalous
Doctrine it contains. But suppose him to know no more on it than the Pope of
Rome, I am confident any single Proposition, so much in favor of Princes,
against the Popes Usurpations, should not have escaped the censure of Claudius
Aquaviva seven Months, nor yet seven Weeks.

M. G. According to this the General of the Society did give order for
correcting that place, and inppressed the Book, till it were corrected.

Answ. That place, a^ though it were but a single Proposition that needed
amendment, and yet I am confident a Copy of Mariana, with that Proposition
expnuged, would be a rarity few Scholars in Europe ever saw.

M. G. But some Copies being abroad (before the error was known to the General)
which the Society would gladly have called in; the Heirs of one Wechel a
Protestant, or as some French Authors call him an Hugonot, Printed it again at
their own charges. And this for no other reason, as it may be presumed, but for
lucre or malice to the Society.

Answ. Some Copies, those were no fewer than two Impressions, the one Printed
in Spain, the other at Mentz.

Whoever offends the Protestants must suffer for it, Wechel's Heirs Printed it
again for lucre, or malice to the Society. Whose avarice or malice was it that
procured the Moguntine Edition. A. D. 1605?? Was Balthazar Lippius an Hugonot?
I have been informed from a good hand, That the Prackfort Edition was procured
by a Jesuit, who chose wechels Heirs, that he might at once publish this
precious Doctrine, and cast the blame upon the Protestants when he had done.

M. G. After this the General sent a strict Command to all of the Society (as
appears Congreg. 8. tit. Censurae) under pain of Excommunication, inability,
and diverse other penalties, prohibiting all of the Society from writing, or
teaching in private or in public, or advising that it was lawful to kill Kings
or Princes, p. 116.
or MACHINE their death upon any pretense of Tyranny. And all the Authors of
the Society (excepting ONLY MARIAN A) both before and since him, perpetually
taught and teach the contrary; saying Anathema to all that teach or practice
any such Doctrine condemned long since by the Council of Constance.

This is what the Society has done to stop that Book, and root out the
opinion, which I conceive will clearly show that this Doctrine is not
reasonably laid to the Society; nor could it be objected but by them, who will
have it, that the fault of ANY ONE of the Society, must like Original sin,
infect all for ever, and That Original sin is an unpardonable infection is
strange Divinity, I thought the Jesuits had not esteemed Original sin so great
a matter.
unpardonably, to whom I can give no other answer, but that I wish them more
wit and less malice.

Answ. How ineffectual this Command of their General has been, and how true it
is that all other Authors of the Society teach the contrary to the King-killing
Doctrine, which our Author, and Mr. Gawen, say, may appear by the writings of
Suarez and others of the Society, who have, since the Year 1606, Published the
same Doctrine with Mariana, though they have baulked that very Proposition,
That it is lawful for a private Person to kill a King, This Position they
condemn in Mariana, but how far they dis-allow the King-killing Doctrine, our
Author acquaints us, viz, as it is condemned by the Council of Constance, and
no further. Now that Council has condemned this Proposition only. Quilibet
Tyrannus potest and debet licite and meritorie occidi per quemcunque vasallum
suum vel subditum, Caranza. edit. Duac. 1659. page 630.
etiam per clanculares insidias and subtiles blanditias vel adulationes, non
obstante quocunque praestito juramento, sen consaederatione facta cum eo NON
EXPECTATA SENTENTIA JVDICIS cujuscunque. Any Tyrant may, and ought to be
killed, lawfully and meritoriously, by any Vassal or Subject of his, even by
Clandestine snares, or subtle Blandishments or Flatteries, notwithstanding any
Oath or League made to or with him NOT WAITING FOR THE SENTENCE OR COMMAND OF
ANY JUDGE WHATSOEVER. How slender security does this Decree afford Protestant
Princes, charged with HERESY, Excommunicated and Deposed by the Pope, and
SENTENCED to death by the General, Provincial, and a whole Consult of Jesuits?
But there are many other fallacies couched in that Proposition, and the Decree
which condemns it, which are fully detected by my Lord Bishop of Lincoln, to
whom I refer my Reader, That a Prince Excommunicate and Deposed by the Pope, In
his Letter to a Person of Honor. 8. p. 163. That Princes excommunicate by the
Pope may be Deposed and murdered by their Subjects.
may be put to death by his Subjects, is a Doctrine none of the Jesuits disown;
and if Mr. Gawen would have cleared himself and the Society of this scandalous
Doctrine, he would have more effectually done it, by renouncing it in the words
of the Oath of Allegiance, and have averred, that all Authors of the Society
teach the contrary. But this had been too bold a Lie; as I shall have occasion
in the close of these Papers to show, and therefore neither our Author, nor Mr.
Gawen, has any reason to charge us as guilty of meting them that hard measure,
of condemning all Jesuits for the rashness of one.

M. G. Our Author says, For my part, p. 118.
I do sincerely make this protestation in the sight of God; I do acknowledge his
Majesly, CHARLES the II. to be my lawful Sovereign, and Liege Lord: I believe
that I am bound to respect, honor and obey hun, and that not only for fear,
but also for conscience sake, as the Scriptures teach me. I do believe that
whosoever resists him, resists God, and whosoever rebelleth against him,
reballeth against God, and procures to himself Damnation. And accordingly, I
do promise to be a true and faithful Subject to His Majesty, and not only never
to Act against Him, or Abet any that shall Act against Him, p. 119.
but also to defend and maintain, according to the best of my skill, His Life,
Crown, Dignities and Prerogatives. And if I refuse the Oath of Allegiance, as
now it is couched, it is not because I refuse Allegiance, but because I must
not renounce my Faith to God. That to take that Oath, as now it lies, is to
renounce the Catholic Faith, I am taught, etc. -- and p. 120. He says, If it
may please His Sacred Majesty, and the Honorable Houses of Parliament, to make
such an Oath of Allegiance, as may, without trenching upon conscience, contain
all imaginable civil Duty in the strongest expressions, that can be conceived,
I shall be exceeding glad, and most ready to take it my self, and invite all
others to take it.

Answ. You see how fair professions and promises he makes, I was tempted to
believe he meant honestly. But this is only a small sprinkling of Holy Water:
After all, he refuses to take the Oath of Allegiance, and says, to take it,
were to renounce his Faith to God. To what God I pray you Sir? I am sure, to
take the Oath of Allegiance implies nothing contrary to the Word of God, nor to
any Article of the three Creeds. Sure enough you mean your Lord God the Pope,
and your Faith given to him, which is inconsistent with fidelity to any
Protestant Prince, or indeed any Prince whatsoever. It Is plain for all your
fair words, what you dislike in the Oath of Allegiance. You have no mind to
renounce the Popes usurped power over Princes, to Excommunicate and Depose
them, nor will you be brought to abjure the King killing Doctrine, for you
promise and profess every thing else contained in that Oath, and your unwary
acknowledgment that you are taught, that to take the Oath of Allegiance, as it
now lies, is to renounce the Catholic Faith, strongly implies, that those
Doctrines are in your esteem matters of Faith. And give me leave to add, That
His Majesty, and the Parliament, have little reason to credit your promise,
that you will take an Oath containing all imaginable Civil Duty in the
strongest expressions that can be conceived, since such a Formulary contrived
by Roman Catholics, and professing no more than Civil Duty, I mean the Irish
Remonstrance, met with so much opposition and persecution from the Jesuits, See
F. Walsh his History of the Irish Remonstrance.
the Popes Nuncio, and the Cardinal Protector, and is last come to just nothing.

IN these recited passages we have either an Account of, or an Apology for the
Jesuits Doctrine in the matter of Equivocation. The Popes power to Depose
Princes, and the King-killing Doctrine. Whether our Author truly assert, that
in these points the Jesuits differ not from other Roman Catholics, it concerns
them more than us to enquire, and do themselves right.

Before I represent there Doctrines, stripped of those disguises wherein our
Author has dressed them up, I shall desire, and I think my request not
unreasonable, that these four points be granted me.

1. That our Author is a Jesuit, and a professed Apologist for them, and
accordingly has given us the most plausible and favorable account of their
Principles that could be contrived, so that the Jesuits Executed, could not be
more moderate and innocent, in these points, than the Society is here
represented. 2. That seeing Mr. Gawen was the only man of the five that spoke
any thing in vindication of the Society, it is probable that in regard he was a
very Eloquent man, and had a passionate moving way, he was appointed by his
Superior to that service, and that what he said was the sense of the Provincial
and the other three. 3. That M. Gawen borrowed what he said in vindication of
the Society, See my Reasons in the Preface.
out of this Account of the Jesuits Life and Doctrine. 4. That Mr. Gawen and
his Brethren concurred with this Author in their Principles, as to the three
points abovementioned.
This premised, I shall prove that by the account here given,

1. The Jesuits, and indeed the Papists in general, do allow the Pope power to
Depose Princes. 2. That they prevaricate in denying that they hold the killing
of Kings: For they deny not that Princes Deposed by the Pope may be put to
death by their Subjects. 3. That the Jesuits allow the concealing of Truth by
Mental Reservations, when there is a just necessity, and that Mr. Gawen and his
fellow sufferers had, in the judgment of their own Casuists, such necessity of
Equivocating at their Execution.
1. That the Jesuits, and indeed the Papists generally, allow the Pope a power
to Depose Princes, according to our Author. He says, That the Jesuits never
did -- teach other than the common Doctrine of the other Doctors of the
Catholic Church, p. 106. He cites Pope Gregory the VII. and with him Divines,
not only of the Secular Clergy, but of all Religious Orders, and Canonists for
it, p. 108. That when Bellarmine wrote his Controversies, this was the Doctrine
of the Schools. That Bellarmine in his Book de summo Pontifice taught this
Doctrine, that four or five Jesuits more followed and defended him in it, p.
110. It never was condemned by the Society in any of those Authors. And though
two Generals of the Jesuits successively forbid the publishing of it, yet
neither censured it as dangerous or erroneous, but did prohibit it merely to
avoid clamor and complaint. Our Author no where professes to dislike this
Doctrine, neither does he so much as intimate that he is of any other opinion,
than that commonly received, viz. That the Pope has power to Depose Kings,
though not arbitrarily (as he says to palliate the matter) and at his list,
yet if they be Heretics, or favorers of them, Schismatics, diminishers of
the Church Rights and Revenues, severe to Roman Catholics, etc. And I presume
none will deny but that His Sacred Majesty is, in the Judgment of the Roman
Court, obnoxious to the Popes Censure upon all these accounts.

11. In the matter of the King-killing Doctrine, this Author and Mr. Gawen
shuffle basely, and baulk the point. The dangerous Doctrine we charge them with
is this, That Princes Excommunicate by the Pope may be Deposed and Murdered by
their Subjects. Si sub voce Excommunicationis comprehendatur depositio, and
^^ss^^atio quae p^ sententiam Canonicam interdum sit, sic conti^ propositionem,
impan^ dep^^i vel OCCIDI a QUIBUSCUDIQUE posse, docer Suarez. Desens. sid.
Cathol. lib. and. c. 6.. 24. Suariz. ibid. cap. 4.. 14. Eil. de sum. ^^nt, l.
5. c 8. Bican. de Controv. Anglic. Suarez ibid. 20. I abjure that Heretical and
Traitorous Position, etc.
If the Sentence of Excommunication contain a Deposition and Absolution of the
Subjects from their Allegiance, which is sometimes done by Canonical Sentence,
then that Proposition is true, that he, viz, [the Excommunicate Prince] may he
Deposed or killed by any whatsoever, without incurring any penalty, says
Suarez. And the same Author says, That after Sentence passed upon him -- he
may be treated as a Tyrant, and killed by any private person. Both Bellarmine
and Becan prove the Popes power to Depose Kings, and to condemn them to death,
by the Example of Jehoiada the High Priest, who first deprived Athalia of the
Kingdom, and afterward of her Life. So that you see more than a single Mariana,
defend the King-killing Doctrine, which while they renounce and impugn
unanimously, in that Proposition condemned by the Council of Constance, they as
unanimously maintain, when the Pope interposes his fatal Sentence, and alters
the Case. It Is plain the Jesuits thenmseves think that Decree of the Council of
Constance, affords no security to Princes against the Popes Sentence. What
says Suarez. to King James. where does the King read in the Council of
Constance such a word, as a PRINCE EXCOMMVNICATED or DEPRIVED by the POPE? I
have heard some Jesuited Papists say (whether in sincerity or not, God knows)
that they would take the Oath of Allegiance, were the word HERETICAL abated
them; they say the Civil Magistrate may declare what is Treason, but it is the
Prerogative of the Church to declare what is Heresy. Now whosoever upon this
score objects against the Oath, must acknowledge that the Council of Constance
has not Condemned the King-killing Doctrine, nor do the Jesuits say Anathema
to it. For did the Decree extend to the condemnation of the Doctrine abjured in
the Oath of Allegiance, they might abjure it as Heretical, being condemned by a
General Council, but so long as they refuse it on this account, it is evident
they do not believe the Council ever intended to censure it, and certainly it
never did.

So that for ought that our Author or Mr. Gawen has said, it is reasonable
still to object these bloody Tenants to the Jesuits, who appear to this day to
have kept on foot that League for the extirpation of Heretical Princes, which
F. Campian says, all the Jesuits in the World had entered into in his days near
100 years ago, Campianus Ep. ad Considiarias Regi^ae Argliae p. 22.
and notwithstanding the many defeats Providence has given them in their
enterprises, yet they despair not of effecting it.

Infer. Seeing then the Jesuits Principles even as represented most plausibly
by an Apologist of their own, are so dangerous and destructive to Princes,
especially such as are of the Protestant Religion; and since we have so much
reason to believe Mr. Gawen, and the rest were of the same Principles, in the
forementioned points with our Author, and there have been treasonable practices
agreeable to their Principles, so legally and fully proved upon them, as
satisfied the Jury and Bench to Convict and Condemn them. I think that person
wants both Faith and Charity, who will not believe them guilty: He little knows
what a Jesuit is, and is utterly unacquainted with the mystery of Mental
Reservations, who suspends his judgment, till one of them shall confess.

III. Touching the matter of Equivocation, you see what our Authors judgment
is, he does not merely assert that it is lawful to conceal Truth by doubtful
Speech, p. 100. and p. 101.
that is, Equivocation or Mental Reservation, but impudently pretends the
consent of all Ages and Parties, all Schools and Universities, none excepted,
as though it were an uncontroverted point. Which, were it true, would make
Equivocation and Mental Reservation, a Doctrine more truly Catholic than
Transubstantiation, or Invocation of Saints, which they deny not to be
unanimously contradicted by Protestants.

Our Author says, that when there is a just cause to conceal the Truth, then
it is lawful (say the Divines) to use Ambiguous Speech, that is, Equivocation
and Mental Reservation.

We are now further to enquire what is a just cause to Equivocate, and see
whether the Jesuits lately Executed had such cause as might, in the Judgment of
their Casuists, make it lawful for them to die thus concealing the Truth.

Our Author plainly tells us. p. 102.
-- When the cause to conceal Truth is just, or not, depends on the particular
circumstance of every occurence for which no rule can be set. This, you will
say, is pretty fair, he leaves every man to judge for himself, when he has just
cause to Equivocate, which a Jesuit will never fail to have, as often as this Art
may do him service.

If you please to consult other Casuists of the Society Quoties id necessarium
aut utile est, ad salute corporis, honorem, res familiares tuendas. Op. mor. l.
3. c. 6. n. 19.
Sanchez will tell you. the defense of Life, Honor, or Goods, is a just cause.
When a Question is Ibid. number. 27. Sed qui praecipue aequivocatione excoluerint,
eo video suisse Anglos. Ep. ad Fr. Duc. p. 108.
asked by any Incompetent Judge. And it is notorious the Jesuits deny any Layman
to be the Competent Judge of Ecclesiastics; or if a Competent Judge ask a
Question extrajudicially. Here is scope enough.

But perhaps it were more advisable to consult Jesuits of our own Nation, for *
Casaubon observes, that they of all men have taken most pains in cultivating
the Art of Equivocation. And I may add, have always practiced it most
licentiously.

Now what has F. Garnet given under his hand in this matter. As often as there
is occasion, for necessary defense, for avoiding of some injury and damage, See
Proceedings against the Traitors. sheet u. fol. 4. Mitig. c. 7. n. 14.
or for obtaining some good of moment, without the peril of any man,
Equivocation is lawful.

And Father Parsons resolves, that Equivocations must sometimes be practiced
when no other evasion can be found for defense of Innocence, Justice, SECRECY,
or the like urgent occasions.

Let us now enquire whether the Jesuits had not several of these causes to deny
what was sworn against them, and take it upon their death, that they were as
innocent as the Child unborn.

1. The defense of their own Honor and Reputation, which would have been
irreparably ruined, should they either by an ingenuous Confession, or but by
silence have owned themselves guilty. 2. The Honor of the Society was at stake,
which would have been utterly lost, should a Provincial, a Procurator, and
other principal Fathers have owned themselves guilty of so Hellish a Plot. 3.
To avoid those severities, which though in truth might justly have been
inflicted on Roman Catholics, yet the Jesuits esteem injuries as well as
damages. Should the dormant Laws be thoroughly awakened, as it is no doubt but
they would (should these Jesuits have made a free Confession) the Popish
Interest would lose ground apace. Bzovius de Pontij. Romans cap. 46. p. 621.
Pa^sors ^iscus. of the Answer of W. B. p. 22, 23.
4. It Is a good of no small moment to purchase themselves the Reputation of
Innocents and Martyrs, as in opinion of Bzovius and Parsons, Campian and Garnet
were, and all that follow them in the same cause are sure to be reputed. And
this will much advance the good of the Catholic Cause, which would be in
danger of losing many well meaning people, by their sincere Confession, who
will be confirmed in the Romish Communion, when they see these Jesuits protest
their Innocence with their dying breath. 5. They had a mighty work upon their
hands, no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and for ought they knew,
the subduing of a Pestilent Heresy which has domineered over a great part of
this Northern World a long time, as Mr. Coleman said. See his Letter to F. la
Chaise.
And the same work appears to be still carrying on, and I am sure requires
secrecy, for it is a work of Darkness. Now I shall argue as our Author did.
There being such a design in hand, for the good of their Holy Mother the
Church, and their most Holy Father the Pope, whose Interests are, no doubt, as
dear to them, as ever was the preservation of His Majesty, and when these two
stand in competition, as it seems at present they do, the former are much
dearer. For to betray the Interests of the Church, or to procure its hurt (as a
free confession of guilt would have done) is not only Treason but Sacriledg. In
this case it is probables the Jesuits thought they might and ought conceal the
Truth; and our Author, (if he were not one of them) and all the Jesuits in the
World are of opinion that they were bound under pain of the highest Treason and
Sacriledg to boot, to equivocate. If they would not they must, by our Authors
Logic, have been Liars or Traitors. And such, I fear, in both requests they
died, for all the help of Equivocation.
Inference. Seeing then the Jesuits Principles, as represented by our Author,
allow Equivocations and Mental Reservations in just necessity; and those lately
Executed had, in the opinion of their own Casuists, a just necessity of
concealing Truth, upon such evidence of their guilt, we have reason to believe,
that in their protestations of Innocence, at Tybourn, they acted suitably to
their Principles, and died like Jesuits as they had lived, prevaricating and
juggling.

There are two things, I observe, stick with some persons, the one is, that Mr.
Gawen professes that he does not make use of any Equivocation; Mental
Reservation, or Material Prolocution. So the rest.

But for the satisfaction of such persons, I desire them to consider what
Father Parsons teaches, Vide citat. apud Abbot Antilog. fol. 13. Ita and
Sanchez Op. mor. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 45. See others cited in the Animadv. on the
Jesuits last Speeches, p. 14.
That if you be asked whether you do not Equivocate, you may answer no, but
with another Equivocation -- and so, as often as you shall be asked this or the
like Question, you may deny that you did Equivocate with a fresh Equivocation,
so that their renouncing all Equivocation, is no security of their sincere
dealing. And if it be replied, here was no such necessity, they were not
examined, but offer freely to speak plainly, and without Equivocation, that
varies not the case. For the Casuists allow the use of Equivocations, Sive
interrogatus sive propria sponte, whether a man answer a question, or speak of
his own accord. Si quis vel solus vel cum ali^ is; sive interrogatus sive
propria sponte -- jaret se non fecisse aliquid, etc. Sanchez. op. mor. l. 3. c.
6. n. 16.


The other is, that they used such dreadful Imprecations, and high
Asseverations, and this at the point of Death, when persons of the most
prostitute conscience, are not without scruples and remorse.

But they who regard this objection, little consider how far a different Notion
the Jesuits have of such Ambiguous Speech, from what they have. They behold
Equivocations as a sort of Lies, and not too without sin; but the Jesuits look
upon them as perfectly blameless, as sometimes necessary and laudable, and so
innocent, as that to use them was not inconsistent with our Parsons Mitig. c.
9. n. 45. Sten. nu. 58. nu. 72.
Saviors perfection, who did no sin, So Heissuis: Resut. Aphor. c. 4. Aph. 4.
nu. 130.
neither was there guile found in his mouth, and a remedy against lying and
perjuries. And if men have such apprehensions of Equivocating, I see no reason,
why at their Death they should in the least scruple a practice so harmless and
innocent, more than at any other time. Gunpowder Treason. p. 219, 220, 221.
We see it has been often practiced. Tresham, one of the Gunpowder Traitors,
confessed that Garnet was privy to the Treason, and had talked with him about
it. After, upon his Deathbed, not above three hours before his Death, under
his hand, and upon his Salvation, he revoked what upon his Examination he had
Confessed; and averred that he had not seen Garnet in sixteen years before,
this Protestation was afterward proved false upon Oath, and Garnet himself
acknowledged the contrary, and that he had often seen him within two years.
Hereupon Garnet being asked what he thought of Treshams dying Protestation?
answered, It might be he meant to Equivocate. Which shows, that in Garnets
judgment, to Equivocate on ones Deathbed, and that upon his Salvation, as
Tresham did, and as these Jesuits protested their Innocence, is no such horrid
matter as to Protestants it appears. And I observe, in the History of the
Gunpowder Treason, Gunpowder Treason. p. 227. I am sorry that I did dissemble
with them; but I did not think they had such proof against me. See the late
Trials and particularly Mr. Jennisons Deposition.
that as Garnet himself practiced Equivocation, and that with so many
detestable Execrations as wounded the hearts of the Lords of the Council to
hear him, yet when he came to his Execution, though he asked those Lords pardon
for his dissembling with them, deeming it an offense against good manners, yet
begs no pardon of God for it, judging it no offense against him at all.

As for the Jesuits lately Executed, we see Ireland, who (as I am informed)
took it on his Death, that he was all the latter part of August in
Staffordshire, has been proved by several witnesses to have been in London at
the same time. And it is notorious, by how vile subornations the rest have
attempted to defend themselves upon their Trials, which was but one Stage short
of their Execution, so that they appear to have been men of no very tender
consciences.

But suppose they were, we have no reason to believe they would stumble at the
use of Equivocation. Parsons Apology of Ecclesiastical subordination. c. 12. in
the end.
For Parsons acquaints us that Equivocations are allowed principally to men of
scrupulous Conscience, for avoiding of Lying. So that upon the whole matter it
appears. That they are all a pack of Juglers. Those of them who have little or
no conscience will lie without scruple, and those who are of scrupulous
conscience will Equivocate without scruple, and therefore we may justly despair
of ever learning the Truth from them.

S. Augustinus de Haeresibus cap. Lxx. de Priscillianistis. Propter occultandas
autem contaminationes and turpitudines suas habent in suis dogmatibus hac verba:
Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.
This principle jumps with those of the Jesuits, and may be thus Englished,

Swear and forswear you must, and not
Confess one tittle of the PLOT.
FINIS.

