GREAT NEWS FROM THE OLD-BAYLY, Mr. Car's Recantation. OR, The True Protestant
Renegade, the Courantier turned Tory; in a Dialogue 'twixt Trueman, and
Amsterdammer.
Tempora Mutantur etc. Amst. SO, that it is very true?


True. Yes, certainly true, Harry has drap't his Whiggish Teeth and claws, cast
his Skin, and has been new melted, and run into Tory Mould.


Amst. A brave true Protestant spark with all my Heart.


True. Nay he has quite cashiered all the Rabbi's of the Faction, Damns his
Patrons, Raves like a Madman, and disclaims outragiously against the late
Horrid contrivance against the KING and DUKE, curses all the Dissenters for
their blundering Treasons; I tell thee that he is a rank, overgrown Tory.


Amst. Alack and alas aday, what! Our historical Courantier begin to be
Toryfied? speramus meliora. Sure the Devill's in the Folk by way of
recantation. Pox on'm, must a little Persecution, alter good solid Republican
principles? A little Hanging Drawing, and Quartering, and unmerciful butcherly
chopping off of Heads terrify our gigantic Scribler, our Friday Atlas of
Fanaticism? If it do, farewell our towering expections. But hanged, I cannot
believe thee upon my Soul, Trueman.


True. Confound your incredulity! What reason have you to distrust the reality
of his conversion? Is Harry Care such a sullen, obstinate piece of Whiggism,
such a sturdy Polish Oak, to break rather then bow? Don't be mistaken. Self
preservation is a principle founded in us by nature, and if a man does not
follow those dictates, he may be Felo de se, and then he may be denied the
benefit of his Clergy. No no, Harry's a better Politician, than so. Upon the
word of an honest Gentleman, Harry's turned a violent Anti-Republican, and
rails desperately against this late Fanatical Conspiracy.


Amst. Well! don't be angry if I speak a blunt word, and pronounce it a damned
lie. What Harry rail at PLOTS? It cannot be. If any man or woman, of what Size,
Age or complexion, speaks more favorably of this matter, puts kinder inter
pretations on it, and more slyly invalidates its Authority than himself, ^hen
you will probably convince me of somewhat.


True. Why, hark ye Mr. These are but, your own sentiments. Pray does he not
cry? Fiat justitia, wipes his hands in Innocence, thanks God that he is neither
Plotter, nor Traitor, and blesses the Almighty for the happy deliverance from
both those dreadful characters.


Amst. Yes! he thanks God that he is free himself (and I wish it may prove so)
Why, there is not one passionate resentment, or real abhorrence of the thing,
not one Thanksgiving word for his Majesty's escape from that impendent
Mischief, that threatened him. No, no; he is as silent as Mouse in a loaf upon
that topique.


True. Prithee, don't think he will leap over Hedges, and Dicthes and run upon
extravagancy's he will do all things mildly.


Amst. He has been a mild fellow indeed, why if he be such a zealous pimping
Proselyte, as you talk, he would certainly use his talent of raillery another way,
and damn all his former proceedings.


True. That would be a piece of imprudence yet.


Amst. I^ and a piece of Ingratitude into the bargain, the little sneaking
Chitterling has been well paid for his weekly endeavors in the Cause, and
he is a cowardly, Indigent fellow if he forsakes it.


True. No the Cause forsakes him, his Patron at Aldersgate and his Bloomsbury
Benefactor are gone; and all the rest of the Worthy Patriots are like to swing,
or be chopped off, and then what shall this Solicitor General, this Whiffler of
a Courantier do to support his Rat-like Carcass?


Amst. He may like Judas een' go and hang himself, for if he draws back, our
Souls shall take no delight in him. The Puppy Monkey Face may do well enough
yet had he his ancient vigor, and resolution; would he make use of down right
blunt abuses (under the notions of Raillery) and consult Billingagate; Harry's
Pen, and the women's Oyster spuds might prove two dangerous weapons yet.


True. So, I see what you would be at; you would have him run the risque of the
Gallows, write a no Protestant Plot, a 3d part of the Growth of Popery; you would
have him (I warrant ye) cast the odium of it on the Crape-Gownorum men (as his
arch wit call's them) and fix the scandal on the Church.


Amst. Why, to speak freely to you, A little true Protestant Syrrup (just upon
the nick of my Lord Russell's Speech) will support the Spirits of the
languishing party. There be thousands that will not believe it; Ah! my Lord's
Speech make's them groan louder then the Groaning-board it self. This dreadful
apprehension of Popery encouraged, would do mighty things yet; the people are
not so dejected as some imagine, the party is Numerous, and powerful.


True. Very likely, but Harry has eyes in's Head, and discovers the visible
hand of Providence in defeating their accursed projects. Notwithstanding his
former misearriages, he is resolved to hearken to conscience at last, and (with
Mr. Settle) think it no disparagement to be honest after all.


Amst. Good God! from whence should this squeamishness proceed? Harry a fellow
(whom all the World thought an Atheist, and some thing worse if possible)
boggle now at Conscience? Why, how often has he boldly checked the King and his
Counsel? How often has he magnified the Ignoramus men, and called the men at
the Loyal Feast, Dukes and Earls, etc. A parcel of beggarly fellows, whose
Teeth watered at a piece of Venison? How often has he called the Orthodox
Clergy Papists masqueradors? How often has he pleaded the Cause of the
Conventiclers? In short, what was it, that Harry's uncontrollable Pen dared not
to undertake, and now talk of Conscience? O Tempora!


True. Here Is a recapitulation of all Harry's excellency's with a vengeance.
Why, what is this to the purpose? Is It a moral impossibility do you think, for a
thumping knave to be honest at long run? there is another conversion, I must
tell ye, than that of the Gallows. Harry's honesty proceeds from his own
choice, not out of a principel of fear.


Amst. Hang him, out of choice; that is a sham I Am confident: He Is a timorous
fellow, and shrinks in his Horns, like a Snayl, when any danger approaches. Why
cannot he stand stiff and firm in all his former purposes, and resolutions? I
thought the fellow had had courage enough to dye a Martyr' for the Holy Cause
once, but I see now he hates both Whig, and Trimmer; he is afraid, in my
Conscience of Justice Observator.


True. Well, you may discourage his generous Proceedings as you please: But
it is resolved, and Harry will be faithful in spite of detraction and a little
obloquy and reproach. Harry will not swing upon a principle of generosity, and dye
with a lie in his Mouth to support the Faction; he is an Enemy to all
Absolutions, denis any power from a Confessor either from Scotland or St.
Omers. No he will magnify God with a plain confession of his Offenses, and save
his Neck and reputation into the bargain.


Amst. Lord! what will be the consequence of all this? What shall we do if our
friends (that have industriously drudg'd for us, now in those critical times of
Trial and Persecution) leave us and forsake us?


True. Now to heighten your admiration, a friend of mine had it from Harry's
own mouth that he will infallibly put out his Narrative very suddenly, and expose
all the intricate windings of this most elaborate and diabolical Plot, and what
mysterious methods they look to carry on the design, tho it will prove a very
amazing business to ye, yet be not too violent upon the man. And to oblige the
World I Am told, he will write now his Packet of Advice from Geneva, not from
Rome, and his Courant shall (instead of Popish principles) be stufft with
variety of sentences out of the Dissenters Sayings.


Amst. I Will tell ye next week, how our party resents this so unexpected
alteration; and so farewell.


London, Printed by G. Croom, in Thames Street over against Baynard's Castle,
1683.


