Paul Grebners PROPHECY Concerning These TIMES. WRITTEN In the Reign of Queen
ELIZABETH, Anno 1582. Taken out of the Original Copy from Trinity College in
CAMBRIDGE. with a Paraphrase thereupon, By a Person of Honor.
READER,
THIS Prophecy received from an Honorable Person, coming so opportunely to my
Hand, I thought it but Duty to transfer it to the public View; not daring to
commit so great a Sin in the secret Concealment of a business of so general a
Concernment.

Touching the Author Paulus Grebnerus, he was a great Astronomer, and a man of
surpassing Piety, and known Integrity, whose Erudition likewise and excellent
Endowments, have received a public Character from this and other Kingdoms.

His Prophecy here need no Panegyric; and a farther Amplification, by way of
Apology, would prove impertinent where so many thousands have been so thoroughly
prepossest in the Truth of his Predictions.

In a word, Schismatics (that speak evil of Dignities and despise Prophesies)
may perchance persist still obstinate; I am sure all Royallists will rest here
well satisfied.

For my part, I shall therefore pray for the Conversion of the First, and
Confirmation of the Last; wishing the one more Faith, and the other better
Fortune.

Farewell.
Grebners's Prophecy.
PAulus Grebnerus was here in England with Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1582. and
presented her with a fair Manuscript in Latin, describing therein the future
History of Europe, here and there limming in Watercolors some principal
Passages.

Dr. Nevil, Clerk of the Closet, being in favor with the Queen obtained this
Book of her, and bestowed it on the Library of Trinity College in Cambridge,
where it has been published to the view of all persons, till about five or six
years ago, by much perusing and ill handling it was much slurred and defaced.

In his Predictions,

He describes the Troubles of Russia, and the Election of a Swedish King
SIGISMVND by name, to be King of Polonia, by which he shall irrecoverably lose
his own Inheritance.

That of the Swedish Race there should be one GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS by Name, that
should take heart from the Distractions of Germany to invade the Empire with a
small Army; fight many Battles prosperously, but should at last perish in a
pitched Field.

That about that time should Reign Rex Septentrionalis nomine CAROLUS, qui
ducit Vxorem Mariam Papisticam, ex quo evadet Regum infelicissimus. Tunc
populus ipsius Ditionis eliget sibi alium Imperatorem, Comitem; qui durabit in
Imperio tres annos aut circiter. At postea idem Populus eliget alium
Imperatorem Equitem, non ejusdem Familiae nec Dignitatis, qui detrudet omnia
sub pedibus suis: durabit aliquanto longiore tempore: and post hunc eliget
nullum.

Post hunc apparebit quidam CAROLUS e CAROLO descendens, cum immensa Class in
Litore Ditionis Patris sui, and cum Auxiliariis Danicis, Suedicis, Holandicis,
Francicis posternet Adversarios suos, and administrabit Imperium
perfelicissime, and long lateque dominabitur, and erit CAROLO Magno major.

Englished thus,

About that time a Northern King shall Reign, CHARLES by Name, who shall take
to Wife MARY of the Popish Religion; whereupon he shall be a most unfortunate
Prince. Then the People of his Dominion shall choose to themselves another
Commander [or Governour] viz. an Earl; whose Government shall last three years
or there about. And afterward the same People shall choose another Commander
[or Gov^^^^^r] viz. a Knight not of the same Family nor Dignity, who shall
trample all things under his Feet: He shall endure somewhat longer time: and
after him they shall choose none at all.

After him shall appear one CHARLES descending from CHALES, with a mighty Navy,
on the Shore of his Father's Kingdom; and with Aid from Denmark, Swedeland,
Holland, France, shall overthrow his Adversaries, and shall govern his Kingdom
wonderful happily, and shall bear Rule far and near: and shall be Greater than
CHARLES the Great.

A Short Paraphrase on the Foregoing Prophecy.
HOw well could Grebner in those blind Times see!
And in these seeing-Times how blind are we?
Our New-found-Lights are lost; those squint-ey'd-elves,
And purblind Seekers, may now seek themselves;
Who have thus erred, imagining Prediction
Of Sacred Prophecy, but some feigned Fiction.
But we (blessed Grebner!) who have still admired,
And looked upon thee as some Soul inspired;
Will hold thy Saws no longer in Suspense,
Which now we have reached with the Optics of our Sense;
Since what was once Apocalypse is known
The unridl'd Truth of Revelation.
Those two grand Champions (that trod on the Neck
Of Nations, and had Kingdoms at their Beck)
Are both extinct; and Fame can only give
A bare Relation that they once did live.
But Thou Renowned Charles, whose matchless Fate
Designed Thee a Victim to the Peoples Hate;
(Maugre the Malice of Thy Foes) were hurled
With Hallelujahs from the wondering World,
A Conqueror over thy doom; from whence we may
Infer, thou only livd'st, we di'd that day.
And now look back, look back, and have recourse,
From whence these streams of mischief had their sourse,
Whiles those promiscuous Hodg-podg-powers oppose,
Like high-swoln floods that River whence they rose.
The Eagle thus dislodged; a Wren-like race
Of Dunghil-Dors soon pierch't up in His place.
And Lapwing-Liberty e're fledged takes Flight,
First has her Champion-Earl, the next a Knight,
Whose heavy pressure has so imp'd her Wings,
She has lost by Consuls what she got by Kings.
And now (but Life's in Prophecy) we might
Die, and despair to see thy Second Light,
Great Charles who like the Bridegroom of the day,
Shall gild sad Britain with thy glorious Ray;
Whiles all those Shower-shot Mushroms, and those new
Created Brats melt like the Morning Dew;
And all those Ignes Fatui shrink and run
Like Exhalations at the Rising Sun.
This is the Wish Great King and Pious Care
Of those who piece-forth Prophecy with their Prayer;
O may Blessed Grebner be added to the Small
Prophets! and prove each Line Canonical;
Whiles what in the old Queen's Reign he did divine,
May be fulfilled and ratified in Thine:
O may thou Reign in thy known Realms who art
Enthroned already in thy Peoples Heart!
O may thou rule! and spend thy Fame through the whole
Earth; from the Artick to the Antartick Pole.
Till the just World with Grebner shall maintain
Thee a mightier Monarch than brave Charlemain.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Thomas Burrel, 1680


