GREAT NEWS FROM THE Polish Camp, and the Terms upon which his Most Christian
Majesty proffers to make a Peace with the Republique of GENOA.
From the Polish Camp at Soochin, the 2d. of October. 1684.
THe Rain has continued here, for four Weeks together, which has so swelled
the Neister, that notwithstanding all Endeavors, it has ruined our Bridge, so
that only a part of our Army got over.

The Rains have so far incommoded us, that we as well as our Horses stand in
Mud, and want forage.

We also, are not freed from an Invasion of the Tartars, for they in a great
Body having already past the River, and laid the Country in ruin.

His Majesty is much displeased, being prevented in his designs if he had got
over the River: But he resolves to put a good Garrison in Suaint and Soochin,
and then to march for Camminack, with hopes, that though he cannot besiege that
place, that yet he shall find an opportunity in Moldavia to get over the River.

It Is said these Tartars are 60000 strong, under Command of the Cham and his
Son.

Conditions, on which his Most Christian Majesty proffers to give a Peacet
Genoa, are as follows, Viz.
1. THat the Duke and four Senators shall come in person and submit to his
Majesty.

2. That the Genovees shall observe an equal Newtrallity, and not Engage in the
affairs of other Princes.

3. That they shall dis-arm all their Galleys but six, and shall Arm no more
without the consent of his Most Christian Majesty.

4 That they shall give free passage, and being to the Salt in Savonia, that so
it may pass freely to Monferrat.

5. That all the French Kings Subjects, that are forced from their Goods and
Estates, shall be restored, and reimbursed; and that Justice shall be
Administered to the French Subjects, that have any pretenses on those of Genoa.

6. That Restitution shall be made of those Goods taken out of the House of
Fresque, and that 100000. Crowns shall be paid in part to the Earl of Fresque:
But if they have any pretense, to any of the Goods belonging to that House,
they shall be heard, and his Majesty will do them Justice.

7. In Case of Refusal, they must expect no peace or quiet with France, and
that this was the last Resolution of that King.

To all which the Genoa Resident (and Prisoner in the Bastile in Paris)
answered as follows,

If the King will see the Duke and Senators, he must go and see them at Genoa,
or fetch them per force, and that he could give no other answer.

LONDON, Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge, 1684.


