A DISCOVRSE OF THE ROMAN FOOT, AND DENARIVS: From whence, as from two
principles, THE MEASVRES, AND WEIGHTS, used by the Ancients, may be deduced. By
JOHN GREAVES, Professor of Astronomy in the University of Oxford.

(...). LONDON, Printed by M. F. for William Lee, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Turks head in Fleet Street. 1647.

Vna fides, pondus, mensura, moneta sit una, Et status illaesus totius Orbis
erit. Budelius de monetis. To his truly noble, and learned friend, John Seldom
Esquire, Burgess of the University of Oxford in the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
THat I should present You, who have so honorably deserved of Antiquity, and
of Your Country, and, if I may add mine own obligations, in particular of me,
with so small a retribution, as a Roman foot, and Denarius, may seem more
proportionable to mine abilities, then to the eminency of Your place, and
worth. But You who, to the honor of Your profession, have joined the wisdom
of the Ancients, and justly have merited this elogy, -- Anglorum gloria gentis
Seldenus, An elogy long since given You by a man, who is deservedly esteemed
(...), the learned Hugo Grotius, You are best able to judge of what importance
these two are, in the discovery of the weights, and measures, used by the
Ancients.

And first, for measures, the (...), or cubit of the Sanctuary, in the
Scriptures, Josephus, and the Rabbines: the (...) and (...) in Herodotus (the
former equal to that of Samos: the later mis-rendred by Pliny, and Solinus,
Pes Babylonius): The (...) in Herodotus, containing XXX. (...), in Strabo,
sometimes LX. sometimes XL. and sometimes XXX. (but in Hesychius (...), and in
Abulfeda three miles: with whom, and with the Persians to this day it is called
the (...) farsach): (...)
the (...)in Herodotus, Artemidorus, and Strabo: the (...) in Hero: the pes
Ptolemaicus, and Drusianus, in Hyginus: besides infinite others depending upon
the proportions of some of these: I say, these cannot after the destruction of
those ancient Monarchies, and Republics, any other way be restored, then from
such monuments, as, by divine providence, have escaped the hands of ruin, and
continued to these later ages. For were it not that the pes Romanus, The
farsach, with the Ancients, and Modern, contains three miles.
or Mon^talis, as Hyginus terms it, were still extant in Rome, on the monuments
of Cossutius, and of Tit. Statilius Vol. Aper (for those two columns, the one
with the inscription (...). mentioned by Marlianus, Abulf. Geogr. MS*
and Philander: the other with (...). seen by the same Philander, are both
lost) we might utterly despair of knowing the measures of the Hebrews,
Babylonians, Persians, Egyptians, Grecians, Romans, and of all others,
described in Classical Authors: who could not transmit to posterity the
individual measures themselves, but only the proportions they respectively
had to one another: which proportions being pure habitudes, cannot, as
Mathematicians observe, be reduced to the measures of these times, unless,
either some of the (...) themselves were existent: or else exact copies taken
from the Originals were derived to us.

In like manner it is for weights, the (...), the (...), the (...), or (...) of
the Hebrews, or (...) of the Chaldeans, which Aruck renders by four (...)
Zuzim, that is, four denarii (from whence, tho Persian (...) in Xenophon, and
Hesychius, may have received its denomination): the (...); containing seven
thousand Attick drachmes, the (...) ten thousand, the (...) a thousand five
hundred, the (...) six thousand, all mentioned by Julius Pollux; the Talentum
Aegyptium in Varro, containing eighty pondo, or pounds; the talentu^ Euboicum
in Festus, four thousand denarii: these, with infinite others, both mensurae,
and pondera, whither considered as Medica, or Georgica, or Veterinaria, cannot
in our times be restored, but only by such weights of the Ancients as are
still extant; that is, either by the denarius of the Romans, or (...) of the
Grecians, or by the congius of Vespasian, or by the librae, and unciae Romanae,
and the like, that have been preserved by Antiquaries.

Seeing therefore the denarius is of as great moment for the discovery of
weights, as the Roman foot for the knowledge of measures, I have taken these
two, as two irrefragable principles, from whence the rest used by the Ancients
may be deduced. And because the denarius may be considered in a double respect,
either as nummus, or as pondus: the first acception conducing to the valuation
of coins, the second to the certainty of weights: it was therefore necessary
that both the weight, and valuation of the denarius, should be exactly known.
To which purpose, in Italy I examined with a balance (the scale of which the
eightieth part of a grain would sensibly turn) many hundred fair denarii, both
Consulares, and Caesarei, as also quinarii, or victoriati in silver: several
aurei of the former, and later Emperors: besides the original standard of the
congius, placed by Vespasian in the Capitol: and many unciae, and librae, in
brass. From whence I collected the weight of the denarius Consularis, and
Caesareus: that to be the seventh part of the Roman ounce, as Celsus,
Scribonius Largus, and Pliny rightly describe: and this to be sometimes the
eighth part, and sometimes the seventh, but most frequently in a middle
proportion betwixt eight, and seven, till Severus', and Gordianus' times: under
whom, and the succeeding Emperors, it recovered the weight of the denarius
Consularis; but lost much of its finenesse, by the mixture of allay.

With these denarii, for the greater certainty, I compared such Grecian coins
(especially Athenian) as I had either seen in choice cabinets, or bought of
mine own; and those were the (...), or (...) absolutely taken, which, as Julius
Pollux, and Hesychius, out of Polemarchus testify, weighed two drachmes: the
(...), or (...), or (...), four drachmes: the (...), the (...), or as Pollux
names them, the (...), with several others.

By which comparison I first discovered, that howsoever the Romans, as Pliny,
and A. Gellius expressly; Valerius, and Suetonius, by way of consequence, equal
the denarius to the dram: and though the Greeks, as Strabo, Cleopatra,
Plutarch, Galen* Dio, and many more, equal the dram to the denarius,
speaking in a popular estimation, and as they vulgarly passed in way of
commerce; yet if we shall put on the resolution of him in the Comedy, Oculatae
nostrae sunt manus, credunt quod vident: we may evidently discern in the scale,
the dram Attica to be heavier then the denarius. And therefore all such
writers of the Ancients, as equal them, if we speak strictly of weight, and
not of estimation, have been deceived: and consequently, all modern writers,
following their traditions, in discourses de ponderibus, and de re nummaria,
have erred.

But because it is not probable, that the Ancients, both Greeks, and Romans,
should be deceived in their own coins, and in their own times: it occasioned me
by observing the practice abroad of the (...) in exchanges, with whom the same
specificall coins, in different States, pass with different estimations, to
think of some means how I might reconcile the traditions of the Greeks, and
Romans, concerning the weight, and valuation of the dram Attica, and
denarius; notwithstanding the difference in the balance, of such as are now
found at Athens, and at Rome.

And this drew from me that discourse, which I have inserted at the end of this
book, Of some directions to be observed in comparing the valuations of coins:
which may serve, not only to reconcile the Greek, and Roman writers, but
especially, the traditions of Philo, Josephus, Epiphanius, Saint Hierome, and
Hesychius: who make the Hebrew (...) shekel, equal to the Attick tetradrachme:
whereas in the scale, which is the best judge of this controversy, I find
them manifestly unequal: the Hebrew, or Samaritane shekel, being much less
then the Attick tetradrachme.

But it may be questioned, why after the labors of Portius, Budaeus, Alciatus,
Agricola, Montanus, Mariana, Budelius, Alcasar, Villalpandus, Jo: Scaliger,
Capellus, Snellius, and of many other eminent men, who have writ, either dedita
opera, or (...), de ponderibus, and mensuris, I should undertake any thing of
this nature. My answer is, that observing in them so great a variety, and
contradiction of opinions, I was willing to use mine own judgment, how mean
soever, in giving my self private satisfaction. And though I intended this
work, as a (...) to other employments; yet having, by the advantage of
travailing in forain parts, ^erused in Jtaly, Greece, and Egypt, more
Antiquities, then I think any of them above named single, I thought it would
not be unacceptable, if I did, as it is the manner of Travelers, publish at
home, such observations, and discoveries, as I made abroad. The which I humbly
dedicate to You, as out of a desire to express my gratitude for many noble
favors: so out of an assurance, that if they receive Your approbation, I need
not to fear the censure of others.

Your most obliged friend, and humble servant, John Greaves.

OF THE ROMAN FOOT.
THat the foot was the most received, and usual measure amongst the Romans, as
the cubit amongst the Jews, is a thing not controverted by any. For Polyb. li.
6.
Polybius describing their Scutu^, makes it in breadth over the ^bend two
[Romane] feet and an half, and in length four feet: or, if it be of a greater
sort, a palm more is to be added to this measure. And not long after
expressing the manner of their castrametation, or encamping, he Polyb. ibid.
(...), etc.
writes; that as often as a place is designed for the camp, the Praetori^um (or
Generals lodging) takes up that part, which is fittest for prospect, and
direction. Set^ing therefore up the Standard where they intend to ^ix the
Praetoriu^, they so measure out a square about the Standard, that each side may
be distant from it ^n hundred feet, and the whole area contain four ^ugera. In
like manner Caes: Comm. lib. 4.
Caesar, in the description of his bridge over the Rhine, makes the binders, or
transversary beams, to be bipedales. Cicero l. 2. Academ. quaest.
Tully also judges the quantity of the apparent diameter of the Sun to be
pedalis. And not to produce more Authorities, Suetonius in Augusto.
Suetonius relates, that Augustus presented before the people of Rome(...) so
the sestertius pes was two feet and an half. Vol. Maet: de assis distrib.
Volusius Maetianus, Sestertius duos asses and semissem, quasi semis tertius;
Graeca figura (...). Nam sex talenta and semitalentum eo verbo significantur.
Lex etiam XII. Tabularum argumento est, in qua duo pedes and semissis
sestertius pes vocatur. But to return to Frontinus, who farther discoursing of
the Roman foot, gives a distinction of three sorts of feet: and those were
first, pes porrectus, next, pes constratus, or as Agricola de mensuris quibus
intervalla metimur.
Agricola reads it, contractus, and lastly, pes quadratus. The first was the
measure of longitudes, the other two of superficies. There were, writes
Frontinus de limitibus agrorum.
Frontinus, In pede porrecto semipedes duo, in pede constrato semipedes
quatuor, in pede quadrato semipedes octo. Which words of his are to be thus
explicated; the pes porrectus, was the Roman foot extended in length, and
therefore there were in it semipedes duo: The pes constratus, was the square of
the semipes, and therefore the perimeter of it contained semipedes quatuor, or,
which is all one, two entire Roman feet: The pes quadratus, was the square of
the Roman foot; wherefore of necessity there must be four feet in the
perimeter, or in Frontinus' expression, eight semipedes. The same Frontinus de
aquaeductibus.
Author likewise in his book de aquaeductibus, describing the digit, and uncia
of this, (Est autem digitus, (says he) ut convenit, sexta decima pars pedis,
uncia duodecima) uses a distinction of digits, as he did of feet before, not
mentioned by any other Author: Quemadmodum autem inter unciam, and digitum
diversitas, ita and ipsius digiti simplex observatio non est. nam alius vocatur
quadratus, alius rotundus. Quadratus tribus quartis decimis suis rotundo major:
rotundus tribus undecimis suis quadrato minor est. The proportions here
assigned by him to the digitus quadratus, and rotundus, are the same, which
Archim. de circ: dimens. prop. 2.
Archimedes long before used: and those are, that a circle has the same
proportion to the square of the diameter, that XI. has to XIV. Hero also,
discoursing of several sorts of measures, informs us thus concerning the
foot: (...), the digit is the least measure, the palm consists of IV. digits,
and is called dactylodochme, and palaiste, and doron. The lichas is ten
digits, the orthodoron eleven: The span XII. The foot has IV. palms, or XVI.
digits the pygme XVIII. digits. The pygon XX. The cubit XXIV. or VI. palms the
orgyia IV. cubits, or VI. feet. Most of which measures the Romans borrowed
from the Greeks; as on the contrary the Greeks borrowed the (...), and (...),
from the Roman jugerum, and milliare. The same Hero describes another sort of
foot used in Italy. (...). The Italian foot contains thirteen digits, and one
third. Whence Salmas^i Ex^rcit: Plinianae. p. (...). 4.
Salmasius concludes, that the Romans used one sort of foot in Rome,
consisting of XVI. digits, and in some parts of Italy another being but XIII.
digits, and one third. Which might be granted, did not Hyginus de limit:
constit:
Hyginus, who is much ancienter, in his tract de limitibus constituendis,
contradict it. His words are these: Item dicitur in Germania in Tungris pes
Drusianus, qui habet monetalem, and sescunciam, ita ut ubicunque extra fines,
legesque Romanorum, id est, ut solicitius proferam, ubicunque extra Italiam
aliquid agitatur inquirendum; and de hac ipsa condition diligenter praemoneo,
ne quid sit, quod praeteriisse videamur. Where speaking immediately before of
the pes Romanus, or as he also calls it, the pes monetalis, by which he
measures and defines the limits, he gives us this caution, that out of Italy
(for in Italy he supposes one measure to be generally received) we are to
observe the quantity of the foot, or measure of the Country. And for this
reason, to avoid ambiguity, he assigns the proportions of the pes Drusianus, at
Tongeren in Germany, to be a sescuncia more then the pes monetalis used at
Rome, and in Italy. And so in another part about Cyrene, which Ptolemy gave to
the Romans. Hyginus ibid.
Pes little qui Ptolemaicus appellatur habet monetalem pedem, and semunciam. But
to omit the pes Ptolemaicus (For our inquiry is only of the Roman foot.) I
cannot but wonder at the mistake of Ios: Scaliger de re nummaria
Joseph Scaliger, concerning the pes Drusianus, and Romanus, who thus writes.
Pes igitur ille Drusianus major est Romano sescuncia. fuit enim XXII.
digitorum, quantorum XVI. est pes Romanus. If it were but a sescuncia, greater
then the Roman foot, as Hyginus, and he also make it, how can it possibly be
XXII. digitorum? or how can he excuse his words, which immediately follow? Ex
quo colligimus pedem Drusianum omnino esse eum, qui hodie in Gallia, and Belgio
in usu est, qui profecto major est VI. digitis, quantorum XVI. est pes, qui
Romae in hortis Angeli Colotii sculptus in saxo visitur. Eum enim nos cum pede
Gallicano comparantes, id verissimum esse deprehendimus. Neither is the error
of some others much less, in making the pes monetalis, or Romanus, and pes
Regius Philetaerius, to be equal, Because the Roman foot consisted of XVI.
digits, as Frontinus writes, and the pes Philetaerius of as many, as Heroin
Isagoge.
Hero shows: (...). therefore both these are equal. The error is in supposing
all digits to be alike; and therefore the same number of digits being in both,
that both are equal. By the same argument we may conclude the Roman foot, and
Arabian foot, and the derah, or cubit of these, to be equal to the cubit, or
sesquipes of the Romans: seeing Abulsedae Geogr. Arab. MS.
Abulfeda, an Arabian Geographer, defines the derah to consist of XXIV. digits,
and so many also did the Roman sesquipes contain. But the observation of
Rhemnii Fannii fragmentu^.
Rhemnius Fannius in this particular is much better; which he applies to
weights, and we may by analogy assign to measures.

Semina sex alii siliquis latitantia curvis
Attribuunt scripulo, lentes veraciter octo,
Aut totidem speltas, numerant, tristesve lupinos
Bis duo; sed si par generatim his pondus inesset,
Servarent eadem diversae pondera gentes:
Nunc variant. Etenim cuncta non foedere certo
Naturae, sed lege valent, hominumque repertis.
But to return to the Roman foot. Lastly, we may allege Isid. Hispal. l. 15.
c. 15.
Isidorus Hispalensis. Palmus autem, quatuor habet digitos, pes XVI. digitos,
Passus pedes quinque, Pertica p^^ssus duos, id est december pedes. And this is
that which I find delivered by such of the Ancients, as are extant. Out of
which bare, and naked descriptions, it is as impossible to recover the Roman
foot, as it is for Mathematicians, to take either the distance, or altitude of
places, by the proportions of triangles alone, or by Tables of Sines, and
Tangents, without having some certain and positive measure given, which must be
the foundation of their inquiry. All that can be collected by these
descriptions, is this, that we may know into how many parts the Romans
usually divided their feet; and all these divisions I have seen in some ancient
ones. But suppose there were no Roman foot extant; how by XVI. digits, or by
IV. palms, or by XII. unciae, (which is the most uncertain of all; seeing
whatsoever has quantity, how great or small soever it is, may be divided in
XII. uncias) could it be precisely restored? For if that of Protagoras apud
(...). l. 1^. cap. 5. Mctaphys. (...).
Protagoras be true, as well in measures, as in intellectual notions, that man
is (...): Whence Nec minus m^^surarum rations, quae in omnibus videntur
necessariae esse, ex corpo^ is membris collegerunt: uti digitum, palmum, pedem,
cubitum. Vitruv. l 3 c. 1.
Vitruvius observes, that the Latins denominated most of their measures, as
their digit, palm, foot, and cubit, from the parts and members of a man: who
shall be that perfect and square man, from whom we may take a pattern of these
measures? or if there be any such, how shall we know him? or how shall we be
certain the Ancients ever made choice of any such? Unless, as some fancy, that
the cubit of the Sanctuary, was taken from the cubit of Adam, he being created
in an excellent state of perfection: So we shall imagine these digits, and
palms, to have been taken from some particular man of completer lineaments then
others. On the other side, if this foot may be restored by the digits, and
palms of any man at pleasure, since there is such a difference in the
proportions of men, that it is as difficult to find two of the same
dimensions, as two that have the same likeness of faces, how will it be
possible, out of such a diversity, to produce a certain and positive measure,
consisting in an indivisibility, not as a point does in respect of parts, but
in an indivisibility of application, as all originals, and standards should
do? The Arabians, to avoid this difficulty, show us a more certain way, as
they suppose, how to make this commensurall digit, and consequently the foot:
and that is by the breadth of six barley corns laid one contiguous to another.
For thus (...) MS.
Muhammed Ibn Mesoud in his book, entitled in Persian gehandanish, relates;
that in the time of Almamon (the learned Calife of Babylon) by the elevation of
the pole of the equator, they measured the quantity of a degree upon the globe
of the earth, and found it to be fifty six miles, and two thirds of a mile:
every mile containing four thousand cubits, and each cubit twenty four digits,
and every digit six barley corns. The same proportions are assigned in the
Geographia Nubiensis, printed in Arabic at Rome: (...) The cubit is twenty
four digits, and every digit is six barley corns. But this is as uncertain as
the former, and is built upon a supposition, that all such are of the same
dimension. Whereas those of one Country differ much from those of another; and
those of the same Country (as I have made trial in Egypt, more out of
curiosity, then as hoping this way to give my self satisfaction) are not all of
the same bigness: and not only so, but in the self same ear, there is a
sensible difference, as experience does show. And yet Snellius, a man much to
be commended for his abilities in the Mathematics, and to be blamed for his
supine negligence, both in his measure of the magnitude of the earth, and in
his dimensions of the Roman foot, upon these slight and weak principles,
deduces the Arabian foot, S^ellius in Eratosth. Batav. lib. 2. cap. 2.
this containing ninety six grains, such as his Roman foot (for none besides
himself will own it) contains ninety. Wherefore some other Arabians to mend the
matter, limit the breadth of one of them, Aly Kushgy, who assisted Vlug Beg in
compiling his Astronomicall Tables in Persian (Tables the most exact of any in
the East) limits their breadth by VI. hairs of an horse. (...) Every digit is
six barley corns laid ^^venly together, and the breadth of every barley corn is
six hairs of an horses tail. Instit: Astron: Aly Cushgy. MS.
by six hairs of a camel, evenly joined one by another: by which invention
their derah being almost answerable to the Roman sesquipes, or cubit, shall
consist of twenty four digits, and every digit of six barley corns, and every
barley corn of six hairs of a camel. So that in conclusion the hair of a
camel, shall be the minimum in respect of measures. But this invention however
at the first it may seem somewhat subtle (for we are come now almost as low as
atoms) is least of all to be approved. For though the supposition were true
that all hairs are of a like bigness in all camels, whereas they are different
in one and the same; yet this objection is unanswerable, that seeing hairs are
not perfectly round, though the the sense judges them so, but angular, and that
with some inequality, as magnifying glasses plainly demonstrate, it will be
very difficult so to size them together, that they shall always take up the
same breadth: and if they do not, little errors committed in such small bodies,
though at the first insensible, will infinitely increase, and multiply, in the
measuring of great distances, to which these are supposed the foundation. And
therefore I cannot but approve the counsel of Villalpandus de apparatu Vrbis
ac Templi par. 2. l. 3. c. 25. Atque in universum illud unum monitos velim eos
omnes, qui mensurarum ac ponderum cognoscendorum desiderio tene^tur, ne a
minimis incipiant examinare majora: nom vel minimus quisque error saepius
multiplicatus in magnum ^dducit errorum cumulum.
Villalpandus, who advises such as will examine measures and weights, to begin
with the greater, and not with the lesser. And that there is reason for his
assertion, may be made evident, especially in weights, to such as shall make an
experiment. For admit there were a Standard of ten thousand grains, and another
of one grain, it will be easy, by a continued subdivision of the former, with
a good balance, to produce a weight equal to the standard of one grain: yea,
though at the beginning, some little error had been committed, which after
many divisions will vanish, and become imperceptible. Whereas on the contrary,
the most curious man alive, with the exactest scale that the industry of the
most skillful artizan can invent, shall never be able out of the standard of
one grain, to produce a weight equal to the weight of ten thousand grains, but
that there shall be a sensible, and apparent difference; yea, though he had
that excellent scale mentioned by Capellus de pond. and nummis lib. 1.
Capellus at Sedan, which would sensibly be turned with the IV. hundredth part
of a grain. The like difference as we find in weights, we may conceive by
analogy to be in measures, when they shall be made out of such little parts, as
hairs, barley corns, digits, and the like. And therefore I cannot but disapprove
the ordinary course of most Geographers, whither Greeks, Latins, or Arabians,
that from such nice beginnings, measure out a degree upon earth, and
consequently the magnitude of this globe. On the contrary the enterprise of
Snell: in Eratosth: Bat. lib. 2.
Snellius in his Eratosthenes Batavus, and of our Countryman Wright, of the
errors of Navigation.
M. Wright, has been more commendable: who by the space of a degree on earth,
(or which were better of many degrees) have endeavored to fix measures, with
more exactness, and certainty for posterity. But of this argument I shall have
occasion to speak hereafter. And therefore to return to the business in hand.

Since the Roman foot cannot be recovered by hairs, grains, digits, palms, and
such like physical bodies, which being of a various, and indeterminate
magnitude, cannot give, unless by accident, the commensuration of that which
ought to be precisely limited, and determined: some relinquishing the former
way as erroneous, have endeavored, with much ingeniousness, by weights, to
find out the Roman foot. For there is the same analogy between measures and
weights, as between continued, and discrete quantiti^s: And as Mathematicians
by numbers demonstrate, or rather illustrate the affections of lines,
superficies, and Geometrical bodies: so by weights, measuring some physical
bodies, especially such as are liquid, in cubicall vessels, (which are easiest
commensurable) we may render the exact quantity of the Roman foot, and by
consequence of all their other measures. And therefore Luc. Paetus li. 3. de
mensur. and pond: Romans
Lucas Paetus, and Villalpandus de appar. Vrbis ac Templi. par: 2. l. 3. cap.
25.
Villalpandus, have attempted with probable reasons to discover the Roman
foot, the one by the Sextarius, the other by the Roman Congius. For the
Sexta^ius being the sixth part of the Congius, and the Congius containing X.
librae, or pounds, as it is manifest by that exquisite standard in Rome, with
this inscription.

IMP. CAESARE VESPAS. VI T. CAES. AUG. F. IIIICOS MENSURAE EXACTAE IN CAPITOLIO

PX PX signifies Pondo december.


Again the Congius being the eighth part of the amphorae, or quadrantal, filled
with water or wine, as by the testimonies of Fragmenta Dioscoridis.
Dioscorides, Sext. Pomp: Festus de Verb: signif.
Sex: Pompeius, and of an ancient Anonymus Greek Author translated by Alciat,
it does appear: if therefore a Vessel be made of a cubicall figure, which may
receive VIII. congii, or XLVIII. sextarii, or LXXX^ pounds of water or of wine,
out of the sides of this cube, by Rhemn: Fann: fragment.
Rhemnius Fannius his description, or rather by Sextus Pompeius, who is
ancienter, will the Roman foot be deduced. For both these write (neither is it
as yet contradicted by any man) that the longitude of one of the sides of the
amphora (being a cube) is answerable to the Roman foot. And here our inquiry
would be at an end (supposing the Authorities of Festus, and Fannius to be
unquestionable) were there not farther some objections, which cannot easily be
removed. And those are first, a supposition that we have the true Roman libra
(for by this we are to find the Congius, admitting there were none extant, as
by the Congius, the amphora, or quadrantal:) a thing of as great difficulty as
the foot it self. And besides, if this were obtained, yet we cannot have an
absolute certainty, that water, or wine, shall in all places alike ponderate;
by reason of the different gravity, which is observed in natural bodies,
though they be homogeneous, and of a like substance. Wherefore laying aside all
such speculations, as being far from that accuratenesse, which is required,
there is no other possible means left for this discovery, but to have recourse
to such monuments of Antiquity, as have escaped the injury, and calamity of
time, which is our next, and second inquiry.

And here it will not be amiss to see what learned men, who not long preceded
our age, have observed out of ancient monuments, concerning the Roman foot:
and then to relate what course I took to give my self private satisfaction,
which, I hope, will be also satisfactory to others. Philander in his
Commentaries upon Vitruvius, being one of the first that had seen, and
diligently perused many ancient measures in Rome (whereas Portius, Agricola,
Glareanus, and some others, received them upon trust) gives us so much the more
certain information. His words are these: Philander in li. 3. cap. 3. Vitruvii.
Veruntamen quoniam non statim ex cujuscunque pollicibus, aut digitis, quis
fuerit apud antiquos Romanus pes sciri potest, facturum me studiosis rem gratam
putavi, si ad marginem libri semipedem apponerem, dimensum ex antiquo pede, in
marmore, quod est in hortis Angeli Colotii Romae sculpto, cujus etiam, nisi me
fallit memoria, meminit Leonardus Porcius lib. de Sestertio. Eum enim pedem,
nos caeteris qui circumferuntur, praetulimus, quod conveniret cum eo, quem
sculptum invenimus in alio marmoreo epitaphio T. Statilii Vol. Apri mensoris
aedificiorum, quod opera Jacobi Meleghini summi^ Pont. Architecti ex Janiculo
non ita pridem refossum, in Vaticanum hortum translatum est. Quamvis jacentem
in Basilica Apostolorum columnam ex porphyrite, cum his Graecis in calce
literis (...) id est pedum novem, nos cum dimensi essemus, deprehenderimus non
respondere nostro eum, quo usus fuerat ejus columnae artifex, sed nostro esse
majorem duobus scrupulis and besse, id est unciae part nona. Vt argumentum
aliquod esse possit pedis Graeci fuisse modulo scapum columnae factum; quod
facilius conjicere potuissem, si integra esset alia ex eodem lapide columna,
quam in via lata est conspicere jacentem, his in calce literis (...)
insignitam. Verum quando stadium Herodoto l. 2. Heroni, Suidae, caeteris
Graecis sit sexcentorum pedum; Plinio, Columellae, caeteris Latinis sexcentorum
viginti quinque nostrorum, necesse est Romanum a Graeco semuncia superari. Thus
far Philander. Not long after him Lucas Paetus, having examined the foot on T.
Statilius tomb, and that other of Cossutius, together with several ancient
ones in brass, found amongst the rudera at Rome, concludes: that the Luc.
Paetus l. 1. de antiq. Ro^. and Graec. intervall. mensuris.
true Roman foot dictis duobus marmoreis comparatus, septima unciae part,
sive unciae scripulis tribus, and duabus scripuli sextulis, and sextulae
semisse brevior est. Much about the same time I find in Ciaconius out of
Latinus Latinius, another experiment to have been made, by many eminent men
together at Rome. Superioribus autem annis (says Ciaconius e Lat. Latinii
observationibus de pede Romans
he) Ant: Augustinus, qui postmodum fuit Archiepiscopus Tarraconensis, Io:
Baptista Sighicellus Episcopus Faventinus, P. Octavius Pacatus, Achilles
Maffaeus, Achilles Statius, Benedictus Aegius, Fulvius Vrsinus, Latinus
Latinius, cum veram pedis Romans quantitatem statu^re vellent, plures ejusd.
pedis mensuras simul contulerunt, and earum octo cum antiquissima dicti pedis
forma, quae in basi quadam in hortis Vaticanis extat, adamussim convenire
videntes, ex hoc pede quadrato vas confecerunt, quod etiam nunc octoginta
aquae, vel vini libras, quibus public signatis civitas utitur, omnino capere
invenerunt, and cum octo congiis antiquis ita congruere, ut reque minus
quidquam, neque amplius inter utraque esset. Quo experimento evidentissime
cognoverunt; and libras nostri temporis cum antiquis Romany esse easdem, cum
congii antiqui vas sub Vespasiano Imp: signatum december libras contineret, quot
etiam nostri temporis libras capit; and hunc esse justum pedem Romanum, cum ex
ejus modulo perfectum Quadrantal octoginta libras contineat, quae cum congii
antiqui libris ad momentum respondent. Notwithstanding these observations,
Villalpandus, knowing how necessary it was to have the true dimensions of the
Roman foot, to find out the proportions of the Hebrew cubit, made new
experiments: and after examination of the measures, and weights at Rome, he
thus concludes. Villalpandi apparatus Vrbis ^c. Templi. par. 2. l. 3. c. 25.
Sed iis omnibus tam variis, aliisque multis sententiis praetermissis, in hac
una conquiescimus, ut arbitremur unum Farnesianum Congium posse omnes antiquas
Romanorum, atque aliarum gentium mensuras, omniaque pondera pristinae
integritati restituere. And in another place. Quapropter aliis omnibus
conjecturis, argumentationibus, aereis pedibus, marmoreis dimensionibus, aut
sculpturis, quasi maris fluctibus praetermissis, in hac una pedis longitudine,
quasi in portu conquiescere jam tendem decrevimus. Yet Snellius in his
Eratosthenes Batavus, could not rest satisfied with this foot of Villalpandus,
how exquisite soever he imagines it. For he had a mind to discover it nearer
home: making the Rhinland foot equal to the Roman. The proof of his assertion
is taken from an ancicient Roman armamentarium, or Fort, near the sea, not far
from Leiden, which by the Natives is called het huys te Briten: And is supposed
by Ortelius to have been built by Claudius Caesar, in his intended voyage for
Britanne, of which Suetonius in Claudio Dio hist. Romans lib. ^0.
Suetonius, and Dio, make mention: sive in commodiorem legionum, cohortiumque
transvectionem, sive quo milites hibernarent ( says Ortelius). Arcis ipsius
fundamenta, ( according to Snell. in Eratosth. Bat. l. 2. cap. 2.
Snellius) quadrata sunt forma, and quaquaversum ducentis quadraginta
Rhinlandicis pedibus patent. Vt vel hinc Romanae mensurae vestigia quam
planissime agnoscas. Nam ipsius podismus duorum Romanorum jugerum magnitudinem
complectitur. Jugeri enim mensuram ducentos and quadraginta longitudinis pedes
esse, non est fere quisquam qui ignoret, inquit Quintilianus l. 1. cap. 10.
Varro de re rustica libro 1. cap. 10. Iugerum quod quadratos duos actus habet.
Actus quadratus, qui and latus est pedes 120. and longus totidem. Is modius, ac
mina Latina appellatur* ut mihi plane dubium non videatur, eos hic Romanae
mensurae modum secutos, hujus structurae podismum ita comprehendisse secundum
jugeri mensuram, ut duo jugera, vel actui quatuor contineret. Frontinus de
limitibus. Hi duo fundi juncti jugerum definiunt, deinde haec duo jugera juncta
in unum quadratum agrum efficient, quod sint omnes actus bini: ut singula ideo
latera ducentos and quadraginta pedes in longum patere necesse sit. Atqui
totidem pedibus Rhinlandicis singula latera exporrigi Geodaetarum experientia
confirmat. Vnde efficitur Romanum antiquum pede^ nostro Rhinlandico plane
aequari.

After these experiments of so many able, and learned men, and those too taken
from ancient Monuments, it may seem s^^ange, that we should not be able as yet
to define the true quantity of the Roman foot. For this I can assign no other
reasons then these. First, that those which have described it, have either not
exactly, and with such diligence, as was requisite, performed it; or else, if
they have been circumspect in this kind, they have omitted to compare it with
the Standards for measures of other Nations. On the contrary, those which have
compared it with the present Standards, never took it from the ancient
Monuments, and Originals, which are at Rome, but only from some draughts, or
schemes, delineated in books. Now how uncertain a way this is, does appear by
Villalpand. de apparatu Vrbi^ ac Templi par. 2. l. 3. c. 25.
Villalpandus, who thus writes. Ego dum haec scriberem, hunc Colotianum pedem
circino expendi, and in annotationibus Guil: Philandri solertissimi viri, and
apud Georgium Agricolam, and apud Lucam Paetum, and Stanistaum Grsepsium, and
nallum potui reperire ^lteri aequalem, imo vero neque ejusdem pedis assignatas
similes parts. The same have I observed in those Roman feet described by
Portius, Agricola, Philander, Paetus, Ciaconius, and Villalpandus himself, that
they differ one from another: and not only so, but those of the ^ame Author,
in the same impression, are likewise different. Which last must arise, either
by the diverse extention of the paper in the press, when it is moist, or by
the inequall contraction of it, when it grows dry, or by some other accident,
in the beating, and binding. So that though it were granted, that so many
learned men had found out, what we inquire after, the Roman foot; yet it is
impossible out of those schemes, and draughts, delivered in their books, for
the reasons before specified, to attain an absolute certainty. But Pars
sexagesima typorum and sormarum loagitudini excusis decedit, quemadmodu^ a
diligentibus and peritis typographis sciscitando edoctus sum. Snell. in
Eratosth. Batavo. l. 2. cap. 1.
Snellius shows us a remedy of this difficulty, which in my opinion is as vain
as his Roman foot, (seeing by his supposition all paper must shrink alike, be
it thick or thin) and that is, to allow one part in sixty for the shrinking
of the paper. For so much, says he, do Typographers observe, that letters
contract themselves, when they are taken off wet from the types.

Wherefore having received small satisfaction from the writings of the
Ancients, and not much better from the imperfect designations of the Roman
foot by modern Authors, I proposed to my self in my travails abroad, these
ways, which no reasonable man but must approve of. And those were first, to
examine as many ancient measures, and monuments, in Italy, and other parts, as
it was possible. And secondly, to compare these with as many Standards, and
Originals, as I could procure the sight of. And last of all, to transmit both
these, and them, to posterity, I exactly measured some of the most lasting
monuments of the Ancients. To this purpose, in the year 1639 I went into Italy,
to view, as the other Antiquities o^ the Romans, so especially those of
weights, and measures; and to take them with as much exact^nesse, as it was
possible, I carried instrument^ with me made by the best Artizans.

Where my first inquiry was after that monume^ of T. Statilius Vol. Aper, in
the Vatican gardens, from whence Philander in l. 3. c. 3. Vitruvii.
Philander took the dimensions of the Roman foot, as others have since
borrowed it from him. In the copying out of this upon an English foot in
brass, divided into 2000 parts, I spent at the least two hours (which I
mention to show with what diligence I proceeded in this, and the rest) so often
comparing the several divisions, and digits of it respectively one with
another, that I think more circumspection could not have been used; by which I
plainly discovered the rudeness, and insufficiency of that foot. For besides
that the length of it is somewhat too much, (whatsoever Ciaconius e Latino
Latinio.
Latinius out of an observation made by Ant. Augustinus, Sighicellus, Pacatus,
Maffaeus, Statius, Aegius, and Fulvius Vrsinus, pretends to the contrary) there
is never a digit, that is precisely answerable to one another. Howsoever it
contains 1944. such parts, as the English foot contains 2000.

My next search was for the foot on the monument of Cossutius, in hortis
Colotianis, from whence ^t has since received its denomination (though ^t be
now removed) being termed by Wri^ers pes Colotianus. This foot I took with
great care, as it did well deserve, being very ^air, and perfect: afterward
collating it with that Roman foot, which Lucas Paetus caused ^o be engraven in
the Capitol, in a white mar^le stone, I found them exactly to agree; and
therefore I did wonder, why he should con^emne this with his pen (for he makes
some Luc Paetus l. 1 de antiq. Romans and Graec. intervall mensuris.
objections against it) which notwithstanding he has erected with his hands
(as appears by the inscription in the Capitol, CURANTE LU: PAETO). It may be
upon second thoughts, he afterward privately retracted his error, which he was
not willing to publish to the world. Now this of Cossutius is 1934. such
parts, as the English foot contains 2000.

Next I sought after that Porphyry Column mentioned by Marlianus de antiquit.
Vrbis
Marlianus, as also by Philander in lib. 3. c. 3. Vitruvii.
Philander, and others, with this iuscription (...). For if the length of that
Column were assigned according to the proportion of the Greek foot, then would
the Roman foot be thence deduced: this (as I shall elsewhere show) containing
24. such parts, as that contained 25: Or if it were made according to the
Roman foot, as the Grecians after their subjection to the Roman Empire, often
used the same measures that the Romans did, then had I my desire. But the
Column being defaced, or lost, my labor was in vain: And it seems Luc Paetus
l. 1 de antiq Romans and Graec. intervall. mensuris.
Paetus about LXX. years before, made the same inquiry, with as little
satisfaction.

I should be too tedious in describing the several feet, which I have perused
in brass, found amongst the rudera at Rome, and carefully preserved by
Antiquaries: of most of which Peircskius has given a good character, in some
letters of his, which I have seen in the hands of Bucharaus, a learned man, not
yet printed. Ex Epistolis Peircskii MSS.
Who thus writes: I cannot sufficiently wonder at the inequality which I have
found in the divisions by digits, and inches, of the ancient Roman feet; which
seem to me to have been made for fashion sake, and dicis causa ( as lamps that
are found in tombs incapable of oil) more to express the mystery, and
profession of those that were to use them, then for to regulate the measure of
any thing besides them.

Besides these, I examined the ancient structures of the Romans, hoping by
collating one with another, to deduce the dimension of their foot. For I
presumed that those excellent Architects, before they began their work, must
necessarily propose some models to themselves, according to the proportions of
which, they meant to raise their fabrics: which proportions could not be
assigned, but in the parts of some common, and received quantity; and this in
probability was the Roman foot; being a measure generally used, and by public
authority prescribed. Upon which grounds, I measured the stones in the
foundation of the Capitol, Domitians', or rather Vespasians' amphitheater, the
triumphall arcs of Titus, and Severus, together with that of Constantine the
great, and above all that exquisite temple of the Pantheon, built by Agrippa, I
know not whither with more cost, or art: concerning which Sebast: Ser^: delle
Antichita.
Sebastianus Serlius is of opinion, that if all rules of Architecture were
lost, they might be revived out of this monument alone. And in truth, this
place gave me more satisfaction then any other. For most of the white marble
stones on the pavement, contained exactly three of those Roman feet on
Cossutius monument, and the lesser stones in Prophyry contained one and an half.

But yet I thought this not sufficient, unless I went to Tarracina, which is
the ancient Anxur, and LIII miles distant from Rome: having read in Andr:
Schott: i^ine^ar.
Andreas Schottus, out of Pighius' Hercules Prodicius, that near the sea by the
via Appia, in the height of a white rock, whence that of Horat l. 1. Sermon Sat.
5.
Horace, Impositum saxis late candentibus Anxur, there are described the Roman
decempedae. And indeed the place is very memorable, for the whiteness,
altitude, and hardness of the rock, which notwithstanding is cut away
perpendicularly, on the side toward the Tyrrhene sea, above an hundred and
twenty feet in depth, to make passage for the Appian way; and at the space of
every decempeda, these characters X XX XXX etc. (being almost cubitales) are
fairly engraven in a continued order descending to CXX. Measuring below the
distance between CXX and CX, it amounted to IX. English feet, and 1314/2^00 of
a foot computing it from the Sea at the end of this book the figure of these
characters as they are cut in the rock at Anxur, with lines incompassing them.
line engraven above CXX to the line next under CX. The rest I examined with my
eyes, by often comparing the distance between CXX and CX whither it were equal
to that between CX and C, and this again (ascending upwards) to that between C
and XC. which manner though it be uncertain, and conjecturall, and far from
that exactness, I used in all others, yet it was the best means I could then
put in practice; and I am confident that whosoever shall measure those spaces,
shall find a manifest inequality. To which opinion I am the rather induced,
because measuring there, in several places, the breadth of the Appian way, cut
out of the same rock, I found a difference sometimes of one, or two inches, or
more. It being in one place XIII. English feet, and 1620/^^^^ of a foot, in
another, XIII. feet and 18^0/^^^^ in a third XIII. and 1975/^^^^. Whereby I
concluded, that the Ancients in making that way, had not respect to a
Mathematical point (as it was not necessary) but only that if any difference
were, it should not be sensible. And such differences have (...) observed in
the white Corinthian pillars, in the Pantheon before mentioned, of above an
inch, or two, in the circuit of the scapus, near the torus: which inequality,
seeing no eye could discover, the masters of that exquisite work did justly
contemn. Whereas the Prophyry stones, and those of white marble, on the
pavement, are sized so even, and so exactly to the proportions of the Roman
foot, that nothing can be more accurate. And this the nature of the work
required. For the temple being round (which has occasioned the Italians
vulgarly to call it the Rotundo) the circle within, could not so exquisitely
have been filled up, if there had not been a special care taken in observing
the true dimensions, in every particular stone. But to return to the rock at
Anxur; the spaces between those characters, to an eye, that shall be
intentively fixed upon them, will be apparently different. So that I concur in
opinion with Schot^i itiner.
Schottus, that those figures were placed there, to give notice to posterity,
how much of the rock had been removed, to make passage for the Appian way; and
not for any memorial of the Roman measures.

Having measured those places in the Appian way at Tarracina, I made trial of
at least XX. others between Tarracina, and Naples, without any great
satisfaction; and therefore partly the incertainty that I found there, and
partly the danger of thieves, discouraged me from measuring the Roman
milliare; a work conceived to be of great use, for the discovery of the Roman
foot. Seeing the milliare containing mill passus, as the very name imports,
and every passus consisting of five feet, as Columella de Re Rust. l. 5.
Columella, and Isiderus l. 15. c 15. Origin.
Isidorus, expressly tell us, here therefore would be 5000 feet to help us to
one, could there be but found out a perfect Roman mile. And this I imagined
might probably be discovered amongst those many vestigia of Roman ways, which
to this day are frequently seen in Italy. Wherefore conferring with Gasparo
Berti, a man curious, and judicious (as appears by his ichnography of Roma
Subterranea in Bosius) as also with Lucas Holstenius, a learned companion of
Cluverius, in those honorable travails of his, for the restoration of the
ancient Geography: they both informed me, that there are still in the Appian
way, where it passes over the Pomptinae paludes, several columnae, or lapides
milliarii, standing; whereby the Romans divided, and distinguished their
miles; and which occasioned those phrases, ad primiu^, ad quartum, ad
centesimum lapidem, and the like. And these, it may be, at the first were
ordinary stones, till C. Gracchus caused columns to be erected in their
places: (...). He measured out, says Plutarchus in Gracchis.
Plutarch, by miles all the ways, the mile containing little less then eight
stadia, and placed columns of stone to design the measure. The thing was of
that ornament, and use, as that it was afterward taken up, and continued by
the Roman Emperors; as appears by these inscriptions, which are fairly
ingrave ^on the first column, found amongst the ruins in the Appian way, and
from thence lately removed into the Capitol, by order of the S. P. Q. R
COLVMNAM. MILIARIAM PRIMI. AB. VRBE LAPIDIS. INDICEM AB. IMPP. VESPASIANO. ET.
NERVA RESTITVTAM DF. RVINIS. SVBVR^ANIS. VIAE. APPIAE IN. CAPITOLIVM. TRANSTVLIT
Senate, and people of Rome.

I

IMP. CAESAR VESPASIANVS. AVG PONTIF. MAXIM TRIB. POTESTAT. VII IMP. XVII P. P.
CENSOR COS. VII DESIGN. VIII

Below this, on the end of the Scapus.

IMP. NERVA. CAESAR AUGUSTUS. PONTIFEX MAXIMUS. TRIBVNICIA POTESTATE. COS. III
PATER PATRIAE. REFECIT

Below this, on the Basis of the same pillar.

IMP. CAESARI. DIVI TRAIANI. PARTHICI. F DIVI. NER VAE. NEPOTI TRAIANO.
HADRIANO AVG. PONTIF. MAXIM TRIB. POTEST. II COS. II VIA TORES. QVI. IPSI. ET.
COS. ET PR. CETERISQVE. MAGISTRATIB APPARENT. ET. H. V.

To these I shall also add the inscription of another columna milliaria, not
extant in Gruterus, or any other, that I know, which I have seen at Tarracina;
the column being exactly of the same magnitude with the former, but wanting by
the injury of time, a basis below, and a globe, of nigh three feet diameter on
the top, serving in stead of a capitel, both which the former has.

X

IMP. CAESAR DIVI. NERVAE FILIVS. NERVA TRAIANVS. AVG GERMANICVS DACICVS
PONTIF. MAX TRIB. POT. XIIII IMP. VI COS. V P. P XVIIII SILICE. SVA. PECVNIA
STRAVIT

LIII

Appii forum Ad medias IX. Tarracina X.

The figure LIII below, signifies the distance of Tarracina from Rome: Which
distance may be farther proved out of Appian, in his third book of the Civil
wars, speaking of Augustus: The figure X signifies the distance of Tarracina
from the next City, or Town, in the way to Rome: And that was, Ad medias: a
place so called, either because it was, ad medias paludes, or else because it
was in the midway almost between Tarracina, and Appii forum. For it was X.
miles from Tarracina, and IX. from Appii forum; as appears by the Itinerarium
Hierosolymitanum in Bertius.
(...). Being about Tarracina, which is distant CCCC. stadia from Rome. These
stadia reduced to miles, if we allow VII. Greek stadia, and an half, to a
Roman mile, as Suidas does, will make up LIII. miles, and one third part of a
mile; that is, two stadia, and an half over and above. Which fraction Appian
neglects; and therefore uses the round number CCCC. stadia for LIII. miles.

The figure XVIIII signifies the Decennovium, or way passing over the fens,
between Appii forum, and Tarracina: so denominated, because it contained
nineteen miles in length: which may also be proved out of Procopius, where he
speaks of the (...). This way was paved by Traian, as the inscription shows,
and I think first of all by him. Long after it was repaired by Theodoricus,
according to another inscription, that I have seen at Tarracina, of which
Gruterus, and Cluverius, also make mention; where, omitting the titles of
Theodoricus, in the marble we find these words engraven.

DECENNOVII. VIAE. APPIAE. ID. EST. A. TRIP VSQVE. TERRACENAM. ITER. ET. LOCA.
QVAE CONFLVENTIBVS. AB. VTRAQVE. PART. PALVDVM PER. OMNES. RETRO. PRINCIPVM.
INVNDAVERANT VSVI. PVBLICO. ET. SECVRITATI. VIANTIVM RESTITVIT.... PER
PLVRIMOS. QVI. ANTE NON. ERANT. ALBEOS... DEDVCTA. IN. MARE. AQVA. By this
number XVIIII. signifying the decennovium, and by the Itinerarium
Hierosolymitanum, we may safely correct the Itinerarium Antonini, in which
Tarracina is placed but XVIII. miles distant from Appii forum. And from hence
likewise we may certainly know how far the Christians went to meet Saint
Paul, and that was XXXIV. miles. For so much was Appii forum distant from Rome,
if we subduct XVIIII. out of LIII. whereas the Itineraries of Bertius Edition
make it more.

If therefore two such columns were found entire, (as I am informed there are
four, or five, in the Decennovium, standing in a continued order) the distance
between two such being exactly measured, would much conduce to the discovery
of the Roman foot. Upon which supposition, I had almost resolved to have gone
thither, as I did to other places, with no other intention, but only to have
been a spectator of those Columns, and to have trusted to mine own hands, in
taking their distances. But upon a more deliberate examination of the
business, I perceived that this inquiry did depend upon a very nice
supposition. For if the Decempedatores, or Curatores viarum, proceeded not with
extreme caution, and aimed almost at a Mathematical point, in designing the
just space of each particular mile (which in a work of that length is not
probable; where the inequality of many feet could not be discerned by the eye,
and might be admitted without any blemish. For in Varrode L. L. lib. 5.
Varro's judgment, Sensus nullus quod abest mill passus sentire potest) it
could not be, but the same differences, or somewhat like, must have crept in
with them, which have been observed amongst us, in our measured, and statute
miles; out of which it would be a vain attempt exactly to demonstrate the
English foot. The neglect of which circumspection, amongst some other reasons,
that may be assigned, I take to be one, of the diversity, which Astronomers
found in that memorable observation, made in the planes of Singiar, or Sinar,
by the command of Almamon, the renowned Calife of Babylon, about eight hundred
years since, in proportioning the magnitude of a degree upon earth. For having
taken the altitude of the pole at two several stations, differing a degree in
the heavens, they measured the distance between these stations on earth, going
on in the same Meridian; where (...)
some of them, says Abulfeda, found it to be fifty six miles, and two thirds,
others fifty six, without any fraction. If therefore the Roman decempedatores,
or geodaetae, used not more circumspection, then the Babylonian Astronomers
(which is not likely), there can be no trust given to their miles, and less
trust to the foot, that shall be deduced from thence.

Wherefore to come to a conclusion; having made inquiry more ways, Abulf
Geogr: Arab: MS.
then it may be any ^an has done, and I think with as much cau^ion, and
exactness, as any, it will be necessary after all to show amongst so many
feet, as are taken to be Roman, which I conceive to be the most genuine, and
true. And though in such an incertainty, and scarcity of ancient monuments, and
in such a diversity of opinions, amongst modern Writers, it may seem too great
presumption, positively to define the magnitude of the Roman foot; yet having
had the opportunity, to have perused in this kind, more antiquities, then any
that have preceded, I may with the more confidence conclude, that the Pes
Colotianus, in my judgment, is the true Roman foot; and that for these reasons.

For first, it most exactly agrees with some very ancient, and perfect Roman
feet in brass, found long since amongst the rudera at Rome: especially with
that excellent one (as I remember) of F. Vrsinus, a learned Antiquary. Though I
cannot deny but that I have seen two ancient feet in brass, different from
this; the one of Gualdus, a very fair one, wanting two parts and an half, of
such as this contains a 1000. a small, and inconsiderable difference. The
second of Gottifridus, a Gentleman of honorable quality, (to whom I stand
obliged for the free donation of several antiquities) which exceeds it by
eight parts; but this last has been made by a very rude, and unskilful hand.

Next, the proportions of almost all the white marble stones, as also of those
lesser in porphyry, in the pavement of that admirable temple of the Pantheon,
are either completely three of these feet, or one and an half; which, it is not
probable, in a structure of so much art, should have been the work of chance.
Add to this the dimensions of several stones, in the foundation of the
Capitol, in Titus, and Severus, triumphal arc's, corresponding either to the
whole foot, or conjointly to the whole, and some unciae, or digits of it.

Thirdly, the inscription on the same monument, where this foot is found, of
the circinus, the libella, the norma, and the like, plainly show that these
were intended to express Cossutius' profession, (whom Luc. Paetu^ lib. 1 de
antiq. Romans and Graec. interval. mensuris.
Paetus imagines to have been a sculptor) and this being intended, I see no
reason why the Roman foot should have been cut in so fair a relevy, either too
short, or too long; when the same hand, and the same pains, might have made it
exact. It is true, that the foot upon Statilius' tomb, is 1944. such parts, as
this is but 1934. whereof the English foot taken by me from the iron yard, or
standard of three feet in Guildhall in London, contains 2000: but how rudely in
respect of digits, that foot of Statilius is described, I have before
discovered. And therefore I wonder that Philander in li. 3. c. 3. Vitruvii.
Philander in his Commentaries upon Vitruvius, should in a matter of such high
concernment in Architecture, proceed with so much inadver^ency, affirming that
between this of Statilius, and that of Cossutius, there is no difference. And
^f he a Mathematician, has thus erred, (though ^ommonly men versed in those
sciences take not ^p things at too cheap a rate, without due examination) what
opinion may we conceive of another observation, made at the same monument, by
Ciaconius e Latini Latinii observe.de pede Romans
Ant. Augustinus, Jo: Baptista Sighicellus, P. Octavius Pacatus, Achilles
Maffaeus, Achilles Statius, Benedictus Aegius, Fulvius Vrsinus, Latinus
Latinius, with as many ancient feet, as there were men present? I shrewdly
suspect they slubbered over their observation, as not regarding in nineteen
hundred parts, and better, the small excess, or defect, of ten parts: or not
rightly apprehending what might be the consequences of such an error, how
little soever, in measuring the vast magnitude of the terrestrial globe, or of
the celestial bodies.

Lastly, besides the authorities of Portius Vicentinus, Georgius Agricola,
Glareanus, Ghetaldus, Donatus, and of many other learned, and judicious men,
who approve of this Pes Colotianus, (though bare authority is the worst,
because the weakest kind of argument) that excellent Congius of Vespasian, now
extant in Rome, so highly and so justly magnified by Villalpandus l. 2 disp. 2.
c. 11 de apparatu Vrbis ac Templi.
Villalpandus, may likewise serve to confirm, if not totally my assertion, yet
thus far, that I have not exceeded in assigning the true longitude. For by the
clear evidences of Fragmenta Dioscoridis.
Dioscorides, and of an anonymus Author before cited, eight Congii are the
just measure of the Roman amphora, or quadrantal and again by as many
testimonies of Sext. Pomp. Festus de Verb. signif.
Sextu^ Pompeius, and Rhemn Fann. carm. fragm:
Rhemnius Fannius, each of the sides of the amphora is equal in longitude to
the Roman foot. Wherefore having procured by special favor the congius of
Vespasian, I too^ the measure of it with It had been better to have made my
experiment with water, and then to have weighed it with an exact balance: but
because no balances are found in Rome so exact as with us, I was fain to
measure it with milium.
milium (being next to water, very proper for such a work) carefull^ prepared,
and cleansed, which being done, with much diligence. I caused a cube to be made
answerable to the true dimension of the Pes Colotianus; filling up the capacity
of which, and often reiterating the same experiment, I found continually the
excess of about half a congius to remain, and that an amphorae made by the Pes
Colotianus, would contain but VII. congii, and about an half. And therefore* I
cannot sufficiently wonder at the observation Ciaconius e Latini Latinii
observationibus de pede Romans Cum veram pedis Romans quantitatem statuere vellent
ejusd. pedis mensuras simul contulerunt, and earum octo cum antiquissima dicti
pedis forma, quae in basi quadam in hortis Vaticanis exstat, adamussim
convenire videntes, ex hoc pede quadrato vas confecerunt etc. Vide supra.
of Ant. Augustinus, Pacatus, Maffaeus, Statius, Vrsinus, and others, with a
cube of that foot, which is described on Statilius' monument: who affirm the
quadrantal of this exactly to contain eight of these congii of Vespasian.
Whereas upon due examination I confidently affirm, that they have erred. And
therefore Villalp. de apparatu Vrbis ac Templi par. 2. lib. 3. c. 25.
Villalpandus in this particular, with more judgment, and ingenuity, has
published his observation, concerning the measure, and precife weight, of
Vespasians' congius, then any other whatsoever. Although I cannot be induced to
assent to that deduction, which he infers of the Roman foot, (from the side of
a quadrantal containing eight of these congii) relying upon the authorities of
Festus, and Fannius, against so many evidences, produced to the contrary.
Wherefore as he is singular in his opinion (for there is not one author of
credit, which follows his assertion) so is his foot as singular, there being
not one, of at least ten ancient ones, in the hands of several Antiquaries
(besides those inscribed on two Monuments in Rome) which arrive to the
proportions of his, by XXVII. parts in 2000. As for those other fancies of his
(for they are no better) of describing also the Roman foot, by the altitude of
Vespasians' congius, and assigning the Vides etiam latus cubicum modii,
semicongii, sextarii, heminae etc. Vil^ lalp. ibidem.
latus cubicum, of the modius, the semicongius, the sextarius, and hemina, from
certain parallel circles circumscribed about it, (which certainly, as the
scheme of the congius it Self, drawn by me to the full proportion, shows, were
delineated without any farther intention then for ornament) I do not think
them worth the confutation.

And therefore it will be much better to give some solution to those
authorities of Sextus Pompeius, and Rhemnius Fannius, alleged by him. For the
objection which may be raised thence is very material: How the Pes Colotianus
can be the true Roman foot, since it is confessed by me, that it does not
precisely answer to the sides of a quadrantal, or cube, containing eight of
those congii of Vespasian, or XLVIII. sextarii? Whereas on the contrary, Festus
expressly writes, that the quadrantal was the square (he means the cube) of the
Roman foot Sext. Pomp. Festus de Verb. signif.
Quadrantal vocabant Antiqui, quam ex Graec^^ amphoram dicunt, quod vas pedis
quadrati, octo and quadraginta capit sextarios. And Rhemn. Fannii carmina de
pond. and mensuris.
Fannius confirms the same. Pes longo spatio, latoque notetur in anglo,
Angulus ut par sit, quem claudit linea triplex
Quattuor ex quadris medium cingatur inane*
Amphora fit cubus: quam ne violare liceret,
Sacravere Iovi Tarpeio in monte Quirites.
We might elevate their authorities by saying, these are only the testimonies
of two Grammarians, better versed in disputes of words, then critical in
measures, which more properly are the speculation of Mathematicians: and
therefore if Vitruvius had affirmed it, much more credit might have been given.
But we shall rather say, they wrote what was vulgarly, and commonly, upon
tradition believed, that the length of one of the sides of the amphora was
equal to the Roman foot: not that it was precisely, and exactly equal, but
that of any known measure whatsoever then extant, this came the nearest to it,
as indeed it does; yea, so near, that if at this day the amphora, and Roman
foot, were in use amongst us, many a writer that had never been so curious, as
diligently to compare them, would not be scrupulous to affirm as much. Which
may appear by the practice of Ant. Augustinus, Pacatus, Maffaeus, Statius,
Vrsinus, and of several other learned men, not long before our times: Who
though they purposely made it their inquiry, to discover the true Roman
weights, and measures, and therefore made special use of this Congius of
Vespasian, yet have no less erred, as we showed before, in the dimension of
the amphora, then both Festus, and Fannius have done. Neither will this answer
seem improbable concerning measures, if we shall examine a place, or two,
concerning coins, in which the ancients, and those too of the better sort of
Authors, have in the very same manner erred. For Livy writing that Marcellus
gave to L. Ban^ius (or Bandius) D. bigati, y Livius l. 23.
that is denarii (so called because the biga was ordinarily stamped upon the
reverse of the Denarius): Plutarchus in MarcellS.
Plutarch describing the same gift, renders it by so many drachmae, the Grecian
manner of computation; not that the dram in the exact, and intrinsecal
valuation, was equal then to the Denarius, or the Denarius to the dram (as
we shall show in the ensuing discourse) but that in the vulgar, and popular
estimation, the one passed for the other, being both not much different in
their weight, as well as valuation. Dio lib. 45. in Caesare Octav.
Likewise Dio informs us, that Octavius promised the Veterane soldiers D.
drachmae a man: whereas Cicero lib. 16. 5. ep. ad A^icum.
Cicero expressing the same thing to Atticus terms them D. denarii. And
Suetonius writes that Caesar by Testament gave to each of the common people
sestertia trecenta, that is, LXXV. denarios, which Plut. in Bruto. Idem in
Antonio.
Plutarch both in the life of Brutus, and of Antonius, renders (...) seventy
five drachmes. In like manner we may say, that Festus, and Fannius, have
described the amphora by the Roman foot; not as if this were the exact measure
of it, but as being the most known, and nearest proportion, in which, without
falling into fractions, it might eevenly, and roundly be expressed.

And thus have we finished our inquiry after the Roman foot: our next labor
should b^ to compare it with the present Standards, and Originals, for measures
of diverse Nations. For which I must refer the Reader to this ensuing Table.

The Roman foot compared with the measures of diverse Nations.
SVch parts as the Roman foot, or that on the monument of Cossutius in Rome,
contains 1000 The foot on the monument of Statilius in Rome, contains 1005
17/100 The foot of Villalpandus, deduced from the Congius of Vespasian,
contains 1019 65/100 The ancient Greek foot, being in proportion to the ancient
Roman foot, as XXV to XXIV, contains 1041 67/100 The English foot 1034 13/100
The Paris foot 110^ 45/100 The Venetian foot 1201 65/100 The Rhinland foot, or
that of Snellius 106^ 25/100 The Derah, or cubit, at Cairo in Egypt 1886
25/100 The Persian arish 3306 1^/100 The greater Turkish pike at Constantinople
2275 ^^/100 The lesser Turkish pike at Constantinople, is in proportion to the
greater, as 3^ to 32 The braccio at Florence 19^8 25/100 The braccio for woollen
at Siena 12^4 31/100 The braccio for linen at Siena 2041 37/100 The braccio at
Naples 2171 6^/100 The canna at Naples 7114 7^/100 The vara at Almaria and at
Gibraltar in Spain 2854 19/100 Il palmo di Architetti at Rome, whereof X make
the canna di Architetti ^56 51/100 Il palmo del braccio di Mercaniia, and di
Te^^ito di Tela at Rome; this and the former are both engraven in a white
marble stone in the Capitol with this inscription. Curante Lu. Paeto 719 21/100
The Genoa palm 842 ^^/100 The Anwerp ell 2360 ^^/100 The Amsterdam ell ^345
4^/100 The Leyden ell 2337 13/100
The English foot taken from the iron Standard at Guild Hall in London, and
compared with the Standards for measures of diverse Nations.
SUch parts as the English foot contains 1000 The Roman foot, or that on the
monument of Cossutius in Rome, contains 967 The foot on the monument of
Statilius in Rome, contains 972 The foot of Villalpandus, deduced from the
Congius of Vespasian, contains 986 The Greek foot 1007 29/100 The Paris foot
1068 The Venetian foot 1162 The Rhinland foot, or that of Snellius 1033 The
Derah, or cubit, at Cairo in Egypt 1824 The Persian arish 3197 The greater
Turkish pike at Constantinople 2200 The lesser Turkish pike at Constantinople
is in proportion to the gre^ter, as 31 to 32 The braccio at Florence 1913 The
braccio for woollen at Siena 1242 The braccio for linen at Siena 1974 The
braccio at Naples 2100 The canna at Naples 6880 The vara at Almaria and at
Gibraltar in Spain 2760 Il palmo di Architetti at Rome, whereof X make the
canna di Architeti 732 Il palmo del braccio di Mercantia, and di Tessito di
Tela at Rome: this and the former are both engraven in a white marble stone in
the Capitol with this inscription Curante Lu. Paeto 6951/2 The Genoa palm 815
The Anwerp ell 2283 The Amsterdam ell 2268 The Leyden ell 2260
This Table I made by the Standards, the former by proportion.

OF THE DENARIVS.
AS I have made for measures the Roman foot, the foundation of my inquiry, and
therefore have handled it in the precedent Treatise: so for finding out of
weights, I shall take the denarius as an undeniable principle, from whence those
of the ancients by a necessary consequence may be inferred. For as the unity is
in respect of numbers, or the sestertius in discourses de re nummaria: so is
the denarius for weights, a fit rise, or beginning, from whence the rest may be
deduced. Not but that it were better (as I gave the caution before) if we
absolutely consider the exactest ways of discovering weights, to begin with
the greater, and by them to find out the less, then by the less, to produce
the greater; but if we look upon the condition of times, and consider the means
that are left after so many revolutions, and changes of the Roman Empire, it
will be safer to alter our method. For to this day there are many thousand
denarii left, and amongst these some so perfect, and entire, as if they had
been but newly brought from the mint, whereas of the Roman librae, and ounces,
there are but few extant, if compared with these. Lipsius, and Gruterus in
their inscriptions mention some, and Paetus some others, besides such as I have
seen in the hands of Antiquaries, and many of mine own: most of which differ
from one another, either as having been consumed by rust, and time, or it may
be also by the men that then lived, for their advantage lessened: a thing too
often practiced amongst us. Wherefore I think it more convenient by the
denarius to deduce the proof, and evidence of these, then by the diversity, and
uncertainty of these to conclude the denarius: And yet if some of the best, and
fairest of them, shall agree with this, I shall think my self so much the more
assured.

Now seeing the denarius may be considered in a double respect, either as
nummus, or as pondus: in the first acception, the valuation of it in civil
affairs is remarkable, in the later, the gravity, and ponderousness: I shall
speak no farther of the former, then as it may conduce in some sort to
illustrate the later. The denarius was a silver coin in use amongst the
Romans, passing at the first institution for dena era, or ten asses. And so
Vitruv. l. 3. c. 1.
Vitruvius expressly writes, Nostri autem primo december fecerunt antiquum numerum,
and in denario denos aereos asses constituerunt. The same thing is attested by
Vol. Metianus de assis distributione.
Volusius Metianus. Denarius primo asses december valebat, unde and nomen traxit.
Plinius l. 33. c. 3.
Pliny, besides a confirmation of the same valuation, assigns also the time, in
which it was first stamped. Argentum signatum est anno Vrbis Budaeus l. v de
ass, corrects these numbers by Livy (l.xxx) and reads them 478.
quingentesimo octogesimo quinto, Q. Fabio consule, quinque annis ante primum
bellu^ Punicum, and placuit denarius pro december libris aeris: that is, for ten
asses. For the asses both then, and under the first Consuls were librales.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus. (...). The assis was a brass coin, weighing a
pound. Where by the way it is worth the observation, the strange, and in mine
opinion, the unadvised proportion, betwixt the brass, and silver moneys, of
those times: that x. pounds of brass should be but answerable to the 84th part
(for so much, or neer^ it, was the denarius) of a pound of silver; or to speak
more clearly, that one pound in silver should be equal in valuation to 840
pounds in brass. Neither can there be any excuse of that error, unless this,
that there then was an infinite plenty of the one, and as great a scarcity of
the other. However it were, the same proportion is testified by Varro, who
farther adds; that the Romans took the first use, and invention of the
denarius, from the Sicilians. Varr^ l. 4. ^e Ling. Lat.
In argento nummi, id a Siculis, denarii quod denos aeris valebant. And
according to this valuation the denarius had an impresse upon it of the figure
X, denoting the decussis, or number of the asses, as Valerius Probus witnesses,
and sometimes this character X; both which I have seen, and can show, in
several ancient ones. This later by the ignorance of Scribes formerly in MSS.
and of our Printers of late in the edition of Celsus, and of Scribonius Largus,
is represented by an asterisc *; and by a worse error in the same authors, the
figure X expressing the denarius, as a pondus, is confounded with the figure X
expressing a number. From this figure on the denarius, or decussis, Vitruv. l.
10.
Vitruvius calls the intersections of lines, decusses, and decussationes. And
Columella l. 5.
Columella uses the phrase in stellam decussari, when lines meet diamond-wise,
or lozenge-like, as these in the character X or X* Neither did the denarius
long pass at the valuation of X. asses, nor the asses which before, and then
were librales, continue at one stay, but with the exigencies of the Roman
State, the rate of the denarius rose, and the weight of the asses fell; that is
in effect, both the silver, and the brass moneys, came to be augmented in
their estimation. For by a public edict of Fabius Maximus the Dictator, the
Commonwealth being hardly pressed upon by Hannibal, the denarius came to be
priced at XVI. asses, and the asses which were then se ^tantarii, or the sixth
part of the Roman pound, (for in the first Punick war, by reason of the
excessive expenses of the State, they first fell from being librales, to be
sextantarii) came now in the second Punick war to be unciales. The whole
progress, and manner of this alteration, is by none so well, and fully expressed
as by Argentum signatum est Ann^ Vrbis Dlxxxv. Q. Fabio Cosquinque annis ante
primum bellum Punicu^. Et placuit denarius pro X libris aeris, quinarius pro
quinque, sestertium pro dupondio, ac semisse. Librae autem pondus aeris
imminutum bello Punico primo, cum impensis Resp. non sufficeret, constitutumque
ut asses sextantario pondere ferirentur. Plin. lib. 33. c. 3.
Pliny, and therefore I shall a little insist upon his words. Silver, says he,
came to be coined in the 585th year of the City, Q. Fabius being Consul, five
years before the first Punick war, and then the denarius passed for X. pounds
of brass, the Quinarius for five, the sestertius for two pounds and an half.
The weight of the assis in brass was diminished in the first Punick war, the
Commonwealth not being able to support the expenses, and then it was decreed
that the asses should be coined sextantario pondere; that is, with the weight
of the sixth part of a pound, or two ounces, whereas before they were librales.
Though Alciatus here upon a very gross mistake contends that they were then
coined dextantario pondere, and not sextantario, but yet that they were called
asses sextantarii, because the sextans or sixth part of an ounce was wanting:
whereas Sext. Pompeius Fest. de verb. signif.
Festus expressly writes. Grave aes dictum a pondere, quia deni asses singuli
pondo librae efficiebant denarium ab hoc ipso numero dictum: sed bello Punico
populus Romanus pressus aere alieno, ex singulis assibus libralibus senos
fecit, qui tantundem valerent. And these words of Pliny, which immediately
follow those before recited, put it out of controversy. Plin. l. 33 c. 3. Ita
quinque parts factae lucri dissolutumque aes alienum.
Whereby, says he, five parts were gained, and the debts (of the
Commonwealth) discharged. I would gladly see by what Arithmetic Alciatus can
demonstrate, that the Commonwealth shall gain five parts, making the asses
sextantarii in his sense; whereas on the contrary, taking them in this
interpretation (as both Agricola lib. 2 de pondere and temperat monetarum.
Agricola, and Villalp. de appar. urbis ac templi par. 2. l. 2. disp. cap 9.
Villalpandus do) it is a thing most evident. For the whole pound, or assis,
before consisting of XII. ounces, being now reduced to two ounces, and these
two passing at as high a rate in the valuation of things vendible, as the
whole libra did, it is plain that the Commonwealth by this diminution of
weight, keeping the same constant tenure of the estimation of the assis, gained
ten parts in twelve, that is, five in six; and not one in six, as Alciatus
would have it. But to omit this digression, and to return to Postea Hannibale
urgente, Q. Fabio Maximo Dictatore, asses unciales facti: placuitque denarium
XVI. assibus permutari, quinarium octonis sestertium quaternis: Ita Resp.
dimidiu^ lucrata est. In militari tamen stipendi^ semper denarius pro X assibus
datus. Nota argenti fuere bigae atque quadrigae, and inde bigati, quadrigatique
dicti. Mox lege Papiria semunciales asses facti. Livius Drusus in Tribunatu
plebis octavam partem aeris argento miscuit. Plin. l. 33. c. 3.
Pliny. Afterward being oppressed by Hannibal, under Q. Fabius Maximus the
Dictator, the asses were made unciales, and the denarius passed for XVI. asses,
the quinarius for VIII. and the sestertius for IIII. And hereby the
Commonwealth gained half, yet in the pay of the Militia the denarius was
always accounted for ten asses. The impresse of the silver [that is, of the
denarius] were the bigae, and quadrigae; from whence they are called bigati,
and quadrigati. Not long after by the lex Papiria the asses came to be
semunciales. Livius Drusus Tribune of the people mixed an eighth part of brass
with the silver: thus far Pliny. Out of which words it is most evident
(omitting many passages of his, worth our consideration) that as the denarius
at the first institution passed for ten asses, so afterward it was valued at
XVI. And Vitruvius gives a reason why next to ten, they made choice of XVI.
rather then of XII. or any other proportion. Vitruv. l. 3. c. 1
Quoniam animadverterunt utrosque numeros esse perfectos, and sex, and december,
utrosque in unum conjecerunt, and fecerunt perfectissimum decussissexi, where
Budaeus l. 5. de ass.
Budaeus reads decussissexis: but Villalp. de apparatu Vrbis ac Templi.
Villalpandus decussi sex, that it may the better, as he imagines, answer to
the Greek (...). Vitruv. l. 3. c. 1
Hujus autem rei, says Vitruvius, autorem invenerunt pedem. E cubito enim cum
dempti sint palmi duo, relinquitur pes quatuor palmorum, palmus autem habet
quatuor digitos, ita efficitur uti pes habeat sexdecim digitos, and totidem
asses aereos denarius. Vol. Metianus de assis distrib:
Metianus also purposely treating of this argument, after that he had related
that the denarius, at the first institution, was valued at ten asses, adds now
it is worth sixteen. And not to cite more authorities, the impresse or stamp of
XVI, as well as of X found upon several denarii, and seen both by Anton.
August. dialogo. 1.
Antonius Augustinus (a man very accurate in coins, as appears by his
dialogues) and by Villalpandus, besides one with the inscription of C.
Titinius, with the same character, mentioned by Fulvius Vrsinus, and
Dalechampius in Plin. l. 33. c. 3
Dalechampius, puts it out of controversy. And this valuation of the denarius,
as it is more then probable, continued from the first institution of it in the
second Punick war, without any interruption, to Justinians' time, and it is
likely longer; since there is no proof out of any ancient Author, nor any
character on any ancient denarius, found to the contrary. As for those
authorities, which are alleged, and pressed by Budaeus, and Alciatus, of
Varro, Apuleius, Arruntius; and Pompeius, affirming, that after the second
Punick war, the denarius contained ten asses, the Quinarius, or Victoriatus
five, the sestertius two and an half: we may give a true, and easy solution,
that these Writers expressed the valuation of them, as they were in their first
original, and beginning, with reflection to their primitive denomination: in
which respect the Treviri monetales, or officers of the mint, usually imprinted
on the denarius the character X, rather then XVI. the former being the impresse
of its first institution, and the latter of its after valuation. And so in like
manner may those citations be answered of Plutarch, Dionysius, and others,
produced by some learned men to strengthen their assertion, that the denarius
after the second Punick war returned to its first estimation. Which thing
could not have been effected, without extreme loss, and prejudice to
particular men, in their private fortunes, and estates; which the justice, and
wisdom of the Roman Senate, under the Consuls, was not likely to have
introduced, or the people to have admitted.

To conclude, the denarius, as it is evident by many irrefragable authorities
before alleged, in the highest valuation passed for sixteen asses, and
according to that proportion the quinarius, or Victoriatus for eight, the
sesteritius for four: but in the lowest valuation, or first institution, it
passed for ten asses: and then the proportion of the quinarius was five, of the
sestertiu two asses and an half, and therefore was thus marked IIS, or thus HS.
as the Quinarius had this character, V. and also this X. as it is to be seen in
a Victoriatus of mine own (besides several others) with the face and
inscription of M. Cato. By which coin that place may not unfitly be explained,
which troubled Budaeus li. ^. de ass.
Budaeus, why the Ordo decussatus, and ordo quincuncialis, signify in the
ranking of trees the same thing, although the quinarius, or quincunx, give the
denomination to the one, and the denarius, or decussis, to the other. The
reason is, because the Quinarius had the character X imprinted on it, Cod. M.S.
Temporarii.
as well as the denarius, or decussis. Besides in Temporarius, we find the
quincunx to be thus {fivedash} represented, as the uncia thus - so that five
of these unciae making the quincunx, and these five being ranged like the
figure X (the character of the decussis) it is no wonder if the ordo
decussatus, and quincuncialis, were taken for the same.

That the denarius should have passed at any other rate between XVI, and X.
asses, as there is no coin extant to prove it, so there is no express
authority to conclude it. Though some infer out of Polyb. l. 2.
Polybius, that it was valued also at XII. asses: because he defines the (...),
or semissis, to be (...), the fourth part of the Attick obolus; and six obol^
being in the (...), to which dram they suppose the denarius equal,
therefore there must be XXIV. semisses, or XII. asses in the denarius* But with
much better reason we may hence infer, that the dram was somewhat bigger,
then the denarius, as we shall prove in this ensuing discourse; and therefore
Polybius allow^ XII. asses to it: whereas, if it had been precisely equal to
the denarius, he would have valued it at X, or else XVI. of the lesser sort of
asses. So that Sir H. Savile, a man of exquisite judgment, and learning, in his
discourse at the end of Tacitus, justly blames Hottoman for altering the text
of Polybius, and is himself to be censured, as also Lipsius Elector. 1. c. 2.
Lipsius, in inferring thence that the denarius contained XII. asses.

The several parts of the denarius, excepting the quinarius, and sestertius,
of both which I have spoken before, are all comprised in this description of
Varro lib. 4. de Ling. Lat.
Varro, with which I shall conclude* Nummi denarii decima libella, quod libram
po^ do as valebat, and erat ex argento parva; sembella quod sit libellae
dimidium quod semis assis* Teruncius a tribus unciis sembellae quod valet
di^midium, and est quarta pars sicut quadrans assis* By which proportions it
appears, that the libell^ was the Xth part of the denarius, when it vva^
current at ten asses, the sembella the XXth, the teruncius the XLth. And thus
much of the denarius as it is nummus.

The second, and our principal consideration of the denarius is as it is
pondus. In which acception it will be necessary to praemise a second
distinction; that the denarius was either The Consularis again may be
considered either in the time of the former, or of the later Consuls: that of
the former Consuls, at the first institution of it by Q. Fabius five years
before the first Punick war, Peireskius not improbably imagines to have been
the sixth part of the Roman ounce: and Agricola by comparing it with the
talentum Atticum, which Varro values at 15000. sestertii, and with the
tetradrachme, which Livy (lib. ^4.) estimates trium fere denariorum, as also
upon the authority of the Scholiast of Nicander, who equals the denarius to a
drachme and an ^alf, as Priscian does to a drachme and a third part, I say
Agricola as^^gnes to it almost the same proportion with Peireskius. But because
I ^ave seen no denarii Consulares of so great antiquity, and these authorities
^ay perchance admit of other constructions, I shall leave this opinion as only
probable, and follow what is more certain, and demonstrative, of ^e later
Consuls.
Consularis, or Caesareus. The Consularis was that which was made under the
government of the City by the Consuls, the Caesareus under the Caesar's: The
Consularis, (I mean the Consularis after the second Punick war, and under the
later Consuls) contained precisely the seventh part of the Roman ounce, as the
other did the eighth part, or somewhat near it.

First, that the denarius Consularis of the later Consuls, was the seventh part
of the Roman ounce: this shall be our principal inquiry, because it is more
evident of the two, and will give us the best light to discover the true weight
of the denarius, in the notion, and acception of the ancients, both Greeks and
Latins. It is most apparent both by several fair coins, which I have perused
of the later Consuls, as also by Cornelius Celsus, who lived in the beginning
of the Roman Emperors, before there happened a general diminution o^ the
denarius, that it was then the seventh part of the ounce, who thus writes,
Celsus lib. 5. c. ^7.
Sed and ante^ sciri volo in uncia pondus denariorum esse septem. The same
proportion is also expressed by Scrib. Largus in praefatione.
Scri^bonius Largus, who lived not long after Celsus as some imagine, his words
are these. Erit au^tem nota denarii unius pro Graeca dram; aequ^ enim in
libra denarii octoginta quatuor apud nos quot drachmae apud Graecos incurrunt.
Plinius l. 33. c. 9.
Pliny also confirms the same. Miscuit denario triumv^ Antonius ferrum, alii
(he means under the Em^perours) e pondere subtrahunt, cum sit justum oct^^ginta
quatuor e libris signari. Out of vvhi^^ words of his, and of Scribonius
Largus, it wi^ by a necessary consequence be inferred, that the true weight of
the denarius Consularis is the s^^venth part of an ounce. For if we multipl^
twelve the number of the ounces in the Roman libra (as by all it is confessed) by
seven the numb^ of the denarii, of which the ounce then consiste^ the sum will
be LXXXIIII. denarii; and so man^ say Scribonius, and Pliny, ought justly to be
(...) the Roman pound. And these are the one clear, and positive authorities
that are to (...) found in Classical Authors; most of the w^^tings of the
Ancients de ponderibus and mensur^ having long since been lost; or else those
(...) fragments that are left, of Cleopatra, Dioscorid^ and of others, are so
corrupted, that little tr^^ with any certainty can be collected. From whence it
will by way of corollary follow, the if either the denarius Consularis be
given, the R^^mane ounce, and libra, in the same proportion will necessarily be
thence deduced; or if the Roman ounce, and libra be given, the denarius will
as necessarily be concluded.

But before we farther treat of this argument, we shall endeavor also to
demonstrate the de^arius, by the dram Attica. For Scribonius ^eems, and so
do other ancients, to make them equal. And therefore Pliny writes: Plinius
li. 21. ca. 34.
Dram Attica denarii argentei habet pondus: whereas the dram Aeginaea
was much larger, this containing X. such oboli as the Attick contained VI. and
therefore the Athenians in hatred of the Ae^inaeans called it (...), as Iul
Poll. l. 9. c. 6.
Pollux testifies. And here as we considered the denarius, as nummus, and as
^ondus; so likewise must we take the dram Attica, as nummus, and as pondus:
in the prosecution of both which relatively to the denarius, I shall insist so
much the ^onger, because it is an argument that has scarce ^t all, or very
perfunctorily been handled. The dram as nummus, was a silver coin in use
amongst the Athenians, (for I intend only to speak of the dram Attica, for
the same reason that (...) Pliny does. Fere enim Attica observatione utun^ur
medici) and so it was the measure of things ^endible, as all coins are: and as
pondus, Plinius l. 21. ca. 34.
so was it ^he measure of their gravity, and weight. Now the dram, as
nummus, passed in the estimation of ^he best Authors, both Greek and Latin, at
the ^^me rate, and valuation as the denarius did. And therefore, as often as
the Latins are to express ^he Greek dram, they render it by the denari^s,
and on the contrary, the Greeks the denarius by the dram. Thus what Cicer.
16. l. 5. ep. ^d Attic.
Tully renders by the denarius, Dio in his 45th book expresses by the dram.
Their words, both speaking of Augustus, are these, Veteranos quique Casilini,
and Calatiae sunt (as Tully relates) perduxit ad suam sententiam, nec mirum,
quingenos denarios dat.(...), says Dio lib. 45.
Dio, (...). In like manner Plinius lib. 8. cap. 57.
Pliny writes, venisse murem ducentis nummis, (that is, denariis; for nummus
absolutely put is often, though not always, taken for the denarius, as on the
contrary the denarius is taken for nummus in Hesychius, Hesychius in voce
(...).)
(...). Casilinum obsidente Annibale, eumque qui vendidera^ fame interisse,
emptorem vixisse annals tradunt. The same thing Valor: Max: lib. 6. cap. 6.
Valerius Maximus reports in his 7th book, and 6th chapter and Strabo li. 5. Geogr:
Strabo in his 5th book; the former writing that it was sold for 200 denarii,
and the later that it was bought for 200 drachmae. To these Authorities I
shall adjoin Fra^menta Cleopatrae
Cleopatra. (...). The Italian denarius contains one dram: and A. Gellius
l^^. c. 8. Noct. At.
A. Gellius, Lais (...) poposcit, hoc facit nummi nostratis, denarium december
millia.

These two thus passing the one for the other, being also at the first
institution much of the same finenesse in respect of silver, it must
necessarily be admitted, either that they were exactly the same for weight,
which is our next inquiry, or else that they were not much different. For in
comparing of forain coins, the (...), or nummularii, in ancient times, must
have taken the same course, which our most knowing bankers do practice now.
First, to respect the pureness, and finenesse of the coins, whither they be
alike for the intrinseck; and next, whither they have the same weight; and if
they differ in either, or both of these, according to those differences to
proportion their exchanges. Those other accidental causes of the rising, and
falling, of exchanges of moneys, since they are merely contingent, depending
upon the necessities, either of times, or places, or persons, I purposely
pretermit, as not so proper, and essential to our inquiry. As for the
extrinseck of coins, by which I mean the outward form, or character, and
inscription of the Prince, or State, though this may raise the valuation of
them in those Countries, which are subject to the Prince, or State, and lessen
them in those which are out of their dominions; yet this can produce no
remarkable difference, more then what is usually* assigned by the Masters of
the Mint, for the wast in coining, and for the labor of the work.

With these cautions if we shall examine the Attick dram, and by such
writings of the Ancients, or by such coins as are extant, inquire their true
weight, we shall come to such a preciseness, as may be hoped for in a work of
this nature. Suidas in voce (...).
Suidas tells us in the general, (...). The dram is the weight of the silver
money. And Hesychius in voce (...).
Hesychius more particularly informs us. (...), The dram is the eighth part
of the ounce: and Rhemn. Fann.
Fannius yet more distinctly writes, In scrupulis ternis drachmam, quo pondere
doctis
Argenti facilis signatur pondus Athenis.
To which we may add Fragmenta Cleopatrae.
Cleopatra,(...). The drachme has three scruples, six oboli, nine lupini,
eighteen siliquae, forty eight aereola. The Scholiastes Nicandri.
Scholiast of Nicander also makes the (...) to be (...), the fourth part of the
[Attick] ounce. In the same proportion are we to take those other silver
Athenian coins mentioned by Iul. Poll. l. 9. ^. 6.
Julius Pollux, namely, the (...), which consisted of three drachmes, the
(...), or (...), which by a Syncope, is the same with the (...), containing
four drachmes, or the half ounce. (...), says Hesychius in voce (...).
Hesychius; though Ammonius (...).
Ammonius puts a distinction between them, (...). This the Greeks also called
(...), as Fragmenta Cleopatrae.
Cleopatra, and Epiphanius (...).
Epiphanius witness. (...), in Cleopatra, (...): the stater weighs four
drachmes, this they call the tetradrachme. And this also may most clearly be
collected out of Matthew. ca. 17. v. 24.
S. Matthew, where seeing the original expresses it more fully then our
translation, I shall recite the words as they are in the Greek. (...); which
the Vulgar renders thus, Et cum venissent Capernaum, accesserunt, qui didrachma
accipiebant, ad Petrum, and dixerunt ei, Magister vester non solvit didrachma?
and our Translation thus; And when they were come to Capernaum, they that
received tribute money, came to Peter, and said, Does not your Master pay
tribute? In the 27th verse of the same chapter, our Savior answers. (...).
Nothwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an
hook, and take up the fish that first comes up: and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me,
and thee. This, which our Translation calls tribute money, in the 24th ver. is
called in the original (...), or two drachmes, and so much was paid by the
pole, according to Josephus li. 7. bell. Iud. ca. 27
Josephus, for each particular person. Our Savior therefore paying for himself
and S. Peter, in the 27th verse, bids him to give a stater, that is, a (...),
or four drachmes, namely, the double to the (...), which our Translation
renders too generally by a piece of money: But the Evangelia Pers. MSS.
Eruditissimi Viri D. Pocockii.
Persian Translation interprets it distinctly by four drachmes. (...) Thou
shall find four drachmes in it, that take, and give for thee, and me.

With this Attick tetradrachme, or silver stater, the Hebrew, and Samaritane
(...) shekell, that is, sicle, did also agree. For if we give credit to
Josephus, who in Scal. (...). in libr. de Emend. Temp.
Scaligers esteem is, Diligentissimus (...) omnium scriptoru^, we shall find
them to be the same. Josephus l. 3. antiq. Iudaic.
(...) (...) The sicle is a sort of money amongst the Hebrews, that contains
four Attick drachmes. The same proportion is evidently collected out of Philo
de decalogo.
h Philo, where for L. shekels mentioned in the Law he renders CC. drachmes,
and for XXX. an hundred and twenty. Hesychius in voce (...).
Hesychius likewise testifies as much, (...), the sicle is [in valuation] the
Attick tetradrachme: and Hieronym. in Ezekiel. 3.
S. Hierome, the ablest of the Fathers in the Jewish Antiquities, Such sicles,
I conceive, were those (...), the XXX pieces of silver, which were given to
Judas, as the reward of his treason. Eusebius relating the story expressly,
terms them silver staters, which an Hebrew would have termed either silver
shekels, or absolutely (...) cesef: this in the Scripture phrase being
frequently put for the shekel, and therefore the Syriack Translation of the New
Testament reads it (...); Whence Tremellius has this annotation. Observant*
Hebraei, ubicunque in Scripturis argentcorum fit mentio, non expressa
numismatis argentei specie, intelligi siclum sanctuarii aequivalentem quatuor
denariis. Some modern Writers imagine them to have been but XXX. denarii; But
Baronius contends that they were, vel librarum argenti XXX, vel aureorum
coronatorum trecentorum: And Arias Montanus, that they were either XXX. librae,
or XXX. talenta. The most probable opinion is, that this sum was neither so
great as Baronius, and Montanus make it, nor yet so little as some Moderns would
have it, but between both, and that is XXX. shekels. M. Casaubone in his
Exercitations upon Baronius has a probable conjecture to strengthen this
assertion. Non enim temere factum videtur, quod filius Dei qui sese exinanivit,
assumpta servi forma, Phil. 2. 7. triginta argenteis venderetur, sicut lege Dei
mancipia totidem siclis aestimantur. Exodus 21. 32. and apud Iosephum lib. IV.
c. VIII. Facit hoc quoque non parum ad Domini abjectionem declarandum, quando
caput ejus tam parvi aestimatum est. A small price I confess, XXX. shekels
being less then XV. of our ordinary crowns: But Hierome upon Saint Matthew
thought it to be as little, who thus writes, as M. Casaubone renders him,
Inselicem Iudam non cogitasse quanti pretii rem venderet. sed Christum mundi
Salv^^^rem, Dei filium, ceu vile aliqu.d mancipium minimo pretio addixisse. Now
the price of a servant we find in Exodus to have been XXX. shekels.
Siclus, id est stater, habet quatuor drachmas Atticas.

These testimonies are so positive, and from so good Authors (to which also I
might adjoin Epiphaniue (...)
. Epiphanius in his book (...), did I not conceive him to be full of errors in
that discourse), that I cannot sufficiently wonder at that strange opinion of
Grsepsius de multiplici sicl^, and talento.
Grsepsius, and some others, introduced out of affectation of novelty, of a
double shekel, the one sacred, equal to the tetradrachme, the other profane,
weighing the didrachme: that used in the Sanctuary, this in civil commerce,
without any solid foundation in the writ, or without any probability of reason,
that in any wise State, the Prince and people should have one sort of coin, and
the Priests should have another: and that this of the Sanctuary should be in a
double proportion to the other, and yet that both should concur in the same
name. It is true there is often mention in the And all thy estimation shall be
according to the shekel of the Sanctuary. Levit. 27. 25. Vet. vulg. sicl^
Sanctuarii ponderabitur.
Scriptures of the weights of the Sanctuary, not as if these were different
from what were used vulgarly in the City; but because the Standards, and
originals, the rules of commutative justice, and therefore of an high and
sacred use, were kept (as it is more then probable) in the Sanctuary; For God
himself makes this one of the Priests offices, 1 Paral. 23. 29
ut sint super omne pondus atque mensura^. And it is no wonder that God, who so
much hated a Prove. 11. 1. item cap. 20. ver. 10. 23.
false balance, and a false measure, should commit the charge of these to the
Priests, as things most holy; since the Heathens themselves out of a reverent
estimation of them, placed them in their temples, as appears by that
inscription of the congius of Vespasian before alleged, and now extant in
Rome; and by these verses of Rhemn: Fann. carmina de p^nd. and mensuris.
Fannius, treating of the Roman measures, Amphora fit cubus, quam, ne violare
liceret,
Sacravere Iovi Tarpeio in monte Quirites.


And afterward in the times of Christianity they were kept in Churches, as it
is to be seen in the Authentic. collat. 9. de collatoribus tit. 11. novel. 128.
c. 15
Authenticks of Justinian; where he commands, that the weights and measures
should be kept, in sacratissima cujusvis civitatis ecclesia, As for those
allegations taken out of the intepretation of the LXX. whereby Grsepsius, and
others go about to prove a double shekell, they are all well, and solidly, in
my judgment, answered by Villalp. de appar. urbis ac templi par. 2. lib. ^.
disp. 4. c. 28. Item par. 2. li. 2. disp. 4.
Villalpandus, and others, to whom I shall refer the judicious Reader. For I
intend not here to speak of the Hebrew shekel, or Attick drachme, more then
what may serve to illustrate the denarius.

Seeing therefore, as we have proved, that the Attick dram was equal in the
notion, and acception of the Ancients, to the denarius: if therefore an entire,
either Attick (...), or (...), or (...) were found, we might thence conclude
the denarius. Again, since the Hebrew shekel has likewise been demonstrated to
be equal to the Attick (...), and this Attick (...) to four denarii, by the
common, and received Quae eidem aequalia, sunt aequalia inter s^. Eucl. ax. 1.
l. 1.
axiom of Geometricians, we may conclude, that the Hebrew shekell was also
equal to 4 denarii, that is, that 4 Roman denarii, the Attick (...), and the
Hebrew (...) were all respectively equal to one another. If therefore an
Hebrew shekel, fair, and entire, were found, we might as necessarily thence
infer the denarius, as by the (...).

We shall endeavor by both these to inquire out the truth, and first by the
Attick tetradrachmes in silver: because of these I have seen, and weighed many,
some of them very fair, and perfect, and found at many several places, as
Athens, Constantinople, Tenedos, and other parts: where the art of
counterfaiting coins is not as yet crept in, and where it is to little purpose
to practice it: seeing in those places there are few so curious as to buy them,
or that will give a greater valuation, then what they are worth in the
intrinseck. Wherefore having in Italy, and elsewhere, perused many 100 denarii
Consulares, I find by a frequent, and exact trial, the best of them to amount
to LXII. grains English, such as I have carefully taken from the Standards of
the Troy, or silver weights, kept in the Tower in London, and in Goldsmiths
Hall, and in the University of Oxford: on the other side weighing many Attick
tetradrachmes, with the image of Pallas on the fore part, and of the noctua on
the reverse. I find the best of these to be CCL XVIII. grains, that is, each
particular drachme LXVII. grains.

And that no man may doubt whither these were true Athenian tetradrachmes, we
are to observe, that the Ancients used several impresses on their coins, by
which they might be known, and distinguished. And therefore argentum signatum,
in the description of Quintius his triumph over Philip, is by Livius l. 34^
Livy opposed to argentum infectum, which Iul Poll. l. 9. c. 6.
Pollux terms (...), as Cicer. 6. Verr.
Tully calls the former sort factum, atque signatum, and the Iul. Poll. l. 9. c.
6.
Greeks (...). Thus the denarius had the impresse of the biga, or quadriga, as
Pliny informs us: and therefore Live. l. 34.
Livy uses the word bigati for denarii, and Plinius l. 33. ca. 3.
Pliny both bigati and quadrigati. The brass coins of the Romans were thus
marked. Plin. ib.
Nota aeris fuit ex altera part Ianus geminus, ex altera rostrum navis, in
triente vero and quadrante rates. The Persians stamped on the reverse an
Plutarchus in Artaxerxe. (...).
archer: which occasioned that conceit of Agesilaus, mentioned by Plut. Agesil.
Plutarch, that the King of Persia had beaten him back with ten thousand
archers, when with so much money he had corrupted the Grecians. The
Carthaginians on the one side signed the face of a woman, (I suppose in memory
of Queen Dido) on the reverse the head of an horse, or in Virgils' expression
Virg. 1. Aeneid.
caput acris equi, both which I have seen. The Peloponnesians had the impresse
of a tortoise on their money, whence that witty Greek proverb took its
original. Iul. Poll. l. 9. ^. 6.
(...). The money at Tenedos had on the one side a double hatchet, and on the
otherside two heads, one of a man, and another of a woman, a rising from the
same stem, or neck, in memory of a Law made by the King of that Island (whom
Heraclides (...).
Heraclides names (...), placing him ancienter then the Trojan war), that a
man, and a woman, taken in adultery should have their heads struck off with an
hatchet. In which kind I met with two very rare, and ancient coins in silver,
at Constantinople, both made with a very fair relevy, and both agreeing in the
same image, and inscription: the one weighed less then the Attick
tetradrachme, the other wanted somewhat of the drachme. And because the coin
has not, I think, been seen by any Antiquary, and the history is remarkable, I
shall here express the figure of the fairest of these.



And the history I shall relate out of Heraclide^ (...).
Heraclide. (...). They say King Tennes made a law, that if one took another in
adultery, he should kill him with an hatchet. His son being found so, and he
that took him, asking the King what he should do, he answered execute the Law:
and for this reason of one side of his money there was an hatchet imprinted, on
the other the face of a man, and of a woman, arising out of one neck. From
hence is it said of severe actions, to be cut with a Tenedian hatchet. For
which exemplary justice those of Tenedos* as it is probable, deified King
Tenes. Cicer. libr: 3. de nature de^rum.
Tully writes, Tenedi Tenem [Deum appellant]: and again,f Tenem apud Tenedios
putant esse sanctissimu^ Deum, ac eoru^ Vrbem condidisse. Where his name is
truer writ the^ in Heraclides. For the coin has only a single N. and so has
Eustathii (...).
* Eustathius.

The money of Chios, as Julius Pollux witnesses, had the effigies, or
resemblance, of Homer: no doubt in honor of his memory; though Herodot. in
vita Homeri.
Herodotus relates, that whilst he was living he found at first but cold
entertainment in that Island. Theseus the tenth King of the Athenians signed
his money with the impresse of an ox; hence that proverb (...). This as Iul.
Poll. l. 9. c. 6.
Julius Pollux testifies was the (...): who farther adds, (...). This was an
ancient coin amongst the Athenians, and was called (...), because it had the
figure of an ox instamped. They imagine that Homer knew this, when he said,
nine hecatombes of oxen, and also in the laws of Draco, it is to pay the mulct
of ten oxen. And they say, that at the solemn show at Delos, the crier when any
gift is to be given, cries so many oxen shall be given, and for every ox so
many Attick didrachmes are given. The same Iul. Poll. ibid.
Author writes, that the Attick tetradrachme was stamped with the face of
Minerva, and he might have added with the noctua on the reverse. This In
Anchise.
Eubulus pleasantly calls (...) Minervae pullum. The (...) had the face of
Jupiter, it may be it is an error in Pollux, for Pallas, and on the other side
the noctua. The (...) had on the one side Jupiter, according to Iul. Poll. l.
9. c. 6.
Pollux, (I conceive it to be a mistake for Pallas, or Minerva) on the other
side two noctuae, because it was the double to the (...). From the diobolu^,
Plautus in Poenulo.
Plautus uses the term diobolaris Servoru^ Sordidulorum, Scorta diobolaria,
which Sextus Pompeius Fe ^us de Verb. signif.
Festus interprets thus, meretrices diobolares appellatas, ex ^o quod duobus
obolis ducerentur. To which I may adjoin, out of such ancient coins as I have
seen, that ^he triobolum (whence that phrase of Plautus in Poenulo.
Plautus, homo trioboli, and of the Greeks (...)) which by Iul. Poll. l. 9. c. 6
Pollux is called the (...), had the face of Pallas on the one side, and the
noctua on the other; and so likewise had the ^bolus, and dram, of such as I
perused, and all of them on the reverse the inscription (...). And I think I
may safely add, that on such coins as we find the noctua, with a deep relevy,
we may conclude them to be Athenian coins. Plutarchus in Lysandro.
Plutarch ^s of the same opinion in the life of Lysander, where he discourses
of Gylippus a Commander, ^s famous for defeating the Athenians in Sici^y, as
infamous for stealing the silver consigned ^o him by Lysander, for the city
Sparta. When (...) arrived, says Plutarch, at Sparta, he hid the ^^lver that
he had stolen under the tiles of his house, and delivered into the hands of the
Ephori the bags, ^^ewing them the seals [intire]: Which being ope^ed, and the
money told, they found the sums to ^^sagree from the labels: wherewith being
troubled (...) servant of Gylippus in obscure terms intima^ed to them, That
under the tiles of his Masters house there were hid many noctuae, or owls;
(...). For the greatest part (as it seems) of the money then had the stamp of
the noctua, by reason of the Athenians: who not long before, as Thucydides, and
the best Historians of those times show, were the richest, and most flourishing
State amongst the Grecians.

Having therefore had the opportunity to have bought, or else the favor to
have weighed many fair, and perfect Attick tetradrachmes, found at remote
places, with the Pallas galeata on the one side, and the noctua, with the
inscription (...) on the reverse, where (...) being placed for (...) proves the
antiquity of them. (For the Atticks at the first used not (...), but only
(...) for both (...) and (...)) I find by the best of these (to reassume what
I said before) that the Attick tetradrachme is 268 grains, and the drachme 67
of our Troy, or English standard. Which may farther be confirmed by an Attick
drachme of mine own, found in the Black Sea, with this inscription, (...), and
by a I have since perused a fair Athenian (...) of my very worthy, and learned
friend, John Marsham Esquire, weighing completely 33 grains English. As also
another of Sir Tho. Roes, together with an (...) of his, weighing 11 grains.
(...), or semidrachme bought by me a^ Alexandria: that weighing near 66
grains, and this 30 and better: the face of Minerva, either by use, or time
being a little diminished in both: but yet so little, that they cannot have lost
above two or three grains of their primitive weight. And as this single Attick
drachme of mine is much to be valued by Antiquarie^ for the weight, and
therefore was desired by the learned Peireskius: so is the inscription (...)
no less vvorth consideration, for the explication of a place in Livius l. 37.
Livy: who describing the naval triumph of L. Aemilius, writes thus. Pecunia
translata nequaquam tanta pro specie regii triumphi. Tetracina Attica CCXXXIII.
millia, Cistophori CCCXXII. mil. Where Bud. lib. 2. de ass. Rhodigin: lect:
antiq. l. 10. c. 2.
Budaeus, and Rhodiginus in stead of tetracina, read tetradrachma. Tetracinum
enim quid sit, nemo ut arbitror novit, says Budaeus: I would rather read it,
as the coin does, Tinarnica: this having almost the same letters with
Tetracina, which by the Scribes, I suppose, have been inverted. Neither is
there any reason, why Livy might not as well mention in this triumph, Attica
Tinarnica, as Tetradrachma; these being the fourth part of the tetradrachme;
and therefore better agreeing with his description: Pecunia translata nequaquam
tanta pro specie regii triumphi: and also better agreeing with the Cistophori
he here mentions: a sort of coin about half of these Attica Tinarnica, whereas
the tetradrachma were eight times as great. For Sextus Pompeius Festus de Verb:
signif:
Festus expressing the talentum Euboicum, renders it by 7500 cistophori, and by
4000 denarii, or Attick drachmes, that is, M. tetradrachmes. Euboicum talentum
nummo Graeco septem millium and quingentorum cistophorum est* nostro quatuor
millium denariorum.

And as these testimonies above alleged are beyond all exceptions, so the gold
coins of the Grecians, which I have examined, do most evidently prove this
proportion assigned to the Attick drachme. Which that we may the better
understand, we are to observe what proportion the valuation of the gold of
those times had to the silver; and next, what proportion it had in respect of
weight.

For the first, Iul Poll. l. 9. c. 3.
Julius Pollux in very perspicuous terms, puts it down, (...). That the gold
was in a tenfold proportion to the silver one may evidently learn out of
Menanders' paracatathece. Scholiastes Aristophanis.
The Scholiast of Aristophanes implies as much. (...). The Darics are golden
stuters, each of them is worth as much as that which is named by the Atticks
the (...). They are called so not from Darius the Father of Xerxes, but from
another King more ancient then he. Some say that the Darick is valued at XX.
drachmes of silver, so that V. Darics are worth a mina of silver. For the
Attick (...), or mina, containing an hundred drachmes in weight, as it is very
clear out of Plinius l. 21. c 34.
Pliny, Iul. Poll l 9. c. 3.
* Pollux, and others. Mna (says Pliny) quam nostri minam vocant, pendet
drachmas Atticas centum. And Pollux, (...): The mina with the Athenians
contains an hundred Attick drachmes, and the (...), or (...) of Darius,
consisting of two drachmes in weight, as we shall presently prove, it will
necessarily follow that the proportion of the (...), was to the (...), in
decupla ratione: and therefore that five Daricks, or ten drachmes of gold, were
equal in valuation to an hundred drachmes in silver, that is, to the (...).
The same proportion may be collected out of Polybii (...)* ca. 28 Ex biblioth.
Fulvii Vrsini. Antv. 1582.
Polybius, when the Romans upon a sum of money to be received, concluded a
peace with the Aetolians. (...) Which words Livius l. 38. (...). Zonaras.
Livy renders thus. Pro argento si aurum dare mallent, dare convenit, dum pro
argenteis december aureus unus valeret. This being granted, as certainly of
necessity it must, I would correct that place of Hesychius in voce (...).
Hesychius concerning the (...), and read it thus, (...). and not (...). as it
is in the printed copies. And by this of Hesychius I would supply the defect of
Suidas in voce (...).
Suidas, who writes. (...). and make it thus, (...). For without the addition
of (...), and (...), there is no sense: And I believe Suidas took these very
words out of Hesychius.

Having thus found the proportion that the (...) had to the silver, our next
inquiry is, how many of these drachmes in weight the (...), or (...), or aureus
contained. Iul. Pollux libr. 4. c. 24.
Julius Pollux gives us in this particular the best, and most positive
information of any, (...). The golden stater [or aureus] contains two Attick
drachmes. The same is confirmed by Hesychius in voce (...).
Hesychius: (...) (...). Polemarchus says that the aureus amongst the
Athenians contains two drachmes; and that the drachme of gold is worth ten
drachmes of silver. And to this of Pollux and Hesychius all the aurei of the
ancient Grecians, which have passed through my hands, do very well correspond.
Now these aurei as they had several impresses upon them, so had they several
names, by which they are distinguished. For they were either (...), or (...),
or (...), or (...), or the like, all which we may prove by Xenophon, (...) (as
Ios. Scaliger rightly corrects the printed copies, which render it (...) or
(...)) (...). Harpoer. (...) Xenophonti sunt (...). Talentum autem 600
drachmae. Ergo (...) sunt 20. drachmae. Scal. de re number.
Harpocratio, the Scholiast of Aristophanes, and others, to have been equal
unto two Attick drachmes, and therefore respectively equal to one another.
Neither is this much to be wondered at, that the Grecians, and Persians, though
at enmity amongst themselves, yet should agree in the aurei; seeing that in our
times, the Venetian Chequeen, the Barbary Ducat, the Egyptian, and Turkish
Sherif, are almost all of the same pureness in respect of the gold, and not
differing above a grain in the weight. Which difference we may also allow to
those of the Ancients, without any prejudice to our inquiry. Concerning these
aurei, or golden staters, the observation of Iul Poll. l. 9. c. 6.
Julius Pollux is worth our consideration, (...). Of the staters some were
denominated from Darius, some from Philip, some from Alexander and were al of
gold. And when you say the aureus, the stater is understood, but if you say the
stater, the aureus is not always meant. And this is most true; for the (...),
or aureus (I speak not here of the aureus Romanus, this being somewhat less
then these mentioned by Pollux) did always imply the (...), but the (...) did
not always infer the aureus: the stater being more general, signifying as
well the argenteus, as the aureus, and that was double to this; the stater
argenteus being four drachmes, as we proved before, and therefore the same with
the tetradrachme, and the aureus two drachmes, and therefore equal in weight
to the didrachme. Wherefore every aureus was rightly called a stater, but every
stater could not rightly be called an aureus.

From these aurei then, or (...), we may deduce the silver Attick drachme, if
we either had the (...), some of which to this day are found in Persia, or if
we had the (...), or the (...). To pass by the (...), because I have not
perused any of them, and to speak only of the (...) and' (...), of which there
are many extant.

Concerning the (...) Snellius de r^ nummaria.
Snellius writes thus. Philippi nummum unicum, and Alexandri Macedonum,
solertissimus veterum nummorum aestimator Nicolaus Rockoxius possidet, utrumque
eodem ponere granorum 179. Now CLXXIX. grains of gold in Holland, such as
Snellius used, are answerable to an hundred thirty four grains English and an
half. Near which proportion I have observed two others, with the inscription
(...), excepting only a grain, or two.

As for the (...), I find the weight of one of the fairest for impression, and
character, I think in the world, which I bought at Alexandria, with the image,
and inscription (...), to be exactly of English grains 133 ^, and another at
Constantinople 133, and in the same proportion several others. With which
comparing one of mine honored and learned friend John Marsha^ Esquire, I find
his a grain defective: And weighing since some others out of that choice, and
rare (...) of ancient coins collected by the noble Sir Simonds D' Ewes, Knight
Baronet, I observed two of his to exceed 133 by a grain.

Wherefore I may conclude (allowing only half a grain for so much wanting by
time, or by the mint) from the aureus being double to the Attick drachme, that
it has been rightly assigned by me to be LXVII. grains; And from this with
those limitations above mentioned I may conclude the denarius Consularis,
(which is our principal inquiry) seeing Galenus l. 8. de composit. medicam.
Galen li. 8. c. 3. de compositione Medicam: according to the Latin manner of
division), speaking of an antidote prescribed by Asclepiades, whereof the dosis
was to be one drachme, or denarius, writes thus. (...). I suppose, that he
means the silver drachme, for so all the later Physicians are wont to call it,
neither will the nature of the thing suffer us to understand any other. And it
is manifest that in such things as we all now name the drachme, the Romans
name the Denarius.

The denarius also, as we proved before out of Philo, Josephus, Saint Hierome,
and Hesychius, may be inferred by the Hebrew, or Samaritane shekel: the shekel,
by the joint testimony of all of them, being equal in valuation to the Attick
stater argenteus, or tetradrachme, and the Attick tetradrachme, as we have
showed, to 4 denarii Consulares: if therefore an Hebrew, or Samaritane shekel
in silver, fair, and not impaired, were found, we might by this as well
discover the denarius, as by the tetradrachme, or the aureus. And here I must
confess I have not seen so many perfect, and entire, with the Samaritane
characters, which certainly are the best, and truest, (For those with the
later characters, invented, as some suppose, by Esdras, are most of them
counterfeit) as to give my self satisfaction. For though I have perused that of
Arias Montanus, now in the University of Oxford, which he describes in his
tract de Siclo, and from whence he deduces the proportion of the Hebrew shekel,
yet to speak the truth, there is no trust to be given to it: Not but that the
coin is very ancient, and the inscription upon it in Samaritane characters well
made; but the sides of it have been so filed away, that it has very much lost
of the true weight. For I find it to be scarce the weight of twenty pence of
our English Standard. Whereas Montanus, if he made his observation exactly,
equals it to almost four Spanish rials, or to four Roman Iulios': bo^^ which
exceed two of our English shillings. So that till such time as I may procure
out of the East, (whither I have often sent) some perfect shekels, I must be
content to take up the relations of others. And here I shall begin with Moses
Nehemani Gerundensis a Jew, a learned expositor of the Pentate^ch, who as Arias
Montanus tells us, flourished in Catalonia above 400 years since. His words, as
Montanus has delivered them in his tract de Siclo, are these. Arias Montanus
de siclo. in libro qui inscribitu^ Thubal (...), sinc de mensurit.
In comment, Exodus 39. multis verbis disserens significabat se non facile ad
Salomonis Iarrhaei, qui ante illum in Gallia scripserat, sententiam de siclo
accedere; cum Solomon affirmasset, Siclum esse dimidiam argenti unciam. Postea
jam absoluto in omnem Legem Commentariorum opere, idem Moses Gerundensis capite
ad eam rem proprie addito, sicli aestimationem a Salomone illo indicatam, re
ipsa doctus, ingenue, and aperte, ut viros doctos, and very inveniendi, atque
docendi cupidos decet, comprobavit. Narrat autem se eo anno, quo illa
scriberet, in Palaestinam ex Hispania sacroru^ locorum visendi causa navi
delatum Acconam, quam nunc Iachan vocant, devenisse; ibidemque sibi ab incolis
ostensum fuisse nummum argent^um antiquissimum, expressis tamen signis and
literis conspicuum; in cujus altero latere forma esse^ vasculi illius, quod
manna plenum in sacra arca ad saeculorum monumentum, Dei jussu, and Mosis
procuratione fuerat repositum: and in altero ramus ille admirabilis, quem in
fasciculum virgularum plurimarum Aaronis nomine illatum (cum illius sacerdotali
dignitati ab aemulis quibusdam obtrectaretur) postera die populus omnis
florentem, amygdalaque explicantem vidit; inscriptiones etiam fuisse in eodem
nummo Samaritanis ch^racteribus, quae olim communes totius Israelis literae
fuerant, ante discessionem december tribuum a duabus, lingua plane Hebraica,
quarum exemplum ex altera part erat SEKEL ISRAEL, quod Latin sonat Siclus
Israelis: ex altera vero JERUSALEM KEDESSAH, hoc est Jerusalem sancta: qui
nummus antiquitatem cum primis magnam probabat, utpote cusus nomine Israelis,
eo tempore quo omnes XII. tribus communi concordia Israelis nomen obtinebant;
quoque Hierosolyma ipsis omnibus regia urbs, sanctaque erat; eademque communis
omnibus and religionis, and publicae rei and monetae, atque literarum ratio,
quae postea discessione facta, alia atque alia utrique parti fuit. Namque
Iudaei, ut omnes fere scriptores asserunt, ne cum Schismaticis Israelitis ullo
Sacrorum usu communicarent, eam Literarum for^^am, quae nunc etiam in usu est,
hoc est quadratam, mutatis valde alterius prioris figuris, ad^invenere.
Affirmat praeterea idem Gerundensis, nummum illum, qui Siclus inscribebatur,
sibi in statera pensum dimidiae argenti unciae pondus reddidisse, ostensam
quoque alteram monetam dimidiato pondere minorem, iisdem omnino vasis and rami
figuris quae tamen non SEKEL, sed HHASZI SEKEL, ho^ est dimidius Siclus
diceretur* probari itaque sibi vel maxim Salomonis Iarrhaei, de sicli pondere,
and valor, sententiam. Thus far Gerundensis: who if he had expressed with what
half ounce he compared his shekel, or if Montanus had done it for him, they had
given the judicious Reader better satisfaction. But this I suppose, by a a
probable conjecture, may be supplied, in saying that he living in Catalonia
weighed it with the Catalonian, or Spanish half ounce; which Eaedem omnino sunt
unciae, quibus olim Romani, Hispanique utuntur. etc. Villalp. de appar. Vrb. ac
Templi par. 2. l. 3. c. 20.
Villalpandus, and Ciaconius de ponderibus page 45.
Ciaconius, both of them Spaniards, make equal to the half ounce now used at
Rome, that is, to two shillings three pence farthing, q. of our money. This
conjecture of mine will exceeding well confirm those many observations of
Villalpandus, a man in this kind very curious, which he made of several
ancient shekels in filver, who thus writes. Villalpand. de app. Vrb^s ac Templi
par. 2. l. 2. disp. ^. c. 28.
Igitur ante aliquot annos appendimus Siclum unum apud F. Vrsinum, and
postmodum eos omnes, quos praecedenti capite percensuimus, atque comperimus
singulos argenti siclos ex aequo semunciae Romanae antiquae respondere; ita ut
ne minimum quidem hordei aut frumenti granulum, huic, vel illi lanci addi
potuerit, quin in eam examen propenderet. Nec mirum cuiquam videri debet,
antiquissimos nummos suo pristino ponderi nunc respondere, neque ullam argenti
partem vetustate consumptam tot saeculis fuisse. Nam singulari Dei beneficio
nobis contigit, tot integros appendere potuisse siclos. Id quod nummi ipsi
integri vetustatem maxim prae se ferentes, literae expressae, extantesque,
argenti color, atque alia id genus multa, facile probant. With these
observations of Villalpandus I find the weight of a very fair Samaritane
shekel of the truly noble, and learned M. Seldom to agree: to whom I stand
obliged for this favor, as he does for the coin to the honorable Antiquary
Sir Robert Cotton. To these testimonies, though (it may be) sufficient of
themselves, I shall add We may also insert the observation of Anton. August.
dialogo 2. Ne ho uno [siclo] che e d' argento, and e di peso di quattro dram
conform a quello che dice San Girolamo sopra Ezechielle: where by four drams
he means half the Roman ounce.
one more, for farther illustration of the weight of the Hebrew, or Samaritane
shekel, and that is of an ancient, and fair one, in silver, amongst his
Majesty's coins, perused by the most reverend Primate of Ireland, a man of
exquisite learning, and judgment, who has often assured me that it weighs two
shillings five pence of the English standard; which proportion excepting some
few grains, in which it does exceed, does well correspond with those of
Villalpandus. And this may farther be confirmed out of the Talmud Kiddushf. 11.
(...) Argentum omne cujus in Lege fit mentio, intelligitur argentum Tyrium
(ponderis and bonitatis ut in urbe Tyri: as Schindlerus in pentaglotto.
Schlinder interprets it) sed Rabbinorum argentu^ intelligitur argentum commune
provinciale. Taking therefore the silver money of Judea, as the Talmud does, to
be equal to the Tyrian, and that of Carthage to be equal to that of Tire: as
it is very probable, that the Carthaginians, being a plantation of the Tyrians,
might observe their proportions in coins, as well as their customs, in
religion, we may by these discover the shekel to be much about the same weight
that has been assigned. For Ant. August dia^og. 6.
Ant. Augustinus, describing in his dialogues the weight of two fair
Carthaginian coins in silver, writes, that they are each of them somewhat more
then four drachmes, that is, as he elsewhere explains himself, a little more
then half the Roman ounce. If therefore we shall adhere to the observation of
Gerundensis, made four hundred years since, or to these later of Villalpandus,
and others; or to this conjecture of mine, the Hebrew shekel, and half the
present ^ Roman ounce, are either both the same, or else very near in
proportion.

And this may easily be granted; but if it be, how will 4 denarii Consulares,
4 Attick drachmes, and the Hebrew shekel, be reciprocally equal one to
another, as they should be by those several testimonies before alleged?
Whereas ^y many hundred denarii Consulares, tried by a^ exact balance, I find
the best of these to contain LXII. grains English, and the Attick drachme
LXVII. And the fourth part of the shekel to be but LIVE. grains if we admit of
Gerundensis, and Villalpandus' observations. Which notwithstanding according to
Philo, Josephus, Saint Hierome, Epiphanius, and Hesychius, should be equal to
the Attick drachme, and the Attick drachme by the testimonies of the ancients
should be likewise equal to the denarius. For the solution of this objection I
answer. First, that the denarius, and Attick drachme, being distinct coins of
different States, and not much unequal in the true weight, it is no wonder,
especially in Italy, and in the Roman dominions, that they should pass one
for another: no more then that the Spanish rials in our Sea Towns in England,
should pass for testars, or the quarters of the dolar be exchanged for our
shillings: whereas the riall in the intrinsecall valuation is better then our
testar by four grains, and somewhat more, and the quarter of the dolar is
better then our shilling by more then 8 grains, or a penny; but because they
want the valuation, character, and impression of our Princes, which I call the
extrinseck of coins, therefore does the Spanish money fall from its true value
with us, and so would ours do in Spain. By the same analogy must we conceive
the Attick drachmes, though in the intrinseck they were somewhat better worth
then the denarius, yet for want of the extrinseck, to have lost in Italy, and
thereby to have become equal in valuation to the denarius. And this seems to
be implied by Vol. Metianus de assis distributione. These words of Metianus I
find in a MS. of Temporarius thus corrected. Victoriatus enim nunc tantundem
valet, quantum quinarius Olim ut peregrinus nummus loco mercis, ut nunc
tetradrachmu^, and dram habebatur. Whither it be by conjecture, or that he
found it in some ancient MS. I know not, but the emendation I cannot but
approve.
Volusius Metianus. Victoriatus enim nunc tantundem valet, quantum quinarius
olim. At peregrinus nummus loco mercis, ut nunc tetradrachmum, and dram,
habebatur. Which words of his loco mercis, plainly show they made some gain of
the tetradrachmum, and dram: as our Merchants, and Goldsmiths do of the
Spanish rials, and quarters of a dolar: Which they could not do, if they were
precisely equal, but must rather be losers in the melting, or new coining of
them. And therefore all Budaeus drachmam putat ejusdem ponderis esse cum
denario, Onuphrius vero inter utrumque statuit rationem sesquitertiam, Agricola
sesquiseptimam, ut Panvinio tres denari^ quatuor drachmas, Agricolae vero
septem denarii octo drachmas efficiant. Capel. de pond. and nummis l. 1.
LXXXIV. denarii, quae est Libra Romana, sunt aequales XCVI. drachmis, quae est
libra Italica, and medica. Scal. de re nummaria.
modern Writers that have treated of this argument, some of them making the
dram less then the denarius, others equal, but none greater, have been
deceived by a double paralogisme, in standing too nicely upon the bare words of
the Ancients, without carefully examining the things themselves. First, in
making the denarius, and Attick drachme precisely equal, because all ancient
Authors generally express the Attick drachme by the denarius, or the denarius
by the drachme; either because in ordinary commerce, and in vulgar estimation
they passed one for another, in the Roman state; or else if any were so
curious to observe their difference, as surely the (...) were, yet by reason of
their neernesse, and to avoid fractions, and having no other names of coins
that were precisely equal, whereby to render them, therefore all Greek, and
Latin Authors, mutually used one for the other. And secondly, because some
Writers, as Dioscorides and Cleopatra affirm, that the Roman ounce contained
eight drachmes, therefore modern Authors infer, that the denarius being equal
to the drachme, and eight drachmes being in the Roman ounce (as so many were
in the Attick) that therefore there are eight denarii in the Roman, and
consequently that the Roman, and Attick ounces are equal. Whereas Celsus,
Scribonius Largus, and Pliny, as we showed before, expressly write, that the
Roman ounce contained in their time, which was after Dioscorides, seven
denarii. And being natural Romans, and purposely mentioning the proportion of
the denarius to the ounce, thereby the better to regulate their doses in
physic, it is not probable, but they must better have known it then the
Grecians. Besides, who with any certainty can collect out of these imperfect
fragments of Dioscorides, and Cleopatra (for those tracts of theirs de
ponderibus are no better) whither at the first they wrote in that manner, as
they are now printed? Or if they did, why might not they endeavor to introduce
into the Roman ounce, in imitation of the Attick, that manner of division,
which is now generally received in our times, of making the ounce, of what
kind soever it be, to contain eight drachmes. And surely this of eight being a
compound number, as Arithmeticians use to speak, was much fitter then seven,
used by the Romans, which being a prime number, is therefore incapable of any
other division. And then for to conclude, that because the Attick ounce had
eight drachmes, and the Roman as many, that therefore their ounces are equal:
is all one as to conclude, that the Paris, and English ounces are equal,
because the French as well as we (and so do all Physicians of all Countries
that I know) divide their ounce by eight drachmes. And thus, I suppose, I have
sufficiently answered the first part of the objection, concerning the Denarius,
and the Attick dra^^me: that if we respect the vulgar and popular estimation,
in which sense classical Authors understood them (For they could not well
otherwise render them, then as they were current) so were they equal; but if
we respect the intrinsecall valuation, which depends upon the weight,
especially when coins are of a like finenesse, so were they unequal: the
Attick drachme being of our money eight pence farthing q, and the denarius
Consularis seven pence half penny farthing: allowing for the standard These
proportions, with chose before, and those which (...) follow, are (...) from
the English standard at five shillings the ounce (as it was formerly coined) to
avoid fractions: that is, eight grains to the silver penny: whereas in these
times it is five shillings ^ two pence. Not that the ounce is increased, for
this is always constant and fixed, but that for reasons of State, our silver
coins are diminished, and consequently contain fewer grains. And this
diminution must necessarily be, as often as other Nations, with whom we have
commerce, rebate in the proportions of their coins; or else we must be content
to be losers.
VIII. English grains to the silver penny.

Neither do I know any authority, that either expressly, or by a true, and
logical consequence, can be produced out of Classical Authors to infringe this
assertion of mine, unless it be one in Fannius, which being a fragment is the
less to be valued: and another in Livy, who thus writes, lib. 34. in his
description of the triumph of Quinctius. Signati argenti octoginta quatuor
millia fuere Atticorum, tetradrachmum vocant; trium fere denariorum in singulis
argenti est pondus. Which words of his occasioned G Agricolae responsio ad
Alciatum de pond. and mensuris. Argentei Romanorum denarii triplices sunt:
graves, qui pendunt arachmam Atticam cum dimidia: mediocres, qui drachmam and
scptimam ejus partem: leves, qui plerunque drachmam.
Georgius Agricola, not knowing how to answer them, to bring in a distinction
of three sorts of denarii: the Gravis, weighing an Attick drachme, and an half,
the Mediocris, one and a seventh part, the L^vis, most commonly one; without
any clear proof, or evidence in any ancient Author, and directly contrary to
all ancient coins of the Atticks, and Romans, which I have seen: of which
error he would not have been guilty (For there is no man that has writ either
de ponderibus, and mensuris, or de re metallica, more solidly, and judiciously
then he) if he had been so happy as to have perused many entire Grecian aurei,
and tetradrachmes, or else to have examined a greater, and more select quantity
of Roman coins. To satisfy my self concerning that place of Livy, I had
recourse to our MSS. here (and I could wish I had done the like in Italy) and
these I find to agree with the printed copies; though the coins, which are
much ancienter then any MSS. constantly disagree. Wherefore if it be not a
mistake in Livy himself, which I am not apt to believe in so grave an Author,
I would correct the copies by the coins, and instead of III. fere denariorum,
make it thus, IV. fere denariorum. Where the figure V, being resolved into two
lines, and left a little open at the bottom, might easily be taken by the
scribe for the figure II. And this I do certainly If this answer be not
satisfactory, we may say, as some have done, that Livy, Fannius, and the
Scholiast of Nicander, speak of the denarii of the former Consuls immediately
succeeding Q. Fabius, For there being but six of those in the ounce, (as they
suppose) the denarius will be greater then the dram, as it will be less
when seven were coined, under the later Consuls, which is our assertion.
believe is the true ground of that error, wherewith so many of late have been
perplexed. However it were, it is as ancient as Priscian, or Pseudo-Priscian (as
Capellus styles him) who, in his tract de ponderibus, reads those words of Livy
in the same manner, trium fere denariorum.

As for the denarius aureus, a name I think not known to the Ancients, which
Salmasius and others collect out of Livius l 38.
Livy, de foedere Aetolico. Pro argento si aurum dare mallent, dare convenit,
dum pro argenteis december aureus unus valeret. I see no solid foundation for that
opinion; all that can be collected thence is, that the gold then was in decupla
ratione to the silver, which I have proved before. And whereas Plautus in
Rudente.
Plautus has his denaria Philippea.

Nummi octingenti aurei in marsupio infueru^t,
Praeterea centum denaria Philippea.
this is a metaphorical, or comical expression of him, and no certain sort of
coin: which he pleasantly calls denarii, because half the (...) were equal in
weight to the dram, and so also was the Roman denarius supposed to be.

Nor are we to take the (...), which is thrice mentioned by Saint Matthew, and
once by Saint Mark, for the denarius, as some have done: no, nor for any other
sort of coin. For it is precisely the Latin word census, that is, (...),
tributu^, and so is it rendered by Saint Luke, (...); where Saint Matthew, and
Saint Mark have it. (...); Though Hesychius, and Moscopulus, both upon an
error, interpret it a sort of coin. Hesychius, (...), or (...), as M.
Casaubone corrects it: and Moscopulus, (...), the census is a coin equal in
weight to the drachme, that is, in the notion of the Greeks equal to the
denarius. The error of these two Greek Grammarians, is a misunderstanding the
propriety of the Latin word census: and that occasioned them to take (...),
and (...), for the same. But the Evangelist Matthew puts a manifest difference
between (...) tributum, and (...), the money that was paid for tribute. (...),
writes Saint Matthew, show me the money of the tribute: or as our new
Translation renders it, Show me the tribute money. And the three Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, immediately after expressly term this money the (...),
And they brought unto him a penny. Which being a Roman coin, and current
amongst the Jews, being then in subjection to the Romans, it is more then
probable that they paid their tribute to Caesar, in the same species of money
that was used by Caesar: and not with any new, or peculiar sort of coin,
according to Baronius (which M. Casaubone has justly confuted) but with the
ordinary current money of Rome, and that was the denarius.

Our next solution should be of the shekel, how it could be equal to the
tetradrachme, and consequently to 4 denarii, when by the constant weight of the
best Hebrew, or Samaritane shekels, extant, we find them to be much less.
And here I am a little unsatisfied, how to reconcile the coins to Philo,
Josephus, Epiphanius, Saint Hierome, and Hesychius: or else, if we admit of the
coins (as I know no just exceptions against them) how to excuse these Aut^ours
of too supine negligence in comparing them, if so be they ever were so curious
as to collate them with the Attick tetradrachmes. For if we shall say that
the silver stater, or Attick tetradrachme, was a forain coin, in respect of
the Rep. of the Jews, and therefore that in Judaea it might somewhat fall from
its true valuation, we shall say no more then what reason, and experience
confirm. But then that the tetradrachme should sink so low, as to loose four
pence half penny, if we take the reverend Primates' observation before
mentioned, or which is more six pence q. if we follow that of Gerundensis,
and Villalpandus, or those of mine, upon two shillings nine pence half penny,
for so much was the tetradrachme of our money, it may seem too great a
diminution: especially the Attick money being as pure, and fine* as that of the
shekel: and therefore no Goldsmith amongst the Jews, but would have given a
greater rate only to melt it, and turn it into bullion. Yet on the other side,
when I consider the practice of the mony-changers amongst the Jews at this
day, which it may be (...)

The sextarius, says Fannius, contains one pound and eight ounces, whither we
weigh clear water, or wine: where by wine, according to Agricola l 3. de
ponder. reru^.
Agricola, is to be understood, vinum fulvu^, such as the Greeks call (...);
rather I imagine that wine, which Galen calls (...). The sextarius then being
one pound eight ounces of clear water, or pure wine, and six sextarii being in
the Congius, it is most evident that the Congius contains ten pounds of water,
or of wine. This also appears by a Plebiscitum of the two Silii, Publius, and
Marius, which is to be seen in the best copies of Sextus Pomp. de verb signif.
Sextus Pompeius.

VTI. QVADRANTAL. VINI. OCTOGINTA. PONDO. SIET CONGIVS. VINI. DECEMBER. IS. SIET
SFX. SEXTARII. CONGIVS. SIET. VINI DVO. DF. QVINQVAGINTA. SEXTARII. QVADRANTAL.
SIET. VINI SEXTARIVS. AEQVVS. AEQVO. CVM. LIBRARIO. SIET The same is confirmed
by Fragmenta Dioscoridis.
Dioscorides: who, for farther certainty, mentions with what sort of water we
should measure it: and that is with rain The proportion (...) rain water has
to fountain water, is as 10 0000 to 1007^22, and the proportion that it has to
water distilled, is as 1000000 to 997 65, as it has been observed by Snellius
in Eratosth. Bat l 2 c. Est in aequali mo^e ratio aquae pluviae ad distillatam,
que^admodum 100^000 ad 997065. pluviae autem ad putealem ut 1000000 ad 1007522.
water, which he makes to be the most infallible of all. (...), etc. (...). The
Chus, (that is, the Congius) contains ten pounds, the semicongius five, the
sextarius one pound, and eight ounces, etc. The weight of water, and of Vinegar
is the same. They say that if it be filled up with rain water, the weight will
be most certain. This authority of Dioscorides, with that other citation
following out of an Anonymus Greek Author, strongly proves my assertion, that
the dram Attica was more ponderous, then the denarius Consularis. For there
being eighty four of these denarii in the Roman pound, as we have elsewhere
proved, and ten Roman pounds in the Congius, it is most evident there are
DCCCXL. denarii in the whole Congius. Again, DCCXX. drachmes, by the
testimonies of Dioscorides, and this Anonymus writer, being equal to the
Congius, and the Congius being equal to DCCCXL. denarii, therefore DCCXX.
drachmes are equal to DCCCXL. denarii, and therefore of necessity every
particular drachme of these, must be greater then each particular denarius. And
though, according to my assertion, the Congius contains some few drachmes
more then are by them assigned; yet that difference, seeing it might many ways
happen, as I afterward show in the like experiments of Villalpandus, and
Gassendus, it cannot any way overthrow my conclusion. For the drachmes are
still fewer then the denarii consulares, and therefore greater: which was the
thing intended to be proved. And this my farther be confirmed, in that both
Cleopatra, and this Anonymus Author, make also the (...), or sextarius (being
the sixth part of the Congius) to contain an hundred twenty drachmes of
fountain water. Whereby it appears there is no error committed in the former
numbers. (...). The sextarius, says Cleopatra, contains in measure two cotyls,
but in weight an hundred and twenty drachmes. And the Anonymus writer,(...).
The sextarius contains in weight an hundred and twenty drachmes.
The Congius weighs seven hundred and twenty drachmes. An Anonymus Greek
Author, falsely reputed to be Galen in the edition at Venice, confirms the same,
Anonymus Graec.
(...): Amongst the Romans is found the Congius, containing in measure six
sextarii (that is) XII Cotylae: but in weight, of rain water, which is most
infallible, DCCXX. drachmes. And whereas Fragmenta Dioscoridis.
Dioscorides elsewhere writes. (...). The Congius has nine pounds, the
semicongius four and an half, the sextarius one and an half; there is no
repugnancy between this, and his former assertion. For here he speaks of the
Congius filled with oil, and before of the same Congius filled with water, or
wine: and that this should be but nine pounds, whereas the former is ten, is no
more repugnant to reason, then it is to nature, that oil should be lighter then
water, or wine: which Ghetaldus in Archim: promoto.
Ghetaldus, in his Archimedes promotus, has demonstrated the most accurately
of any man, to be in the proportion that 1 is to 1 1/11 in respect of water,
and as 1 is to 1 4/55 in respect of wine: which is almost the same with
Dioscorides. The not observing this difference of weight, arising from the
different gravity of several liquors, in vessels of one and the same capacity,
is that which has occasioned much incertainty, and confusion, in modern
writers. And therefore we shall for farther perspicuity insert that
distinction, which is often inculcated by GaleNus l 1. and 6. de comp. medicam.
secundum genera.
Galen, that the Romans used two sorts of ounces, and pounds: and those were
either (...), or (...), ponderall, or mensurall: the one had respect solely to
the gravity, the other to the moles, and gravity conjointly: the former were
always certain and fixed, consisting of solid matter: the later were Vasa
(frequently (...)) being receptacles, and measures of liquid substances: and
therefore the librae, and unciae mensurales, in these were greater or less,
according as the liquor to be measured was heavier, or lighter. Whence Li. 6.
de compos. medicam: sec: genera.
Galen blames Physicians for not expressing this difference. (...). And he
gives the reason of it. Lib 1. de composit. medicam: secundum genera.
(...). For the ponderall examine the weight of bodies, but the mensural the
moles. But to return to the Congius, and by it to our discovery of the
denarius. The water then must be natural, either of some fountain, or of rain.
For if it be artificial, such as are made by distillations, whither by a
strong reverberation, or by a gentle, in an alembeck, these having somewhat of
the property of fire will be lighter then the natural, as Perinde vero ut
vinum hoc factitium omni nativo est levius, sic aquae fere omnes, quae ignis
calore rebus quibuscunque excoctis destillarint, quas ob id distillatas
appeilant, caeteris aquis leviores sunt. Agricola l. 3. de pondere rerum.
Agricola, and others observe. I shall produce two observations of the Congius
vvit^ fountain water, made by two very eminent, and able men, Villalpandus,
and Gassendus, the one at Rome, with the Roman weights, from the This Congius
I had weighed, if I could have procured a balance of such exactness, as was
fitting for such a work. The want of which occasioned Villalpandus to suspect
the observation of Paetus: though Paetus writes thus of himself. Plenum, cum
justissima trutina, qua hodie Romae utimur cum appendissem [ congium], inveni
aquam, qua eum compleveram, libras nostri temporis novem, uncias sex semis
efficere, quibus uncias quinque, drachmas quatuor, scripulum unum, and grana
XIV. (quae amplius sunt in his nostris, quam in antiquis libris computando eum
congium libras december) and ultra scripulum unum, and grana XIV. (de quibus
nullam rationem habendam esse judicavi) ex antiquis libris praedictis pendere
inveni. But Villalpandus trying it long after Paetus, with more care, and with
a balance made of purpose, found it to be exactly ten such pounds, as are now
used in Rome. All that I could do was to fill the capacity of it with milium
well cleansed, and to compare it with the English measures taken from the
Standards. It contained of our measures for wine three quarts, one pint* and
one eighth part of a pint. Of our corn, or dry measures, three quarts and about
one sixth part of a pint. At my being in Italy, there was found amongst the
ruins at Rome a Semicongius in brass, of the same figure with this of
Vespasians, the sides much consumed by rust. This I also measured, and found it
to be the half of Vespasians' Congius. From this measure of the Congius we may
rightly apprehend how vast that draught was of Novellus Torquatus, who drank
three of these Congii at once: from whence he was called Novellas Tricongius.
The story is recited by Pliny [l. 14. c. 22.] Apud nos cognomen etiam Novellus
Torquatus Mediolanensis ad Proconsulatum usque e praetur^ honoribus gestis,
tribus congiis (unde and ^omen illi fuit) epotis uno impetu, spectante miraculi
gratia Tiberio principe in senecta jam severo, atque etiam alias saevo, sed
ipsa juventa ad merum pronior fuerat. In the same chapter Pliny likewise
discourses thus of Cicero, son to that famous Orator. Tergilla Ciceronem
Marci filium binos congios simul haurire solitum ipsi objicit, Marcoque
Agrippae a temulento scyphum impactum.
original Congius it self, the other at Aix, with the Paris weights, from a
model, or copy of that at Rome, procured by Peireskius. And here to compare the
denarius Consularis with their observations, it is necessary to have exactly
both the Roman, and Paris weights. The former, with as much accuratenesse, as
it was possible, were taken in Rome. The other were sent me by Monsieur Hardy,
a learned man of honorable quality in Paris, who compared them with the
Standard. To begin with that of Villalpandus, who gives us a large
description, with how much caution, and circumspection, and with how exquisite
a balance he twice made his experiment, whereby he discovered the weight of it
in water to be exactly answerable to ten such pounds, as are now used in Rome:
Whence he concludes, Villalpandus l 2. disp. 2. c. 11. de apparatu Vrbis ac
Templi
Constanter asserimus antiquam Romanorum libram, unciam, ac pondera, tot
aetatum successione, ac Romani imperii perturbationibus minime immutata fuisse,
sed eadem per manus tradita usque ad nostra tempora perdurasse. This Roman
pound of his reduced to the English Standard for silver, or Troy weight, with
which I have faithfully collated it, is 5256 grains English, such as the Troy
pound is 5760: the whole Congius therefore consisting of ten pounds, will be
52560 English grains. The other observation is related by Gassendus in vita
Peireskii.
Gassendus, in his elegant discourse de vita Peireskii. Vt paucis ergo res
dicatur, cautiones adhibuimus easdem, quas Lucas Paetus, and Villalpandus, dum
vas ipsum, ad summum collum puteali aqua opplevimus, expendimus, vasis pondus
subduximus. Deprehendimus autem aquam, quae Romano pondere esse debuit december
librarum, seu unciarum centum viginti, esse pondere Parisiensi (quale nempe
Parisiis exploratum, missumque est) librarum septem, minus unciae quadrante:
seu unciarum centum undecim, and quadrantum unciae trium. Deinde ex hac
proportione collegimus unciam Romanam continere grana quingenta, and triginta
sex, qualium quingenta septuaginta sex in Parisiensi continentur: unde and
illis in drachmas collectis, obvenere cuilibet drachmae grana sexaginta septem:
idque proinde censuimus pondus denarii Caesarei, quem dictum est fuisse The
inference of Gassendus I easily grant, that the denarius under some of the
Caesars' was drachmalis, that is, the eighth part of the Roman ounce. But
neither was it always so under the Caesar's, nor if it had been so, will it
therefore follow that it was drachmalis, or the eighth part in respect of the
Attick ounce. Seeing the Athenian ounce was greater then the Roman, as we have
before proved; and therefore the Denarius Consularis, which was the seventh
part of the Roman ounce, was scarce the eighth part of the Attick. Where fore
he must see how he can make it good, where he brings Peireskius in the second
book of his life thus discoursing -- Denarium, cum tempore Regum pependisset
trientem unciae, sub antiqua tamen Rep: pependisse solum sextantem, sub
recentiore partem septimam, sub primis Caesaribus octavam, seu drachmam
(Atticae nempe drachmae aequalem.)
drachmalem. Now the Paris ounce sent come by Mon (...) unto him Caesars'. This
denarius Caesareus, if we respect some definitive quantity, and weight, was as
various, and uncertain, as the denarius Consularis of the later Consuls was
constant, and fixed: being under the first Emperors, sometimes more, sometimes
less, as the reasons, and exigencies of the State did require, or the
profuseness, and prodigality of those times. Yet this uncertainty (as far as I
have observed) was limited within some certain, and determinate bounds: the
denarius Caesareus never exceeding the seventh part of the Roman ounce, and
never being less then the eighth part, but often in a middle proportion
between both, and that with much inequality. And this made Villalpandus de
apparatu Vrbis ac Tem. pli par. 2. l. 2. disp. 2. c. 13.
Villalpandus, after many experiments at Rome, to conclude, that out of the
denarii nothing concerning the Roman weights could be determined. Though
Portius, Agricola, Ciaconius, Snellius, and several others, before, and after
him, are of a contrary opinion. And it may be, if Villalpandus had
distinguished between the difference of times, and in them of the different
coins, and considered those of the Consuls, distinctly from those of the
Caesar's, and those of the former Caesar's, from those of the later, he would
have reformed his judgment* For it plainly appears, upon examination, tha^ the
diminution of their weight was an invention introduced after Antonius the
Triumvirs' time wherasbefore the denarius was fixed. Miscuit, says Plin. l. 33.
c. 9.
Pliny, denario Triumvir Antonius ferrum, ali^ e pondere subtrahunt (his
meaning is under the Emperors, to Vespasians', or his own time) cu^ sit justum
octoginta quatuor e libris signari. Where he says very well in speaking so
generally, alii e pondere subtrahunt, without precisely limiting the
proportion. For this, as we observed, was very various, and undeterminate: so
that whereas the just number of the denarii, according to the practice of the
later Consuls, should be eighty four in the Roman pound, we find by the
weight of the best of them under the former Caesar's, that they coined sometimes
eighty six, eighty eight, etc. till at last there came to ^e ninety six
denarii in the Roman pound, that is, eight in the ounce. And this, by a very
necessary consequence, may be inferred out of another place of Pliny, if we
take for granted, what some learned Moderns confess, and the gold and silver
coins found to this day, of the later Consuls, and first Emperors, strongly
prove, that as the Atticks made their (...), or aureus, double in weight to the
(...): so did the Romans make their aureus double in weight to the denarius.
Which proportion they might borrow from the Athenians, and other Grecians, who,
Arias Montanus in T^ubal^ Cain, sive de mensuris.
as Arias Montanus imagines, first received it from the practice of the
Hebrews: or rather, as I suppose, from the Phenicians, and these from the
Hebrews. From whencesoever it came, it is not much material in our inquiry:
that which we may safely conclude from thence is this, that the gold being, in
respect of weight, double to the silver, the aureus Romanus falling in its
weight, the denarius likewise of necessity must fall: else could they not have
continued in dupla ratione. Now in what manner the aureus was first coined, and
how afterward it lost of its primitive weight, Pliny informs us. Plin. l. 3.
c. 33
Aureus nummus, post annum LXII. percussus est, quam argenteus, ita ut
scrupulum valeret sestertiis vicenis, quod efficit in libras ratione
sestertiorum, qui tunc erant, sestertios DCCCC. Post haec placuit XL.M. signari
ex auri libris: paulatimque principes imminuere pondus, imminuisse vero ad
XL.VM. For this testimony, and the former, we are to thank Pliny, seeing there
is neither Greek, nor Latin Author extant, from his time to Theodosius, that
gives us any certainty, what to conclude concerning the ancient coins. And
therefore since this later is of great consequence, but somewhat corrupted, I
compared it with the MSS. in the Vatican, and Florentine Libraries, and with a
fair one in Baliol College, which renders the later part of it thus. Postea
placuit X.XL. signari ex auri libris, paulatimque principes imminuere pondus,
imminuisse vero ad XLVIII, where for XLVIII. Villalped^ appaer. Vrbis ac
Templ^. par. 2. l 2. disp. 2. c. 12
Villalpandus corrects, or rather corrupts, the text, in writing XLV. But
Agricola, and Snell. in Eratosth. Batavo. l. 2. c. 5.
Snellius read it by conjecture thus. Post haec placuit XLII. signari ex auri
libris, paulatimque principes imminuere pondus, minutissime vero ad XLVIII. And
Ibidem.
Snellius gives a reason of it in his Eratosthenes Batavus. Nam ita argentei
denarii, and aurei nummi cadem manet analogia, pondere subduplo, ut quamdiu
octoginta quatuor argentei e libra, and e singulis unciis septem cudebantur,
tam di^ quoque aurei duo and quadraginta libram implerent. Postquam vero
argentei nummi pondus imminutum est: ut sex and nonaginta in libram
constituerentur, tum quoque duo de quinquaginta aurei, pondere tanto leviore,
in singulis libris cudi coeperunt. Which conjecture seems not altogether
improbable, if we respect the later Consuls, and first Caesar's, in whose times
we find the aurei to have been double to the denarii Caesarei; but surely long
before Justinian, the aurei, or as they were then also called the solidi, lost
that proportion to the silver, and kept it only to the s^misses aurei, to
which they were double, as they were in a treble proportion to the tremisses.

Wherefore in stead of these conjectures (which have been the bane of many a
good Author) of Agricola, Villalpandus, and Snellius, I would read the later
part of those words of Pliny, as the MSS. do, till I can see some concluding
reason, or good authority of ancient Authors to the contrary. For I do not see
why the Romans at the first might not coin forty aurei out of the libra, as
well as forty silver teruncii out of the denarius: which Varro l. 4. de L.
Latin.
Varro assures us they did. And who knows whither at the first making of their
gold coins, which was sixty two years, according to Pliny, after the first
coi^ing of silver, they endeavored to keep them in ^upla ratione, in respect of
weight: which graceful manner they might afterward intro^uce by commerce with
the Grecians.

And here, ere I proceed any farther in my ^nquiry after the Denarius
Caesareus, I cannot ^ut complain, either of the negligence of for^er times, or
unhappiness of ours: in that not one Author extant mentions the true weight
of the denarii, under the Caesar's. Xiphilinus in Anton. Caracalla.
Xiphilinus relates in his epitome of Dio, how Antoninus Caracalla corrupted,
and abased the coins; but makes no mention of the weight. (...). To Antoninus,
as other things, so also his money was adulterated. For the silver and gold,
which he gave us, the one was prepared of lead silvered over, and the other of
brass guilt. Suidas in vote (...)siv (...).
Suidas also speaking of the monetarii writes thus. (...). The Monetari^ are
Ar^izans employed in the ma^ing of money. These in Aurelians time corrupted the
money, and, having slain their Governor Felicissimus* raised a civil war:
whom Aurclianus with much difficulty conquering, pu^ to death with exquisite
torments. And many good laws were made, by several Emperors against
adulterating, and corrupting of coins (...) and those executed with much
severity, even in the time of Christianity. For we find under the Emperor
Constantine, that such as offended in this kind, were not only put to death,
but to a cruel, and bitter death by fire. L. OM^NES SOLIDI. C. THEOD. SIQVIS
SOLI^DI CIRCVLVM EXTERIOREM INCI^DERIT, VEL ADVLTER ATVM IN VEN^DENDO
SVBJECERIT. Omnes solidi, in qui^bus nostri vultus, ac veneratio una est, uno
pretio aestimandi sunt, atque vendendi, quanquam diversa formae mensura sit:
quod siquis ali^er fecerit, aut capite puniri debet, aut flammis tradi, vel
alia poena mortifer a. Quod ille et^^m patietur, qui mensuram circuli
exterioris adraserit, ut ponderis minuat quantitatem, vel figuratum solidum,
adultera imitatione, in vendendo subjecerit. In Constantius' time the same
punishment was inflicted. L. PRAEMIO. C. THEOD. DE FALSA MONETA. Pr^mio
accusatoribus proposito, quicunque solidorum adulter potuerit reperiri, vel a
quoquam fuerit publicatus, illico omni dilatione submot^ flammarum exustionibus
mancipetur. And afterward under V^lentinianus, Theodosius, and Arcadius, they
were accounted, and suffered as rei laesae Majestatis. L. FALSAE MONETAE. COD.
EODEM. Falsae monetae rei, quos vulgo paracharactas vocant, Majestatis crimine
tenentur obnoxii. But no where is it mentioned concerning the denarii, and
quinarii, which were the nlver coins, in common use, how much should be their
weight. Wherefore in such a silence of ancient Authors, we have no more solid,
and sure foundation of our inquiry: then either by our selves to examine the
weight of the fairest coins under the Emperors: or else to relate, what others
long before our time have observed, Antonius Augustinus in general informs us,
when coins were at their highest perfection, and how they began to decline with
the Roman Empire: as commonly when money comes to be abased, and that the mint,
like the pulse, beats too slowly, and irregularly, it is an evident symptom of
some distempers in the bowels of a State Le medaglie di tutti i tempi [sono
degne da esser osservate degli Artifeci] comminciando de Alessandro magno,
well' et a del quale principalmente fiorirono, per fin al tempo dell' Imperador
Gallieno, nel quale caddero affatto in sieme con l' imperio. Da indi poi in
fina Giustiniano si trovano bon medaglic di tutti gli Imperado^i ma con notabil
perdita della pulitezza, and perfettione antica. Quelpoi che habbiamo duppo
Giustiniano, e tanto cattivo che non si puo sosserire. Et se ne da quasi da
ognano la colpa a gli Vnni, a i Vandali, a gli Alani, a i Goti, a i Longobardi,
and ad altre barbare, and fiere nationi, che signoreggiarono gran part d'
Europa. Ant. August. dialog 1.
The medailes of all times (says he) [are worthy to be observed by Artizans]
beginning from Alexander the great, in whose time they principally flourished,
till the Emperor Gallienus, when they chiefly fell together with the Empire.
From thence to the end of Justinian, there are found good medailes of all the
Emperors, but with a notable diminution of their politenes, and ancient
perfection. Those which we have after Justinian, are unsufferably bad. The
fault by all men is assigned to the Huns, and Vandals, and Alanes, and Goths,
and Longobards, and to other barbarous, and savage Nations, who conquered the
greatest part of Europe. Erizzo, who lived almost an hundred years since, a
very diligent man in the Roman coins, but it is to be wished that he had used
more judgment in the explication of them, more particularly informs us. Havendo
io tali monete le quali sono del peso di un denario Rom pareggiate di peso all
medaglie di argento, che hanno scolpile le test de i Principt Romani, le ho
ritrovate differenti non poco del peso, si che quelle medaglie p^sano quasi
tutt^ meno del Denario; and havendo ancora pesate quelle medaglie che hanno
scolpita la effigy de i Caesari, le ho sempre ritrovate differenti fra loro
nel peso, Erizzo.
Having compared the weight of those sorts of money, which are equal in weight
to the Roman denarius, with the medailes of silver, which have the heads of
the Roman Emperors imprinted, I have found them not a little different, so
that as it were all those medailes weigh less then the denarius. And having
also weighed those medailes which have the effigies of the Caesar's, I have
continually found them different amongst themselves in weight. This uncertainty
so troubled Villalpandus, after many experiments made at Rome, that he knew not
what to determine. And it seems Blondus l. 5. de Roma triumph.
Blondus long before conceived it impossible. Haec omnia qualia per singulas
aetates fuerint, examussim ostendere, non magis difficil^, quam impossible
fuerit, non solum quia obscuris, and nostra aetate ignotis verbis sunt a
majoribus tradita, sed quia omnis fere aetas suam habuit cudendi varietatem,
and formam. Wherefore, for farther satisfaction of the Reader, I shall relate
some observations of mine own: especially those of the twelve first Caesar's,
which I took, with many others, by an accurate balance, from some choice
cabinets in Italy. And first, I shall begin with the gold coins. For seeing the
aurei under the former Caesars' were in dupla ratione to the denarii, therefore
the weight of those being known, we cannot be ignorant of the weight of the
denarii Caesarei. Besides; they are not subject to be consumed by time, and
rust, but only ex intertrimento, and therefore we may the safelier give
credit to them. And lastly, because the difference, though but of a grain, is
of some consideration in gold, the Masters of the Mint use to be the more
circumspect about them: whereas in silver coins; since it is hardly worth the
pains to stand precisely upon the excess, or defect of every grain, therefore
there are few of these so exact, but either exceed, or want, in the very mint,
one or two grains, and sometimes more.

The weight of some aurei under the first twelve Caesar's.
* C. CAES. COS. III. Eng: grains. CXXIII7/12 * A second, on the reverse. A.
HIRTIVS. PR CXXII * A third CXXIV
AUGUSTUS. CAESAR. III. VIR CXIX A second, on the reverse, OB CIVES SERVATOS
CXIX * A third, on the reverse, DIVOS. AVG. DIVI. F CXIX
TIBERIUS CXVIII * A second On the forepart TI. CAESAR. DIVI. AVG. F. AUGUSTUS
CXVII On the reverse, a temple

CALIGVLA. CLAUDIUS, on the reverse, S. P. Q. R. OB. CIVES. SERVATOS CXVII A
second CXVII A third CXVIII
* NERO, on the reverse, SALVS CXVI * A second, on the reverse, JVPPITER.
CVSTOS CXIII * A third, on the reverse, CONCORDIA. AUGUSTA CXIII
GALBA, on the reverse, CONCORDIA. PROVINCIARVM CXV OTHO, on the reverse,
SECVRITAS S. P. Q. R. CVIII VITELLIVS, on the reverse, LIBERTAS. RESTITVTA CXII
1/^ VESPASIANVS, on the reverse, PACI AVGVSTI CXI * A second, on the reverse,
COS. III TR. POT. CXIV A third, on the reverse, PONT. MAX. TR. P. COS. VI CXI *
A fourth, on the reverse, PACI. AVGVSTI CVIII A fifth, on the reverse, PACI.
AVGVSTI CX
* T. VESPASIANVS, on the reverse, ANNONA. AVG CIX * DOMITIANVS. COS. II. CXIII
* A second, DOMITIANVS. COS. VI. CAESAR. AUG. F. on the reverse, IVVENTVTIS.
PRINCEPS CXII

These aurei were selected by me, out of several others, as the fairest and
intirest; and amongst these to such as I have prefixed an asterisc, they are
such as seemed so perfect, that I could make no just objections against them.
By these it appears that Plin. l. 33. c. 3.
Pliny, speaking of the gold coins, rightly informs us. Paulatimque Principes
imminuere pondus, imminuisse vero ad XLVIII. That by degrees the Emperors
lessened the weight [of the aurei] to the forty eighth part of the Roman pound;
that is, to the fourth part of the ounce. For this is the lowest weight, that I
find, till Heliogabalus time, who coined new sorts of aurei, different from
what had been the constant practice of the Roman State: some of which were
the fiftieth part of the libra Romana, and others again so massy, that they
were centeni, or bilibres; which not long after were altered, and abolished, by
Alexander Severus. The manner is expressed by Lampridius in Alex: Severo.
Aelius Lampridius, in the life of Alex: Severus. Formas binarias, ternarias,
and quaternarias, and denarias etiam, atque amplius, usque ad bilibres quoque,
and centenas, quas Heliogabalus invenerat, resolvi praecepit, nec in usu
cujusquam versari: atque ex eo his materiae nomen inditum est, cum diceret plus
largiendi hanc esse Imperatori causam, si cum multos solidos minores dare
posset, dans december vel amplius una forma, triginta, and quinquaginta, and
centum dare cogeretur. Under the same Alex: Severus began the semisses
aureorum, and tremisses to be coined, which had not formerly been in use. The
semisses were answerable in weight to the denarii Caesarei, when they were
least, that is, ninety six in the Roman pound; though Agricola, Villalpandus,
and others, upon a mistake, equal them then to the dram Attica. Lampridius
in Alex: Severo.
Aelius Lampridius writing of Alex: Severus, plainly expresses that in his time
they began. Tumque primum semisses aureoru^ formati sunt, tunc etiam, cum ad
tertiam parte^ aurei vectigal decidisset, tremisses, dicente Alexandro etiam
quartarios suturos, quod minus non posset. Afterward, Constantine,
Constantius, Julian, and other succeeding Emperors, lessened the weight of the
aurei, whereby there came to be seventy two in the Roman pound, so that each
of them weighed the sextula, ot four scrupula. That the aurei of Constantines'
time were sixty two in the Roman pound, is most evident out of the Codex
Theodosianus, where they are also absolutely called Solidi, without the
addition of aurei. Codex Theodos. l. 1. de ponderatoribus.
L. SIQVIS. C. THEOD. DE PONDERATORIBVS, ET AVRI INLATIONE. Siquis solidos
appendere voluerit auri cocti, septem solidos quaternorum scripulorum, nostris
vultibus figuratos, adpendat pro singulis unciis. XIV. vero pro duabus, juxta
hanc formam omnem summam debiti inlaturus: eadem ratione servanda, etsi
materiam quis inferat, ut solidos dedisse videatur. Gui: Pancirolli thesaur.
var. lect. utr. juris.
Pancirollus, in his thesaurus variarum lectionum utriusque juris, reads VI.
solidos, instead of VII. and XII. instead of XIV. And that it must necessarily
be so, besides that the solidi of Constantine now extant prove as much, may be
collected out of the proportion of weight, which is here assigned by
Constantine himself to the solidi, and that is four scruples, or the sextula.
For the solidus containing four scruples, and the ounce containing twenty four
scruples, there will therefore be six solidi in the ounce; again, the pound
consisting of twelve ounces, and the ounce of six solidi, the whole pound
therefore will consist of seventy two solidi. These aurei by Justinian in like
manner are termed solidi. L. QVOTIESCVNOV E. C. DE SVSCEPTORIBVS, PRAEPOSITIS,
ET ARCARIIS. Where he also defines the same weight. Cod. lib. 10. tit. 70. in
rescripto Valentiniani and Valentis Impp.
Quotiescunque certa summa solidorum pro tituli qualitate debetur, and auri
massa transmittitur, This excellent place very hardly escaped Haloanders'
emendation, who had a great mind to have played the Critic, and to have
altered it. For he thus writes. In vetusto codice in rasam membranam haec ita
reposita sunt, ut certum sit alteram, and furtasse genuinam lectionem sublatam,
and legendum, duodequinquaginta, aut certe quinquaginta. A goodly consequence,
because the parchment was scraped, and the first writing altered, therefore the
true reading must be expunged and a fal^e one put in: whereas he might with
more candor, and ingenuity, have concluded the contrary, that the false one was
expunged by the scribe, and the true one inserted. For who uses in copying of
MSS. to scrape any thing out of the apographum, but only when by collating it
he finds it to be different from the Original?
in LXXII. solidos libra feratur accepta. The same thing is implicitly
confirmed by Isidorus (l. 16. Orig. c. 24.) Solidus alio nomine sextula
dicitur, quod iis sex uncia compleatur. Hunc ut diximus, vulgus aureum solidum
vocat, cujus tertiam partem ideo dixerunt tremissem, quod solidum faciat
termissus. Where Agricola l. 2. de pond. and temperat. monetarum.
Agricola, I imagine, truly finds fault with him for calling the solidus,
sextula; though the proportion he assigns is right, that is, that the solidus
was the sixth part of the Roman ounce, and contained (...), the weight of the
sextula; as it is attested by Zonar. l. 3.
Zonaras: or, which is all one, that seventy two solidi were made out of a
Roman pound, as Justinian before expressly assigned: and as infinite store of
the solidi, or aurei, from Constantine to Focas, which I have weighed,
manifestly prove.

In the same place of Isidorus l. 16. Orig. c. 24.
Isidorus we may collect the reason, why the aureus was called solidus. After
that, the semisses, and tremisses aurei were coined, the aureus was called
solidus, because nothing was wanting to it. Solidum enim Antiqui integrum
dicebant, and totum: In which sense the solidus was also taken for the libra,
or assis; that is, as the assis is taken for the whole, according to that
usual phrase of Civilians ex ass haeres, when one is heir to the whole
inheritance: so the solidus was taken for the whole assis. Vol. Metianus de
assis distrib.
Volusius Metianus. Prima divisio solidi, id est librae quod as vocatur, in
duas parts dimidias deducitur. From hence (says Hinc and solidum aureum
dixere Romani, ubi idem pondus habere coepit in auro, quod solidus, id est, as
haberet in aere, duarum nempe drachmarum. Salmas. de modo Vsur.
Salmasius) the Romans called that the solidus aureus, when it had the same
weight in gold, which the solidus, that is, the assis had in respect of brass,
that is, two drachmes. Though I rather suppose that the aureus was called
solidus, first of all in Severus' time, not for containing two denarii in
weight, (which Salmasius calls drachmes) for so it always did under the later
Consuls, and first Emperors, but because the aureus was then first d^vided
into two parts, that is, into the semisses, and tremisses, and so relatively to
these the whole aureus was rightly called solidus. Of the same opinion is
Agricola l. 2. de pond. and temp. monetaru^.
Agricola. Quos aureos, cum respectum ad semisses and tremisses haberent, tunc
primo dixerunt solidos, quod semisses ex dimidia eorum part, tremisses ex
tertia constarent.

The semisses, and tremisses, of the other Emperors, at some distance after
Severus, came to be less in the same proportion, as the aurei were lessened.
For the aurei of Severus were double to the denarii Caesarei, and therefore but
forty eight in the pound, and not fifty as Heliogabalus made, whose error
Severus corrected. But when the later Emperors made seventy two aurei out of
the Roman pound, the semisses came also to be diminished, and were half of
these new aurei, and not of the former, and the tremisses the third part. And
here the aurei lost that proportion, which they kept before of being double to
the denarii. Of these tremisses is Justinian to be understood, L. FORTISS.
MILITIBVS. COD. DE MILIT ARI VEST Fortissimis militibus nostris per Illyricum
non binos tremisses pro singulis clamydibus, sed singulos solidos dari
praecipimus. And this may be farther proved by a fair I have since perused
another tremissis in gold, a very fair one, with this inscription D.N.
JUSTINUS. PF. AUG. weighing twenty two grains and better; which formerly
belonged to the learned Geographer Ortelius. Besides a third, of Majorianus
with CONOB superscribed (which signifies Constantinopolitanum obrizum or
Constantinopoli obsignatu^) weighing likewise twenty two grains. And a fourth,
of Justinian, weighing twenty three.
tremissis in gold of mine own of Justinian, with the inscription D.N.
JUSTINIANUS, weighing twenty one grains English, and therefore wanting only
three grains, which it may have lost by time: otherwise it would be exactly the
216th part of the Roman pound, that is, the third part of the aureus, or
solidus of those times: whereas if it had been coined to the proportion of the
aureus, when there were forty eight in the pound, it should have weighed 36
grains, so that it must have lost 15, a difference so great, in a piece of gold
so fair, and withal of so small a quantity, altogether improbable. And
therefore this coin alone, if no more were extant, would confute their opinion,
who maintain, that the tremissis of Justinian differed not from the tremissis
of Severus, and consequently the aurei of them both, better then the reasons
produced by Covarruvias tom. 1. c. 3. paragr. 1. and 2. de vet. aureis, and
argenteis numis.
Covarruvias to the contrary have done.

The weight of some of the fairest Aurei of the Roman Emperors, from Nerva to
Heraclius.
On the fore part of the Aurei are these characters. On the reverse these. Eng:
grains. IMP. NERVA. CAES. AVG. P. M. TR. P. II. COS. IIII. P. P. FIDES.
EXERCITVS 111 IMP. TRAIANVS. AVG. GER. DAC. P. M. TR P. COS. VI. P. P. DIVVS.
PATER. TRAIANI 110 IMP. CAESAR. TRAIAN. HADRIANVS. AVG. COS. II. P. M. TR. P.
P. AVG 121 ANTONIUS. AVG. PIUS. P. P. TR. P. XII. COS. IIII 119 ANTONIUS.
AVG. ARMENIACVS P. M. TR. P. XVIII. IMP. II. COS. III. in Scuto Victoriae. VIC.
AVG 118 IMP. CAES. L. AVREL. VERVS. AVG CONCORDIAE. AVGVSTOR TR. P. II. COS. II
117 L. VERVS. AVG. ARM. PARTHI. MAX TR. P. V. IMP. III. COS. II 113 M. COMM.
ANT. P. FELL. AVGP. P IOVI. VLTORI 114 SEVER. P. AVG P. M. TR. P. X. COS. III
FELICITAS. SAECVLI 114 IMP. M. ANT. GORDIANVS. AFR. AVG CAESAR. M. ANT.
GORDIANVS. AFR. AUG 114 * Trebonianus Gallus P. M. TR. P. IIII. COS II. P. P 75
* Gallienus P. M. TR. P. III. COS. P. P. 74 ^MP. PROBVS. P. F. AVG VICTORIOSO.
SEMPER 106 ^MP C. CARINVS. P. F. AVG SPES. AVGG 72... DIOCLETIANVS. P. F. AVG
IOVI. CONSERVAT. AVGG 77... MAXIMIANVS. VIRTUES. MILITVM. T 74 CONSTANTINVS.
MAX. AVG SECVRITAS. REIPVBLICAE infra TR 70 ^/^ CONSTANTINVS. P. F. AVG.
VIRTUES. AVGVSTI. N 68 CONSTANTIVS GLORIA. REIPUBLICAE VOT XXX MVLTIS. XXXX.
infra SNNS 70 IM. CAE. MAGNENTIVS. AVG VICTORIA. AVG. LIB. ROMANOR infra TR 70
FL. CL. IVLIANVS. P. F. AVG VOT. X. MVLT. XX. infra ANT 68 D. N. IOVIANVS. P.
F. PERP. AVG. SECVRITAS. REIPVBLICAE VOT. V. MVLT. X. infra COS. P 68 D. N.
VALENS. P. F. AVG RESTITVTOR. REIP. infra ANTO 68 D. N. VALENTINIANVS. P. F.
AVG RESTITVTOR. REIPVBLICAE 69 A second -- 69^ D. N. GRATI^NVS. P. F. AVG
VICTORIA. AVGG. infra TROES 69 A second -- 68 D. N. THEODOSIUS. P. F. AVG
VICTORIA. AVGG. infra CON 68 A second -- 69 D. N. ARCADIVS. P. F. AVG NOVA.
SPES. REIPVBLICAE intra corollam XX. XXX infra CONOB 67 A second -- 68 D. N.
HONORIVS. P. F. AVG VICTORIA. AVGGG statua, cui inscript. R. V infra CONOB 69
^/^ A second -- 69 A third D. N. HONORIVS. P. F. AVG VICTORIA. AVGGG. N.D.
infra CONOB 68^ D. N. THEODOSIUS. P. F. AVG IMP. XXXXII. COS. XVII P. F. infra
CONOB 69 D. N. PLA. VALENTINIANVS. VICTORIA. AVGGG. infra CONOB 68 D. N.
VALENTINIANVS. AVG VICTORIA. AVGGG infra CONOB 69 D. N. VALENTINIANVS. P. F.
AVG VICTORIA. AVGG. infra TROES 68 D. N. IV^. NEPOS. P. F. AVG. VICTORIA.
AVGGG. A. infra CONOB 69^ D. N. ANASTASIVS. P. F. AVG VICTORIA. AVGGG. infra
CONOB 68 D. N. IVSTINIANVS. P. F. AVG VICTORIA. AVGGG. A infra CONOB 69 D. N.
FOCAS. PERP. AVG VICTORIA. AVGG. infra CONOB 68 D. N. FOCAS. PERP. AVG
VICTORIA. AVG. infra CONOB 69.... HERACLIVS 69^ a second 69^

And thus much of the aurei under the former, and sater Emperors, as they
serve to illustrate, and prove the weight of the denarii Caesarei, which is our
next, and principal inquiry.

The denarii under the Caesar's were almost as various, and unconstant, as the
aurei, sometimes more, sometimes less; and if they had not been so, they could
not have kept that proportion to the aurei of the former Emperors, which we
assigned. From Augustus time to Vespasian, as I find by examining many of
them, they continually almost decreased, till from being the seventh part of
the Roman ounce, they came now to be the eighth part: and therefore ninety six
were coined out of the Roman libra, whereas before under the Consuls eighty
four. From Vespasian to Alex: Severus, as far as I have observed, the silver
continued at a kind of stay in respect of weight, excepting only such coins,
as upon some extraordinary occasion, both then, and in the first Emperors
time, were stamped, either in honor of the Prince, or of the Empress, and
Augusta familia, or else in memory of some eminent action. These last, most
usually were equal to the denarii Consulares, and many of them had these
characters EX. S. C or else S. P. Q. R Under Severus, and Gordianus, the
denarii began to recover their primitive weight, and came to be equal to the
denarii Consulares, the half of which also were exactly the Quinarii: and so
continued during the succeeding Emperors till Justinian, with little
diminution, but most commonly with a notable abasement, and mixture of allay.
After Justinian, there happened such a deluge of barbarous Nations, which
overflowed the greatest part of Europe, that not only the coins, but even the
liberal arts, and sciences, began with the majesty of the Empire to decline
from their first luster, and perfection.

Wherefore I shall not speak of the (...), or (...), a sort of silver coin in
use, before, and after Justinian, which some collect out of Cedrenus to have
been the eighth part of the ounce, Cedrenus in histor. compend.
and therefore equal to the denarius, in the lowest valuation; though Suidas
in voce (...).
Suidas renders (...), and the Scholiastes Basilic. Eclog. 23. (...), and to
contain twenty four (...). But I shall not positively determine, either the
weight of this, or of the (...), or siliqua in silver, both coined when the
Imperial seat was translated to Byzantium, unless I had examined some of the
fairest of them. And for the same reason I shalll not define the Hebrew
denarius, mentioned by Elias in Thisbite, in the word (...), and by p. 72. Col.
4.
Moses Gerundensis upon Exodus, and by the Chaldy Paraphrase, 2 Reg. 5. 5.
which I imagine to have been no other then the Roman denarius, used by the
Jews: neither shall I determine the Arabian (...) dinar, and (...) derham: the
former of which the Rabbis call (...), used by Rhasis, Avicen, Mesue, and by
several other Arabians, both Physicians, and Historians. All that can
certainly be concluded is this, that by the (...) dinar, when we speak of a
coin, is meant sometime the denarius, and sometime the aureus: but when we
speak of a weight, always the aureus is understood: ^s by the (...) derham,
the (...), or silver ^ram. But surely the quality of the thing is different
from the name: the silver drachme of the Arabians, as it is generally now used
in the Mahometane dominions in the East, consisting ^f XLVII. 41/52. grains
English, (as I have found by ^eighing many of them) which is much less then
^ther the Dram Attica, or the denarius Consu^ris: and somewhat less then
the Denarius Caesare^^. And yet it is not improbable, but that this ^ay have
continued with the^, without any dimi^tion, for six, or seven hundred years to
our ^mes: as well as the Roman pound, and ounce, ^ave continued entire sixteen
hundred years, and better. But to omit any farther prosecutio^ of the (...) of
the Arabians, which may hereafter more fully be discussed, when we shall handle
their measures, and weights, and to go on with our discourse of the Roman
denarius. After the breaking in of so many barbarous Nations, as of a torrent,
into the Roman Empire, the denarius began generally to be disused, every one
almost of these, as an argument of their Sovereignty, and conquests, making new
coins of their own: or else such as continued the former, either by allaies so
abased the finenesse, and valuation of the coins, or by several diminution^ so
impaired the weight, that the denarius totally fell, and at last almost
vanished into nothing* Neither will this seem strange, if we shall consider
that the like alteration, in respect of weight has happened, by the revolution
of a less time, in our own coins. I shall instance in our denarius, or penny,
which in Ethelreds time, that is, a little more then DC. years since, was the
twentieth part of the Troy, or silver ounce: as Lambar^i Gl^ss^rium (...) 1644
M^ Lambard in his Saxon Glossary observes, and a^ by experience I have found
(and the same proportion was anciently observed by the In appendice libri de
limit. agrorum: luxta Gallos vigesima pars unciae denarius est, and 12 denarii
solidum reddunt.
French in their denier). This proportion continued successively to Ed^: the
first, in whose time we find the weight of the denarius by Stat. 31. Edov. 1.
Statute to be thu^ defined. Per ordinationes totius regni Angliae denarius
Angliae, qui vocatur Sterlingus, rotundus sine tonsur a, ponder abit 32 grana
frumenti in medio spicae, and 20 denarii faciunt uncia^, and 12 unci^ faciunt
libram. Under Stat. 9. Ed. 3.
Edward the third it cam^ first to be diminished to the twenty sixth part of
the Troy ounce: and under Stat. 2. Hen. 6.
Henry the sixth it fell to be the two and thirtieth. In Stat. 5. Ed. 4.
Edward the fourths time it came to be the fortieth. Under Stat. 36. H. 8.
Henry the eighth at first it was the fortieth, then the forty fifth. Afterward
sixty pence were coined out of the ounce in the second year of Stat. 2. El:
Queen Elizabeth; and during her reign sixty two: which proportion is observed
in these times. So that it is evident that Ethelreds' penny was bigger then
three of ours. And after times may see this of ours, as well as the Roman
Denarius, to be quite diminished, and brought to nothing. For if either our own
exigencies, or the exigencies of forain States, with whom we have commerce,
cause us, or them (as occasions will never be wanting) to alter the proportions
of the gold, and silver coins, either in respect of weight, or in respect of
purity, or lastly, in respect of the valuation, the gold bears to silver; by
all, or some of these causes, there will inevitably happen such a diminution of
the penny (and proportionably of our other coins) that at length it will not be
worth the coining. But I leave this speculation to such, whom it does more
nearly concern. And certainly it is a consideration not of the least
importance; money being as the sinews, and strength of a State, so the life, and
soul of commerce: and if those advantages, which one Country may make upon
another, in the mystery of exchanges, and valuation of coins, be not thoroughly
discovered, and prevented, by such as ^it at the helm of the State, it may fare
with them after much commerce, as with some bodies after much food, that
instead of growing full, and fat, they may pine away, and fall into an
irrecoverable consumption. But I return to the Roman denarius, which we have
brought so low, that there is nothing now left of it, but only the name: and
that also suffered an In the same manner the solidus, or aureus, as it lost its
valuation, so suffered an alteration in the Greek name. For instead of (...) we
find the Glosses to render it (...). Glossae. (...) solidu^: and in the same
Glosses we read (...) interpreted Biniones, and (...).
alteration. For the later Greeks instead of the (...) called it the (...): and
both Greeks, and Latins, and sometimes the Arabians, took it not in the same
sense, as it passed for in the first institution, that is, for a silver coin,
worth in valuation ten, or sixteen asses, but for any sort of coin whatsoever.
And therefore Meursii Glossarium Graeco-Barbar: in voce (...).
Meursius' observation, in his Glossarium Graeco-Barbarum, is worth our
consideration. Postea (...) dixerunt aevo corruptiore, and generaliter pro
quavis pecunia. Sicut Itali denaro. Galli Denier, Hispani Dinero. Anonymus de
bello sacro. (...),
(...).


Whence the learned Scalig de re numm.
Jos. Scaliger rightly observes, that, ultimis temporibus denarii pro exigua
stipe usurpati sunt, ut hodie in Gallia. Imperator Aurelianus: Philippeos
minutulos quinquagenos, aeris denarios centum. Eos Vopiscus in Bonoso
sestertios aeris vocat. Macrobius de nummo ratito loque^s, qui erat sr^us: Ita
fuisse signatum hodieque intelligitur in alcae lusu, cum pueri denarios in
sublime ^actantes, capita, aut navia lusu test v^t^st^tis ^^^amant. In
Evangelio secundum (...) 12. (...). Hilarious (...) inopis Deo acceptiores. Luc.
10. (...), Ambrosius, duo aer^* Vetustissimus est igitur denarii usus (...),
vel stipe. Thus far Scaliger.

Such an uncertainty being then, as we have mentioned, both of the aurei, and
denarii, under the first Caesar's, in whose times the purest coins, and the best
wits most flourished, and such an abasement, and impurenesse of the silver
under the later Emperors, no reasonable man can imagine, that either the
anci^nt Grammarians, Poets, Orators, Historians, or especially Physicians,
whom it did most concern to be precise, and most of which lived under the
former Emperors, did ever allude to the weight of the denarius Caesareus, but
rather to the Consularis. And to this only, and to no other, did the Attick
drachme mentioned by Dioscorides, Cleopatra, Galen, Julius Pollux, Oribasius,
and the rest of the Greek Authors correspond. And thus have we finished our
discourse concerning the denarius, in the notion, and acception of the
Ancients, both Greeks, and Latins.

Our next labor should be to compare it with the standards for weights of
diverse Nations, used in these times. For which I had recourse to the public
Zygostatae, and Ponderatores, in my travails abroad: and for my observations I
must refer the Reader to this ensuing Table.

A Table of the gold, and silver These weights (excepting the rotulo of
Damascus) were diligently compared with the Originals, and Standards: in like
manner as I examined the measures above described. In both which if any shall
find some ^ide difference, from some Originals, AS five, or six grains in the
English pound, and it may be one, or two parts of a thousand in the English
foot, different from the Standards in the Exchequer, or the Tower, or at
Winchester, or some other place, it is not much to be wondered. For I have found
as great differences in ^ollating the English Standards themselves: and have
heard Gasparo B^^ti (one of the (...) men in this kind that I have known) to
complain of the same diversity at Rome. (...) though it be a (...) that in any
(...) Kingdom, (...) Commonwealth, (...) Standard, which (...) of (...)
justice, should be unequal, and therefore unjust; yet unless more art, and
circumspection be used, then hitherto has been put in practice, it is
impossible but such inequalities will creep in. But this observation of mine by
some may be thought too nice, and curious. That which follows, I am certain, is
as necessary* as the preservation of the life of many a man. And that is, that
some Physicians erroneously imagine the granum auri to be alike in all Nations.
And therefore Fernelius, a very able man (who, I think, was the first Author
of that opinion) writes thus. (Fern l. 4. c. 6. Method. Medendi) Granum, cui
tanquam basi reliqua innituntur pondera, ratum constansque esse decet; neque id
granum esse hordei, neque tritici, neque ciceris, neque frugis ullius, aut
legumi^s, quod aullius par s^t ubique gentiu^ pondus. At vero nummarium
minutu^, quod aurifabri granum appellant, and Latin momentum dici potest,
omnibus mundi nationibus unum idemque est, and stabile, quod auri sacra fames,
and opum furiosa libido, inviolate and incorrupte servat, idque signis and
exemplaribus undique identidem collatis. Indeed it was an useful fancy of his
to think of some common measure, in which all Nations might concur: though it
is more to be wished for, the^ ever to be expected: But that ^sseveratio^ of
his, inviolate, and incorrupte servat, idque signis and exe^plaribus undique
identid^ collatis, from a man of such rare abilities, I cannot but extremely
wonder at. For if we shall go no farther to confute his assertion, then to
compare our grana auri with those of Paris, which Fernelius used, we shall find
ours much bigger: XXIX. English grains almost equalling XXXVI. of Paris. Or if
we shall compare the Spanish grana auri, with his, we shall find those much
less: XXXVI. Spanish grains weighing but XXVIII.. of his at Paris. The like
could I demonstrate in those of other Countries. By which dangerous, and
notable error, for want either of due care, or an exact balance, we may
conceive that whatsoever also is delivered by the Ancients, in the like nature,
is not presently without due examination to be credited.
weights of several Nations, taken from their Standards, and compared with the
Denarius.
Eng: grains. SUch parts, or grains, of the English Standard for gold, and
silver (or of the Troy weight) as the denarius Consularis contains 62,
according to the weight of the best coins, or according to the weight of the
Congius of Vespasian 62^ The ancient, and modern Roman ounce contains 438
The ancient, and modern Roman pound, consisting of twelve ounces, contains
5256 The Troy pound, or English Standard of gold and silver; consisting of
twelve ounces, contains 5760 The Troy, or English ounce, (to which five
shillings two pence of our money in these times are equal) contains 480 The
Paris pound, or Standard for gold and silver, of XVI ounces 7560 The Paris
ounce 4721/^ The Spanish pound, or Standard for gold and silver, of sixteen
ounces, taken by me at Gibraltar 7090 Another weighed by me at Gibraltar 7085
The Spanish pound in Villalpandus, is (I know not by what error) but 7035 The
Spanish ounce at Gibraltar (the pound consisting of 7090. grai. English) 4431/^
The Venetian pound, or Standard for gold and silver, of XII. oun. 5528 The
Venetian ounce 460*^ The Neapolitane pound, or Standard for gold and silver, of
twelve ounces 4950 The Neapolitane ounce 4121/^ The pound, or Standard for gold
and silver, of twelve ounces, at Florence, Pisa, and Ligorn 5286 The ounce at
Florence, Pisa, and Ligorn 440 The pound, or standard, at Siena, for gold and
silver of twelve oun. 5178 The ounce at Siena 431 The ounce at Genoa, for gold
and silver 405^ The Turkish Okeh, or Oak, at Constantinople, consisting of four
hundred silver drams ^9128 The silver dram generally used in the great Turks'
dominions: as also in Persia, and in the Moguls' Countries, if I be not
misinformed 47^ The Turkish sultani, or Egyptian sherif, being a gold coin,
with which the Barbary and Venetian chequeen, and Norimberg ducat, within a grain
more, or less, agree. 53 The Ratel, or Rotulo, for gold and silver of 144.
drams, at Cairo 6886^ The Ratel, or Rotulo, for silk of 720 drams, at Damascus
(with which I suppose they there formerly weighed their gold and silver;
because most Countries use the same weights for silks, gold, and silver) 34430
In this Table I judged it much fitter to compare the denarius, with the
Standards for gold, and silver of several Nations, then with their gold and
silver coins, now current. Because the pounds, and ounces of the Standard,
continue always the same; whereas the gold, and silver coins, being cut in
several proportions, according to the exigencies of the State, admit of
several alterations, and diminutions.

The CONCLUSION.
IT was my intention from the Pes Romans and denarius, together with the Congius
of Vespasian, to have deduced the other weights, and measures, ^sed by the
Romans; and from those of the Romans, by such testimonies, as are upon record
in the writings of the Ancients, to have inferred those of the Hebrews,
Babylonians, Egyptians, Grecians, and of other Nations. A work I confess
intricate, and full of difficulties: wherein I could expect neither to give my
self, nor others satisfaction, without first laying some sure, and solid
principles for the basis, and foundation. Therefore that occasioned me to
insist the more largely in the prosecution of the pes Romans and denarius, and to
examine all the ways, I could possibly imagine, for the evident proof, and
confirmation of them. What in this kind I have done, and with how much truth,
and diligence, I leave to the impartial test of after times, the rest at more
leisure may be perfected. Yet these following observations, as a coronis to the
whole work, I thought would not be unacceptable, if by way of anticipation I
communicated them to the world: and those are how the Originals, and Standards,
of weights, and measures, notwithstanding the revolutions, and vicissitudes of
Empires, may be perpetuated to posterity. Amongst several ways, which I have
thought of, I know none more certain, and unquestionable, then to compare them
with some remarkable, and lasting monuments, in remote Countries, that have
stood unimpaired for many hundred years, and are like to continue as many more.
In which kind I made choice of the first, and most easterly of the three great
Pyramids in Egypt; of the basis of that admirable Corinthian pillar, erected
(as I suppose) by one of the Ptolemies, a quarter of a mile distant to the
South from Alexandria, being one vast, and entire marble stone: Of the rock at
Tarracina, or Anxur, where it adjoins to the via Appia, and almost touches the
Tyrrhene sea: Of the gate, or entrance into the Pantheon, or Temple of Agrippa,
dedicated by him to all the gods, and by the Christians to all Saints. Of the
Porta sancta, in that new, and exquisite structure of Saint Peter's Church in
Rome. If the like had been attempted by some of the ancient Mathematicians, our
times would have been freed from much uncertainty, in discovering the weights,
and measures of the Greeks, and Latins.

The first, and most Easterly of the three great Pyramids in Egypt, has on
the North side a square descent, when you are entered a little past the mouth of
it, there is a joint, or line, made by the meeting of two smooth, and polished
stones over your head, which are parallel to those under your feet, the breadth
at that joint, or line, is 3 feet and ^ of the English foot.

Within the Pyramid, and about the midst of it, there is a fair room, or
chamber, the top of which is flat, and covered with 9 massy stones: in it,
there stands a hollow tomb of one entire marble stone: the length of the South
side of this room at the joint, or line, where the first, and second rows of
stone meet, is 34 feet ^

The breadth of the west side of the same room at the joint, or line, where the
first, and second row of stones meet, is 17 feet 190/^^^^

The hollow, or inner part, of the marble tomb near the top, on the west side
of it, is in length 6 feet 488/1^^^.

The hollow, or inner part, of the marble tomb, near the top of it, on the
north side, is in breadth a feet 218/^^^^.

The basis of the vast Corinthian pillar, about a quarter of a mile from
Alexandria to the South, on the West side of the pillar at a b, is in breadth
12 feet 539/1000. at ^d it is 14 feet 417/1000.

The rock at Tarracina, or Anxur, near the via Appia, close by the Tyrrhene
sea, has these figures, besides several others in the same perpendicular,
very deeply engraven.

The uppermost line b c, over the figures CXX, in the innermost, and deepest
part of the ingraving, is in length 4 English feet, and (...)

The lowermost line d a, in the innermost, and deepest part of the ingraving,
is in length 4 feet 692/1000

The stately gate, or entrance, into the Pantheon, or Temple built by Agrippa
in Rome, the jambes, and top, and bottom of it, being all of one entire marble
stone, is in breadth between the jambes, or sides, some three inches above the
bottom, and some nine inches within, nineteen feet 6^2/1000

The Porta sancta, on the right hand of the frontispice of Saint Peter's Church
in Rome, is in breadth on the pavement, or threshold, between the jambes, or
sides of the entrance, eleven feet 928/1000

The great gate, or entrance, which is the middlemost of the five in the
frontispice of Saint Peter's Church in Rome, the doors of which are covered with
leaves of brass, with very fair and exquisite figures, is in breadth on the
pavement, or threshold, between the jambes, or sides of it, eleven feet 948/1000

The measures being fixed, we may likewise fix the weights in this manner; by
making a vessel of a cubicall figure, answerable to the proportion of any one
of these feet, or palms, or braces, which are described in the Table at the end
of the first Treatise. This cubicall vessel being filled with c^eer fountain
water, we are to weigh it with an exact balance, and to express, the weight of
it by some one of those weights, which we have placed in a Table at the end of
the second Treatise. The side of this cube being known, and the weight of it in
water defined, the rest of the weights in the second Table, by way of
consequence by those proportions, which we have assigned, may be discovered.
Thus for example: the Roman foot described by Villalpandus is nine hundred
eighty six parts, such as the English foot contains a thousand: this being
cubed (says he) weighs of fountain water eighty Roman pounds. If therefore
there be given nine hundred eighty six parts of a thousand of the English
foot, the cube of this will give us eighty Roman pounds in fountain water: and
consequently the other weights will be discovered by those proportions, we have
assigned to them, in respect of the Roman pound. Again, eighty Roman pounds
of water being given, if we reduce this into a cubicall body, the side of it
will give the Roman foot described by Villalpandus: and consequently the other
measures may be deduced, by those proportions we have given them in a peculiar
Table. Whereby it appears, that as by measures weights may be preserved, so on
the contrary by weights measures may be restored.

Some directions to be observed in comparing the valuations of coins.
IN comparing the valuations, either of ancient coins with modern, or of modern
one with another, we are to consider: first, the intrinseck of them, and then
the extrinseck. The intrinseck is either the finenesse of the coin in respect
of metal, or the gravity in respect of weight. The extrinseck I term first,
the character imprinted on the coin: and secondly, the valuation injoined by
the Prince, or State: by which character, and valuation, what originally, and
materially, was but common metal, or plate, comes now legally, and formally,
to be current money. With these limitations, if we shall compare ancient coins
with modern, and modern one with another, it will be no difficult matter to
proportion out their several respective valuations; and withal to reconcile
the seeming repugnancies, either of ancient coins, now found, differing from
the traditions of ancient Authors: or the traditions of ancient Authors
differing amongst themselves.

I shall first give an instance of modern coins compared with modern, in our
English money compared with that of Spain, as being most familiar to us: the
application of which will by analogy serve for all other distinct States, and
times, using distinct coins.

In comparing therefore English money with Spanish money in England, or Spanish
money with English in Spain, we are thus to proceed: First, we are to examine
whither they be of a like finenesse, for the intrinseck; if they be, then an
ounce of English money, and an ounce of Spanish (supposing the weight of the
ounce to be alike) will be of like value in any other Country out of England,
and Spain; where neither are current, but only considered as so much metal,
or plate. Secondly, we are to consider the extrinseck, that is, the form, and
stamp of the coin, with the valuation of it by the injunction of the Prince of
either State; and here that which before was equal, comes now to be unequal.
For an ounce of English money in England comes to be more worth, then an ounce
of Spanish money in England: because this wants the character, stamp, and
valuation of our Princes, whereby it is current and for the same reason will an
ounce of English money be less in valuation, then an ounce of Spanish money in
Spain, supposing (as I said) the ounce in both Countries to be exactly one and
the same.

The same analogy will be, if we compare ancient coins, as those of the
Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans, with our modern coins. We are first, to consider
the intrinseck of them, whither they be of a like weight, and finenesse for the
metal, with ours: and this is the natural, or physical consideration. From
whence we may conclude, that if, for example, so many Attick tetradrachmes do
equal in pureness, and weight, so many of our English shillings, newly
brought from the mint, or so many of our Troy, or silver ounces, taken from the
Standard, then are they to be balanced with these in the acception of them as
plate; and a silversmith, abstracting from the extrinseck, that were to melt
them both, would give a like value for them both. But if we secondly, look upon
them with the image, and character of the State, and in the notion of money,
which is the politic consideration, then that which before in the trutina, and
scale, was equal, in the foro, and in commerce, comes to be unequal: and an
ounce of English money shall pass for more, then an ounce in Attick
tetradrachmes, with reference to the expenses of the mint, and to the civil
valuation, depending upon a mandate, or law, inacted by the Prince.

In like manner will it be, if we compare ancient coins with ancient, made in
different States, as it is in comparing ancient with modern.

Upon these grounds of reason it will follow, that whereas the Roman Authors
make the denarius Consularis to be equal to the dram Attica, and the Greeks
equal the dram Attica to the denarius Consularis, that both say true; and
yet both of them, if we speak strictly, and exactly, may be deceived. For the
denarius Consularis examined by the balance, which is the best judge of the
intrinseck. (I speak of the intrinseck in respect of weight, and not of the
intrinseck in respect of finenesse, that being best discovered by the scale,
and this by the test: which last for the more cleernesse of my discourse, I
suppose in all these coins to be alike). I say the Denarius Consularis is found
by me, contrary to the opinion of all modern vvriters, to be lighter, then the
dram Attica: and therefore, to speak strictly, and precisely cannot be
equal to it in the intrinseck. But again, if we look upon the extrinseck of
the dram Attica, and denarius Consularis, that having the stamp of Athens,
and this of Rome* here reason must be our balance, and not the trutina. For the
Athenian coin being a fo^rainer, and not current in Italy, in the way o^
exchange, and commerce, will loose of its primitive valuation it had at Athens,
and for wan^ of the extrinseck of the Roman stamp, necessarily rebate in the
intrinseck. And therefore both Greeks, and Romans, vvriting in Italy might
truly say, that the denarius Consularis and dram Attica, were equal, that
is, speak^ing in civil commerce, and popular estimation: al^though they were
unequal in the intrinseck, and natural valuation.

But if we shall change the scene, and carry the denarius Consularis to Athens,
the ca^^ will quite be altered. For the denarius being stranger, and the
dram Attica a denizon, tha^ cannot have the same privileges with this. An^
therefore the extrinseck of the denarius being there of no use, and the
intrinseck in respect o^ weight falling short of the dram, it must
necessarily be much less in valuation at Athens, then the dram: and I think
no advised Athenian, writing in Attica, would make them equal, I am certain no
nummularius would.

The same may be said of the Hebrew shekel, and Attick tetradrachme, and of all
other coins, of distinct States, mentioned in classical Authors. Thus Philo,
and Josephus, in Judaea, both truly equal the shekel to the Attick
tetradrachme, that is, in way of commerce; though the shekel be unequal, and
less then the tetradrachme (as I have found by examining many of them) in a
just notion of weight. The reason is evident by what has been expressed
before. For in Judaea the extrinseck makes amends, for what the shekel wants in
the intrinseck; and on the contrary, what the tetradrachme exceeds in the
intrinseck, is diminished for want of the extrinseck, till at length in a
popular estimation they come to be equal. But the quite contrary would happen,
in the transportation of shekel from Jerusalem to Athens. Here the shekel would
necessarily fall from its primitive valuation, and the tetradrachme, being
considered now no longer as a forainer, would recover what it lost in Judaea,
and consequently rise above the Hebrew shekel: as having a double advantage in
the extrinseck, from the State, and in the intrinseck from its weight.

But what need we to go so far for examples, when as we instanced before, we
have them nearer home? The Spanish quarters of the dolar, or double rials,
pass ordinarily in our Sea towns but for shillings, (whereas they are worth in
the intrinseck thirteen pence farthing) and our shillings pass in Spain scarce
for a riall and an half. For theirs wanting in England our extrinseck, and ours
in Spain wanting their extrinseck, must respectively rise, and fall in their
valuation.

FINIS.

