THE VOICE OF TRUTH OR THE HICH WAY LEADING TO TRUE PEACE Composed in Latin by
M. G. and translated into Inglish by F. G.

Discite a me quia mitis sum, and humilis cord: and invenietis Requiem
animabus vestris

Matthew 11. 29. Learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart: and you
shall find rest to your souls.

Matthew 11 29.

AT GANT, Printed by Robert Walker, at the sign of the Annuntiation of our
Blessed LADY, 1676.

To the most virtuous and Honorable lady MARY KNATCHBVLL Abbess of the Inglish
Dames of the order of S. Benedict in Gant.
MADAME
MY wishes to your lady. and Community, are of a most happy Christmasse and to
the end they may not prove mere empty ones, that pass with the breath that
convayes them to the ear, they go accompanied with a small treatise, which
may help to further the happiness I wish both you, and them. I present you
with The voice of truth, the Angel of peace who giving himself unto us, gave
the first happy Christ-masse, and peace on earth to men of good will. First
fruits seldom have their due maturity: yet their being first supplies this
want, and makes them the most acceptable. I hope these being my first (in this
kind) will, if not merit a gratfull acceptance, at least plead a gracious
pardon for.

Your ladps most humble servant F. G.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. that Peace the greatest good of Man Living on earth, is
only to be found in God.
Son I said unto my Disciples Peace I leave unto you, my peace I give unto
you; nor did I give a ^ale ^ng, when I gave peace. For peace, ^d tranquillity
of mind, is the g^eatest of happinesses, this would (...) afford. All labor
for this a^e, that they may live in quiet, (...) peaceably pass their days.
^e who you will Riches, Pleasu^, and Honors, if he enjoyes (...) peace he
will still be miserable. Peace of mind is a comfort in (...) labors, a
buckler against misery, a^ antidote against fear, a school (...) virtues.
Without peace neither Kings, nor Princes, can be happy, and on the other side
either in sickness, Poverty, torments, or death it self, if you enjoy but
peace of mind you are happy; and none of earth can be more happy then you,
unless he enjoy a greater peace, and more tranquillity. Learn therefore
Son of me this science of Saints, hear me, and Ile' teach thee what this
Peace is, and where it is to be found.

Peace is a tranquillity of mind by which man rests content, according to true
Reason with what soever happens, and desires nothing but what he has. This is
the complete peace, and most perfect possession of the blessed, who have
nothing to fear, or wish for, because they do securely, and fully enjoy all
good according to the measure God is pleased to impart. You must not expect
this peace on earth, but shall enjoy it in heaven when death shall be swolloed
up in victory, and mv Father shall wype a way all tears from your eyes that
you may contemplate the face of God. Yet there is an other peace much to be
wished for, where unto by Gods grace you may attain. For though your will
cannot be fully satiated in this life, nor perfectly at rest, (for as long as
you do not possess the supreme good, where unto you were created, the mind
is still wavering among the incertaintyes of hope and fear) yet you may enjoy
a secondary kind of peace or less perfect; which consist's in this, that you
only fear, hope, and seek one thing, to wit, God; and regard all other things
with a quiet and serene mind. And this is the peace of Saints living in this
banishment. Which as it is much surpassed by the peace of the Blessed, so does
it also far surpass the peace of Sinners.

Seek therefore dear Son this peace which leads to heaven. Then shall you
be at rest, when you only rely on me; for as long as you do not leave me,
let what will befale you, you shall ever enjoy the supreme good, if not in a
sure possession, at least in tranquil hopes, and sincere love, which is the
greatest happiness any man can enjoy in this life: nor is there any thing more
pleasing then my conversation that has noe bitterness. All creatures (though
you enjoyed them at your will) cannot quiet thee so much as I, the Creator of
them all, that infinitely surpass all good imaginable. Creatures may feed thy
senses, but because they do not reach the soul, leave it empty. I interiourly
replenish the soul with my self, and show it all good in me. Seek therefore
me and my peace, and Ile' take care of thee; leave not me, and Ile' not
forsake thee, but comfort thee in all adversityes, and not only give thee
peace, but make thee sit at my table; and though not for a permanency (because
thou must be tried) yet passing Ile' serve thee with heavenly Comfort.
Remember the comfort you have received, and you will see what I say is true.
Behold my Martirs and Confessors exulting in the midst of torments, and you
will understand, how much the interior consolation which I afford, does
surpass all the joys of the world. All joy of the world is overcome by any
small pain: but my joy overcomes all the pains of the world. When the
worldlings overfloe with delights, and swim in the midst of pleasures, if
their head ache, if a fever distemper them, all their joy is lost, and they
poor souls sigh and lament. So easily is all the joy of the world overcome
with the least sufferance or pain. On the contrary my servants in the greatest
pains and adversityes, in the most grievous torments, and death it self
rejoice; and replenished with my joy despise the torments. As therefore the
sorrow of the world does incomparably exceed its joy, so does mv joy in an
infinite manner surpass all the sorrow and pains of the world. Many hear the
name of my peace, and the words of Those that Evangelize peace and see the
Goodly feet of the Saints; but few understand what they see or hear, of
their internal joye. And therefore conceive it not because they have not tasted
of it. What a difference is there between my joy, and the joy of the world?
Heaven does not so much exceed the earth, as my peace does surpass all
comfort, or content, that is to be found out of me. Taste and see what the
abundance of my sweetness is: for if you taste it not, neither will Your eye
see, nor ears hear, nor shall it ascend into your heart, what things God has
prapared for those that love him. Therefore few understand, because few have
tasted how sweet I am. They will not seek the permanent good, but follow their
own inventiones: And therefore I deliver them up to the desires of their heart,
and passions of ignominy, that they may vanish in their cogitationes. None of
all these shall find peace: because they seek, where it is not; that is, they
seek it out of me, who only am able to comfort my Creature, when I will, and
in what measure I will. Son let this therefore be thy final conclusion, that
all peace and tranquillity of mind consists' in the possession of good; nor can
man's will rest else where but in good. Wherefore of necessity you must judge
the supreme peace to consist in the perfect possession of the supreme good in
heaven. The next degree of peace, which is the greatest good of this life, does
wholly consist in making toward the supernall peace, that is; toward the
enjoying God as soon, and securely as possible, and here enjoy: all mighty God
not yet face to face but through A looking glass and in a riddle. You are a
Pilgrimme and cannot possess a perfect peace till you come to your journeys
end. Yet you may enjoy the tranquillity of mind a travaler has, when you see
your self to go on in the right way with out danger. Neither is this more
propper to you, then to all other creatures. The greatest happiness of all
creatures is to rest in their final end, and the next, to tend with all speed
there unto. Thus the maine appetite and ^lination of the Elements is to (...)
in their center, and the next, to move toward the center; for all other places
are violent, Thus the brute beasts enjoy their chief happiness when they
feed their senses, and the next to this when they are in readiness to receave
this pleasure. In the same manner you may say of your self and all men; the
chief felicity of man is to enjoy and possess God, the next is to seek God;
for there is nothing so good, after the possesing God, as the approaching
toward God. And besides these, there is nothing that may be truly termed
good to man: for what soever is good ever perfects the thing, unto which it is
good, and nothing perfects man, that does not place him in his end, or at least
premote him toward it: as on the contrary nothing is justly to be termed
evil, but what hinders him of his end.

Son if you understand this you may live peaceably, nor shall any evil
affection touch you as long as you stick to this maxim. For all inordinate
affectiones that destroy peace, proceed from a salfe representation of good or
evil: so that who so ever is persuaded that nothing is good but what leads to
God, nor evil but what separats from him, may have a tranquil mind, and
peacebly rest in his Lord and God, by the assi^tance of devine grace; since he
sees it is in his free will and power, to want all evil, and possess all good.
For noe man looses God that wills not, and noe man that wills but enjoyes him.
And on the contrary whosoever do not tend toward God, besides that they are
deprived of the hopes of this happiness, and run into certain mischief,
they are troubled with many other affections. They are vexed with the desire of
many things, they fear and hope many things, which though they would never so
feign, they cannot obtain, nor retain when they have obtained them. They
leave the only true good, and are carried away with an insatiable avidity of
false apparent goods; and so are justly served, whilst they are illuded with
false goods, that neglect the true and maine good.

If some times they seem happy, and fully to rest, and desire nothing else,
whilst they take their pleasure, yet they are not happy. Noe man can be happy
and miserable at once; and whosoever hastens to eternal misery is miserable;
unless you think him happy, that being condemned to death is lead hood winkt
to the precipice; but such, therefore seem happy because they are drunk with
pleasure, and this is the happiness of drunken men, that whilst they are over
heated with wine, through the defect of the brain they seem to be happy.
Truly the felicity of such men is far inferior to the happiness of the
brutish beasts; for they can take the same pleasures more freely with out
danger of health, anxiety, or fear. But in these there, is noe peace, or
satiety of the will; but rather a certain dullness of mind, that makes evil
appear in the likeness of good, and so come to be coveted. As it uses to
happen to those that are sick of a feavor, who through their distemper desire
what is hurtful, and loath nothing more then wholesome meats. If these things
be true of those that have pleasures at their will; what may be said of the
miserable lot of those who seldom attain, and possess even for a short time,
this vain and imaginary felicity, which they so much labor for, and buy with
the loss of an aeternity, and the ruin of their soul. But because they do
not regard devine pleasure, nor raise their minds to heavenly things, they
therefore justly begin their punishment with their smnes, and walking In a
circle being deceived bv on creature they pass on to another to borrow
comfort.

Raise thy mind to thy creator, love him alone, him a lone fear, regard all
things in him alone, and to him a lone direct all things. Thus laysed, relving
on the Onnipotent, despise the Creatures under you. Then all things shall
cooperate to your good; when you refer all things to their author, from
whom, both you, and they take their offpring. You shall have peace; if you
take all things from God, and refer them to him again; what else soever you
do, you go disorderly to work, and shall necessarily loose your peace.

CHAPTER II. How a Soul relying on God may have Peace both in adversity and
Prosperity.
LOrd it is as you say: peace is only to be had in you. All other things are
imperfect and defective goods, if they are to be caled goods, and not rather
evils, which fill the mind with so many evils, which provoke the Appetite,
but do not satiate, raise thirst, but do not extinguish it; puff up, but
neither do nor can nourish: for as the body is not nourished with spiritual
food, so is not the soul delighted with corporal pleasures. I now therefore
return to thee o Lord, I have sought rest in all other things, Ile' now at
last, by they leave, make my a boad in they inheritance, that I may sleept and
rest in peace.

Because thou Lord have singulary settled me in hope, i will only seek thee an
infinite good, where with the whole capacity of my soul can be filled, a
permanent good that cannot be taken a way from me unless I will, an endless
good that can make those that love it happy for an aeternity. I Will only seek
thee I say; for when soever I have sought after other things I have found my
self deluded.

I now know that peace is only to be sought in thee, but know not how it is to
be had. Teach me therefore a Lord yet farther, how I may come to persever in
a continual peace in thee, with out disturbance; for though I do seek thee,
yet adversityes do not cease to befale me, which destroy the peace of my
mind. Yea even when things fale out properously, I am presently forgetful of
my self, and insteede of the peace which I ought to have in thee, I place it
in creatures; which peace is not sinsere; and ends in grievous war.

Son you would feign know how you may in all accidents proceed with such
indifferency, that you do not over much rejoice in prosperity, or give way to
be unprofitably contristated in adversity, where in the sum of my peace does
consist, which that you may obtain, Consider thus with me.

Mans' nature is such, that what so ever the understanding represents as good,
the will presently embraces, and what is represented unto the understanding as
evil, that the will presently avoyds, shunnes, and hates. So that of necessity
the affectiones of joy and sadness must vary, as long as the vicissitude of
good and evil last. (And by consequence the peace, and indifferency of mind be
lost) noe man can have a perfect, or imperfectly happy peace, but he, unto
whom always what is good happens. Nor do any sort of goods quiet and satisfy
the mind; but only those, that are such as the will covets according to right
reason. How then shall you come to possess peace of mind?

To the end you may always have what you wish, you must have an indifferency to
all things, and it must be all one, what soever happens to you, without your
fault. For seeing you cannot rule things as you will, you must accomodate your
will to things, if you will have your will agree with them, which you must
obsolutly wish for, to enjoy peace, which consists in the wills acquiessing
with content, to what so ever happens. You must not therefore more covet
pleasures then pain, nor prefer ease to labor, nor rather wish life, then
death; but keep your self in an aequal balance of indifferency to all
things. Now, you cannot be indifferent to all things, unless they all appear
aequaly to be desired. For as long as you judge one thing more to be desired
then another, so long you shall rather incline to one thing then another, and
so loose your indifferency. Now to the end that all things may appear aequaly
to be desired, harken to an abbreviated word, wherein the happiness of
Pilgrimmes is consummated, and the content of all Saints consists, and this is
the word my son, Consider all things in me, and not in themselves. This is
the art of arts, the gate of the kingdom of heaven, and the source of peace.
Consider all things in me and not in themselves, that thou may have peace in
all things.

If you rightly Consider all things, you shall see they proceed from me, and
perceive that nothing happens unto you, but what the infinite goodnesle, and
wisdom has out of an aeternal love, ordered for your greater good. If you
Consider all things in this love, they shall all seem good, all aequaly to be
desired, and so by consequence you shall have an indifferency to all, and
shall wish most for what happens, because you will not Consider things in
themselves, but in me, and judge it more fitting, my will be done, then
thine, because it ought to be so, and it is most expedient for thee. Noe
other consideration, but this will afford thy soul peace. For if you Consider
poverty, if contumely, if labor, if sickness if death, or any thing that
happens of adversity in it self, you cannot bear them without great trouble
and afflicion of mind, because so they are all contrary to nature. If you do
consider these things as proceeding from your, or their sins, they will yet
seem more intolerable; because the manner of punishment will torment the
mind as much, as the inflicted evil in like manner when you see the just
persecuted, and the wicked exalted, you will be enraged against triumphing
impiety, and will not be able to contain your self from the desire of
revenge. But if you recale all these things to their first of spring, you will
be able to behold them without disturbance. You shall understand all, when you
read all in the book of devine providence, where in the reasons of all things
are. And what weighed in the balance of humane reason appears unjust, shall
be found in the scales of the devine wisdom just and most fitting. All things
serve for this only affair of aeternity, the salvation of the elect. If the
Turks press, if Heriticks are multiplied, if the wicked domineere, it is not
for the Turks, nor heretics, nor the wicked sake, but for the elect that by
patience they may enter into the Kingdom of heaven. If there were any thing
that did not conduce to the good of the elect, God would have erred in his
work, who only made or permitted all things, that they should cooperate to the
good of the elect* This is Paul's mind. All things* cooperate unto good to
those that are caled according to purpose Saints. What is given to one of the
least of these whom God has chosen is of so great moment, that it is noe
ways to be omitted, and Kingdoms and empires are rather to perish, and the
whole earth, and heaven it self, rather to be annihilated, then that one of
the elect should be lost. So great a thing, it is, to see the face of God.
Neither will this seem strange if thou Consider me who when I was in the
form of God did rob my self, to the end that by my death I might open the
way to heaven for each of these little ones.

Consider therefore Son all things in me, and behold me in (...) things
working as I will; to (...) glory, and thy salvation, and of (...)* That will
cooperate with my gra^ and though you do not percei^ how I compass this in
all things yet firmly believe I do so, in eve^ thing, and so deliver your
will in^ my hands, most certainly know it* that I shall wisely and forcibly
pe^fect my work, and that Ile' neith^ do, or permit any thing, the shall not
be for your good, an^ promote you toward the designe^ Bravium if that you
will but mak^ use of my grace.

Whosoever shall root this trut^ well in his mind, shall never be^ uoyd of
peace of mind, and shall look adversity, and prosperity un davntedly in the
face without any change of affection, because the motive of his affection shall
never vary. He shall all ways rejoice because he shall ever find the good,
which he only seeks for; and he shall always rejoice in the same manner,
because he shall ever find the same reason of good in all things; to wit my
glory, joined with his welfare.

Son I do not say you shall ever as long as you live, come not to feel the
acrimony of grief, or allurement of pleasure. But I say that the soul that is
solidly settled in me may so command these affections, that she shall not
loose her tranquillity in adversity, though she groan under the wound of the
doctor, nor rejoice in prosperity, as prosperity, but in my will which she
acknowledges as the only true measure, of good and evil. This only
consideration of my will, shall so swallow up, all other Considerations that
they shall not appear, and though they strike the sense, they shall not move
the judgment, nor cast the will out of her Imperial Throne; but as a poor man
chosen out of a Cottage to a fair Kingdom is full of joy, which does not
cease, or is diminished, though the Cottage fale to the ground at the same
moment, nor would be increased though the Cottage should be made greater:
because his thoughts are wholly employed upon the gained Kingdom. So whosoever labors for Eternity makes Gods glory and his own salvation his only
business, and thinks this affair so much to surpass all others, that he
cannot find leisure to think of them, much less to rejoice, or be sad for
these toys of mortals. And truly as this poor man assumed to a Kingdom
would deserve to be laughed at, if he were still sollicitous for his Cottage:
much more does the man deserve to be laughed at, or rather lamented who being
made heir of God, will not accept of this Kingdom, but cast himself a way
upon childish follyes, and only seek a temporal convenience, in things ordered
for gaining an eternity. But this proceeds from the great weakness of humane
understanding though there be an infinite Kind of distance, between temporal
and eternal things, yet it prefers them before these: because it only beholds
heavenly things as it were a far of through a cloud, and handles earthly
things, it comes to pass that the most excelent things being only conceived
in a drousy dead manner do not move the soul, and the sensual and perishing
goods, though very small in themselves, because they are more lively
represented, and have a greater proportion with corrupt nature, do wholly take
the mind, and inflame the will. Now seeing it is certain the mind is most
carried a way with those things that have the greater appearance of good; the
chiefest industry and labor of a wise man, ought to be to endeavor to
conceive those goods as greatest, and most lively to propose them to the will;
which truly in themselves are greatest, and effect, that all other things
which are not realy good, appear sordid, and vile, at the first aspect. Whosoever shall do this shall not love any good more then he ought, but aequaly
empart his affection to each, according to the dictate of right reason; and so
at last come to live in true peace; not leaving in himself any motion of the
will not regulated.

But this is not the work of one day; long labor, and much meditation is
necessary to instruct and help the mind, to blott out the false Ideas it has
conceived, and begette true notiones of things, and such as shall of their
own accord prevent the will, and so raise it to contemplate the eternal good
in every thing, as now the carnal appetites do incline to the seeking of
temporal convenience. Nor is meditation alone sufficient to perform this,
unless it be accompanied with a continu^ practice added thereunto; for
meditation only conceives, but it is practice that brings forth; and unless
action follow contemplation, it is not virtue, but vanity that shall increase.
Therefore Son to the end you may obtain my peace, and put in execution what
you have conceived, you must do thus.

First if what you are about, be a good, convenient to nature (as are sleep,
meat, recreation honor, and what soever other goods of nature) consider it to
have a twofold manner of goodness one natural, and the other supernatural. The
natural goodness is that congruence which the thing has with our body and
soul, and the supernatural is the ordination of the thing to do Gods will,
and for his glory, and your salvatione, for which ends you must certainly
believe all things in the world are either done, or permitted. I call this
Kind of good supernatural to distinguish it from the other. Now having
considered these two Kinds of good, though nature do never so much propend
toward the natural goodness, yet you ought to judge the thing to deserve much
more to be coveted for its supernatural goodness. Neither does the whole sea
more exceed a drop of water then this supernatural goodness does surpass
the natural. For the natural goodness does proceed from an imperfect Limited,
and corruptible object, and the supernatural draws its goodness from the most
perfect, infinite, and Eternal object. This judgment being presuposed, the will
is to be stirred up, not to desire that good for its natural goodness which is
so small that it ought not to be ^arded, but for that which is infinitely more
deserving, that is, for the supernatural goodness; nor ought you to begin
any action before you find your self to be moved to do it, because it is my
will. What is said of your actions is to be understood of all other natural
goods. Thus when any congratulate with you for any good parts in you, you must
keep your will, from being carried a way with the natural goodness, and
endeavor to raise it, to rejoice in this congratulation and accept of it, as a
gift of God, whereby God intends to work his glory and your salvation.

You must altogether take great care, not to take delight in creatures; for
there is not any more deadly enemy of true peace, then this joy and content.
For whosoever place their joy in creatures shall not rejoice long; for all
creatures pass a way, and none can stand long that relyes on them. If you
rejoice at the possession of a thing you see is soon like to perish you must
needs be contristated at the loss thereof. Do not therefore serve two
masters, God, and the Creature, but serve God only, and be above all other
things. Never let your joy rest in any creature, but what soever joy or comfort
you find in any; embrace it, because that is my will: who did vouchsafe to
mingle some corporal delight with your actions, that you might come to me with
the more alacrity. Take therefore the delight and joy which some times arises
from creatures, as coming from my hand, and return it again to me, least
your joy prove vain and deceitful. And this is the first precept to be
carefully observed in things that please nature.

The second, which is not unlike to this, ought to be as carefully observed in
adversity. When therefore any thing of adversity happens, enter into your
self, and you will perceive the thing may be considered two ways also.
Considered in it self it is evil, and contrary to nature: but if that you
reflect, that adversity proceeds from me, you will see it contains so much
good, as ordained to my glory, that it shall consume with its goodness all
manner of evil, as the rodd of Moses devoured all the other rodds. You must
not therefore be terrifyed at this evil which is but small, but encouraged and
comforted with the good. For if labors, pains, and wounds can be joyfully
borne in this life, with the hopes of some reward that will ensue, of a
temporal good; how much more reason is there, that, any labor or pains should
be undergone joyfully, where the good proposed for reward is infinite. Truly
if you had but eyes to see what an immense good it is to suffer for God, there
is nothing you would so much covet as to be daily afflicted; you would
esteem it the greatest joy, to fale into tentationes, you would rejoice that
you were thought worthy to suffer contumely for my name; for certainly there
is nothing more holy or glorious, more profitable or secure, then to suffer
tribulationes. I came into the world, to suffer for thee, and you came, into
the world to suffer for me, that so you may be Crowned by me. This is the
profession of Saints to rejoice in tribulations, this is the distinctive sign
of my Church, to groe in the midst of persecutions. O That you did know, how
pleasing a patient soul exercised, and tried, with various afflictions is! you
would then much more covet to be contemned then honored, You would repute
laughter an error, and say to joy why are you deceived to noe purpose. If you
did well consider, what danger there is in prosperity, and how scure, and
great gain there is in adversity; believe me all that is bitter would become
sweet, and all that is sweet bitter. You would prefer ignominy before honor,
and grief before joy. You would fear least whilst men did applaude, you
should fale in so slippery a passage, and so offend me: and when any
creature did please you, you would be sorry that your affection were divided,
and not as yet wholly placed on me; and loved any thing besides me, though not
contrary to me. You would be glad and rejoice when adversity did befale you,
to drink of my chalice, you would desire to bear my cross, and become
pertaker of my goodly inheritance by the devine dignatione.

Then lastly shall your peace be with out disturbance, when adversity shall
become more pleasing to you then prosperity, when you shall rejoice in grief,
and still desire to suffer more. But even this desire must not pass the bounds
of indifferency: but you must be so affected, that though you be equaly
prepared to receave all things from my hands, on your part you desire to suffer
(if it be my holy will) because it is so pleasing before my father who wills
this for his glory, to the end you should imitate my passion, and in your
patience possess your soul.

This then o Lord is your doctrine (to the end I may enjoy an undisturbed
peace) that all things, and especialy adversityes, are to be embraced as
means ordained for thy glory, and my salvation. I give thee a thousand thanks
that thou have vouchsafed to deal so mercifully with me, as not to permit
any thing either in, or about me, but what conduces to help me to thee. If
either man or Angel had such care of me as to assist me in all my actions I
ought to be thankful. But now that you the Lord of all things, and my God,
and Creator, are pleased to ordain all my actiones, what shall I do but wholly
deliver my self up to your will, and willingly accept of what soever you shall
ordain. I therefore o Lord wholly deliver my self unto thee, and entirely
resign my self unto thy will. I can fear nothing under so good a master:
But if I did, the benign Providence wherewith you have governed me from my
infancy would reproach my diffidence: for you a lone o Lord have always assisted
me, by sea and Land, you have preserved me in several Provinces and
countries. My father and mother have forsaken me; but you have embraced me,
and I have found none that have taken care of me, but thee o Lord, or for
thee: nor do I complain of this, but rejoice, and wish with my whole heart
that I may know none, nor none know me, that I may love none, nor none love
me, but you, and for you, whom in all things I desire to seek, and confide
in above all things.

CHAPTER III. That some Principles for Peace are to be drawn from the
knowledge of ones self
Son you have now Learnt the first principle of peace, which in all events
can afford a tranquillity of mind. For he that considers God in all things,
and all things in God, finds all in peace, and enjoyes perpetual
tranquillity. This a lone is enough to afford peace and without this nothing
will suffice. You must therefore labor for this, and when you arrive to the
hight of charity, you shall enjoy the most perfect peace. If you cannot on a
sudden fly high at least clyme daily as high as you can, that you may at last
come to the hight of peace and perfection. The more you come to consider all
things in God, the more peace you shall find, and the more you fail of it, and
betake your self to consider creatures in themselves, the more disquiet shall
you experience. Worldly things are like a torrent, which may be securely
looked on, but not trusted, for if you are once engolfed there is noe retiring
back, but are forced on to your ruin Consider therefore God in Creatures, yet
do not trust your self to Creatures, but beholding God in all, as you see the
Sun in water, take care you be not drowned. Know that the less you have of
worldly things, the more you shall enjoy heavenly. Rid thy self therefore of
the love of creatures, that thou may begin to love the creator: use thy
self to have nothing that thou may possess all things. Thou shall be so
long deceived, as thou do confide in creatures; thy grief shall ever equal
the joy found in Creatures; and thou shall loose as much of true liberty, as
thou have of tie and affection to Creatures. True liberty does not only free
from necessity but rids of all ties of self-love, and leaves the will in a
perfect indifferency ready to follow Gods pleasure in all things.

And this is the first principle of peace drawn from the contemplation of God.
The next must be gathered from the knowledge of your self. Study therefore
the knowledge of your self if thou desire peace, for next unto God, all your
peace and happiness depends chiefly of your self. And that knowledge of your
self shall most conduce to your peace, whereby inordinate affections are cut
of, that trouble and disturb the mind. This is the perfect knowledge of your
own baseness whereby you will cast of your self, and all self confidence,
wholly placeing your hopes on me, to the end you come not to build on sand, but
on a firm Rock, an indeficient peace.

Lord you bid me consider my self, to find peace; and when I do so, I am
much disturbed and full of Confusion: where soever I turn my self, I find
miseryes and dangers on all sides. I am a Pilgrimme in my nothing, and go on
for an incertaine space of time, in a dangerous jorney to eternity. It is
common to all men to be Pilgrimmes as well as me; yet the peril becomes not
less, by the greater multitude that run the hasard, but fear is rather
increased by the frequent examples of those that perish. All men in this world
are travalers walking on the slippery declivity of a most deep precipice, at
the bottom where of hell is seated, and heaven at the top: but heaven lies
hid with a cloud, and hell is covered with the pleasant amaenity of green and
delitious meddoes, so that almost all, not co^ring heaven, nor hell, as they
ought, are easily carried whither the alluring pleasures inuit. And if any one
by reason, find out the deceitfullnesse of our senses, and discover the
ambuish, what shall he do? shall he clime up? but his weak feet slipp away,
but the path is cragged and inaccessible to human sense, but the dark and
thick cloud threatens tempest and danger of shipwreck. Thus all things drive
downe-wards, the flesh, the world, and the devil, all hinder the assent, the
thorny and difficult way, the travalers weakness, and the imminent tempest.
Yet we must ascend, we must clyme upwards. But with what forces? o Lord not
ours, but thine: this is the work of thy mercy which makes that possible by
grace, which is impossible to nature. I am not able of my self to work my
salvation unless you that command, give me forces to do what you ordain.

Now if I look into my soul, alas how poor and miserable am I? The
understanding capable of little, knows very few things. If I run over all
creatures I have not knowledge of the hundred thousand part of them; and if an
unprofitable knowledge is a Kind of ignorance, what a deal of what I know is
wholly unprofitable? Or even sometimes hurtful. A gain a mong those few things
I know, if I examine each in particular I shall clearly see I know noe one
thing, I say not perfectly, and as to the essence but even superficially in
order to the uses it was given for. As for heavenly things, which it were only
fit to know, I do almost always err by a certain Kind of necessity: for as
a Mathematiciane that does use instruments that are not exact or well
proportioned cannot choose but err: So for the most part my soul making use
of the senses of the body which have noe proportion with spiritual and
heavenly things, judges nothing rightly but generaly always erres, where it
is not led by the conduct of devine faith.

I inquire after the enormity of sin and find noe measure for it, for I have
offended God more then any humane thought can conceive. I seek what Eternity
is, and measure it by time, because I have noe other measure of Eternity: for
though time be not the measure of Eternity yet it is more like it, then other
things that have noe similitude, therewith: I seek to understand the
happiness of the Blessed, and I define all according to a sensible love, where
as that happiness surpasses all sense, witness the Apostle who teaches that
Neither eye ha^ seen, nor ear heard, nor has it ^cended into the heart of
man, what things God has prepared for those that love him.

Thus am I ignorant of all things, and what is the greatest weakness of my
understanding, is, that in all this palpable obscurity and darkness, I am
ignorant of my own ignorance, and if I find others more absurd then my self,
I presently cloak my ignorance with the fair name of wisdom; I will not
compare my self with many that excelle me, least I should come to the
knowledge of my own weakness, but with a few which I judge inferior, that
others greater madness may flatter my phrensy, and I seem to know the more,
the less I doat. And this is that great Idol which does so puff up my
poor understanding, that it is not capable of other things. These are the
distempers of the understanding: now how much more dangerous are the diseases
of the will? O what a civil war do I suffer with in my self, whilst so
many several contrary affections, and passions each draw their way? The sea is
not so toren with contrary winds as my mind is rent, and tossed toe and froe
with contrary desires. The flesh and spirit each draw their way, hope and fea^*
anger and pusillanimity, avarice and luxury; and the mind is divided on the one
side with the labor of acquiring glory, and on the other with the shame of
loosing it. O raving ambition! o cruel torment! yet but a just punishment of
thy self. How much more happy should I be, if content with a mediocrity, I
did cast a way all hope or fear of humane things? For now that I seek humane
praise, and fear disprayse, I am overwhelmed with a multitude of disagreeing
passions which only serve, to hinder me from obtaining the peace I so much
seek after.

These o Lord are the things that pass my heart, when you my peace, my joy, and
my Crown are absent. And there is yet another great evil that praedominates
which is inconstancy. O how weak is my will? I seldom begin to do well,
but I presently come to fail. I not sooner resolve great matters, and make
great purposes, but at the first occation of difficulty all my fervor is lost,
and like an infant I am puffed up with a small good, and cast down again with
as small an evil; and in the mean time, live in noe small danger: for though
the fale be easy, the ruin is aeternal. In the midst of tentations I live
daily in danger of being overcome, with Idleness, anger, pride, pusilanimity,
or presumption, of faling through the concupiscence of the flesh or eyes, into
sin, being surrounded with infinite occations. And if I offend in one, I am
guilty of all, and the fale is erreparable if death seases on me offending. If
one might dye twice, and live as often; At least the second life might be
rightly ordered, and the soul better informed of the truth of things, would
abhor the danger the second time, but now that the blind understanding
leads a blind will, I am forced to fear Least they both fale into the pit.

If I must Judge my self by the memory of my past life, my fear does much
increase. Alas, woe is me! how have I spent my time? where are the days of my
life, how ill have I guarded my senses? How have I sinned both interiourly and
exteriourly? How seldom have I corresponded with devine grace? of all my
actions, for so many years, among so many helps, in the world or Religion,
I have hardly performed any so, but there has been some thing to repent. Some
times performed with sloth and negligence, some times I have been puffed up
with good success, some times contristated at evil events; and never entirely
cooperated with devine grace. This I have been, such does my memory represent
me; and this and worse shall I be for the future, if thou Lord do not
prevent me, with thy grace. Banished, poor, ignorant, inconstant, feeble,
sick, infirm in spirit, and more infirm in flesh, blind in the understanding,
blinder in the will, prone to sin by nature, proner by evil custom, I live a
scandal to my brethren, a prejudice to Religion, and dangerous to my self.
There is noe creature whose injuryes I am not exposed to, there is noe member
of my body that is not subject to innumerable miseryes, noe sense but that
eternal death may enter by, not a day, not an hour, not a moment, but that I
am in great danger of loosing an aeternity.

Lord whilst I consider these things I cannot choose but be much troubled, and
ceased with fear and trembling. How then o Lord do you say that the knowledge
of my self does contribute to peace of mind? Lo how even this imperfect
knowledge of my self, makes me a weary of my Life, and have noe mind to any
thing, but to lament and weep: If then I did fully know my self, and clearly
see my basnesse what other should I find, but most bitter bitterness and
vnconsolable grief?

Son do not think you loose your peace by the knowledge of your self. This
thought is not with out pain and grief, and therefore worldings fly it as a
disturber of quiet. The knowledge of ones self takes a way sloth and
pusillanimity, but not peace. Peace cannot consist without security, nor
security without a fear, that proceeds, from the knowledge of ones self. The
fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of ones self the
beginning of the fear of God. Unless all things be rightly ordered in you,
you can have noe peace, nor can you have any thing rightly ordered in, or
concerning, unless you know your self.

There are three chief principles, or maxims conducing to peace, to be
drawn from the knowledge of your self.

The first is, not to place any confidence in your self, but cast all your
hopes in Allm: God, whosoever confides in himself, shall be deceived, and
restless. Do not presume of your self neither in great, little, or even the
least things; for of your self you can do nothing. If in your daily actions
you do rely, on your own forces, you will necessarily fale, when assaulted
with a strong tentation: For on the one side your forces are not sufficient,
and on the other, not being used to make your recourse to God, you will not
be able to hope, for his help: so that you will come to be left void of all
help. The affair of your salvation must be perfited by God, and your self,
and as God will not do any thing with out you, so can not you do any thing
at all with out God. Do not therefore confide in thy self least God leave
thee to thy self: but beg of God that he will vouchsafe powerfully to
prevent thee, that so thou may be able to do all things, in him that
strengthens thee.

The best counsel you can follow, is to enter into the abyss of your own
baseness before you begin any affair, even the least, to see, understand,
and confess, that you can do nothing without me, and when you have rightly
considered the abyss of your nothing then ascend unto the hight of my mercy,
which is above all my works, and so let one abyss invoke another abisse, and
Ile' open the cataracts of heaven, and powerforth my grace upon you. When you
have thus humbled your self ask what you will, and it shall be done. The
exinanition of ones self is the most efficatious prayer. Lessen first your
pride, and then bend your knee in prayer. As often as you shall humble your
self in any of your actions, so often shall I assist you with my
omminipotency that you may want nothing.

Lo therefore Son, what great good there is contained in the knowledge of
your self. If you know your self, you will humble your self, and make your
recourse to me, and if you have recourse to me, Ile' help you, and labor
with you: and what can you fear when you have the Omnipotent to assist you,
who can as easily do great matters, as the smalest things. You ought to fear
nothing, but only confiding in your self: for as long as you place your
confidence in God, you shall aequaly overcome all, because you rely on him,
who can with the same case do all things either alone, or with you.

God therefore left man, naked, needy, and unable to raise him self toward
his end, because he would himself, out of his infinite love allways assist
him, with his wisdom rule him; with his power defend him: and replenish him
with grace ^mediately floeing from himelfe. If you do rightly understand these
things you have laid a solid foundation of true peace. And if you are come to
know your ^nperfections you have made a great step toward perfection* and
this is the first fruit you must reap from the knowledge of your self, which
being well understood, you will easily obtain the two following.

The second fruit then is, that this knowledge of your self cutts a way all
vain hopes by the roots. Why do you begin with vain hopes what of your
self you are not able to effect? for whom do you heap up treasures who are
but a passenger that must leave them all to morrow? Eternity is at the door,
which will force thee to bid a long adieu to thy desires, what will then become
of the honor you so dearly bought, and so carefully cherished, when you
shall sleep in dust, and be noe longer thought on? but grant that all did
praise you after death, what then? shall not the worms still feed in the same
manner on thy corpse? shall not thy soul be tormented a like? perhaps many
have praised, you in your life time which you knew not of, what were you the
better for this unknown praise? Many alfoe have disprayed you which you were
ignorant of, and what are you the worse? It will be just so after death, when
neither praise, nor disgrace shall move you absent, now and insensible.

If you did know your self you would curb your ambition and live in a most
profound peace. Do not labor and take pains that others may know you, but
endeavor to be fully known to your self, and God. You are, what you are in
the sight of God, and not what men Judge you. Do not compare your self with
others, but behold your self, in the presence of God, that you may always
humble your self. If you compare your self with others, to be sure your
perfections of body or mind, will not reach to a mediocrity, and labor what
thou will, you shall find your self surpassed by a great many. Be therefore
content, that as many surpass you in gifts of nature as God has preferred,
and only endeavor in matter of good will, and virtue (whereby a man's worth is
only to be measured) to be a mong the first. If you be in this or that
office, if you be preferred before this or that person, if this, or that man
praise you. Does not the burdone increase with the honor? Does not solicitude
the punishment of ambitious increase with their praises? Praise and envy
always go hand in hand, mirth and sorrow are twins, nor has any seen the
day of glory, that has not been seconded by a night of ignominy.

This is the nature of the world that all strive to pull down those that
preceed them. Many compassionate him falen, whom raised with prosperity, and
aiming at great matters they shall strive to keep down. If noe man did envy
you, if you could easily gain, and retain honor, yet you ought not to accept
of it, if you did rightly know your self; for you were not created to seek
this humane day, if you had been created for to be renouned among men, God
would have furnished you with other helps for obtaining the glory of the
world. Conclude therefore from your Imbecility and weakness, that you were
not made to be great in this world, but in heaven, nor must you seek to be
glorious before men, but God. Knowing therefore your self cut of all vain
hopes, and cast away all a^bibition, and only mind, covet, and strive to have
God for witness of your actions, be satisfied to have him a lone for your
spectator, who when you have lawfully contended, only can give you the reward.
Let this be the second fruit of the knowledge of your self, that being
poor, banished, abject and infirm, you ought not to presume great matters,
but all ways set in the last place, and aim at nothing that is great in this
world, that you may find all things in the next.

The third fruit of this knowledge is Patience. If you know your self to be
a man, you know with what an innumerable multitude of afflictions you are
encompassed on all sides, and if you remember your sins you will allways
expect just punishment. You cannot being a man live without miseryes, and being
a sinner, you ought not. It is therefore just, and necessary that you should
always suffer. It is a foolish presumption to expect to find noe adversityes.
Prepare your self then from this moment and know for certain you must daily
suffer. If you have already suffered some thing, you will do wisely to believe
you shall yet suffer much more. When you go about any thing Consider your
weakness, that you wonder not if any misfortune happen in the event. There is
neither creature you love, nor person you deal with, from whom you must not
suffer. Expect therefore a cross in every thing, that so it may become the
lighter by expectation. As there is nothing more frequent in this life then
tribulations, so is there nothing more necessary then patience. You must
suffer from all, but chiefly from your self. For your own frailty is the
heavvest cross, which taken a way, it would be easy to bear the rest. Let
then your frailty admonish you, of your want of ability, that you do not
presume of your self, but when soever by devine grace you desire to do good,
you propose it unto me with fear, and if that after your purpose (which you
thought very firm and efficatious) you fale into your former faults, have
patience, and purpose a gain with greater fear of your self, and more
confidence in me. And if you fale again what wonder if a staff of reed be
broken? Begin a new, and forgetting what is past, lay hold on your good
purposes, not as if you would force victory and with one lump rise to the
highest perfection, but by little and little daily endeavoring to advance with
patience and longanimity. This is your infirmity that you find a will to good,
but find not how to compass it: knowing therefore your self do not wonder if
you fale, but when you have falen confess your sins against your self,
humble your self, and do penance, and I Will a gain raise you, that you may
go on as though you had never falen.

Son lo here the three things which you will learn from the knowledge of
your self. First to diffide in your self, and place all your confidence in
me. Secondly to seek nothing in this exile, nor desire to be praised or
esteemed great; and finaly daily to expect, considering your own unhappiness,
a Cross in, and from all things. If you observe these things you shall not be
so easily disturbed, because you will cut of the roots of disquiet. For all
disquiet arises from these three heads, either to much confidence in one self;
Avaine desire of worldly things; Or impatience in adversity.

CHAPTER IV. Some points conducing to peace that ought to be considered in
things.
ILe' yet speak to thee Lord, though I am but dust and ashes, thou have taught
me two maxims of peace, to wit, the knowledge of thee, and the knowledge of
my self, whereof, all peace and perfection depends. There are yet two things
remaining, toward the completing your instruction, to wit concerning the
things, and persons I deal with, that I may know how to conserve a lasting
peace in all events. Teach me therefore O Lord yet farther what so ever more
is necessary to find true peace in all things.

Son the first thing you must deeply print in your mind concerning things,
is to know you must allways labor, allways be doing some thing. Peace and
Idleness can never agree, nor is there any thing so opposite to the
tranquillity of mind, as lithernesse and sloth. Among all things created that
are active there is nothing so active as the soul of man, and therefore
nothing can be more opposite and contrary to it then doing nothing at all.
Examine your self if when you refrain from all action, and are wholy Idle,
you do not find a tediousness and loathing. There is nothing does more
strengthen, and comfort the soul then to see it self make progress, nor any
thing oppress it more then to be wholly forced to cease from all action.
Desires kill the slothful. How do they kill? By gnawing and consuming the
very soul; they also kill by delivering into the hands of many tormenters.
For Idleness is the seminary of all vices, the receptacle of all wandering
evils, the devils table where unto the evil spirits are rather invited, then
come by chanse, the deadly enemy of all virtues, the scoole of wickedness, the
sink of vices, where unto all filth gathers. There are two things wholy
inconsistent with Idleness: Wisdom, and Chastity. Lo how the slothful man
is killed by his desires, who being robbed of the chiese ornaments of soul and
body, (for vvisdome is the grace of the soul, and Chastity of the body)
becomes an enemy of virtue, and is exposed to as many miseryes, as there are
deceits of the world, the, flesh, and the devil. There is noe vice so full of
mischief as Idleness, none so ungrateful and fruitless; for an Idle person
is useful to nobody, and always displeasing to him self. There is nothing
so like Idleness, as foolishness; for both render people unfit for all
things. And there is nothing so agreeable to peace as a hardy, but moderate
labor, where with life is ceasoned, and time spent in tranquillity. Adam was
placed in Paradise to manure it; and you are caled to Religion to cultivate
your soul by manfully working in it. A Religious life, is the work of God,
And cursed he that does the work of God negligently. You shall have your
reward according to your works, even in this life as well as the next. Labor
therefore in my vineard and you shall have a double reward, peace of mind in
this life, and glory in the next.

This is the fust conclusion conserning the things one is to do that intends
to live a pious and quiet life, he must always labor. Now Son harken where
in you are to labor. Allways do that which you shall not repent, but wish to
have done, and you will find peace. But what things are these O Lord? Son
they are those things which God requires and exacts of you. But who shall tell
me what God requires of me? O happy man that has God for the directour of his
actions and hears God saying this is the way, walk in it, that you may go
straight to aeternall Salvation. Truly he were inexcusable that should
decline from the way, that has God for his guide. It Is true Son, there is noe
greater happiness, then to have God for master, directour, and assistent in
all actions Neither Kings nor Princes have such a Counceler; yet you enjoy this
praerogative of Saints, that you ever know the will of God in all your actions.
I told you interiourly when I spoke in your heart, and caled you to Religion;
and now I tell it you again that I command what soever your Superiors order.
You know my will, when you know the will of your Superiur, that cyther now is,
or shall be for the fature. And seeing I have given your Superior my place,
it belongs to me to provide that he shall command what I will have; and if I
did not take care of this, my Providence would be defective, which is
indeficient and cannot fail. The day you made your vows to me, and promised
to obey your Superior in all things; That very day did I take you into my
care, and ordered in the council of my wisdom, certain actions, which I have
in part already let you know, and in part shall declare, wherein I have, and yet
will have you exercise your vow, which I declare by your Superior. I do not
say your Superior is infallible, but I say that what soever your Superior
commands (that is not a sin) I command the very same, and I Will so direct
you, that if you obey as you ought, what soever your Superior commands, shall
conduce to your salvation. This is an infinite confort of Religious persons
that they allways hear me speaking in the Superior, and so are more sure
they do the will of God, then if an Angel did reveal it to them. For they may
doubt of the Angel, but ought not to doubt of the command of the superior:
because I have constituted him in my place, and Ile' so guide him, that though
he do not think of it, or will not, he shall do my will. That is, he
shall command that, which I resolved to command, when you offered your self
unto me. Do not therefore deliberate any longer, but know that will. That is,
he shall command that, which I resolved to command, when you offered your
self unto me. Do not therefore deliberate any longer, but know that when you
hear your superior speak you hear my will For it is truly my will to
govern thee as the supertour shall command, whom I now feresee; though you
do not yet know, who, or where they are. there are many and hard commands
that expect you, which you shall understand how hard they are when you shall
hear them, but I now tell you of them that when they happen you should
remember that I have told you, that this is my will, which you ought to
fulfill, for your great comfort and consolatione. Lord I now see that the
chief and maine rule, or choosing things for obtaining, peace, is to choose
nothing but wholly depend on obedience, that I may always do thy will, which is
to be coveted above all things. Lord give me thy grace that I may always do
thy will, because I know this to be best and most profitable for mce; and let
me never seek my own. And now because it often happens that there is some
time left free to me, I also desire to know what even then I am to do: For
superiors do not so employ us but there is some time left overplus. Son
when you find any such time (which will often happen if you be diligent) come
to me, and open your mouth, and I will fill it. I say betake your self to God
in prayer and contemplation. It is the most proper duty of man to contemplate
the Devinity, there is nothing on earth more sublime then prayer, but the
frequenting Sacraments. It is an unspeakable dignity of man that he can speak
with God, and lay open all his miseryes and necessityes in his presence. If any
had so free an access to a king as you have to God, to propose what you will,
and when you will; he would think him self most happy. Do not therefore so
much neglect your good, but make your recourse to God with confidence as often
as you can, and take it as a great favor that I have provided thee this time.
If you do not willingly converse with God by meditation, you are in great
danger of leaving your vocation; for whosoever does unwillingly recollect
himself, gives an evident sign that he little regards his progress, and he
that does not regard his progress cannot stand long.

Now to the end you may with constancy and profit converse with god in the
recolection of your self, be sure to have always some thing in readiness
wherein to employ your self with zeal. Now consider the excellency of God,
now his love toward you, now your end, and the terrible passage of death, some
times look in to your past actions, and others again foreeast your future;
knowing that the more you weigh each in the sight of God the more profitable
and tolerable they will become: the chief point of humane wisdom consists in
this, that a man comparing future with the past, do rightly order his actions
in the sight of God. And he that will not take time, to forecast what is to
be, can never behave himself well in occations. Meditation is the rule of
life, and prayer is the key of heaven; the one disposes to Paradise, the other
opens heaven, the one teaches what is to be done, the other gives forces to
put in execution both illuminate, both inflame, both conduce to make the burden
light, and Putrify the yoke at the face of oil.

Son, betake your self therefore to meditate and pray as often as your
obedience will permit, and when you can, write down what I suggest unto you,
that it may the longer remain in your mind, and so your comfort be more
permanent. Let it be your exercise, to gather scrappes from your Lords table,
wherewith to feed your hunger, when afterward you are in desolation. All have
some private exercise wherein they spend their time; do you choose this, which
is the most excellent, most profitable and secure, and if you do but use your
self to it, it will become the most sweet and pleasing. There is nothing can
more conduce to peace of mind, then this internal conversation, which frees the
soul from the dependence of all other things, and persons. For he that can
tell how to converse alone, with God alone, carries his comforter with him, and
needs not beg comfort from Creatures: such do neither regard place nor
office, because they find free access to their God in all places, and
employments, and deem his conversatione the greatest good. All seek their
comfort in some thing, but he is happy that makes prayer and meditatione his
employment, for he shall have God for his comforter.

But because humane frailty is such that it cannot long continue in any
exercise without weariness and irkesomnesse; prayer ought not to be to much
continuated, but the mind must be released from to serious application. Now
what relaxation, a religious person is to take, and when, is not to be
doubted, this also being to be ordered by the prescript of obedience as well
as all other things.

Relaxation of mind 15 to be taken in such sort, that it be not embraced for
it self, but to the end that you may afterward betake your self more
vigorously to serious matters. There are some studyes which delight with their
variety, and conduce not only to avoid Idleness, but if undertaken with a good
intention, also help to serve God the better. and thus much as to the things
that are to be done. Now Son Ile' say some what of the manner of doing
them. In the first place consider for whom you do things. Whether therefore
you eat or drink, learn or teach, or what soever else you do, do all
things in the name of the Lord. raise your mind, that your eye being clear
your whole body may be light; you will perform this, if you ruminate well
what I have said: first that God ought to be considered in all things, that
as all things floe from him, so all things should again return unto him.
Secondly of the know ledge of your self, to Consider who it is that does them,
for reflecting on the weackenesse of the agent, you will easyly resign your
self to all events: thirdly to Consider what you do, and regard things as
they are, fading mortal, and not able to satiate. Considering the nature of
things thus, your mind will acquiesce to all accidents, as you will see
descending to particulars. It Is a hard thing to loose a friend, yet if you
consider a friend to be what he is, you will find your self separated from
one, whose company was only lent you till a future separation, nor will you
take it heynously that a mortal man shall dye, nor that God take back what he
had lent. It Is a harder thing to see familyes and Kingdoms destroyed; but
consider that Kingdoms are assemblyes of men who as they began, so must
they end; nothing humane can be everlasting. There is noe Kingdom that has
continued from the beginning of the world, nor any now in being that was not
built on the ruins of a former; nor is there any like to last till the latter
day. God has weighed in the Counsel of his Eternity the sins of all shates,
Kingdoms and Empires and resolved to punish them being come to such a measure.
If therefore the destruction of some happen in your days, adore the Justice of
God, and you will not wonder the works of men shall perish. There is nothing
more grievous, then to see the Church oppressed, and that fire extinguished
which I kindled. Yet look on this very oppression as the safty of the elect,
and any persecution what soever will seem tolerable. Consider also with your
self that Gods elect dispersed in all ages, and clymats, do suffer more or
less, according as God decreed before all ages, as it is written. When the
highest devidel, the nations, When he separated the sons of Adam, he
appointed the limus of people according to the number of the children of Israel
(that is the number of the elect) for not all that are of Israel they be
Israelits: nor they that are the children of the flesh, but those that walk
according to faith, and for these God made all things, So that though the
Church seem to be extinguished in this, or that place: yet it is not
extinguished; but seeing there will be, noe more elect in such, or such a
place, the light of faith is withdrawn from the reprobate, by their demerit:
Yett God ever affords them sufficient grace to salvation: and this is not to
be wondered at. Consider therefore thus each thing to be what it is, and you
will not wonder at any thing that happens. And allthough this consideration be
very profitable in the occations themselves yet it is much better to dispose
the mind before hand: for in the occations, or after wards there is need of
great violence to suppress a raised passion. He that foresees all things will
be prepared for all events: Nothing can come sudden or unexpected to him.
And whosoever considers things as they are, will love them as he ought. The
only way to keep a quiet and settled mind in all events prosperous or adverse,
is to give each a just proportion of love. Things that are immutable, are to
be loved with an unalterable affection, and those that are changable with a
changable one. The immutable goods are God and his will, and then the salvation
of men, which is contained in the will of God. Wherefore these are the only
things which are to be loved vnalterably, always, and by all. All other
goods, either of body or soul, of parents, of friends, ones Country, or of the
whole earth, are mutable goods and limited, for there is none of these things
that fail not, none that do not deceive their lovers. Yet they are all goods
in their way, if you do but know how to make use of them. You must only lend,
and not give them your affection, you must not place your whole affection on
them; but afford each their proportion, more or less, according as they are
better and more permanent. Yet you must so impart to each, that you do not
derogate from the chief affection to the unchangeable good, which will be, if
you love all other things in order to that immutable good, there being nothing
truly good but in order to that. If therefore you desire not to be disturbed
with any thing which you either do or suffer, bridle your affections so that
they do not to much adhere to any thing but give each a just proportion,
according to their merit and deserts.

CHAPTER V. Certain things to be Observed concerning the Persons we deal
with, for preserving the Peace of mind.
Lo here my Son the hardest lesson of all; how to have peace with men. O
what a many things are to be observed not to displease men? you are oblidged
to love all, but not to be beloved by all, nor will you be able to effect it,
yet you must Provide good things not only before God, but also before all men,
if it may be, to which end you must observe many things.

In the first place if you desire to live in true peace among men, let your
chief care be not to communicate your self to freely to men; but keep at a
just distance with all people. Familiarity according to the old Proverb
breeds contempt. For whilst familiarity does wholly expose men, and discover the
most hidden secrets, it manifests many vices with few virtues: and vices and
defects do hinder love, toward the person they are in: and if they do not
begett a hatred, they at least breed contempt. More over a frequent
conversation with the same persons causes a satiety and that a loathing. If
therefore you desire to have a friendship long lasting with any one, do not
commnuicate to frequently with them, nor ever wholly, for the less freely you
impart your self to others the more precious shall your friendship be. How
com's it to pass that so many begin friendships with so much fervor and
affection, which are so soon lost? There are many reasons, where of this is
not the least. Because when they have wholly delivered themselves to each other,
and exposed their most hidden secrets love not finding how to increase, like
unto the flame having consumed the flax perishes with the fuel; so the love
of these not being able to increase consumes it self. This is so natural to
man. that neither the understanding nor will, can rest, but still seek to go
on tell they come to the possession of an infinity: and if they are not
permitted to pass on in any thing, they presently loath it and seek an other.
Thus they that heap up riches still desire to increase the heap; Thus they
that swim in pleasures still thirst for others. Thus they that are the most
Learned still desire a greater knowledge; nor can any of these rest, as long as
riches, pleasures, or knowledge have certain bounds, which they ever will
find. Yet as long as they labor in the pursuit of these goods, though they do
not rest (for noe man rests in that which he labors to obtain)
notwithstanding they delight in the progress; and man's mind is more pleased
with a progress in small things, then to stop at great. This is the reason
why you never ought wholly to impart your self unto your friends; But make a
moderate distribution, that love may still find place to increase. And so much
as to this.

There are yet many other reasons which if well Considered will more powerfully
withdraw you from to much familiarity with men. For as friendship is the
strongest and sweetest band, so does it also most easily captivate, and
hinder them from enjoying themselves, and God, with a true freedom. All love
of Creatures that has not its of spring from true charity is opposite to the
love of God; and there is nothing does so dead devine love, as the love of
men. The love of Gould makes men avaritious, that of honor ambitious, but the
love of men heaps all vices together. Many would overcome their own vices,
unless they were overcome by those of others, and drawn into mischief by
keeping their friends Company, most sins are committed, because men live
according to example and none dare recale others from sinning, but are rather
ashamed not to follow those that lead to sin. O hard slavery of friendship
which obliges to live according to the ways of others and those generaly evil?
there is yet a another evil in familiarity, that most betray them selves to
their friends, you laugh and disclose your self to your friend, and he noe
Sooner has received your secret, but recommends it to another friend, oblidging
his fidelity to be most faithful in the secret; and thus your secret wanders,
till at last it becomes Public. This is a great mischief of Familiarity, but
inevitable; for to conceal any secret, is to renounce friendship, and to
disclose it even to your most familiar is to divulge it. And you do most
unjustly exact another should keep the secret you could not conseale, for how
can you with reason comitte that to an others trust which you were not
faithful to your self in.

Though this were the only evil of friendship that it discouers what ought to
be kept secret, this alone might justly withdraw you from the familiarity of
men, but there are a thousand other ways whereby men err and offend by
familiarity. When you deal with strangers you seldom slip in your words, and
hardly ever deal with your familiars but you speak many things which you
repent to have uttered: So that errors are committed on all sides in
frindship; now you find fault with others actions, now you discover your own
faults, now you make new frindshipps, now you betray Secrets, now yours are
betrayed; now you are infected with your friends disease, now you impart your
own, you always offend God, and always return worse from your friends. Lord
if this be the condition of a friend with his friend, it is better to have noe
friend. And if one man be so prejudicial to another we must fly the company
of all men, and live retired, placeing our hopes in silence and solitude.

Son this is your weakness that as soon as you find difficulty in any
thing, you presently fale on the contrary. You must not therefore wholly leave
all humane conversation, because there are errors committed in friendship; for
though it be hard to live among men uprightly: Yet it is much better to live
so, then to live in solitude. Errors are oftener committed in a Community,
but they are more Dangerous in solitude; and if virtue be more peaceable in
solitude, yet it is greater and stronger in a community, you must not therefore
fly company, but the vices of company. As for what appertains to particular
frindship, it is Dangerous. If you can live without a frind you will be much
more quiet, and you shall almost avoid the enmitys of all, if you avoid
Frindships. Yet it is sometimes necessary for some to have a frind, to whom
they may ease themselves, and by whom they may be directed in their doubts;
which though it is profitable to all, yet it is more necessary for the younger.
If you be, wise you will take your Superior, and him that rules your
conscience instead of this frind: and use your self so much to their company,
that you be not asshamed to discover your infirmityes unto them, and ask
their counsel in all things, knowing for certain, that I will rule you by
them, and direct them so, that as long as you obey their voice sincerly,
whatsoever they advise, shall cooperate to your good. As to what concerns
others live so as neither to have friend, nor enemy; which you shall effect,
if you behave your self like a Pilgrimme and a stranger, as you ought to do,
if you desire to live quietly. Have a care then not to be to familiar with
any, but more perticularly with the imperfect, and above all with women, whose
conversation though never so holy is subject to danger. If you will needs have
a friend, let him be such an one as you could wish your self most perfect,
that so his life may be the model of your actions. But do not presently
judge any one such, till the long experience of many years have made his
virtue known in several occasions. If you can meet with such an one,
insinuate your self into his company if you can, and deem your self to have
found a treasure. In the mean while, live content with me alone. Fly all
familiarityes, and you shall the more freely enjoy God, and your self: and
this is the first advice, that you do not easily contract friendship with any,
til you meet with some body very perfect, and in the mean time esteem all
others, but me, and your self, as passangers and strangers; which if you
perform, you will avoid the greatest part of those things, which among men use
to disturb the peace of mind; and if you do not; you shall find as many
disturbers of your peace as you have friends.

Now Son do not only hear, how you are to take heed of men, but also how
you are to gain the love of all, and live quietly with them. Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. There is nothing where by you shall gain the love
of all more, then by loving all. Love is the goulden hook wherewith men are
taken. To much familiarity and private frindship, besides the evils we have
already spoke of, has annexed unto it, that it generally displeases all; where
as common charity which embraces all, is grateful to all, and displeasing to
none. Do therefore live so, that you love all, and that all may see they are
loved by you, and you shall also be loved by all. Now to the end this love
be solid, it must be grounded upon unchangeable, and aeternal motives. Love
because I love, love because it is fitting: for love if well placed, is the
most noble production of the mind. Love for the interjour worth of each, for
man is the work of God, capable of an infinity, and cannot be to much loved,
if but rightly. Love all for these motives, as if they were thy brethren.

Endeavor to behave your self so, that all may perceive, you are not lead by
private obligations, but that you are ready to accomodate your self to each in
particular, as far, as the aeternal motives will permit. Of all the acts
which love produces, the giving honor, is the chief, and most efficatious to
win peoples hearts. Honor therefore, if you desire to be honored; all love
honor, and him that honors them. Yet let not your honor be servil but,
generous, let it not flatter, but respect, let it not fear, but love, and let
it be always such, that it please God, whether it please man or not; and so
you shall be sure not to loose your reward. Nor indeed, need it be feared that
you shall not please men, as long as you honor them. For there are but few that
are of such abject and servil spirits, that are not delighted with honor, nor
ought you to leave the common high way for a few. Do what you ought, and if
others misconster your proceedings, do not therefore desist but follow the
tract, true reason dictat's.

This honor and love which you are to afford your neighbor is perceived in
two things; to wit, words, and deeds. First you must not do any thing that is
injurious to another upon any account whatsoever. Nevther ought you only do
this, for even heathens and publicans do the same. But for my sake, you shall
endeavor to yeald of your own right, rather then to permit, that others
should suffer any inconvenience, that you can redress, nay you shall even
seek occations to exercise charity toward your neighbor. This the
Evangelical law requires of you, which I was pleased to ground on fraternal
Charity: and this does your vocation exact which you cannot comply with, but by
exercising charity in all occations. I have caled you to be wholly employed in
helping your neighbors and wholly bent on their good. And if you are ready to
under go any labors for your neighbors in general, and even death it self,
what ought you to do for your brethren with whom you live, and of the same
profession with you. If you did know what a glorious thing it is, to be caled
and be a companion of JESUS, you would bear each of them great Reverence, and
love, and study how to please, and serve me, in my companion, though with
never so great inconvenience; for whatsoever you do to the least of these my
companions, is done to me, you must therefore have great care that you do not
contristare me in my companion, by doing any thing whereby your brother, and
mine may justly be offended. Neither must you think it sufficient not to
offend, but you must endeavor to oblidge each, with most singular charity. If
you can not express this charity in effects and deeds, at least let it appear
in a sincere expression of words. Words are the instruments, where with the
souls of men converse, with one another, and make a mutual excha^ge of their
thoughts: a word is soon spoken, and there is nothing lighter; but once vttred
it is irrevocable, and works great things; for whilst the voice perishes in
the air, it leaves behind an impression in the hearts of the hearers, which
some times noe art, or labor can wear away. What wars has an inconsideratly
vttred word been cause of? noe man can tame a toungue, neither are you or any
other free from this inquiet evil; yet the better you command your toungue the
more quietly you shall live, both to your self and others.

When you speak you must not be morose, or to sad. Yet you must take
greater heed, of faling into such an effusion of toungue, that you regard not
what you say, so you gain the laughter and plause, of people: For it is
better be sad then ridiculous, there being nothing more unworthy, and
unbeseeming then to see a Religious man like a jester do nothing else but
seek to provoke people to laughter by the absurdity of his sayings. Such
persons neither have any sense of devotion, or Solidity in them, nor can they
profit either themselves or others. Do you therefore not only avoid doing any
such things your self, but even the conversation of such, least you seem by
your company, and patience to authorize their folly, Persuade your self most
certainly that there is noe peace to be found with such, but by flying them.
There are but few such, nor are you to think any such, unless he show
himself to be so, but you must treat all honorably not with a sordid
compliment but a sincere charity.

You must not disprayse any, nor speak of those things which you know they are
unwilling to hear, unless necessity oblidge, or the duty of your office
require it. You shall not contend with any, but rather choose to hold your
toungue to preserve peace, then overcome by contending. Those that dispute much
about every thing, and alwavs defend their opinion generally want judgment,
and if they were but so wise as to judge rightly they would not do it. They
are also often blinded with the affection of a perverse will and persuade
people that things are as they would have them, not as they know them to be.
Whether they err in will, or understanding, do not oppose them, but when you
have delivered your opinion, leave them in their error, whether it be that
they will not, or cannot see the truth.

Avoid complaints which prejudice charity and gauld the mind of the plaintiff.
If you find nothing praise worthy, do not disprayse, but be silent: if you
see any thing praise worthly praise with moderation, for the excess of praise
does great prejudice; as well because it shows the imperfect judgeme^t of him
that praises, as that it deceives the praised: and finaly because that he,
that gives great praises to meaner things has nothing to add to greater: and
besides a moderate praise gets credit, which the immoderat loses. Praise
therefore those that are praise worthy with moderation, and according to their
desert, but never praise your self: for whosoever praises him self rayses
envy needlessly: for all men endeavor to suppress the arrogant, nor is there
any thing more apr to begette contempt then an itching desire of praise,
expressed by the commendation of ones self. It is better, and much more
wisdom to say nothing of ones self, but let deeds speak. If you have
abilityes, there will not want occationes wherein to show them: expect
therefore a while, and virtue or wisdom will appear more pleasing, the less
exspected. Boasting does even lessen good actions, and makes great things seem
small; because they were greater in expectation. If you will prejudice any
future action, you cannot effect it in a more compendious way, then if you
prevent and fill peoples minds with great promises which cannot be performed.
For men being frustrated of their expectation become passionat judges, and
desire to find fault and condemn every thing. Praise not therefore your self,
nor prefer your self before any: but be as kind and indulgent to others as
you can. Praise what you can according to its desert, make the best of what is
doubtful, that love may appear every where which pleases all; and let not
Insolency, pride, Anger, neglect, or a mean oppinion of your neighbor,
appear any where, or any thing that may breed aversion: and do not that to
another you would not have done to your self, and so you will fulfill my
commandment. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. But seeing it is
very hard to behave ones self as on ought in all events, especially when we
are to deal with others, observe these two following rules which will very
much conduce to your peace of mind.

The first is not to intrude your self into the employments of others. Let
each do their duty, it is their own deeds must make them stand or fale. It is
good to be willing to help others, but it is very troublesome to meddle in
others duties. you are not a Censor to pry into others lives and actions, nor
shall you be judged for the actions of others, but your own. If there be any
thing amiss in your neighbor, let him mend it. What is that to you? do not
you pass your bounds because another has transgressed his, you make your self
miserable to no purpose while you afflict your self with the cares of others.
Suppose therefore every body to do their duty, and do you in like manner
perform yours If your neighbors, fault is manifest; first see if there be
nobody else unto whom it belongs to reprehend, and correct, which if there
be, you are not to meddle with it. If there be noe such person, then
consider a gain, whether, what you may say is like to do good; and do not
easily persuade your self it will: for all reprehensions are ungrateful, even
from a superior, and from an aequal, or inferior intolerable to all, but
those that have a perfect abnegation of themselves. But if you certainly see
your words will do good, you ought not to refuse your neighbor this charity.

The second rule is. That in all you do, or say of your neighbor, you make
the most favorable construction. For since you must, almost of necessity
incline to one side or other of the balance, it is much better you should
incline rather to indulgence, then to much severity. For to much indulgence is
easily monded, but to much severity once used is hardly ever forgott.
Indulgence or condecendency is a humane error, and deserves love, but severity
is cruelty, and rayses hatred and envy. Yet this is not so to be understood,
as though you were any-wise, either out of love or indulgence to deviate from
what is right: for such indulgence is very prejudicial, and rather deserves the
name of contempt of good discipline, then fraternal charity. But where there is
any doubt, you had better err twice out of to much charity, then once out of
two much rigor.

Son these are the things, which you may do for love of your neighbor, to
fulfill my will in all things. Yet when you have done them; you must not
presently think you shall be in peace with your neighbor; for though you
have done your part, yet it is not in your power to hinder, that none shall
oppose you, and so disturb your peace. You must therefore lastly learn how
to bear injuryes when they happen, so that they do not disturb your peace
of mind. If that you do but rightly conceive and retain what has been said
there is noe more to be added. But because there is nothing harder then to
bear injuryes and contumelyes as one ought, I will say some what that may much
conduce there unto.

When soever then (which doubtless some times will fale out) it shall happen
that any one provoke you by injuryes, or calumnyes, you must endeavor most
carefully to pass over your injury as if you were not wronged. They that
provoke you, often desire noe more, then to move you to anger; do not
therefore pleasure them so far, as to let them see you are offended. It Is
very convenient to dissemble your being offended, and it can do noe good to
publish it. It is wisdom when you are offended to be silent, and very
dangerous to speak. What you do not now speak of, you may afterward when
you please take notice, but you cannot recale what once is vttred. The greater
sense you have of an injury, the more you ought to dissemble it, and take
heed, your unbeseeming passion do not appear in public. Know that if it be
hard to suppress and dissemble anger; it is yet much harder not to exceed the
bounds of modesty, and reason, if you once begin to speak in anger. When
your mind is well settled and free from passion you can hardly speak, that you
do not repent, something that you have uttered; how then shall you expect to
contain your self in reason when you are disturbed with anger. If what you
were a bout to speak be necessary, you may speak it afterward: and in the
mean while you have the advantage of overcoming your passion. When therefore
it shall happen (which you must allways expect) that any on shall injure you in
word or deed, or prove unfaithful to you, dissemble it for a while, and pass
it over, as though you did not resent it. And then as soon as you can come to
me in the Church, and there comme morate your sufferings in my presence, and
advise with me whether they ought to be borne; or not: If they be such as you
confide you may be able to bear, do not loose the occation of imitating my
passion, but offer them me, that they may be laid up in my wounds in memory
of you; for you ought to desire such crosses, there being nothing in the world
better then adversity, well borne. And if you complain of small and easy
things what will you do when greater evils shall befale you? If the injury or
difficulty be so great that you fear your forces are not able to bear it,
or that it ought not to be suffered Consider in my presence what you can do
to avoid it, and that do; neither ought you to expose your self to
tentatione, but help your self by all lawful means, that may secure you.
For though it be allways good, and to be wished to suffer, yet it is contrary
to all reason, and the will of God also, to expose your self to grievous
tentations, which probably you shall not master; or are such things which
justly ought not to be borne with. For it is incomparably better to fly
tentations, then to be overcome by them, wherefore it is not only lawful but
necessary to apply fit remedies in these cases. Only take heed you make not
passion but reason your counceller, and do not what flesh and blood shall
suggest, but what my father that is in heaven shall reveal unto you, for as
long as you follow passion, and obey the desires of the flesh, you do
disorderly, and shall be disquieted: but as long as you do not seek your
self or any other Creature, but desire according to right reason, to do the
will of my heavenly Father, so long shall you find in all things either
prosperous, or advers, the wished peace. Your peace shall be the greater, the
better you are, you will the better, the greater progress you make, you will
make the greater progress, the more you are united to me, you will be the
more united to me, the more you are sequestered from all Creatures, and you
shall be the more sequestered from Creatures the less you seek your self.
Endeavor therefore to leave seeking your self, and use violence to your
self, for the Kingdom of heaven suffers force and the violent lay hold of
it. The more opposition nature makes, the greater violence you must use to
overcome your self in occations. And though at the beginnings you find it hard
and difficult to overcome your self, fear not, but make your recourse to me,
and I promise you shall find my joke is sweet, and burden light. The first
degree then to perfection and peace is to leave your self: and the highest,
which you must always aim at, is in all things to adhere to me: which when
you shall attain to, imagine you have found true peace.

FINIS.
Imprimatur, Actum Gandavi

19. Decembris 1675. P. de MEY C. L. C. G.


