Great News from Lymerick in IRELAND.
A full and true Account of the State and Siege of that City, by His Majesty's
Forces, commanded by Count Solms, and Lieutenant General Douglas. With a
particular Relation of the Surrendering of Cork and Yaughall, by the IRISH.

THeir Majesty's Armies in Ireland, as well that under the Command of
Lieutenant General Douglas, as that Commanded by the Genesis the Count de Solmes,
have been forced to make very slow marches, in their way to Lymerick, on the
account of their Cannon, and heavy Baggage; they seldom marching above eight or
nine miles a day. In the 30th. past, Lieutenant General Douglas joined his Army
with the Count de Solmes, at a place called Goallen-Bridge, after which they
immediately marched in two Lines to Limerick; on their approach, near the Town,
the Lord Tyrconnel, with his numerous Rabble Irish Army, retired from about
Limerick, further into the Country. Our forces were very busy in disposing
all things for a Regular Siege, in order to which, they have brought with them
in Wagons, Engines made in Holland, to make a Bridge of Boats over the
Shannon. His Majesty is hourly expected in the Camp, upon whose Arrival we
shall immediately begin a regular Seige, if they deliver not on Summons. The
Garrison consists of three thousand French Infantry, and some few Troops of
Horse: The Priests have been very diligent, both h^re, and in most other
Garrisons, in their endeavors to hearten the Enemy, deluding them with the
Stories, that the French have Landed F^fty thousand men in England that the
Protestants have joined with them, that we are all in co^^^usion, that King
James is Landed with them, and that there will be speedy Relief come to Ireland
from France, etc. The St. Malloe Frigates, with the Priva^eers, and
Merchantment, or Traders, that were in Cork, Kinsale, Waterfoo^d etc. have been
all ordered reund to the River of Limmerick, most of which are sailed in
already; by which it is plain. That the endeavoring to keep this City is the
last Game they design to play, which when they are beaten from, they will cuit
all further Hopes of Pretensions to Ireland; these Ships being certainly
desined to bring off the Gentry and chief Officers, with their ^ag^ard Baggage,
etc. We have an account that the City of Cork, and Town of Yaughal^, are
quitted by the Enemy, having first plundered most of the Inhabitants.

This City is the biggest in Ireland, except Dublin; its Haven lies on the
West Side of Ireland, and South of Galway; it divides the Province of
Cannaught from Munster, being of a very great length, no less than sixty miles;
for so far it is from the mouth of the Haven to the City of Limmerick, and yet
Men of War may ly under the Cannon of the Walls of the City. The River Shannon
of this great depth so encompasseth it round, that it makes the City a perfect
Island: Here is a very strong Wall, on which are several Bastions, also a good
Castle, and Stone Bridge, viz. King's Castle and Thomond-Bridge, Pieces
formerly of very great streng^h and beauty; but very ancient, after the old way
of Fortification, being of the Foundation of K. John; but the late King has
made some small additional Fortifications, as Pallisadoes Ravelins, etc.
according to the modern way; this City being all along, ever since K. James's
first coming to Ireland, designed the last place of Refuge for the Rebels to
have ^etreat to.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno Dom, 1690.


