Great News from Gravesend
BEING A True Account of Mr Gibbon's Seizing several Irish Officers, who
intended to make their Escape for Ireland, upon his Majesty the Late King
JAMES's Landing at KINS ALE, With such Arms, Ammunition, and Provision as were
designed for that expedition.

Licensed

March the 24th. 1689.


PUrsuant to His Majesty's late Order of Council, to prevent the Abuse made of
Passes, and the Exportation of ill-affected Persons out of this Kingdom, into
any part beyond the Seas, especially of the Roman Catholics into Ireland: Mr.
Gibbon, a zealous Prosecutor of these Fugitives, puts himself in a posture to
pursue them on the Scent: and considering that particular Care was taken in the
Ports of Chester, Beaumarris, Hollihead, Milford Haven, and in all other Ports
and Creeks on the Irish Seas, that no person or persons whatsoever be
Transported into Ireland; without a Pass from His Majesty, or one of the
Principal Secretaries of State he makes directly to Gravesend: where several
Irish Officers had privately Imbarqued themselves for Ireland, upon the Report
the Late King James' Arrival there.

There he had not waited many hours, when he found the effects of his Labor,
and his Diligence rewarded with answerable Success; for after some hours
search, going yesterday on board a Ship called, The John of London, bound for
France, he found the Persons following making off; which, tho they endeavored
in disguise, he soon ferreted out of their holes; some were in Mazarine red,
and some in blue Scarlet, (as Teague has it) endeavoring by this means to pass
off undiscovered; but nothing can conceal the Brogue upon the Tongue, which is
is natural a Badge of a Dear- Joy, as a Turbant of a Turk, or a Cloak of a
Spaniard. Being now discovered, as well as their Design, they were disarmed,
and brought Prisoners to Gravesend, where they now lie in Custody, to the
number of Ten, who are as follows:

Tho. Burk, an Officer in the Duke of Graston's Regiment. Capt. Drummond,
belonging to the first Troop of Guards. Capt. Owen Macarty, Adjutant to Coll.
Mackillacud. John Scot, Ensign in Coll. Bochans Regiment Gilbert Hern, Ensign
to Capt. Smith. Will. Carel, Sergeant in the Lord Lichfield's Regiment. Alex.
Petre, a pretended Seaman, in disguise, some eminent Officer (it is supposed)
yet unknown. Garret Parry, and Cornelius Mahan, Officers in the Lord
Salisbury's Regiment.
From these Fugitives were taken, Muskets 50 Musquetooons 80 Cartress-Boxes 12
Cartresses 20 Javelins 6 Half-pikes 12 Barrels of powder 2 Cases of pistols 10


One Passage is yet remarkable; These bold Adventures were to give 50 1.2 ^iece
for their passage, who when it came to the Test, could not raise so many ^ence
among them all; except the Seaman in disguise, whose Pockets were something
better lined.

POSTSCRIPT.
I have sent you this exact Account, that you may see I have not been idle
since I left the Town. In this whole Relation I have asserted nothing but the
Truth, because it is under my own hard; and I have communicated it to Gentlemen
some at Man's Coffee-house, who I am confident will make it public.

London, Printed by Alex. Milbourn in Green-Arbor, in the Little-Old-Baily.


