Europes VVonder: OR, THE TURKS Overthrow. Contained in a PROPHECY, Written by
that famous Divine PAVL GREBNER. TREATING Of those strange Mutations yet
expected; as the destruction of the Turkish Empire, the ruin of the Popish
Hierarchy; with the Conversion of the Jews, and their restoration to their
ancient Inheritance in the Holy Land, and of the Universal Reign of the Gospel
of Christ upon Earth. WITH A great Victory lately obtained against the Turks,
by His Majesty the King of Great Brittain's Royal Navy, under the Command of
the Right Honorable the Lord G. Montague: The entering of the famous Port of
Guienne, the taking of the strong Fort of Agria; and the coming in of the
Knights of Malta and Venecians to the assistance of the English Fleet; with a
brief Narrative of their Bloody Fight, and the chief particulars thereof.

HAGVE. Printed by John Brown, 1661.

Europes Wonder: OR, THE TURKS Overthrow.
FOrasmuch as there are many that has desired a Relveation of things to come,
i^ has been my best endeavor to searc^ the Manuscrips of several Learned
Authors, whereby it might move us all wit^ Repentance, to meet God in these
great mutations and changes He is likely to bring upon us in this Land, for our
unbelief and unstableness in Religion; so that we have great cause to desire of
God, from the bottom of our hearts, to reform us from these Heresies, Sects,
and Schisms, which do at this time too much abound amongst us, and to suffer
the Scripture to be our Rule, and the Holy Ghost our Guide, both in Faith and
Religion.

And to this end and purpose, I have taken the pains to collect several
Prophesies of Paul Grebners, a laborious Devine, an acute Philosopher, and a
witty Poet; so that in the Library of Trinity College in Cambridge, are
several excellent Epigrams of his, of the Conversion of the Jews, of the
destruction of the World by fire, of the ruining of Rome, and of the last
Judgment; which Epigrams I find translated out of Latin into English.

First Of the burning of the World by fire.
AS the first World did first by Lust offend,
whose burning rage to such a height did win,
That God to quench the same a Flood did send,
Oh Drunkenness, the second first Worlds sin,
The course of Vice that Element must end,
which is opposed to that which did begin.
In every thing Gods justice we may spy,
As Floods drown Lust flames Drunkenness must die.
2. Of the ruin of Rome.
FLy faithful Christians from the Sea of sin,
who hate the Whore, and the two horned Beast;
Fly, fly, in time before their griefs begin,
least as their pleasure, so their plagues you taste:
When once the Lamb that Victory does win,
he of Fat things will make his Flock a feast:
Who is she sowed, so shall she reap those evils
O^ce the Worlds-Mistress, now a Cage of Devils.
3. Of the Conversion of the Jews.
THe Gospel once being preached in every place,
to Lands of which our Fathers could not tell,
And when the Gentiles all are drawn to Grace,
which in the New Jerusalem should dwell;
Then shall the stubborn Jews the Truth embrace,
from which with such disdain they did rebel:
Who first the Law, last shall the Gospel have,
Christ whom he first did call, shall last receive.
4. Of the last Judgment.
THat threatened time which must the World appaul,
is that all may amend by Signs fore shown,
Wars rumored are, the Gospel preached ore all,
the Jews convert, the Antichrist is known,
Devils rage, Vice reigns, Zeal cools, Faith fails, Stars fall,
all sorts of Plagues has the last Trumpet blown:
And by prodigious Signs it may plain appear,
That of the Son of Man the time draws near.
Thus by this great Divine, living in the mistiest time of Popery, it may
plainly appear, that it was a received Opinion, That the total destruction of
Rome and the conversion of the Jews, should conclude the end of the World:
There was also another Prophecy of the Times found in writing in the Church of
St. Dennis in France, by the Sexton of that Parish, as he was digging in a
place to erect a Monument, or Fabric, for the Lord Teligni: He gave it unto
the Popes Nuncio, who rewarded him with 200 Dollers, for his pains: From him,
it was sent to the Cardinal of Bruges, who presented it unto the young King
Lewis the 13. It was written in Parchment, and wrapped in Lead in the form of an
Heart Numerical Figures are placed on the side, signifying in what year of our
Lord every Accident should come to pass.

Anno Christi. The Prophecy runs thus: 1661. The heat of War does Italy
surround, 1665. Let Christ's pasture be one, his sheep and ground, 1666. Gods
wrath and terror does the world confound, 1667. But few that God do
reverence. 1678. A Prince shall rise of eminence. 1686. Asia does tremble,
Europe shake. 1693. Now is a general Earthquake. 1699. All Nations Gods
knowledge partake. 1700. Rivers are dried every where. 1710. Pastors and Church
only are. By this Prophecy, great Troubles must arise in Italy, within this
small time, cruel Wars afflicting every State thereof, which must be
preparations to the utter destruction of the chief City of Rome, But Rome it
self can never be destroyed, unless Protestants lay aside their unnecessary
civil Contentions, which may come to them, against their wills, in the year
1665. After which, great commotions are like to arise in Europe, until a Noble
Christian Hero [of Royal Blood] arise, who shall quench those evils, by
employing Christians in Martial exercises against the Turk.

And about this time, Two hundred thousand Turks are in the Field, with an
intent to invade Germany; they have already some part of Hungaria in
possession, of which you shall hear more largely hereafter.

Now there has been, and is yet, continual contentions and massacres amongst
the Turks, the Jannizaries eluding and despising the young and weak Emperor,
which terrified the Mustiva and the Bassas sore, because they had this
Prophecy. That as a Mahomet did win Constantinople, so a Mahomet should lose
it again to the Christians.

However things go for the present, yet in the year 1658, will be fatal both
unto the Turk and the Pope, utter ruins, and the beginning of the comparative
felicity of the Church of God, as may be further manifested by another
Authentic Prophecy, which was found in the Study of Justus Lipsius, wherein
was thus written:

Six thousand years from Virgins birth expired,
six hundred after that acquired,
The famous Ninety eight year shall come on,
full of great contention:
This year the Turkish hateful Race shall rue,
Rome shall a Fable prove, not true;
Then shall be tossed all Kingdoms of the World,
and into a new Kingdom hurld,
That into all Coasts Christ his Word may spread,
and be alone the Peoples Head.
In order to a beginning of this great work, we hear, that there is now lately
a great defeat given to the Turks, by His Majesty's Navy, the manner whereof
was thus:

As the Lord General Montague was sailing with a considerable Fleet on those
Seas, he was by a sudden and violent storm driven to Harbor: By that time he
had remained there the space of an hour, the storm ceased, and knowing where he
was, immediately endeavored to find entrance into the Port of Guienne, in
which place lay a great number of Turkish Galleys, who very resolutely resisted
him: But after a tedious and cruel conflict between both parties, and a great
number of Turks slain, General Montague took the aforesaid Port, with the loss
of two Ships, of which most of the Men were saved, having sunk and fired of the
enemy to the number of 80 Galleys, and has since taken Agria, a strong hold in
Hungaria; to the strengthening and maintenance of which, diverse of the Knights
of Malta are come to assist the English, with whom are joined great Armies of
Greecians, Venecians, and Hungarians: Time will soon manifest their proceedings.

The consideration of this may teach Men Humility in Prosperity, carefulness to
know God, and keep his Commandments; seeing every Plant he has planted shall
be plucked up, and nothing can be permanent but by his favor and protection.
FINIS.



