Pyramidographia: OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE PYRAMIDS IN EGYPT.

By JOHN GREAVES, Professor of Astronomy in the University of OXFORD.

Romanorum Fabricae and antiqua opera (cum venia id dictum sit) nihil accedunt
ad Pyramidum splendorem, and superbiam. Bellon. lib. 2. Observe. cap. 42.
LONDON, Printed for George Badger, and are to be sold at his shop in St
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street 1646.

The Preface.
HOw high an estimation the Ancients had of the Egyptian Pyramids, appears by
the several testimonies of Herodotus, Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny. For (...)
Herod. lib. 2.
Herodotus acknowledges, that though there were a Temple at Ephesus very
renowned, as also at Samos* yet the Pyramids were worthier of relation: each of
which single might be compared, with many of the most sumptuous structures of
the Graecians. Diodorus Siculus confirms as much: who as he preferres the
works of the Egyptians for magnificence, before those of other Nations, so he
preferres the Pyramids before the rest of the Egyptians. It is confessed,
(...) Diod. Sic. Biblioth. lib. 1. (...) Ibid.
says he, that these works far excel the rest in Egypt, not only in the
massinesse of the structures, and in the expenses, but also in the skilfulnesse
of the Architects. He farther adds, The greatness of the work, and art of
the workmen; strike an admiration into the spectators. (...) Strab. lib. 17.
Strabo also testifies, that three of them are very memorable, two of these are
accounted amongst the seven miracles of the world. Lastly Regum pecuniae
ociosa* ac stulta ostentatio -- Tres quae orbem Terratu^ implevere fama. Plin.
l. 36. c. 12.
Pliny, though he judges them to be an idle, and vain ostentation of the
wealth of Kings; yet he grants that three of them have filled the world with
their fame. Which three by his description, and by such indications, as may be
collected out of Diodorus, and Strabo, must necessarily be these three, which
now are extant, and of which I intend especially to discourse. For (...), Diod.
Sic. l. 1.
Diodorus writes, that they are seated on Libya side, an CXX stadia (or
furlongs) from Memphis, and from Nilus XLV. We read in (...). Strab. lib. 12.
(...), Idem ibid.
Strabo, XL stadia from the City (Memphis) there is a certain brow of an hill
in which are many Pyramids: where presently after describing more particularly
the three greatest, he gives us this character: These three stand near to one
another upon the same plain. And if this be not sufficient to point them out,
Reliquae tres] sane consspicuae undique innavigantibus, sitae sunt in part
Africae, monte saxco sterilique inter Memphim oppidum, and quod appellari
diximus Delta, a Nilo minus IV millia pas^^a Me^phi^ex, vico apposito, que^
vocant Busirin, in quo sunt assueti scandere illas. Pl. l. 36. c. 12.
Pliny delivers many evident marks, whereby to discover them. These three (as
he informs us) are very conspicuous to those that sail upon the Nilus, they
are seated on Africa side, upon a rockie, and barren hill, between the City
Memphis, and that place, which we said is called the Delta, from the Nilus
less then IV miles, from Memphis VI, there being a village apposite to them,
which they name Busiris, from whence they use to ascend up to them. All which
characters were, and are, appliable to none, but only to these three.

Having thus discovered their true place, or situation, we shall next discourse
of the Authors, who have written of them. Amongst the Ancients there were
many, who thought it worth their labor to describe them. For Pausanias, as it
were complaining that the Graecians had been very curious in describing these,
whilst they had omitted many remarkable structures of their own, writes thus:
(...). Pausaniae Baeo^^^^.
That the Graecians admired things of strangers more then of their own, seeing
that some Historians of note had most accurately described the Pyramids of
Egypt, whereas the Treasury of Minyas, and walls of Tiryns (places in
Boeotia) no less to be admired then these, had been omitted by them. Pliny
gives us a large catalogue of Authors, that had purposely treated of this
Argument: Qui de iis scripserint, sunt Herodotus, Euhemerus, Duris Samius,
Aristagoras, Dionysius, Artemidorus, Alexander Polyhistor, Butorides,
Antisthenes, Demetrius, Demoteles, Apion Plin. not. hist. l. 36. c. 12.
Those which have writ of them, are, Herodotus, Euhemerus, Duris Samius,
Aristagoras, Dionysius, Artemidorus, Alexander Polyhistor, Butorides,
Antisthenes, Demetrius, Demoteles, Apion. Where we are beholding to him for
preserving the names of so many Writers, though their works (unless those of
Herodotus) by the injury, and calamity of times, have long since perished.
Besides these, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pomponius Mela, Pliny, Solinus, and
Ammianus Marcellinus (the names of modern Authors I purposely omit) have given
us some relations of them. But it may be, if the writings of Aristides had not
perished, who in his (...) speaks thus of himself, (...). Aristid. (...).
After that I had entered into Aethiopia, and four times traveled all over
Egypt, and had left nothing unhandled, neither the Pyramids, nor Labyrinth,
nor Temples, nor channels, and partly had procured out of their writings such
measures as might be had, and partly with the Priests had measured such things
as were not obvious, yet could I not preserve them entire for thee, seeing the
Books, which thy servants by my appointment transcribed, have perished: Or if
we had the sacred Commentaries of the Egyptians, so often cited by (...).
Diod. Sic lib. 1. (...). Idem. Ibidem.
Diodorus, we might receive better satisfaction, and be also more content with
the loss of those other writings of the Graecians. But seeing the
vicissitudes, and revolutions of times, have deprived us of these, whilst the
Pyramids have been too great to be consumed, it will be no superfluous labor
to imitate the examples of the Ancients, and to supply the loss of them, by
giving a distinct narration of the several respective dimensions, and
proportions of these Pyramids. In which I shall tread in as eeven a path as I
can, between truth, and the traditions of such of the Ancients, as are still
extant: First, putting down those relations, which by them have been
transmitted to us: and next, showing in what manner, upon examination, I found
the Pyramids in the years one thousand six hundred thirty eight, and one
thousand six hundred thirty nine, or in the thousand forty and eighth year of
the Hegira. For I twice went to Grand Cairo from Alexandria, and from thence
into the deserts, for the greater certainty, to view them: carrying with me a
radius of ten feet most accurately divided, besides some other instruments, for
the fuller discovery of the truth. But before I descend to a particular
description, I shall make enquiry by whom: at what time: and to what end, these
Monuments were erected.

Of the Authors or Founders of the PYRAMIDS.
IT is the opinion of some Henr. Spondanus de coemeteriis sacris, lib. 1. par.
1. cap. 6. ^ Brodaeus epigr. Graec. (...).
modern Writers, that the Egyptian Pyramids were erected by the Israelites,
during their heavy pressure under the tyranny of the Pharaohs. And this seems
to be confirmed by Joseph. lib. 2. Antiq. cap. 5. (...), etc*
Josephus; who relates, that when as time had extinguished the memory of the
benefits of Joseph, the Kingdom of Egypt being transplanted into another
Family, they used the Israelites with much severitie, wasting them with
several labors; for they were commanded to cut diverse Channels for the River
(Nilus) to raise walls, and cast up banks, whereby to hinder the inundation of
the stream: they oppressed also our Nation with those fabrickes of the
Pyramids, compelling them to learn many (mechanical) Arts, and inured them to
the supporting of labors. But the sacred Scriptures clearly expressing the
slaverie of the Jews, to have consisted in making and burning of Brick (for
the original is (...) Lebenim, which the Exodus cap. 5* saepe.
Septuagint renders by (...) and (...)) whereas all these Pyramids consist of
Stone, I cannot be induced to subscribe to their assertion.

Much less can I assent to that opinion of (...), Steph. (...).
Stephanus, (...)] Id est aedificia quaedam a Joseph, ut nonnulli opinan^ur, ad
condenda frumenta sci^e admodum elaborata, (...), id est a frumento nomen
consecuta. Nicetas in XX Ora^. Naz^anzeni.
Nicetas, Non a vero, ut inquit Nonnus, a^horret, quin has Pyramides post
Joseph* tempora* excessu^^que Iudaeorum ex Aegyp^o in Regum sep^lchra
conve^^erint. B^l^^s ex Nonno monacho ibidem.
Nonnus, and the Author of the Greek (...).
(...), with some others, who derive the name of the Pyramids (...), that is
from Corn, and not (...), from the figure of a flame of fire, which they
resemble; because, say most of them, these were built by the Patriarch Joseph,
as (...), Receptacles, and Granaries of the seven plentiful years. For,
besides that this figure is most improper for such a purpose, a Pyramid being
the least capacious of any regular Mathematical body, the straightness, and
fewness of the rooms within (the rest of the building being one solid, and
entire fabric of stone) do utterly overthrow this conjecture. Wherefore the
relations of Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and of some others, but especially of
these two, both of them having travailed into Egypt, and conversed with the
Priests (besides that the later made use of their Commentaries) will give us
the best and clearest light, in matters of so great antiquity.

For Herodotus writes thus concerning the first of these Pyramids that He^od.
lib. 2 (...), etc.
until King Rhampsinitus time the Egyptians report the Laws to have
flourished in Egypt: after whom, Cheops succeeding in the Kingdom, fell into
all manner of vice; for, shutting up the Temples, he forbad the Egyptians to
sacrifice: besides, he commanded that they should be employed in his works
(he means this Pyramid of which he discour^eth) that some of them should
receive the stones dug out of the Quarries of the Arabian mountain, and that
from thence they should carry them to the Nilus; these being waf^ed over the
River, others were to receive them, and to draw them to the mountain, which is
called Libycus. There were employed in the work ten Myriads of men, every
three months a Myriad: the people spent ten years in the way, in which they
drew the stones, which seems to me no less a work then the building of the
Pyramid it self. Diod. Sic. l. 13
Diodorus Siculus discoursing of the same argument, gives the erector of this
another name, different from that of Herodotus, stiling him Chemmis; but in the
time and person they both agree, each of them affirming him to have succeeded
Rhampsinitus, and to have been the father of Mycerinus, and to have reigned
over the Egyptians fifty years. This difference of names between Herodotus
and Diodorus, concerning the same King, may probably be thus reconciled; that
Diodorus expresses the genuine denomination in the Egyptian Language, and that
Herodotus renders the signification in the Greek: a practice not unusual with
him, and with other approved Authors. Thus the Patriarch Isaac in the
Scriptures, being denominated from (...), that is laughter, is by Alexander
Polyhistor, as E^seb. lib. ^. Evangel. p^aep^r. cap. 19.
Eusebius testifies, named (...). Wherefore (...) Cham in Hebrew (or in the
Greek flection Chemmis) signifying adustion, which anciently might be the same
in Egyptian, and (...), or (...), signifying swarthie visage, or adult,
Herodotus might call him Cheops in Greek, whom in the Egyptian Language
Diodorus styles Chemmis. But I go on with Diodorus. This Chemmis, Diod. Sic.
l^b* 1. (...).
says he, erected the greatest of these three Pyramids, which are reputed
amongst the seven wonderful fabrics of the world: where he also enlarges the
number of the workmen employed by him, to three hundred and sixty thousand,
which Herodotus mentions only to have been an hundred thousand; though both
of them concur, and Pyramid amplissima ex Arabicis lapidicinis constat.
Trecenta LX hominum millia annis XX came construxisse produ^tur, Plin. lib. 36.
cap. 12.
Pliny with them both, that twenty years were spent in the building of this
Pyramid.

Concerning the second Pyramid, Herodotus and Diodorus assign the author of it
to have been Cephren, brother to the former King. Diodorus adds, that by some
he is also called Chabryis, and was the son of Chemmis; a difference which I
imagine to have been occasioned out of the diversity of pronuntiation, of
Chabryis for Cephren; there being an easy transmutation in letters of the same
Organ, as Grammarians use to speak. Cheops, as Herod. lib. 2. (...), etc.
Herodotus informs us, being deceased, his brother Cephren reigned after him;
who imitated him, as in other things, so in the making of a Pyramid, the
magnitude of which is less then that of his brothers. And Diodor. lib. 1.
(...), etc.
Diodorus relates, that Chemmis being dead, his brother Cephren succeeded him
in the Kingdom, and reigned fifty six years: Some say, that not his brother,
but his son, which was named Chabryis, reigned after him. This is affirmed by
the consent of all, that the successor of the former King, in imitation of him,
built the second Pyramid, like to the first in respect of the art and
workmanship, but far inferior to it in respect of magnitude.

The third Pyramid was erected by (...), Herodot. lib. ^.
Mycerinus, some call him Mycherinus, as it is observed by Diodorus, who makes
him the son of Chemmis, as Herodotus does of Cheops; the difference between
them being, as we noted before, rather nominall then real. The same Herodot.
lib. 2. (...), etc.
Herodotus also writes, that some of the Graecians make the third Pyramid the
work of Rhodopis a Curtizan; an error in opinion of those, who seem not to
know who this Rhodopis might be, of which they speak: for neither could she
have undertaken such a Pyramid, on which so many thousand talents were to be
spent; neither lived she in this man's time, but in the time of King Amasis.
Now this Amasis, as he elsewhere shows lived long after these Pyramids were in
being. The same story is recited by (...) (...)
Strabo and Pliny, both of them omitting the names of the Founders of the
former two: Strabo gives her a double name; The third Pyramid is the Sepulcher
of a Curtizan, made by her lovers, whom Sappho the Poetresse calls Doricha,
Mistress to her brother Charaxus; others name her Rhodope. But whether we
name her Doricha, or Rhodope, the relation is altogether improbable, if we
consider either her condition or the infinite vastness of the expense. For
Diod. Sic
Diodorus, though he rightly acknowledges this Pyramid to be much less then
either of the former two, yet in respect of the exquisite workmanship, and
richness of the materials, he judges it not inferior to either of them. A
structure certainly too great and sumptuous, to have been the design, and
undertaking of a Curtizan, which could hardly have been performed by a rich,
and potent Monarch. And yet Diodorus has almost the same relation, only a
little altered in the circumstances: Diod. Sic. lib (...) (...)*
Some say, that this is the Sepulcher of the strumpet Rhodope; of whom, some of
the Nomarchae (or Prefects of the Provinces) being inamoured, by a common
expense to win her favor, they built this Monument. But to pass by this Fable
(for it is no better) and to return to our inquiry. The same Author
immediately before ingenuously confesses, that concerning them all three, there
is little agreement either amongst the Natives, or amongst Writers: Idem ibid.
(...)
For they say, Armaeus made the greatest of these; the second, Amasis; the
third, Inaron. And Tres vero factae annis LXXVIII and mensibu. IV. Plin. lib.
36. cap. 12
Pliny informing us, that these three were made in seventie eight years, and
four months, leaves the Founders of them very ambiguous: For reciting the
names of many Authors that had described them, he concludes; Plin. ibid.
Inter omnes eos non constat a quibus factae sint, justissimo casu obliteratis
tantae vanitatis authoribus.

The Arabians, whose excellencies I judge to have been in the speculative
sciences, and not in the Histories, and Occurrences of ancient times, assign
other Founders of these three, different from those mentioned by the Greeks.
The Author of the Book entitled, Morat Alzeman, writes, they differ concerning
him that built the Pyramids; Some say Joseph, some say Nimrod, some Dalukah the
Queen, and some that the Egyptians built them before the flood: For they
foresaw that it would be, and they carried thither their treasures, but it
profited them nothing. In another place he tells us that the Coptites (or
Egyptians) report that these two greater Pyramids, and the lesser, which is
colored, are Sepulchers. In the East Pyramid is King Saurid, in the West
Pyramid his brother Hougib* and in the colored Pyramid Fazfarinoun, the son
of Hougib: The Sabeans relate, that one of them is the Sepulcher of Shiit (
that is Seth) and the second the Sepulcher of Hermes, and the colored one the
Sepulcher of Sab, the son of Hermes, from whom they are called Sabaeans. They
go in pilgrimage thither, and sacrifice at them a Cock, and a black Calfe,
and offer up incense. Ibn Abd Alhokm: another Arabian discoursing of this
Argument, confesses, that he could not find amongst the learned men in Egypt,
any certain relation concerning them (wherefore) what is more reasonable
(says he) then that the Pyramids were built before the Flood? For if they had
been built after, there would have been some memory of them amongst men; at
last he concludes. The greatest part of Chronologers affirm, that he which
built the Pyramids, was Saurid ibn Salhouk the King of Egypt, who was before
the Flood 300 years. And this opinion he confirms out of the Books of the
Egyptians: To which he adds, The Coptites mention ^n their Books, that upon
them there is an inscription engraven; the exposition of it in Arabicke is
this: I Saurid the King, built the Pyramids in such and such a time, and
finished them in six years; he that comes after me, and says he is equal to
me, let him destroy them in six hundred years; and yet it is known, that it
is easier to pluck down, then to build; and when I had finished them, I
covered them with Satin, and let him cover them with Mats. The same relation I
find in several others of them, that this Saurid was the Founder of these
three Pyramids, which the admiration of after times enrolled amongst the
miracles of the world. And these are those three, which are still fair, and
entire, and standing near to one another, formerly not far distant from the
great and ancient City Memphis, built by (...), Diodor. lib. 1.
Uchoreus, (of which there is now not so much as the ruins left) and less
distant from the River Nilus; as Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny, rightly describe.

Besides these three, we find mentioned in Herodotus, and Diodorus, the names
and Authors of some others, not much inferior to these in magnitude, long
since ruined, and defaced by time. On the contrary, there are many now standing
in the Libyan desert, whose names, and Authors, neither Herodotus, nor
Diodorus, nor yet any of the Ancients have expressed.

After Mycerinus, according to Herod. lib. 2.
Herodotus, (for Diodorus is here silent,) Asychis succeeded in the Kingdom,
(...).
who being desirous to excel his Predecessors, left for a monument a Pyramid
made of Brickes, with these words engraven in stone: Compare not me with the
Pyramids built of stone, which I as far excel, as Jupiter does the other
gods. For striking of the bottom of the Lake with long poles, and gathering
the dirt which stuck to them, they made thence Brickes, and formed me in this
manner.

The same Author relates, that many Ages after this Asychis, Sanacharib King of
the Arabians, and Assyrians, who certainly is the same, which is mentioned in
the Scriptures, having expelled Sethon the King of the Egyptians, and the
Priest of Vulcane, Herod. lib. 2.
the Egyptians recovering their liberty, made choice of twelve Kings, (which
is also confirmed by Diodorus) dividing Egypt into so many parts: For they
could at no time live without a King, these by a common consent built a
Labyrinth, above the Lake of Moeris: At the angle where the Labyrinth ends,
there is a Pyramid of XL Orgyiae, (that is, of CCXL feet) in which are engraven
huge resemblances of Beasts, the passage to it is under ground. And this is
that Pyramid, as may evidently be collected out of Strab. lib. 17.
Strabo, in which Imandes lies buried, whom we may probably suppose to have
been the builder of it: his words are these; At the end of this building (that
is, of this Labyrinth) which contains a furlong in length, there is a certain
Diodorus relates, that over the Sep^lcher there was ^ Circle of Gold of 365
Cubits compass, and a Cubit in thickness* in which the days of the year
were inscribed, and divided into a Cubit a piece, with a description according
to their nature, of the setting and rising of the St^rs, and also their
operations, ^f^er the Aegy^tian Astrologers. They say, the Circle was carried
aw^y by C^mbyses, and the Persians, at what time they conquered Egypt (Diodor.
Sicul. lib. 1.) He which shall s^rio^sly consider this, and several other
passages* in Herodotus and Diodorus, of the stupendi^us works of the
Egyptians, ^u^t needs acknowledge, that for magn^ficence, i^ not for Art,
they far exceed^d ^he Gracian^ and Romans, eve^ when t^eir E^pires were ^t
the highest, and most flourishing. And theref^re, th^se Admiranda Romae,
collected by Lipsius, are scarce to be admired, if c^mpared with some of these.
At this day there is hardly a^y vast Column, or O^e^iske, remaining in Rome,
w^rthy of no^e, which has not a^c^ently ^eene brought thither out of Egypt.
Sepulcher, being a quadrilaterall Pyramid, each side of which is CCCC feet,
and the altitude is the same; the name of him that lies buried there is
Imandes, whom the Author of the Epitome calls Maindes, and Strabo himself not
long after, Ismandes; Diodorus names him Osymanduas. Which of these two,
whether Herodotus, or Strabo, has given the truest measure of it, unless the
Pyramid were now extant, cannot be decided by us. Though Pliny adheres to the
dimensions of Herodotus: but whereas Herodotus and Strabo mention there but one
Pyramid, he makes mention of many: And wh^^eas Strabo makes this to be
quadrilaterall, he desc^^bes these (if I mistake not his words) to be
sexangular. Pl^n. lib. 36. cap. 13.
Superque Nemeses XV aediculis incluserit Pyramides complures (that is above
this Labyrinth, which he places in Heracleopolite Nomo) quadragenarum Ulnarum
VI radice muros obtinentes.

Long before these four Pyramids of Cheops, Cephren, Mycerinus, and Asachis,
who immediately succeeded one another in the Kingdom, but after this of
Ismandes, Myris as he is called by Diodorus; but Herodotus, Strabo, and Pl^ny,
name him Maeris. Another Aeg^ptian King built two admirable Pyramid^; the
description of which though in Herodotus it immediately follows that of the
twelve Kings; yet as it may evidently be collected out of him and Diodorus,
these two of Moeris must many ages have preceded: Herod. lib. 2. (...).
For Herodotus tells us, that from Menes (the first King of the Egyptians, whom
Diodorus names Menas) the Priests recited out of their Books, CCCXXX Kings,
the last of which was Moeris; long after whom reigned Sesostris, who is called
by Manethos, Sethosis; and by Diodorus, Sesostris, and Sesoosis; where he more
particularly, then Herodotus, expresses this Sesostris to have been Diod. Sic.
lib. 1.
seven ages after Moeris, and to have reigned long before these twelve Kings.
The which Sesostris, or Sethosis, immediately succeeding Amenophis, (according
to Manethos in Josephus, as we shall show in the ensuing discourse) must have
been before Cheops, Cephren, Mycerinus, and Asychis; and therefore
consequently, that Moeris must long have preceded these twelve Kings. This
Moeris undertook, and finished that most admirable Lake, denominated after his
name, as it is testified by Herodotus, Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny. A work the
most useful, and wonderful, if it be rightly considered, that I think was
ever by any man attempted: in the midst of which, he erected two Pyramids; the
one in memory of himself, the other of his wife, each of them being DC feet in
height; the description of both which, and of his Lake, we have in Herodotus,
the latter we find in Strabo, but in none so fully as in Diod. Sic. lib. 1.
(...), etc.
Diodorus, and therefore I shall relate his words. Ten Schoenes, (that is, DC
furlongs; though Strabo and Artemidorus before him, observe a difference of
Schoenes in Egypt) above the City (Memphis) Myris dug, ^ Lake of admirable
use, the greatness of which work is incredible: For they relate, that the
circumference of it conteines M.MM.DC. furlongs, the depth of it in many places
is fifty fadome (that is, two hundred cubits, or three hundred feet) who
therefore may not deservedly ask, that shall consider the greatness of the
work, how many myriads of men, and in how many years they made it. The common
benefit of it to those that inhabit Egypt, and the wisdom of the King, no
man can sufficiently commend. For since the rising of Nilus is not always
alike, and the Country is the more fruitful by the moderatenesse of this; He
dug a Lake to receive the superfluity of the water, that neither by the
greatness of the inundation unseasonably drowning the Country, it should
occasion Marshes, or Lakes; or flowing less then it should do, for want of
water it should corrupt the fruits, he therefore cut a ditch, from the River to
the Lake, eighty furlongs long, and three hundred feet in breadth. By which
sometimes receiving in, and sometimes diverting the River, he exhibited a
seasonable quantity of water to the husbandmen, the mouth of it sometimes being
opened, and sometimes shut, not without much art, and great expenses. For he
that would open the bars (or sluices) or shut them, it was necessary that he
spent at the least fifty Talents. The Lake in this manner benefitting the
Egyptians, has continued to our times, and from the Author of it, at this day
is called the Lake of Myris. The King that dug it, left a place in the midst,
in which he built a Sepulcher, and two Pyramids, each a furlong in height; the
one for himself the other for his wife, placing upon them two Marble-Statues,
sitting on a Throne, imagining by these works he should propagate to posterity
an immortal memory of his worth. The Revenue of the Fish of this Lake he gave
to his Wife, for her Unguents, and other Ornaments; the fishing being worth to
her a Talent a day: For they report, there are two and twenty sorts of Fishes
in it, and that such a multitude is taken, that those who are perpetually
employed in salting them, of which there is a very great number, can hardly
dispatch the work. Thus far Diodorus: Which description, as it is much more
full then that of Herodotus, so Herodotus has this memorable observation
omitted by Diodorus. Herodot. lib. 2.
That this Lake was made by hand, and hollowed, it is apparent, because almost
in the midst of it there stands two Pyramids, fifty fadomes above the water,
and as many fadomes of the building under wa^er: upon the top of each of which
there is a Colossus of Stone, sitting upon a Throne; so that the Pyramids are
an hundred fadomes high. Strabo I know not by what oversight omits these two
Pyramids, whereas he acknowledges the Lake of Moeris, in which they stood,
(...)^ Strab. lib. 17.
to be admirable, being like a Sea for greatness, and for color.

Besides these which we have handled, and whose Founders are upon record in the
writings of the Ancients, there are many others in the Libyan Desert, where it
bounds Egypt, of which there is no particular mention extant, either in the
Greeks, Latins, or Arabians. Unless we shall apply these words of Diodor.
Sic. l. ^. (...).
Diodorus to some of them. There are three other Pyramids, each side of which
contain two hundred feet, the structure of them, excepting the magnitude, is
like to the former (that is, as he there specifies, to those three Pyramids of
Chemmis, Cephren, and Mycerinus) these three Kings before mentioned are
reported to have erected them for their Wives. The bigness of some of these
now extant, does well answer the measure assigned by Diodorus: But if these
three Kings built them for their Queens, it may be wondered why they should
have placed them so remote from their own Sepulchers: or why they should stand
at such large, and inequall differences, of several miles from one another. I
find as little satisfaction in Plin lib. 36. cap. 12.
Pliny, where he writes, Multa circa hoc vanitas illorum hominum fuit,
vestigiaque complurium inchoatarum extant, una est in Arsinoite nomo, duae in
Memphi, non procul Labyrintho, de quo and ipsi dicemus. For not telling us the
Founders of these, he leaves us still in the same darkness, only we may in
general collect out of him, and likewise out of that Ode in Horace: (Hora^.
Ode 30. lib. 3.)
Exegi monumentum aere perennius:
Regalique situ Pyramidum altius.
That they were the works of Egyptian Kings; but of which of them, and at what
time, we are altogether uncertain. Regum pecuniae, Plin. lib. 36. cap. 12.
says Pliny, otiosa, ac stulta ostentatio. Of the same opinion is Leo
Africanus, in his accurate description of Africa* after many years travel in
those parts. Hac per desertum arenaceum, itur ad Pyramides, nempe ad priscorum
Aegypti Regum Sepulchra, Leo Afric. lib. 8.
quo in loco Memphin olim extitisse asserunt. It may be it was the Royal
Prerogative, and that it was prohibited to private men, how wealthy, and potent
soever, to be thus intombed; but without some farther light* from the Ancients,
it would be too great a presumption to determine any thing.

Lucan. lib. 8.
Lucan, I know not upon what ground, makes as if the Ptolemies had imitated the
Egyptian Kings in this particular: Cum Ptolemaeorum manes seriemque pudendam
Pyramides claudant. Surely if they did, these are none of those: For they would
have built them at Alexandria, which was then the Regal Seat* and not at
Memphis, the which as Diodor. lib. 1.
Diodorus assures us, began to decay after the building o^ Alexandria, like as
the ancient Thebes (as the Plato, and alij.
Grecians styled it; or the City of the Sun, as the Egyptians, according to
Diodor. lib. 1.
Diodorus called it; or Diospolis, as Diodorus and Strabo Strab. lib. 17.
also name it,) did after the building of Memphis. Those which imagine the
Monument, or Sepulcher, mentioned by Plutarch. in Antonio.
Plutarch at Alexandria, into which Cleopatra fled for fear of Augustus, to
have been a Pyramid, are much deceived. For in the life of Mark Antony, where
he informs us, that there were Sepulchers near the Temple of Isis, of
exquisite workmanship, and very high; into which she conveyed the richest of
her treasures, he describes one of them, wherein she hid her self, to have had
a window above the entrance, by which she drew up with cords the body of
Antony, and by which afterward Proculeius entered, and surprised her. This
window is not in any of those Pyramids I have seen; neither can I apprehend,
if these were of as solid, and massy stones, and of the same shape, as those
at Memphis, and the chambers within as remote from the outward superficies, of
what use it could be, either in respect of light, or ornament; and therefore I
conjecture these monuments of the Ptolemies, to have been of a different
structure from those of the Pyramids.

In all other Classical Authors, I find no mention of the Founders of the
rest in the Libyan Desert: and after such a distance of time, we must be
content to be silent with them.

Of the Time in which the PYRAMIDS were built.
TO define the precise Time in which these Pyramids were erected, as it is an
inquiry of much difficulty, so of much importance, in regulating the various
and uncertain traditions of the Ancients, concerning the Egyptian
Chronology. For if we shall peruse those fragments of Manethos, an Egyptian
Priest, preserved by Joseph. lib. 1. contra Apionem.
Josephus; or those relations of Herodot. lib. 2.
Herodotus, of CCCXXX Kings to Moeris, from Menes the first that reigned in
Egypt (who probably is Genesis 10.6.
Mizraim, the second son of Cham, and Joseph. lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 7.
Father of the Egyptians;) or that computation of Diodor. lib. 1.
Diodorus, borrowed from their sacred Commentaries, That to the CLXXX Olympiad,
or to the time in which he travailed thither, there had been a Succession in
the Royal Throne for XV M years; or that calculation of Trecento^ and
triginta Reges ante Amasim, and supra tredecim millium annorum aetates, certis
annalibu^ referunt, Pomp. Mela, lib. 1. cap. 9.
Pomponius Mela* of CCCXXX Kings to the time of Amasis, continuing above XIII M
years; or lastly, those Dynasties mentioned by Africanus and Eusebius, but
pretermitted by Herodotus and Diodorus, the first of which Scal. in Eusebii
Chronic.
Joseph Scaliger places in the VII M and IX year of that Julian period, which
by him is called Periodus Iuliana postulatitia, and the time tempus
prolepticum, preceding the Creation by MCCCXXXVI years, we shall find our
selves entangled in a Labyrinth, and Maze of Times, out of which we cannot,
without much perplexity, unwinde our selves. And if we farther consider, that
amongst those many names delivered by Manethos, and preserved by Josephus,
Africanus, Eusebius, and Syncellus, how few there are that concur with those
of Herodotus, and Diodorus, or with those in Plato, Strabo, Pliny* Plutarch,
Censorinus, and some others: and that which is of greater consequence, how
difficult it is to reconcile these Names, and Times, to the Egyptian Kings
recorded in the Scriptures, we shall find our selves beset, and as it were
environed on every side, with great and inextricable doubts. What therefore, in
inquiries of this nature, is approved as the most solid, and rational
fo^^dation, that is, to find out some common, and received Epoch, in which
either all, or most agree, that shall be our guide in matters of so great
antiquity. Now, of all the ancient Epocha's, which may conduce to our purpose,
there is none that we may safelier rely upon, then that of the migration of the
Israelites out of Egypt; which had the same hand faithfully to pen it, that
was the most active, and miraculous instrument of their departure. And though
profane Historians differ much in the manner of this action, either as they
were tainted with malice against the Hebrews, or misled with the calumnies,
and false reports of their enemies, the Egyptians; of whom, (...). Io^ lib. 1.
contra Apionem.
Josephus may seem to have given a true censure, That all the Egyptians in
general are ill affected to the Jews; yet all agree in this, that Moses was
the chief author, and conductor of this expedition. If therefore we shall
discover the time in which Moses flourished, and in which this great enterprise
was performed by him, it will follow by way of consequence, that knowing what
Pharaoh, or King in Egypt was coetaneous, and concurrent with him, we may by
Synchronisme, comparing sacred, and profane Authors, and following the Line of
their Successions, as it is delivered by good authority, at length fall upon
the age in which Cheops, and those other Kings reigned in Egypt, whom we
assigned out of Herodotus, and Diodorus, to have been the founders of these
Pyramids.

And here, for our i^quirie what Egyptian King was concurrent with Moses, we
must have recourse to the relations, not only of the Scriptures, but also of
other approved Authors, amongst the Jews and Gentiles: in which last, though
we often find more then an Egyptian darkness, yet sometimes thorough this we
may discover some glimmerings of light. By the Scriptures alone, it is
impossible to infer, what King of Egypt was coetaneous with Moses: seeing
the name, which is there given him, of Pharaoh, is a common denomination
applyable to all of them; much like Caesar, or Augustus, with the Roman
Emperors, or sometime Cosroe with the Persians, and no distinctive
appellation. Yet in Herodotus we find one King, the successor of Sesostris, to
have been called (...). Herodot. lib. 2.
Pheron; which I suppose is Pharaoh, and his proper, and peculiar name. But who
this Pharaoh should be, whose heart God hardened, and upon whom Moses wrought
so many wonders, is worth our disquisition. Josephus in his first book contra
Apionem, out of Manethos contends, that Tethmosis (who is termed also Amosis
by Africanus, and Eusebius) reigned then in Egypt. The whole force of his
argument lies in this, that Manethos mentions the expulsion of the Nation of
Shepherds to have been by Tethmosis: But the Hebrews were a Nation of
Sheepheards, therefore the Hebrews were expelled out of Egypt, or in the
Scripture phrase, departed out of Egypt, under Tethmosis; and consequently,
that Moses, who was their Conductor, was coetaneous with him. That the Hebrews
were a Nation of Sheepheards, and so ^ccounted of themselves, and were esteemed
by others, is very perspicuous. Genesis 46 31, 32.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his fathers house, I will go up
and show Pharaoh, and say unto him, my brethren, and my fathers house, which
were in the land of Canaan. are come unto me. And the men are Sheepheards, for
their trade has been to feed cattle, and they have brought their flocks, and
their herds, and all that they have. And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh
shall call you, and shall say, what is your occupation? That ye shall say, thy
servants trade has been about cattle, from our youth even until now, both
we, and also our Fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen. For every
Shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians. But before we shall disprove
this assertion of Josephus, which carries much speciousnesse with it, and
therefore is approved, and followed, by In oratione contra Graeco^.
Tatianus, by In paraenetico ad eosdem.
Iustine Martyr, and by Lib. 7. Stromatum.
Clemens Alexandrinus we shall put down the words of Manethos himself, as they
are reported by Joseph. lib. 1. contra Apionem. (...), etc.
Josephus in his first book contra Apionem. T^maus by name being our King,
under him I know not how God was displeased, and beyond expectation, out of the
Eastern countries, men of obscure birth encamped themselves in the country,
and easily, and without battle took it by force, binding the Princes, and
besides cruelly burning the Cities, and overthrowing the Temples of the Gods.
Last of all they made one of themselves a King, who was named Salatis, he
reigning nineteen^ years dyed. After him another named Baeon reigned forty
four years: next to him Apachnas; another, thirty six years seven months:
then Apophis sixty one, Janias fifty, and one month, after all Assis forty
nine years and two months. And these were the first six Kings of them always
conquering, and desiring to extirpate Egypt. There nation was called Hycsos,
that is kingly Sheepheards. For Hyc in the sacred tongue signifies a King; and
Sos a Shepherd, or Sheepheards in the common dialect, and thence Hycsos is
compounded. But some say that these were Arabians. [ In other Copies I have
found that by the denomination Hyc, [These are the word^ of Josephus, and not
of Mane^bos.]
Kings are not signified, but on the contrary captive Sheepheards* For Hyc in
the Egyptian language, when it is pronounced with a broad sound, plainly
signifies ^aptives; and this seems more probable to me, and better agreeing to
the ancient history.] Those Kings therefore which we before mentioned, and
those which were called Pastores, and those which descended of them ruled
Egypt five hundred and eleven years. After this he mentions that by the Kings
of Thebes, and of the rest of Egypt, there was an invasion made upon these
Sheepheards, and a very great and lasting war. The which he says were
conquered by a King, whose name was Alisfragmuthosis, whereby they lost all
Egypt, being shut up into a place c^ntaining in circuit ten thousand acres.
This space Manethos says, the Sheepheards encompassed with a great and strong
wall, that they might secure all their substance, and their spoils in a
defensible place. But Themosis the son of Alisfragmuthosis indeavoring to
take them, with four hundred thousand armed men, beleagred the walls. who
despairing to take them by Seige, made conditions with them, that they should
leave Egypt, and go without any damage whither they would: They upon this
agreement, no less then two hundred and forty thousand, with all their
substance went out of Egypt, by the desert into Syria, and fearing the power
of the Assyrians ( who then ruled Asia) in that Country, which is now called
Judaea, they built a City capable to receive so many myriads of men, naming it
Jerusalem. By way of answer to Josephus, we say that though the Israelites
might properly be called Sheepheards,.
yet it cannot hence be inferred out of Manethos that these Sheepheards were
Israelites. Nay if we compare this relation of Manethos with that in Exodus,
Exodus 1.
which Josephus being a Jew, cannot but approve of, we shall find the
contrary. For there they live under a heavy slavery, and persecution, whereas
here they are the persecutors, and afflictors: there they groan under their
taskemasters the Egyptians, here they make all Egypt to groan under them:
lastly whereas there they are employed in the lowest offices, Exodus 1.14.
in Mortar, and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the field: here,
after the destruction of many Cities, and men, and infinite outrages committed
upon the Egyptians, they make one of themselves a King, and for six descents
keep themselves in possession of the royal Throne, of which after a long, and
bloody war they are deprived. Their building likewise of a City in Iudaea and
naming it Jerusalem, according to Manethos, is a strong argument against
Josephus, that these Sheepheards could not have been the Israelites. For
before the entrance of the Israelites into Canaan, we find that Jerusalem was
a fort of the Iebusites upon mount Sion, unconquered by Joshua. Josh. 15.63.
As for the Iebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Israel
could not drive them out. But they were long after subdued by David. And 1 Chronicles. 11.4, 5.
David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus, where the Iebusites
were the Inhabitants of the Land. And the Inhabitants of Jebus said to David,
Thou shall not come hither, Nevertheless David took the castle of Zion, which
is the City of David. Besides all this, the History, and Chronology of those
ancient times, if we compare Sacred, and profane Authors, will in no sort
admit that these Sheepheards must have been the Israelites. For if these that
departed out of Egypt in the reign of Tethmosis King of Thebais, or of the
upper part of Egypt, were the children of Israel, then must Moses their
Conductor have been as ancient as Tethmosis, or Amosis, that is as ancient as
Inachus, the first King of the Argiues. For Apion in his fourth Book of the
Histories of Egypt, shows out of Ptolemaeus Mendesius an Egyptian Priest,
that this Amosis lived in the time of Inachus, as it is recorded by In Oratio^e
contra Graecos.
Tatianus, In paraenetico ad G^aecos.
Iustine M^rtyr, Lib. 1. Stroma-
Clemens Alexandrinus, and others. Eusebius though he does not approve of it,
for he places Moses in the time of And so does Saint Augustine, Ed^xit Moses ex
Ae^y^t^ populum (...) novissimo tempore C^^^opis (...) l. 18. c. 1^. de (...)
Dei.
Cecrops, yet he assures us that it was a received opinion among many Learned
men. Eusebius. Ch^on.
Moysen Inachi fuisse temporibus eruditissimi viri tradideruntex nostris
Clemens, and Africanus; ex Iudaeis, Josephus, and Iustus, veteris historiae
monimenta replicantes. Now Inachus according to Eusebius. Chron.
Castor an ancient Chronographer* with whom Eusebius also concurres, began to
reign a thousand and eighty years before the first Olympiad, that is MCCLXVIII
before the destruction of the Temple under Zedekiah, and before Christ's
nativity, after the Dionysian, or common account, MDCCCLVI. That of the
Olympiads is so assured an Epoch, and so strongly, and clearly proved by
Eclipses of the Sun, and Moon, which are the best demonstrations in Chronology
these being expressed by some of the Ancients to have happened in such a year,
of such an Olympiad as by Ptolemae^s (...).
Ptolemy others in such a year of the epoch of Nabonassar, that we cannot
err in our Calculations an hour, much less an entire day. By this therefore
we shall fix the time of Zedekiah, and the destruction of the Temple: and
consequently, if, by our continuation of the years mentioned in the Sacred
story, it shall appear, that from the time of Moses, either to the first
Olympiad, or to Zedekiah, and the destruction of the Temple, there cannot be so
great a distance as these suppose, we may safely then conclude that Moses lived
not in the time of this Tethmosis, and is not so ancient, as Josephus makes
him, and that these Sheepheards were not the Israelites, but very probably
Arabians, as Manethos here also reports, some say that these were Arabians: who
to this day for the greatest part, like the Nomades wander up and down, feeding
their cattle, and often make incursions upon the Egyptians, and Syrians. Which
occasioned Sesostris the great (as we find it in Diod. Sic. lib. 1.
Diodorus) to make a wall on the East side of Egypt a Thousand and Fifty
furlongs in length, from Pelusium by the Desert to Heliopolis, against the
inrodes of the Syrians, and Arabians. As at this day the Chinese have done,
against the irruptions of the Tartars on the North, and West parts of China,
for many hundred miles: The which appears by a large Map of mine of that
Country, made, and printed in China. On the contrary, if the succession of
times, from Moses, recorded in the holy Writ, better agrees, with the age of
Amenophis, the Father of Ramesses, whose Story Joseph. lib. 1. contra Apionem.
Josephus has preserved out of Manethos, and whose time and rank in the
Dynasties, Africanus, and Eusebius deliver out of the same Manethos, we may
with more probability affirm, that the migration of the Israelites, and time
of Moses was, when Amenophis, was Pharaoh, or King of Egypt, then that it was
when Tethmosis reigned, as Josephus, and others contend, out of a desire to
make Moses ancienter, then in truth he is.

And though this argument from the Series and successions of time is so
demonstrative, and conclusive, that nothing can be opposed against it, and
therefore might be sufficient to evince our purpose: yet if we considerately
examine another relation of Manethos (which is slighted, and depressed by
Josephus, because it made not for his purpose) it must necessarily be that by
those Sheepheards he meant not the Israelites, but rather, by the Israelites,
the leprous people, which in his computation are three hundred thirty years,
and six months, after the Dynastie of the Sheepheards. And therefore we may
oppose the authority of Manethos apud Joseph. lib. 1. contra Apionem.
Manethos against himself, or rather against Josephus. The sum of whose
discourse is this: That Amenophis, who was a great worshipper of the Gods, as
Orus one of the former Kings had been, being desirous to see the Gods, one of
the Priests of the same name with him, told him he might, if he cleansed the
Country of leprous, and polluted people. This leprous people chose for their
Captain, one of the Priests of Heliopolis, named Osarsiphus, who changing his
name, was called Moses, He causing Amenophis for fear to f^y into Aethiopia,
was afterward by him, and by his Son Sethon, who was also called Ramesses, by
the name of his father, overthrown in battle, and the leprous people were
pursued by them unto the confines of Syria. Thus far out of Manethos. Here,
which is very remarkable, we have expressly the name of Moses, whereas in the
former relation of Manethos, there is no mention of him, but of six other
Kings, with their peculiar names. Whereas it is not probable he would have
omitted the name of Moses, if he had lived in that age, being a name so famous,
and so well known to them: and by (...)* (...)* 1. contra Apionem.
Josephus acknowledged, that the Egyptians accounted him to be an admirable,
and divine man. The pursuing of them unto the confines of Syria does very well
intimate the following of the Israelites by Pharaoh, and his Host. For his
terming them a leprous, and polluted people, we must consider him to have been
an Egyptian, and therefore not unlikely to throw as many aspersions as he
could upon the Israelites: whom they deadly hated, it may be out of memory of
their former plagues. How ever it were, Chaeremon has almost the same History,
as Lib. 1. contra Apionem (...), etc.
Josephus confesses. Chaeremon professing to write the History of Egypt, says
that under Amenophis, and his son Ramesses two hundred and fifty thousand
Leprous, and polluted men were cast out of Egypt. Their leaders were Moses the
Scribe, and Josephus who was also a Sacred Scribe. The Egyptian name of Moses
was Tisithen, of Joseph Peteseph. These coming to Pelusium, and finding there
three hundred and eighty thousand men left by Amenophis, which he would not
admit into Egypt, making a league with them, they undertook an expedition
against Egypt. Upon this Amenophis flies into Aethiopia, and his Son Messenes
drives out the Jews into Syria, in number about two hundred thousand, and
receives his Father Amenophis out of Aethiopia. I know Lysimachus apud Joseph.
lib. 1. contra Apionem. (...), and^.
Lysimachus assigns another King, and another time, in which Moses lead the
Israelites out of Egypt, and that was when Bocchoris reigned in Egypt, the
nation of the Jews being infected with leaprosies, and scabs, and other
diseases, betook themselves to the Temples to beg their living, many being
tainted with the disease, there happened a dearth in Egypt, Whereupon
Bocchoris consulting with the Oracle of Ammon, received answer, that the
leprous people were to be drowned in the Sea, in Sheets of lead, the scabbed
were to be carried into the will: dernesse, who choosing Moses for their leader
conquered that country, which is now called Iudaea. Out of which relation of
Lysimachus, and some others of like credit, Tacit. l. 5. Hist. Plurimi auctores
consent^unt, (...) per Aegyptum tabe* quae corpora faedaret: Regem Bocc^o^^m,
ad^^o Hammonis oraculo, remediu^ peten^em, purgare regnu^, and id genus hominum
^t invisum deis alias in terras avehere jussum. Sic conquisi^um collectu^que
vulgus, postq^am vasti^ locis relictum si^, caeteris per lachryma^ torpentibus,
Mosen unum exulum monuisse* ne qua^ deorum hominu^ve opem expectarent ab
utrisque de^erti, sed sibimet ut duci c^lesti, crederent, primo cujus auxilio
credente^ p^aesentes miserias pepulissent. Assensere atque omnium ig^a^i for^u
tum (...) i^cip^un^.
Tacitus may have borrowed his in the fifth book of his Histories. Most
authors agree that there arising a contagion in Egypt, which defiled their
bodies, King Bocchoris consulting the Oracle of ^ammon, whereby to find some
remedy, was bid to purge his Kingdom, and to carry that sort of men, as hated
of the gods, into other countries, Thence the vulgar sort being inquired after,
and collected together, after they had been left in the deserts, the rest
being heavy with tears, Moses one of the banished men admonished them, not to
expect the help, either of Gods, or men, being deserted by both, but that they
should trust to him as their Captain, sent from Heaven, to whose assistance by
their giving credit at the first, they had overcome their present calamities.
They assented unto him, and being ignorant of all, they begin their journey, as
fortune should lead them. Thus much and a great deal more has Tacitus of
Moses, and the Jews. But to pass by his, and Lysimachus calumnies, we can no
more assent to these testimonies of theirs, that Moses should have lived in the
time of Bocchori^, then we did to Josephus that he was coetaneous with
Tet^mosis. For we find Bocchoris to be placed by Africanus, and Ex Edit. Ios.
esaligere.
Eusebius* in the twenty fou^th dynasty, and by Diod. lib. 1.
Diodorus long after Sesostris the great, or Ramesses: which Ramesses, or
Sethosis, or Sethon (that is Sesostris, and Sesoosis in Diodorus) both in
Manethos, and Chaeremon, is the son of Amenophis, who is the last King of the
eighteenth dynasty, according to Africanus, and Eusebius. I purposely omit the
opinion of Apud Ios. lib 2. contra Apionem.
Apion, that Moses (whom he makes to be of Heliopolis) departed with these
lepers, and blind, and lame, in the first year of the seventh Olympiad, in
which year, says he, the Phoenicians built Carthage; and that other of Ex
Ethnicis vero impius ille Porphyrius in 4 to operis sui libro, quod adversum
nos Casso labor contexuit, post Moysen Semira^^um fuisse affirma^. ^use. Ch^on.
Porphyrius in his fourth book against the Christians, that Moses was before
Semiramis. Where he places him as much too high, as Apion does too low.

Laying therefore aside these vain, and uncertain traditions, we have no more
assured way exactly to fix the time of Moses, then to have recourse to the
sacred Scriptures, and sometimes to compare such authors of the Gentiles with
these, against whom we have no just exceptions. For by those, and these
conjointly, we may continue his time to the first Olympiad, and thence to the
destruction of the Temple, by N^buchadnezzar King of Babylon: That of the
Olympiads being a most certain, and known epoch with the Greeks, as that of
the destruction of the Temple with the Jews. From Moses then, or the migration
of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the building of Solomon's Temple, are
CCCCLXXX years current, or four hundred seventie nine complete: and so also
Eusebius. Chron.
Eusebius computes them. The words of the Text plainly conclude this Sum. 1
Kings 6.1.
And it came to pass in the four hundred and fourth score year, after the
Children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of
Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month, that
he began to build the house of the Lord. From the building of the Temple, to
the destruction of it in the reign of Zedekias, by the calculation, and
confession of the best chronologers, are betwixt four hundred and twenty, and
four hundred and thirty years. Which is thus deduced: After the first
foundation of the Temple, Solomon reigned For 1 King. 6.1. in the fourth year
of his Reign, and the second month he began to build the house of the Lord: And
in 1 King. 11.41. The time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel
was forty years. Out of which, if we subduct 3 complete years that preceded the
foundation of the Temple, there remain 37 years.
thirty seven years, 1 King. 14.2^. He reigned 17 years in Jerusalem.
Rehoboam with 1 King. 15.2. Three years reigned he in Jerusalem.
Abia twenty; in whose time we are to place Shishak or Sesochosis, the King of
Egypt. 1 King. 14.25, 26.
And it came to pass in the fifth year of King Rehoboam, that Shishak King of
Egypt came up against Jerusalem, And he took away the treasures of the house
of the Lord, and the treasures of the Kings house, he even took away all: and
he took away all the shields of gold, which Solomon had made, This Shishak is
named by the Septuagint (...), by Saint Hierome, Sesac, and is the same whom
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 4.
Josephus calls (...), which he imagines to have been Ses^stris the great whose
victories, and conquests are described at large by Herod. lib. 2.
Herodotus. But this Sesostris, or Diodorus in the printed Copies always names
him Sesoosis, but in one of the MSS as (...). Stephanus observe^, he is
sometimes called S^sostris* and sometimes Sesoosi^, vid. edit. Diod, ab Henr.
Stephan.
Sesoosis as Diodorus also terms him, must long have preceded Rehoboam's time,
as in the sequel of this discourse it will appear. Therefore the more
probable opinion is that of Scaliger, that by Shishak is meant Sesochosis, whom
Manethos calls (...), and the Scholiast of Apollonius (...), the time of the
XXII th. dynasty, in which we find him placed by Africanus, and Eusebius, does
well agree with it, and the radical letters in Shishak, and Sesac, being the
same, do very much strengthen our assertion. After Rehoboam and Abiah's reign,
1 Kings 15 10. 41 years reigned he in Jerusalem.
Asah and 1 Kings 22.42. He reigned 25 years in Jerusalem.
Iehosaphat reigned LXVI. years, 2 King. 8.17. He re^gned 8 years in Jerusalem.
Ioram and 2 Kings 8.26. He reigned one year in Jerusalem.
Ahazia IX. 2 Kings 11.3. And he was with her hid in the h^use of the Lord 6
years: And Athaliah did reign over the Land.
Athalia and 2 Kings 12.1. 40 years reigned ^e in Jerusalem.
Ioas XLVI. 2 Kings 14.2. He reig^^d 29 years in Jerusalem.
Amasias XXIX 2 Kings 15.2. He re^gned 52 years in Jerusalem.
Uzziah LII. 2 Kings 15.33. He reigned 16 years in Jerusalem.
Iotham XVI. 2 Kings 16.2. He reigned 16 years in Jerusalem.
Achaz XVI. 2 Kings 18.2. He reigned 29 years in Jerusalem.
Hezekiah XXIX.

Now 2 King. 18.13, ^6
in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, did Sennacharib King of Assyria come
up against all the fenced Cities of Judah, and took them. But afterward when
he came to besiege Jerusalem -- 2 King. 19.35, 36.
It came to pass that night, that the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote
in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and when
they arose early in the morning behold they were all dead corpses. So
Sennacharib King of Assyria departed, and went, and returned, and dwelt at
Nineveh. In the time of this Sennacharib, Sethon succeeding Anysis reigned in
Egypt, according to Herod. lib. 2. (...).
Herodotus, who in his Euterpe has plainly the name Sanacharib, stiling him
King of the Arabians, and Assyrians, and making him to have received a
miraculous defeat, which it may be was that of Hezekiah, though he applies it
to Sethon King of the Egyptians. His Story is well worth our observation,
which runs thus. Herod. lib. 2. (...), etc.
After this (Anysis) the Priest of Vulcane, by name Sethon, reigned, who
abusing the men of war of the Egyptians, and contemning them, as not useful
to him, besides other ignominies he deprived them of their Lands, which had
been given to every company of twelve by the former Kings. Whence it happened*
that when afterward Sanacharib the King of the Arabians, and Assyrians invaded
Egypt, the Egyptian Soldiers refused to assist him. Then the Priest
destitute of counsel, shut himself up, lamenting before the Image how much he
was in danger to suffer; in the midst of his mourning falling asleep, a God
appeared to him, encouraging him that he should suffer no distress, if he
would march against the Armies of the Arabians. For he would send him succor.
He therefore giving credit to this dream, taking with him such volunteers of
the Egyptians, as followed him, pitched his Army at Pelusium. For there Egypt
is easiest invaded, neither did any of the Soldiers follow him, but Tradesmen,
and Artificers, and Merchants. Coming thither, by night an infinite number of
Mice, entering upon his enemies, knawed their Quivers, and Bows, and the
leathers of their Shields, so that the next day the enemies destitute of Arms
fled, many of them being slain. And therefore now this King stands in the
Temple of Vulcane, in a statue of Marble, holding in his hand a Mouse with this
inscription. He that looks upon me let him be religious. After Hezekiah 2 King.
21.1. He reigned 55 years in Jerusalem.
Manasses reigned LV years. 2 King. 22 19. He reigned two years in Jerusalem.
Amon II. 2 King. 22* He reigned 31 years in Jerusalem.
Josiah XXXI. 2 Kings 13.29. and 2 Chro. 35.20. Necho^ K^^g of Egypt came up
to fig^^ against Carchemish by Euphrates and Josiah went out against him.
In his days Pharaoh Nechon King of Egypt went up against the King of Assyria
to the river Euphrates, and King Josiah we^^ against him, and he slew him at
Megiddo, when he had seen him. The same relation we read in Herodotus, if we
pardon him the mistake of Magaolo for Megiddo, who writes that (...). Herodot.
lib. 2.
Necus (the King of Egypt) fighting a battle on land with the Syrians in
Magdolo, obtained the victory, and after the fight he took Cadytus a great
City in Syria.

Next to Josiah succeeded 1 Kings 23.31. He reigned three months in Jerusalem.
Ioachaz, 2 Kings 23.36. He r^igned eleven years in Jerusalem.
Iehotakim, and 2 Kings 24 8. He reigned in Jerusalem ^hree months.
Iechoniah or Iehoiakin, reigning XI years and six months. And in the eleventh
year of And the City was besieged unto the eleventh year of King Zedekiah.
And on the ninth day of the fourth Month the Fa^ine preva^led in the City, and
there was no bread for the people of the Land: And the City was broken up* and
all the men of war fled by night.
Zedekiah the next King after Iechoniah was the Temple burnt by Nebuzaradan, in
the And in the fifth month o^ the seventh day of the month (which is the
nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon) cam^ Nebuzaradan, Captain
of the Guard, a servant of the King of Babylon unto Ie^usalem. And he burnt the
house of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and
every great man's house burnt ^e with fire* 2 Kings 25.2* 3, 4, 8, 9. The same
Relation we find in Jeremiah Chap. 52. verse. 5, 6, 7, 12.13. almost word for
word, which is remarkable
nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon. This Zedekiah, says I
s^^h Antiquit. lib. 10. cap. 10. (...).
Josephus, having been a confederate of the Babylonians for eight years,
broke his faith with them, and joining league with the Egyptians hoped to
overthrow the Babylonians. This league we find intimated in Ezekiel. 17.15.
Ezekiel; and we read in Jeremiah 37.5.
Jeremiah and Ios Ant. l. 10. c. 10 (...)
Josephus of succors, and assistance, sent by the King of Egypt, when
Zedekiah and Jerusalem were first distressed by the Chaldeans, or forces of the
King of Babylon, Ier. 37.6, 8.
Then Pharaohs army was come forth out of Egypt, and when the Chaldeans, that
besieg^d Jerusalem, heard tidings of them they departed from Jerusalem. The
same is re^terated by him: Behold Pharaohs army which is come forth to help
you, shall return to Egypt to their own land. And the Chaldeans shall come
again, and fight against this City, and take it, and burn it with fire. All
which we see was performed by Nebuchadnezzar in the eleventh year of Zedekiah:
and a judgment also denounced against the King of Egypt. Ier. 44.30*
Thus says the Lord behold I will give Pharaoh Hophra King of Egypt, into the
hands of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life: as I gave
Zedekiah King of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon his
enemy, and that sought his life. The same is often threatened by the Prophet
Ezekiel. 30.22, ^3.
Ezekiel, who lived in the time of Hezekiah, as Jeremiah did. I am against
Pharaoh King of Egypt, and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,
and will disperse them throughout the countries. And I will strengthen the
arms of the King of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break
Pharaohs arms. Which prophecies we may discover most manifestly to have been
fulfilled in the reign of Apries, as Herod. lib. 2.
Herodotus names him, or Apryes as Diodor. lib. ^^
Diodorus calls him, or Vaphres, as the Septuagint, and Eusebius, render the
name of that King, which here in Jeremiah, is called Pharaoh Hophra. Who, says
(...). Herod. l. 2.
Herodotus, next to Psammitichus his Grandfather was the most fortunate of all
the former Kings, for twenty five years of his reign, Which might occasion
Zedekiah to fly to him for succor: But the Egyptians rebelling against him,
he was overthrown in battle, taken prisoner, and afterward strangled by his
own servant Amasis, whom they had made their King. The whole story, and
manner, is at large in Herodot. lib. 2.
Herodotus, neither did divine vengeance long forbear to pursue the traitor.
For Cambyses the King of the Persians, and of Babylon, coming with an army
against him, possessed himself of Egypt, as the Prophets had foretold. Nor could
the Egyptians ever to this day recover the Monarchy. For after the Persians
succeeded the Macedonians, after them the Romans, then the Arabians, next the
Mamalukes, or Circassians, and last of all the Turks, or Scythians. So that we
may conclude from the occurrences then happening (the relations of Herodotus
exactly agreeing with the threatenings of the Prophets) as also from the
computation of times, and from the affinity, and analogy of names, that Hophra,
and Apries, or Vaphres, must have been the very same Egyptian King coetaneous,
and concurrent with Zedekiah.

To reassume then what has been demonstrated by us. From the migration of the
Israelites out of Egypt, under the conduct of Moses, to the building of
Solomon's Temple, are four hundred seventie nine years complete, and from the
building of the Temple to the destruction of it, are four hundred and thirty
years, and six months. But because it is not probable, that, amongst so many
Kings, all of them should have reigned completely so many years, as are
expressed in the Text: it being the usual style of Kings to reckon the years
current of their reign, as complete, I shall limit this uncertainty between
CCCCXX, and CCCCXXX years, which is a sufficient latitude. If any one shall
desire a more exact calculation, he may compute them, by comparing other places
of the Scriptures with these, to be but CCCCXXV. years current, according to
the opinion of the most Reverend, and judicious Primate of Ireland, to which I
willingly subscribe; though either computation be sufficient for my purpose.

This destruction of the Temple, by our best Chronographers is placed in the
first year of the forty eighth Olympiad, and in the hundred and sixtieth of
the Epoch of Nabonassar, and in the nineteenth (as the Scripture often makes
mention) of Nabuchodonosor, the son of Nabolassar, (as (...). Beros. apud
Joseph. l. 1. contra Apionem*
Berosus in Josephus names him) which Nabolassar must necessarily be the same
with him that is called Nabopolassar in Ptolemy, and is the XIV King of the
Assyrians and Medes after Nabonassar, whom Nabocolassar (or So Josephus, and
the Vetus Vinga^a always name him.
Nabuchodo^ozor, or Ier. 52.12.^8* 29.
Nebuchadrezzar, or 2 Kings 25.8. Ezra 1.7. Ez^a 2.1.
Nebuchad^ezzar, for so the Scripture also terms him) in ^is Canon Regnorum
succeeds. The neernesse of ^he names, and agreement of the times, in the ^acred
Scriptures, and profane Authors, do ^trongly prove them to be the same.
Wherefore we may conclude, that from the time of Moses, or the migration of the
Israelites out of Egypt* or from the end of Amenophis (coetaneous with Moses)
the last King of the eighteenth dynasty (as Eusebius out of Manethos ranks
him) to the reign of Apries, or Vaphres, or Hophra; the eighth King of the
twenty sixth dynasty (according to the same Eusebius out of Manethos) being
coetaneous with Zedekiah King of Judah, and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, are
DCCCCIV years, and from Moses to the first Olympiad DCCXV and not MLXXX as
they who make Moses as ancient as Inachus affirm. In which space we may with
much certainty, If we give credit to Herodotus, and Diodorus place the Kings,
the Founders of the three greatest, and fairest Pyramids; which is the
principal intention of this discourse* For H^rodot. lib. 2. Diodo^. Sic. l. 1.
both of them describe these to have reigned many ages before Apries, and long
after Sesostris the great. Which Sesostris, or Sesoosis, as Diodorus also
styles him, must have been the same King, whom Manethos in Josephus calls
Sethosis, and Ramesses, and (...). Manethos apud Ios. lib. 1. contra Apionem.
Where in the same place Mane^hos calls thi^ (...), also (...) and son of
Amenophis; And therefore Scaliger (...) h^ly obser^es that Ramesses with
Manethos is (...) Seal in Eusebius. Chron.
Aegyptus son to Amenophis before mentioned, and brother to Armais, or Danaus;
and Eusebius of Scaligers edition in Greek names Sethos* the latin
translations of Saint Hierome both MSS. and printed copies Sethus, and by all
of them is the first King of the XIX dynasty. The great acts, and conquests,
assigned by Herodotu^ to Sesostris, and as great attributed by Manethos to
Sethosis, or Ramesses, which cannot well be applied to any other precedent, or
subsequent Kings together with the relation of them both, tha^ while he was in
pursuit of his victories abroad his brother, whom Manethos names Armais, and
This Danaus (for his rebellion being expelled by his brother out of Aegyp^)
sailed into Greece, and possessed himself of Argos, as it is testified by
Josephus, (l^b. 1. contra A^^^nem) by ^fric^nus and Eus^^ius, (vid. Eus. Ch^o.)
^y Pausamas, and several others. From whom desc^nded the Danaidae, one of the
races of the Kings at Argos^^f all which there is frequent meant on in the
G^e^ke Historians and Chronogra^hers: wherefore we cannot be ignorant, either of
Dan^us, or of hi^ bro^hers time. I shall only add, for further illustration
what I find in Africanus (...). Afr. apud Eusebius C^r.
Danaus (in Herodotus his name is omitted) rebelled against him at home, and
the neernsse of the time, which may be collected out of both, do very much
confirm the probability of this assertion. Sesostris then, and Sethosis being
one, and the same, is by Manethos in Josephus ranked immediately after
Amenophis, (coetaneous with Moses as we have proved) and in the same Manethos
in the tradition of Eusebius after Menophis, that is Amenophis, both in the
Greek and Latin Copies. Wherefore the Founders of these Pyramids, having
lived after Sesostris, must likewise have been after Amenophis. If we will
come to a greater preciseness yet of time (for this latitude of nine hundred,
and four years, which we assigned from Moses to the destruction of the first
Temple, in the time of Zedekiah King of Judah, and Apries King of Egypt, is so
great, that we may lose our selves in it) we have no other possible means
left, after the revolution of so many ages, and the loss of so many of the
commentaries, and monuments of the Egyptians, but by having recourse to those
dynasties of Manethos, as they are preserved by Africanus, and Eusebius. And
yet in neither of these shall we find the names of Cheops, or Chemmis; of
Cephren, or Chabryis; or of Mycerinus, the Authors of the three greater
Pyramids, mentioned by Herodotus, and Diodorus; or of Asychis the builder of a
fourth, according to Herodotus. Wherefore what their writings have not supplied
us with, that reason must. For since these Egyptian Kings, as we have proved,
lived between Amenophis, and Apries, and by Eusebius. Chron.
Eusebius ou^ of Africanus, Amenophis is the last of the XVIII dynasty, and
Apries or Vaphres, the VIII of the XXVI dynasty, we must necessarily place them
in one of the intermediate dynasties. But seeing all the intermediate dynasties
have their peculiar Kings, unless it be the XX, we have no reason to exclude
them, and to bring these in their places as usurpers: But rather, with great
probability (for I must say here with Live. lib. 1.
Livy, Quis rem tam veterem pro certo affirmet?) we may assign to them the XX
dynasty. In which we find not the name of any one King, but yet the space left
vacant of CLXXVIII years, according to Eusebius.

Here therefore we shall place.

First, Cheops, or Chemmis, the Founder of the first Pyramid, who began his
reign in the MMM CCCC XLVIII year of the Julian Period, that is CCCCLXXXX
years before the first Olympiad, and DCLXXVIII before the first destruction of
the Temple, and MCCLXVI* before the beginning of the years of our Lord. He
reigned L years, says Herodotus, and built this Pyramid, as Diodorus
observes, a thousand years before his time, or the CLXXX Olympiad, whereas he
might have said a thousand two hundred and ten.

Secondly, Cephren or Chabryis the builder of the second, who reigned fifty
Herod. lib. 2. Diodor. lib. 1.
six years.

Thirdly, Mycerinus the erector of the third, seven years.

Fourthly, Asychis the Author of the fourth.

Fifthly, Anysis the blind.

How long these two reigned is no where expressed.

Sixthly, Sabachus the Ethiopian. He conquered Egypt, and reigned He^od. lib.
2. Diodor. lib. 1.
fifty years,

The sum is CLXIII years, this being subducted out of CLXXVIII years (the
whole time allowed by Eusebius to this dynasty) the remainder is XV years;
which space we may without any inconvenience divide between Asychis, and Anysis.

If any shall question why the names of these Kings are omitted by Manethos, an
Egyptian Priest, in the XX dynasty, I can give no other reason, then what we
read in Herodotus. (...). Herodot. lib. 2.
These Kings (speaking of Cheops and Cephren) the Egyptians out of hatred will
not so much as name, but they call them the Pyramids of Philition a Shepherd,
who in those times, at that place, fed his cattle. The which hatred,
occasioned by their oppressions, as Diodor lib. 1.
Diodorus also mentions, might cause him to omit the rest, especially Saba^hus,
an Ethiopian, and an Usurper.

Following this computation of Eusebius of CLXXVIII years for the XX dynasty,
and not that of Africanus, who assigns only an CXXV of whom Scalig in Eusebius.
Chron.
Joseph Scaliger has this censure, in istis dynastiis, aliquid turbasse
videtur Africanus, ut consuleret rationibus suis; it will follow by way of
consequence, as the most Reverend, and learned Primate of Ireland in his
Chronologia Sacra has singularly well observed.

First, that the XVIII dynasty ends with the migration of the Israelites out of
Egypt, and with the death of Amenophis: which is clearly signified by
Manethos, and the times of Belus, and Danaus noted by the Greek Chronographers
do evidently confirm it. I mean the Egyptian Belus, or Amenophis, the Father
of Aegyptus, or Sethosis and Danaus, not the Babylonian Belus the father of
Ninus, whom Mythologists confound with this; feigning him to have transported
colonies out of Egypt to Babylon. The time allotted by Thallus apud Eusebius.
Thallus, an ancient Chronographer, to Belus of CCCXX years, before the Trojan
war, does exactly agree with this Egyptian Belus, or Amenophis.

Secondly, that the XX dynasty will receive those six Kings, which out of
Herodotus we have placed there: the number of whose years exceed the time
limited by Africanus.

Thirdly, that the XXII dynasty will fall upon the latter time of King Solomon,
whereby Sesonchis the first King of it, may be the same with Sesac, or Shishac,
who in the 1 King. 14.25, 26.
fifth year of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, invaded Iudaea Which was the
only reason that moved Scalig in Eusebius. Chron.
Scaliger to suspect, that something had been altered by Africanus in these
dynasties.

By the same series, and deduction of times, we may conclude, that the
Labyrinth adjoining to the Pyramid of Osymanduas raised by a common expense of
the XII Kings, who Herodot. lib. 2.
succeeded Sethon to have been MMCCC XXIV years since, or DCLXXX before
Christ. For Sethon living in the time of Sennacharib, and these immediately
following Sethon in the government of the Kingdom, they must have reigned,
either in the same age the Scripture assigns to Sennacharib, or not long after.

Those other Pyramids, the one of Osymanduas in Diodor. lib. 1.
Diodorus, or Ismandes, in Strabo lib. 17.
Strabo; and those two of Moeris, or Myris, in Herodot. lib. 2.
Herodotus, and Diodor. lib. 1.
Diodorus, it is evident they preceded Sesostris the great, and must therefore
have been above three thousand years since, but by how many Kings, or how many
ages, is hard to be defined.

Of the end or intention of the PYRAMIDS, that they were for Sepulchers: where,
by the way is expressed the manner of imbalming used by the EGYPTIANS.
That these Pyramids were intended for Sepulchers, and monuments of the dead,
is the constant opinion of most Authors, which have writ of this argument.
(...). Diod. Sic. l^b. 1.
Diodorus expressly tells us that Chemmis and Cephren, although they designed
(these two greater) for their Sepulchers, yet it happened that neither of them,
were buried in them. (...). Strab. l. 17.
Strabo judges all those near Memphis to have been the Sepulchers of Kings.
Forty stadia from the City (Memphis) there is a certain brow of an hill in
which are many Pyramids the Sepulchers of Kings. And in particular he calls an
other near the lake of Moeris, the (...). Ibid.
Sepulcher of Imandes. To which also the writings of the Arabians are
consonant, who make the three greater the monuments of Saurid, Hougib, and
Fazfarinoun. And the Sabaeans the first of them, the Sepulcher of Seth, the
second of Hermes, the third of Sab, the son of Hermes, from whom they suppose
themselves denominated Sabaeans, as we formerly mentioned. And if none of these
authorities were extant, yet the tomb found in the greatest Pyramid to this
day of Cheops, as Herodotus names him, or Chemmis, according to Diodorus, puts
it out of controversy. Which may farther be confirmed by the testimony of (...)
Ibn Abd Alhokm an Arabian, where he discourses of the wonders of Egypt, who
relates that after Almamon the Calife of Babylon, had caused this Pyramid to be
opened [about eight hundred years since,] G. Almec. Hist. Arab. ex edit. Erp.
(...) Ibn Abd Alhokm (...)
they found in it toward the top a chamber, with an hollow stone, in which
there was a statue like a man, and within it a man, upon whom was a breast
plate of gold, set with Jewels, upon this breast plate was a sword, of
inestimable price, and at his head a carbuncle of the bigness of an egg,
shining like the light of the day, and upon him were characters writ with a
pen, which no man understood.

But why the Egyptian Kings should have been at so vast an expense in the
building of these Pyramids, is an inqui^y of an higher nature. Arist. l. 3.
Polit.
Aristotle makes them to have been the works of tyranny: and Pliny
conjectures, that they built them, partly out of ostentation, and partly out of
state policy, by keeping the people in employment, to divert them from
mutinies, and rebellions. Plin. lib. 26, c. 12.
Regum pecuniae otiosa, ac stulta ostentatio. Quippe cum faciendi eas causa a
plerisque tradatur, ne pecuniam successoribus, aut aemulis insidiantibus
proeberent, aut ne plebs esset otiosa.

But the true reason depends upon higher, and more weighty considerations;
though I acknowledge these alleged by Pliny might be secondary motives. And
this sprang from the theology, of the Egyptians, who as Servius shows in his
comment, upon these words of Aeneid. lib. 3.
Virgil describing the funeral of Polydorus, -- animamque Sepulchro
Condimus. --
believed that as long as the body endured so long the soul continued with it,
which also was the opinion of the Stoici medium sequentes, came di^ animam
durare dicunt, quam diu durat and corpus. Serve. Com. in l. 3. Aeneid.
Stoickes. Vnde Aegyptii periti s^pientiae condita diutius reservant cadavera,
scilicet ut anima multo tempore perduret, and corp^ri sit obnoxi^, ne cito ad
aliud transeat* Romani contra faciebant comburentes cadavera, ut statim anima
in generalitatem, id est, in suam naturam rediret. Serve Com. in l. 3. Aeneid.
Hence the Egyptians skillful in wisdom do keep their dead imbalmed so much
the longer, to the end that the soul may for a long while continue, and be
obxoxious to the body, least it should quickly pass to another. The Romans
did the contrary, burning their dead, that the soul might suddenly return
into the generality, that is, into its own nature. Wherefore that the body
might not, either by putrefaction, be reduced to dust, out of which it was
first formed; or by fire be converted into ashes (as the manner of the
Graecians, and Romans was) they invented curious compositions, besides the
intombing them in stately reconditories, Whereby to preserve them from
rottenness, and to make them eternal, Pompon. Mel. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Nec eremare, aut fodere fas putant, verum art medicatos intrapenetralia
collocant, says Pomponius Mela; And Herodotus gives the reason why they did
neither burn, nor bury. For discoursing, in his third book, of the cruelty of
Cambyses, and of his commanding that the body of Amasis, an Egyptian King,
should be taken out of his Sepulcher, whipped, and used with all contumely, he
reports that after all he bid it to be burnt, Herodot. lib. 3. (...), etc.
commanding that which was not holy. For the Persians imagine the fire to be a
God, and neither of them are accustomed to burn the dead body. The Persians
for the reason before alleged, because they conceive it unfitting for a god to
devour the carcaise of a man; and the Egyptians because they are persuaded the
fire is a living creature, devouring all things that it receives, and after it
is satisfied with food, dies with that which it has devoured. Nor is it their
custom of giving the dead body This barbarous custom is still practiced in
the East Indies, as Teixeira (who from his own travels, and the writings of
Emir Cond, a Persian, has give^ us the best light of those Countries) truly
informs us. Wherefore, we may give credit to that of Tully: Magorum mo^ est
no^ humar^ corp^ra suorum, nisi a feris si^t antea lan^ata. In Hy^chan^a Pl^bs
publicos alit canes, optima^es domesticos (Nobile autem genus canum illud
sci^us esse) sed pro sua quisque facultate parat, a quihus lanietur, eamque
optimam illi esse cens^nt sepulturam. (Tusc. q. l. 1.)
to beasts, but of imbalming (or salting) it, not only for this reason but that
it may not be consumed with worms. Baruch 6*71.
The term used by Herodotus) (...), of salting, or imbalming the dead, is also
used by Baruch and by Plat. Phaedon.
Plato, and by Lucian de Luct. (...).
Lucian in his discourse de Luctu, treating of the several sorts of burial
practiced by several nations. (c) The Grecian does burn [the dead] the
Persian bury, the Indian does anoint with the fat of swine, the Scythian eats,
and the Egyptian (...) imbalmes, (or pouders,) Which manner also is alluded to
by Antoninus under the word (...) M. Aurel. Anto. lib. 4* (...).
that which the other day was excrementitious matter, within few days shall
either be (...), an imbalmed body, or mere ashes: in the one expressing the
custom of the Egyptians, in the other of the Romans, Where Doctor Casub.
ann. in l. 4. M. Aurel. Anton.
Casaubone, the learned son of a learned Father, has rightly corrected the
errors of those who render (...) to be a certain sort of fish. By this means
then salting the body, and imbalming it (the manner of both we shall describe
out of Herodotus, and Diodorus) the soul was obliged (according to the belief
of the Egyptians) to abide with the body, and the body came to be as durable
as marble. In so much as Plato, who lived in Egypt, with Eudoxus no less then
XIII years, as Strabo lib. 17.
Strabo witnesses, brings it for an argument in his Phoedon to prove the
immortality of the soul, by the long duration of these bodies. Which surely
would have been more conclusive with him, could he have imagined that to these
times, that is till MM years after him, they should have continued so solid,
and entire, as to this day we find many of them. Wherefore Aegyptij vero soli
credunt Resurrectione^, quia diligenter curant cadavera mortuorum, more^ enim
habent siccare corpora, and quasi aenea reddere, Gabb^r^s ea vocant. Aug. sermon.
120. De Diversis.
Saint Augustine truly affirms, that the Egyptians alone believe the
resurrection, because they carefully preserve their dead corpses. For they have
a custom of drying up the bodies, and rendering them as durable as brass,
these [in their language] they call Gabbares. Whence the Gloss of Isidore,
Gabares mortuorum, in Vulcanius, his edition: or as Spondanus de Caemet sacris,
lib. 1. par. ^^. c. 5.
Spondanus reads, Gabares mortuorum condita corpora.

The manner how the Egyptians prepared and imbalmed these bodies, is very
copiously, and by what I observed at my being there, very faithfully described
by Herodotus, and Diodorus, and therefore I shall put down their own words.
Their mourning says Herodotus, lib. 2. (...), etc
Herodotus, and manner of burial are in this kind. When any man of quality of
the family is dead, all the women besmeare their heads and faces with dirt,
then leaving the body with their kindred, they go lamenting up and down the
city, with their kinsfolks, their apparel being girt about them, and their
breasts naked. On the other side, the men having likewise their clothes guirt
about them beat themselves. These things being done, they carry it to be
Amongst these imbalmed bodies are found Egyptian Idols.

Omni-genumque Deum monstra, and latrator Anubis. To use Virgils expression.
Aen. 8. Some of these are in great, some in little portraictures, formed either
of potters earth baked, or else of stone, or metal, or wood, or the like; in
all which kinds I have bought some. One of them for the rarity of the matter,
and for the illustration of the Scriptures deserves to be here mentioned: being
cut out of a Magnes in the form, and bigness, of the (...), or Scarabaeus,
which as De Is. and Osir. (...).
Plutarch testifies was worshipped by the Egyptians, and was by military men
engraven, as an Emblem, on their seals. To which sort of Idols, it may be
Moses alluded, when speaking of the Gods of Egypt he terms them (...)
Gillulim, Stercoreos Deos* Deuteronomy. 29.17. Vidistis abominandos and stercoreos
Deos illorum.
as the Original is rendered by Iunius, and Tremellius: for such places are the
unsavory dwellings of the Scarabaeus. That which is remarkable of it in nature
is this, that the stone, though probably two thousand years since, taken out
of its natural bed, the Rock, yet still retains its attractive, and
magneticall virtue.


imbalmed. For this there are some appointed, that profess the art, these,
when the body is brought to them show to the bringers of it certain patterns of
dead bodies in wood, l^ke it in painting. One of these they say is accurately
made (which I think ^t not lawful to name) they show a second inferior to it,
and of an easier price, and a third cheaper then the former. Which being seen
they ask of them according to what pattern they will have the dead body
prepared? When they have agreed upon the price, they depart thence, Those that
remain, carefully imbalme the body in this manner. First of all they draw out
the brain with a crooked iron by the nostrills, which when they have drawn out
they infuse Having caused the head (...) ^ne of the richer sort of these
imbalmed bodies to be opened, in the hollow of the skull I found the quantity
of two pounds of these medicaments: which had the consistence, blackness, and
smell of a kind of Bitumen, or pitch, and by the heat of the Sun wax^d soft.
This infusion could not well have been made any other way, the^ as Herodotus
here intimates, by the nostrils. The tongue of this imb^lmed body being waighed
by me was less then seven gr^ines English So light was that member which Saint
James calls a world of m^sch^^fe. James 3 6.
medicaments. Then with a sharp Aethiopicke stone they cut it about the bowels,
and take out all the guts: which purged, and washed with wine made of palms,
they again wash with sweet odours beaten, then filling up the Plutarch writes
that they first exp^sed the belly being opened, to the Sun, casting the
bowels into the river ((...)) tanquam inqu n^mintum corporis: this being done,
they filled up the belly and the hollow of the breast with unguents and odours,
as it is manifest by those which I have seen.
belly, with pure Mirrhe beaten, and Cassia, and other odours, except
frankincense, they sow it up again, having done this they salt it with nitre,
hiding it seventy days (For longer it is not lawful to salt it) seventy days
being ended, after they have washed the body binding it with fillets (or These
Ribbands by what I observed were of linen which was the habit also of the
Egyptian Priests for Herodotus (li. 2.) writes that it was profane for the
Egyptians either to be buried in wo^^len garments, or to use them in their
temples: And Pluta^ke in his book de Iside and Osi^ide, expressly tells us that
the Pr^ests of Isis used linen ve^tments and were shaved; and therefore the
Goddess Isis is called in Ovid. 1. amor. Ele. 2. Linigera Nee tu linigeram
fieri quid possit ad Isim Quaesieris. O^ the^e Ribbands I have seen some so
strong, and perfect, as i^ they had been made but yesterday. With these they
bound, and swathed the dead body, beginning with the head, and ending with the
feet: over these again they wound others, so often one upon another, that there
could not be less then a thousand else upon one body
ribbands) and wrapping it in a shroud of silk linen, they smeare it with
gum, which the Aeg^ptians often use instead of glue. The kindred receiving it
thence make Of these coffines I have seen many fashioned in the similitude of a
man, or rather resembling one of those imbalmed bodies, which as we described
before, are bound with Ribbands, and wrapped in a shroud of linen. For as in
those there is the shape of a head, with a kind of painted vizard or fa^e
fastened to it, but no appearance without of the Arms and Legs: so is it with
these Coffines, the top of them has the shape of the head of a man, with a
face painted on it resembling a woman, the residue being one continued trunk:
at the end of this trunk is a Pedestall, somewhat broad; upon which it stood
upright in the reconditory, as Herodotus here mentions. Some of these Coffines
are handsomely painted without, with several H^eroglyphicks. Opening two of
them I found within, over the body, diverse scroles fastened to the linen
shroud. These were painted with sacred Characters, for the colors very lively,
and fresh; amongst which were in a larger size the pictures of men, or women,
some headed like Hawks, some like Dogs, and sometimes Dogs in chards standing
alone. These scroles either ran down the belly and sides, or else were placed
upon the knees, and legs. On the feet was a linen cover (and so were all the
scroles before mentioned of linen) painted with Hieroglyphics, and fashioned
like to a high slipp^r Upon the breast was a kind of breast plate made with
folds of linen cut scolop-wise, richly painted, and guilt. In the midst of the
bend at the top of it, was the face of a woman with her arms expanded: on each
side of the^, at the two outmost ends was the head of an Hawke fairly guilt,
by which they represented the Divine nature, according to Plutarch (in his book
de Iside and Osiride) as by a Serpent with the tail in his mouth, the
revolution of the year, was resembled: in which kind also I have seen fair
sculptures in gemmes, found at Alexandria: and as by the sign of the cross
they did denote spem venturae salutis, or vitam aete^nam, in Ruffi^us
expression. Of these crosses I have seen several amongst their Hieroglyphics;
some painted, and some engraven in this manner and some others amongst their
mummies formed of stone (or baked earth) in this figure

At Rome on the statue of Osiris it is engraven thus. T.


a coffine of wood, in the similitude of a man, in which they put the dead
body; and being thus inlosed they place it in a reconditorie in the house,
setting it upright against the wall. In this manner with great expenses they
prepare (the funerals) ^f their dead. But those who avoiding too great
expenses desire a mediocrity, prepare them in this manner. They take a clyster
with the juice of Cedar, with which they fill the belly by the fundament,
neither cutting it, nor taking it out, and salt it so many days, as we
mentioned before. In the last of which they take out that (clyster) of Cedar
out of the belly, which before they injected. This has such efficacy, that it
carries out with it the whole panch, and entrails corrupted. The Nitre
consumes the flesh, and there is only left, the skin, and bones, of the dead
body. When they have done this, they restore the body to the kindred, doing
nothing more. The third manner of preparing the dead is of them which are of
meaner fortune: with lotions they wash the belly, and dry it with salt seventy
days, then they deliver it to be carried away.

Diodorus Siculus as his manner is, more distinctly, and clearly, Diod. Sic.
lib. 1.
with some remarkable circumstances expresses the same thing. If any one dye
amongst the Egyptians, all his kindr^d and friends, casting du^t upon their
heads, go lamenting about the City, till such time as the body is buried. In
the mean time they abstain from baths, and wine, and all delicate meat; neither
do they w^are costly apparel The manner of their burial is threefold. The
one is very costly, the secondlesse, the third very mean. In the first they
say there is spent a talent of silver, in the second twenty minae, in the last
there is very li^le expense. Those who take care to dress the body are
artizans receiving this skill from their Ancestors. These showing a b^ll, to
the kindred of the dead* of the expenses upon each kind of burial, ask them in
what manner they will have the body to be prepared When they have agreed upon
it, they deliver the body to such as are usually appointed to this offce. First
he which is called the Scribe, laying it upon the ground describes about the
bowels on the left side, how much is to be cut away. Then he which is called
the Cutter, taking an Aethiopick stone, and cutt^ng away as much of the flesh,
as the law commands, presently flye^ away, as fast as he can; they which are
present running ^f^er him, and cast^ng st^nes at him, and cursing him (hereby)
turn^ng all the execration upon him. For whosoever does offer violence, or
wound, or do any kind of in^ury to a body of the same nature with himself,
they think him worthy of hatred. But those which are called the ^mbalmers,
they esteem them worthy of honor, and respect. For they are familiar with
their Priests, and they go into the Temples, as holy men, without any
proh^bi^ion. As s^on as they meet about the dressing of the d^ssected b^dy* one
thrusting his hand by the wound of the dead body into ^is entra^les, takes ^ut
all the bowels w^thin, besides the heart, and kidneyes; another clenses all the
entrails, washing them with wine made of palms, and with od^urs. Lastly the
whole body being carefully anointed with the ^uice of cedar, and other things
for above thirty days, and afterward with Mirrhe, and Cinnamon, and such other
things, which have power not only to keep it for a long time, but also to give
a sweet smell, they deliver it to the kindred. ^his being thus fin^shed, every
member of the body is kept so entire, that upon the brows, and I find ^n the
^ravail^^ of Monsieur de Br^ve^, (...) at Constan^^^ople* that at his b^ing in
E^ypt, about forty years sinc^, they s^w so^e ^f the^e imbalmed bod^e^, with
h^^res rema^^ni^g on th^^r ^eads, and (...) ^ea^ds which (...). N^us (...) and
^esp^^d, des^^^verts ^a ca^se qu^ les (...) b^ndes (...)) qui (...) veux, la ^a
^e and, les e^g^es. ^es voy^ges de M. de Bre^es.
eyelids, the hairs remain, and the whole shape of the body (continues)
unchanged, and the image of the countenance may be known. Hence many of the
Egyptians keeping the bodies of their Ancestors in magnificent houses, d^e see
so expressly the faces of them ^ead, many ages before they were born, that
beholding the b^gnesse of each of them, and the dimensions of their bod^es* and
the lineaments of their faces, it affords them wonderful content of mind, no
otherw^se then as if they were now living with them. Thus far Diodorus. By
which description of his, and that of Herodotus, we see the truth of what
Co^d^un^ Aegyp^^ mo^t^o^, and cosdom^ (...). Tuscul. qu. lib. 1.
Tully writes. The Egyptians imbalme their dead, and keep them at home:
Amongst themselves above ground, Says Sex^us Empiricus: and Lib. 1. cap. 9.
intra penetralia in Pomponius Mel's expression: and in lectulis, according to
Athanasius in the life of Antony. Lucian adds farther in his tract de luctu.
(...) Luc^an.
They bring the dried body (I speak^ what I have seen) as a guest to their
feasts, and invitations, and oftentimes ore necessit^us of many is supplied, by
giving his brother, or his father in pledge. The former custom is intimated by
Silius Lib. 3 Punicoum.
Italicus. speaking of the several manners of burial of diverse nations.

Aegyptia tellus
Claudit odorato post funus stantia Saxo,
Corpora, and a mensis exanguem haud separat umbram.
The latter is confirmed by Diodor Sic l. 1.
Diodorus Siculus. They have a custom of depositing for a pledge the bodies of
their dead parents. It is the greatest ignominy that may be not to redeem them;
and if they do it not they themselves are deprived of burial. And therefore
says he immediately before, Such as for any crime, or debt, are hindered from
being buried, are kept at home without a coffine: whom afterward their
posterity growing rich, discharging their debts, and paying money in
compensation of their crimes honorably bury. For the Egyptians glory that
their Parents, and Ancestors, were buried with honor.

This manner of the Egyptians imbalming, we find also practiced by Joseph upon
his Father Jacob in Egypt: and if we will believe Tacitus, Iud^os ab Aegyptiis
didic sle, condere cadavera potius quam crema^e Ta^it. histor li^. 5.
The Hebrews (in general) learned from the Egyptians rather to bury their
dead, then to burn them. Where ^pondan. lib. 1* part. ^. cap. 5. de coe^et^r^i^
sacris.
Spondanus instead of condere cadavera* reads condire, as if it had been their
custom of poudring, or imbalming the dead. Wash them, and anoint them we know
they did, by what was done to our Savior, and to the widow Dorcas: and long
before it was in use amongst the Gentiles, as well as Jews, as appears by the
funeral of Patroclus in (...) Iliad lib. 19.
Homer, and of Missenus the Trojane in Act. eid. lib. 6.
Virgil. Corpusque lavant frigentis, and ungunt, And of Tarquinius the Roman
in Ennius. Tarquinii corpus bona foemina lavit, and unxit.

But certainly the Egyptian manner of imbalming, which we have described out
of Herodotus, and Diodorus, was not received by them; John 11.39.
or if it were Martha the sister of Lazarus needed not to have feared, that
after four days the body should have stunk. Transtulerunt Israelitae hunc
ri^um ex Egypto secum in Cananaeam, quo deince^s^n sepul^uris Principum, and
Regum usi dicuntu^ in historia Asae. 2 Paral. 6. and alibi. D. Parae^^ omin in
Genesis 50.2.
They which infer out of the Funeral of Asa King of Judah, that it was the
custom of the Jews, as well as Egyptians, have very little probability for
their assertion. Chron. 16.14.
We read that they buried him in his own Sepulcher, which he had made for
himself in the City of David, and laid him in the bed, which was filled with
sweet odours, and diverse kinds of spices prepared by the Apothecaries art: and
they made a very great burning for him. This very great burning is so contrary
to the practice of ^he Egyptians, to whom it was an abomination, as appears
by the authorities before cited of Herodotus, and Mela, besides the little
affinity of filling the bed with sweet odours, and the Egyptians filling the
body, and the place of the entrails with sweet odours, according both to
Herodotus, and Diodorus, that we shall not need to inla^g our selves in any
other confutation. But as for that of Jacob, and Joseph, the Father, and the
Son* both living, and dying in Egypt, the text is clear they were imbalmed
after the fashion of the Egyptians. Genesis 50.2, 3.
And Joseph commanded his servants the Physicians to imbalm his father, and the
Physicians imbalmed Israel, and forty days were fulfilled for him (for so are
fulfilled the days of those which are imbalmed) And the Egyptians mourned for
him threescore and ten day^s. In the same Chapter we read Genesis 50.26.
So Joseph dyed being an hundred and ten years old, and they imb^lmed him, and
he was put in a coffine in Egypt. Both which places are very consonant to the
traditions of Herodotus, and Diodorus, and may s^rve to show what necessity
there is of having often times recourse to the learning of the heathen, for the
illustration of the Scriptures. Forty days were fulfilled for the imbalming of
Jacob, This D^od Sic lib 1. (...), etc
Diodorus tells us was their custom, they anointed the dea^ body with the
juice of Cedar, and other things for above ^hirty days, and afterward with
myrrh, and Cinnamon, and the like; which might make up the residue of the forty
days. And the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days. This time
out of Herodotus may be collected to have been from the first day of the death
of the person, till the body was returned by the Physicians after seventy days
perfectly imbalmed. The Text says, and Joseph was put in a coffine: which is
very lively represented by D^od Sic lib 1. (...), etc
Herod. lib. 2.
Herodotus. The kindred rec^iving the dead body from the imb^lmers make a
coffine of wood in the simil^^u^e of a man, in which they put it. This coffine
then as it is probable, of Joseph was of wood, and not man morea theca, as (s)
^ajetane imagines, the former being the custom of the Egyptians. Besides that
this was much easier, and fitter to be carried by the Israelites into Canaan,
marching on foot, and for ought we read destitute of wagons, and other
carriages.

Veteres Hebraei co^me^tati sun^ dua^ fu^sse areas una incedentes in deserto,
a^teram Div^nita^s, altera^ Iosephi. ^^lam scilicet arcam aederis, hanc ve^o
loculos quibus Iosephi ossa ex Aegypto a^portab^ntur in Regionem Chanaan.
The tradition of the ancient Hebrews in their commentaries is very probable,
and consonant to it. They carried in the desert two arckes, the one of God, the
other of Joseph, that the arcke of the Covenant, this the arcke (or coffine) in
which they carried Joseph's bones out of Egypt. This coffine (if it be lawful
for me to conjecture after the revolution of three thousand years) I conceive
to have been of sycomore (a great tree very plentifully growing in Egypt) of
which sort there are many found in the Mummies, very fair, entire, and free
from corruption to this day. Though I know the Arabians, and Persians have a
different tradition that his coffine was of glass. erer. comm^n 50 cap. Genes.
They put his blessed body, (...)
after they had washed it, into a coffine of glass, and buried it in the
channel of the river Nilus, says Emir Cond a Persian.

That phrase of Joseph where he takes an oath of the children of Israel, Genesis
50 25.
ye shall carry up my bones from hence, surely is a synecdoche, or figurative
speech: And so is that in Exodus. And Exodus 1^.19.
Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had staightly sworn the
children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up
my bones away hence with you: For his body being boweled, and then imbalmed,
after the manner of the Egyptians, not only the bones, but the skin, the
flesh, and all besides the entrails (which according to Plutar 7 Sapient.
convivio.
Plutarch were thrown into the river) would have continued perfect, and entire,
a much longer space, then from his death to their migration out of Egypt.

Having thus by art found out ways to make the body durable, whereby the soul
might continue with it, as we showed before, which else would have been at
liberty to have passed into some other body, (...). Herod. lib. 2.
this also being the opinion of the Egyptians, from whom Pythagoras borrowed
his (...), or transanimation (the which made him to forbid his Disciples the
eating of flesh, Ne forte bubulam quis de aliquo proavo suo obsonaret, as
Tertullian wittily speaks) the next care of the Egyptians was to provide
conditories, which might be as lasting as the body, and in which it might
continue safe from the injury of time, and men. That occasioned the ancient
Kings of Thebes in Egypt to build those, which Diod. Sic. lib. 1. (...), etc.
Diodorus thus describes. There are they say the wonderful Sepulchers of the
ancient Kings, which in magnificence excede the imitation of posterity. Of
these in the sacred commentaries forty seven are mentioned, but in the time of
Ptolemaeus Lagi there remained but XVII. Many of them at our being in Egypt,
in the hundred and eightieth Olympiad were decayed, neither are these things
alone reported by the Egyptians, out of the sacred books, but by many also of
the Graecians* who in the time of Ptolemaeus Lagi went to Thebes, and having
compiled histories (amongst whom is Hecataeus) agree with our relations. And
thi^ might occasion also those others recorded by Strabo, which he calls (...),
or Mercuriale^ tumulos, seen by him near Siene, in the upper parts of Egypt,
very strange, and memorable Strabo lib. 17. (...), etc.
Passing in a chariot from Siene to Philae, over a very even plain, about an
hundred stadia, all the way almost, of both sides, we saw in many places
Mercurial tombs: a great stone, smooth, and almost Spherical, of that black,
and hard marble, out of which morters are made, placed upon a greater stone,
and on the top of this another, some of them lying by themselves: the greatest
of them was no less then twelve feet diameter, all of them greater then the
half of this. Many ages after, when the regal throne was removed from Thebes
to Me^phis, the same religion, and opinion continuing amongst the Egyptians,
that so long as the body endured, so long the soul continued with it, not as
quickening, and animating it, but as an attendant, or guardian, and as it were
unwilling to leave her former habitation: it is not to be doubted this incited
the Kings there, together with their private ambition, and thirst after glory,
to be at so vast expenses in the the building of these Pyramids; and the
Egyptians of lower quality, to spare for no cost, in cutting those hypogaea,
those caves, or dormitories, in the Libyan deserts, which by the Christians now
adays are called the mummies. Diodorus Siculus excellently expresses their
opinion, and belief, in this particular, together with their extreme cost of
building Sepulchers, in these words. Diod. Sic* l^b. ^. (...), etc.
The Egyptians make small account of the time of this life being l^mited but
that which after death is joined with a glorious memory of virtue they highly
value: They call the houses of the living innes, because for a short space we
inhabit these: But the Sepulchers, of the dead they name eternal mansions,
because they continue with the Gods for an infinite space. Wherefore in the
structures of their houses they are little solicitous but in exquisitely
adorning their Sepulchers they think no cost sufficient

Now why the Egyptians did build their Sepulchers often in the form of
Pyramids (for they were not always of this figure, as appears by those (...)
or Mercuriales tumult, before cited out of Strabo, which were sphericall; and
by those hypogaea, or caves still extant in the rocks of the de^ert) Pierius in
his hieroglyphickes, or rather the Anonymus author at the end of him, gives
several philosophical reasons. Ex Eruditi cuju^d. l ^. sub finem Hierogl.
P^erii* Per Pyramidem veteres (Aegyptii) rerum naturam, and substantiam illam
informem formas recipientem significare volueru^t: quod ut Pyramid a puncto,
and s^mmo fastigio ^ncipien^, paulatim in omnes pa^^es d^latatur, sic rerum
omnium natura ab unico principio and font, qui divi^i non potest, nempe a D^o
summo opifice profecta, varias deinde formas suscipit, and in varia genera
atque speci^s diffuditur, omniaque a^ici (...) and pun^to conjungit a quo omnia
manam and flu^nt Ve^um and alia hujus rei ratio naempa Astronomia reddi potest,
etc.
By a Pyramid, says he, the Ancient Egyptians expressed the nature of things,
and that informed substance receiving all forms. Because as a Pyramid hav^ng
its beginning from a point at the top* is by degrees dilated on all parts, So
the nature of all things proceeding from one fountain, and beginning, which is
indivisible, namely from God, the chief workemaster, afterward receives
several forms, and is diffused into various kinds, and species, all which it
conjoynes to that beginning, and point, from whence every thing issues, and
flows. There may also be given an other reason for this taken from Astronomy.
For the Egyptians were excellent Aronomers, yea, the first inventors of it,
these [dividing the zodiaque, and all things under it in to twelve signes] will
have each sign to be a kind of Pyramid, the basis of which shall be in the
heaven (For the heaven is the foundation of Astronomy) and the point of it
shall be in the center of (...) earth, Seeing therefore in these Pyramids all
things are made, and that the coming of the sun, which is as it were a point
in respect of those signs, is the cause of the production of natural things,
and its departure the cause of their corruption* it seems very fitly that by a
Pyramid, nature the parent of all things, may be expressed. Also the same
Egyptians under the form of a Pyramid shadowed out the soul of man, making
under huge Pyramids the magnificent Sepulchers of their Kings, and Heroes, to
testify that the soul was still exi^tent, notwithstanding the body were
dissolved, and corrupted, the which should generate, and produce another body
for it self, when it should seem good ^o the first Agent, (that is the circle
of thirty six thousand years being transacted.) Like as a Pyramid (as it is
known to Geometricians) the top of it standing fixed, and the base being moved
a^out, describes a circle, and the whole body of it a ^^ne, So that the circle
expresses that space of years, and the cone that body which in that space is
produced. For it was the opinion of the Aegyp^ians, that in the rev^lution of
thirty six thousand years, all things should be restored to their former state,
Plato witnesses that he received it from them; who seems als^ to me in his
Timaeus to attest this thing, that is, that our soul has the form of a
Pyramid, which (soul) according to the same Plato, i^ of a fiery nature, and
adhereth to the body as a Pyramid does to the basis, or as fire does to the
(...) well. Thus far the Anonymus author in Pierius; most of which reasons of
his are but pretty fancies, without any solid proof from good Authors. For he
might as well say that the Egyptians were excellent Geometricians, as well as
Astrono^ers (as they were very skillful in both) and that they made these
Pyramids, to express the first, and most simple of Mathematical bodies: or
else being excellent Arithmeticians, to represent the mysteries of pyramidall
numbers; or else being well ^een in the optickes, to shadow out the manner of
vision, and the emission of rays from luminous bodies, as also the effluvium
of the species intentionales from the object, all which are supposed to be
pyramidall. But this were to play with truth, and to indulge too much to fancy.
Wherefore I conceive the reason why they made these Sepulchers in the figure of
a Pyramid, was; either as apprehending this to be the most permament form of
structure, as in truth it is (For by reason of the contracting, and lessening
of it at the top, it is neither overpressed with its own weight; nor is so
subject to the sinking in of rain, as other buildings:) or else hereby they
intended to represent some of their Gods. For anciently both they, and some
others of the Gentiles, by Columns and obeliskes, did so: Whereas a Pyramid is
but a greater kind of obeliske, as an obeliske is but a lesser sort of
Pyramid. Thus we find in Clem. Alex. l. 1. St^omatum ex Phoron^dis au^tore.
Clemens Alexandrinus that Callithoe, the Priestesie of Juno, decked the Column
of the Goddess* with ^^ow^es and Garlands: that is, says ^cal. in Eusebius.
Chron.
Joseph Scaliger, the image of the Goddess For at tha^ time the statues of the
Gods were (...). Pyramidal columns, or obeliskes. And (...) was nothing else
but (...) a column en^^ing in a point (that is a Pyramid) as (...). Su^da^.
Su^das relates. Which kind of Columns, (says the same Author) some make
proper to Apollo, others to Bacchus, and others to them both. Lib. 18. cap. 31.
Diod. lib. 1. Obeliscum Mesphres Rex Aegypti primus fecisse fertur -- qui post
caecitatem visu recepto duos obeliscos so^i consecravit. Isid. li. 18. cap. 31.
Isidore writes that they were dedicated to the sun, whom Diodorus describes
the Egyptians to have worshipped under the name of Osiris, as they did the
moon by ^he Goddess Isis; and therefore as Isis cornigera represented the
horns of the moon, or Luna ^alcata: so these Pyramids, and obelisci
acuminati, might not unfitly resemble the rays of the Sun, or their God
Osiris. In (...). Pau^aniae Corinthi^ea.
Pausanias also we read that in the City Corinth^punc; Jupiter Melichius, and
Diana surnamed Patroa were made with little, or ^o Art: Melichius being
represented by a Pyramid, and Diana by a Column. Whence Clemens Alexandrinus
imagines this to have been the first ^inde of Idolat^y in the world (and
therefore well agreeing with the antiquity of the Aegyp^ians) Before the exact
art of making statues was ^ound out, the Ancients erecting Columns, (...).
Alex. lib. Stromatum.
wor^^ipped these as the images of God.

This practice of the Egyptians was but rare^y imitated by other nations, I
mean of erecting Pyramids for Sepulchers; though Servius seems ^o make it
frequent in his comment upon these ^erses of Virgil.

-- Fuit ingens monte sub alto
Regis De cenni, terreno ex aggere bustum
Antiqui Laurentis, opacaque il ce tectum.
Apud maiores* Nob^les aut sub montibu^, aut in montibu^ sepeliebantur* unde
natum est, ut supra c^davera, aut Pyramide, fie^ent, a^tingen^es coll^ caten^^r
(...). Se. v. in Virgil.
With the Ancients (says Servius) Noble ^en were buried, either under
mountains, or in (...) un^aines, wh^nce the custom came, that over ^he dead*
either Pyramids were made or huge co^umnes erected. In imitation of the later
custom it may be 2 Samuel c. 18. v. 18.
Absalom erected his pillar: and Pausanias describing the manner of burial
amongst the ancient nation of the Sicyonians tells us Pausaniae Corinth, ^ive
lib. 2. (...)*
that they covered the body with earth, and raised pillars over it. But for the
former of Pyramids, I find none out of Egypt accounted miraculous, unless it
be the Sepulcher of Porsena King of Hetruria (with which I shall conclude)
described by Pliny out of Varro: being more to be admired for the number, and
contrivance of the Pyramids, then for any excessive magnitude. Plin. l. 36 c.
13. Vtemus ipsius M* Varronis ^u expositione ejus* verbis. Sepultus est,
inquir, sub Vrbe Clusio, in quo l^co m^numentum reliquit lapide quadrato,
singula latera pedum l^t^ tricenu^n, alta quinquageru^: inque basi quadrata
in^u^ labyrinthum inextricabile^ quo siquis improperet sine glomereli^i, extum
inven^re nequeat. Supra id quadratum Pyramides stant quinque, qua^uor in
angul^s, and in me^dio una* in imola^ae pedum septuage um (...)* al^ae ce^tum
qu^quagensi^^ita fastig^atae, u^ in summo orbis aeneu^, and pe^asus un^s
omnibus si^ imposi^us, ex quo ^endeant excepta catenist^nti^^ ^bula, quae (...)
agitat ^lo^ge^^ itus ^efer^n^* ut D^do^ae olim factum. Supra quem ^rbem q^a ^or
Py^a^^^e, insuper si^gu^ae ex^^nt altae pedu^^ c^nte (...) Supra quas uno solo
qui^que Py^^mides quar^m (...) Varronem pudu^t adijcere. ^a^ule H^^ruscae
tradunt eandem ^u^ss^ quam to^ius (...) ve^ana d^^entia quaesisse gloriam*
i^pen^io nu^li profuturo. Praeterea fatig^sse reg ni vires, ut tamen laus mayor
arti^icis esset. Plin l. 36. c. 13.
We shall use M. Varro's own words, in the description of it. He was buried,
says he, without the City Clusium, in which place he left a monument of
square stone. Each side of it is three hundred feet broad, and fif^y feet high.
Within the square basis there is an inextricable labyrinth, ^hither who so
adventures without a clue can find no passage out. Upon this square there
stand five Pyramids, four in the angles, and one in the middle, in the bottom
they are broad seventy five feet, and high an hundred and fifty. They are
pointed in such a manner, that at the top there is one brass circle, and
covering for them all, from which there hang bells fastened to chains: these
being moved by the Wind, give a sound a far off as at Dodona it has formerly
been* Upon this circle the^e are f^ure other Pyramids each of them an hundred
feet high. Above The outside of the first Pyramid
which upon one plain there are five Pyramids, the altitude of which Varro was
ashamed to add. The Hetruscan fables report that it was as much, as that of
the whole work. With so vain a madness he sought glory by an expense useful
to no man: wasting besides the wealth of his Kingdom, that in the end the
commendation of the Artificer should be the greatest.

Gorsena's Tomb at Clusium in Italy consisting of many Pyramids


A description of the Pyramids in Egypt, as I found them, in the MXLVIII year
of the Hegira, or in the years MDCXXXVIII, and MDCXXXIX of our Lord, after the
Dionysian account.
HAving discovered the Founders of these Pyramids, and the time in which they
were erected, and lastly the end, for which these monuments were built: next in
the method we proposed, the sciography, of them is to be set down: Where we
shall begin with the dimensions of their figure without, and then we shall
examine their several spaces, and partitions within.

A description of the first and fairest Pyramid.
THe first, and fairest of the three greater Pyramids, is situated on the top
of a rocky hill, in the sandy desert of Libya, about a quarter of a mile
distant to the West, from the plains of Egypt: above which the rock rises
an hundred feet, or better, with a gentle, and easy ascent. Upon this
advantageous rise, and upon this solid foundation the Pyramid is erected: the
height of the situation adding to the beauty of the work, and the solidity of
the rock giving the superstructure a permament, and stable support. Each side
of the Pyramid, computing it according to Herodot. l 2.
Herodotus conteines in length DCCC Grecian feet: and in Diod. l. 1. (...).
Diodorus Siculus account DCC: Strabo l. 17
Strabo reckons it less then a furlong that is less then DC Grecian feet, or
six hundred twenty five Roman: And Plin. l. 36. c. 12. Amplissima octo jugera
obtinet Soli, qua^^or angulolorum paribus intervallis, per octingentos
octoginta tres pede^, ^^ngulo^um late^um.
Pliny equals it to DCCCLX^XIII. That of Diodorus Siculus in my judgment comes
nearest to the truth, and may serve in some kind to confirm those proportions,
which in another discourse I have assigned to the Grecian measures. For
measuring the North side of it, near the basis, by an exquisite radius of ten
feet in length, taking two several stations, as Mathematicians use to do,
when any obstacle hinders their approach, I found it to be six hundred ninety
three feet, according to the English Standard: which quantity is somewhat less
then that of Diodorus. The rest of the sides were examined by a line, for want
of an even level, and a convenient distance to place my instruments, both which
the area on the former side afforded.

The altitude of this Pyramid was long since measured by Thales Milesius, who
according to Tatiani Orat. contra Gr^^os.
Tatianus Assyrius lived about the fiftieth Olympiad: but his observation is no
where by the Ancients expressed. Only Plin. l. 36. c. 12. M^nsu^am altitud^^^s
e^^um, omniumque similium deprehendere in veni^ Thales Milesi^^ ^^^bram
me^iendo, q^a ho^^ p^r esse cor^^^^ ^oict
Pliny tells us of a course proposed by him, how it might be found, and that is
by observing such an hour, when the shadow of the body is equal to its
height. A way at the best, by reason of the faintness, and scattering of the
extremity of the shadow, in so great an altitude, uncertain, and subject unto
error. And yet Diog. Laert. in vita Thaletis, l. 1.
Diogenes Laertius in the life of Thales has the same story, from the
Authority of Hieronymus. Hieronymus reports, that he measured the Pyramids by
their shadow, marking when they are of an equal quantity. Wherefore I shall
pass by his, and give my own observations. The altitude is something
defective of the latitude; though in Strabo lib. 17. (...).
Strabos computation it exceeds; but Diod^^. ^. 1. (...)
Diodorus rightly acknowledges it to be less: which, if we measure by its
perpendicular, is four hundred eighty one feet; but if we take it as the
Pyramid ascends inclining (as all such figures do) then is it equal, in
respect of the lines subtending the several angles, to the latitude of the
Basis, that is to six hundred ninety three feet. With reference to this great
altitude Stat l. 5. Sylv. 3.
Statius calls them.

-- audacia saxa
Pyramidum --
Pyramides sunt tucre in Aegypto, fastigiatae ultra excelsitatem omnem, qu^e
manu fieri potest. Iul. Solin. Polvh c. 45.
Julius Solinus goes farther yet. The Pyramids are sharp pointed towers in
Egypt, exceeding all height, which may be made by hand. Ammian. Marcel. l 22.
Ammianus Marcellinus in his expression ascends as high. The Pyramids are
towers erected altogether exceeding the height, which may be made by man, in
the bottom they are broadest, ending in sharp points atop: which figure is
therefore by Geometricians called Pyramidall, because in the similitude of fire
it is sharpened into a cone, as we speak, Pro^ert (...) ^. 3 eleg. ^.
Propertius with the liberty of a poet, in an Hyperbole flies higher yet.

Pyramidum sumptus ad sidera ducti. And the Graec. Epigram^ l^b. 4. Francosurti
1600 cum annot. B^odae^.
Greek Epigrammat^st in a transcendent expression is no way short of him.

(...).
(...).
What excessive heights these fancied to themselves, or borrowed from the
relations of others, I shall not now examine: this I am certain of, that the
shaft, or spire, of Paul's in London before it was casually burnt, being as
much, or somewhat more then the altitude of the tower now standing, did exceed
the height of this Pyramid. For Pyramid ^ulche ^^ma Ca^hed^alis Ecclesiae S
Pauli, quae singula^^ Vi^i o^namento in suspiciendam edita altitudinem DXX
scilicet pedes a solo, and CCLX a turre quad^a^a, cui imposit ^ e^a^ e materia
ligin^a plumbo vestita, de coelo prope fastig^um lacta deflag^avi^ Cambdeni
Elizabetha.
Cambden describes it to have been, in a perpendicular, five hundred and
twenty feet from the ground.

If we imagine upon the sides of the basis, which is perfectly square, four
equilaterall triangles mutually propending, and inclining, till they all meet
on high as it were in a point (for so the top seems to them which stand below)
then shall we have a true notion, of the just dimension, and figure of this
Pyramid: the perimeter of each triangle co^prehending two thousand seventy nine
feet (besides the latitude of a little plain, or flat on the top) and the
perimeter of the basis, two thousand seven hundred seventy two feet. Whereby
the whole area of the basis (to proportion it to our measures) conteins four
hundred eighty thousand, two hundred forty nine square feet, or eleven English
acres of ground, and 1089 of 43560 parts of an acre. A proportion so monstrous,
that if the Ancients did not attest as much, and some of them describe it to be
The insideof the first and fairest Pyramid
more, this age would hardly be induced to give credit to it. But Herodotus
describing each side to contain eight hundred feet, the area must of necessity
be greater then that by me assigned* the sum amounting to six hundred, and
forty thousand: or computing it as Diodorus Siculus does, the area will
comprehend four hundred and ninety thousand feet: and in the calculation of
Pliny if we shall square eight hundred eighty three (which is the number
allotted by him to the measure of each side) the product seven hundred seventy
nine thousand six hundred eighty nine, will much exceed, both that of
Herodotus, and this of Diodorus. Though certainly Pliny is much mistaken, in
assigning the measure of the side to be eight hundred eighty three feet, and
the basis of the Pyramid to be but eight iugera or Roman acres For if we take
the Roman iugerum to contain in length two hundred and forty feet, and in
breadth one hundred and twenty, as may be evidently proved out of
I^^erumquadratos duo ^actu^ habet Actus q^adratus qui and la^ est pede^ CXX,
and lo^gus toti ^em* Is modius ac mina ap^ellatu^. Varro de Re R l. 1. c ^0.
Varro, and is expressly affirmed by (...) m^ns^^a^ CXL longi^u ^i^^^ pedes
esse di^^^ di^que in let tudin^m pate^e non f^re quisquam est qui igno^er
Quint^l. l. 1. c. 10.
Quintilian, then will the superficies, or whole extention, of the iugerum be
equal to twenty eight thousand eight hundred Roman feet: with which if we
divide seven hundred seventy nine thousand six hundred eighty nine, the result
will be twenty seven Roman iugera, and 2089 of 28800 parts of an acre.
Wherefore if we take those numbers eight hundred eighty three of Pliny to be
true, then I suppose he writ twenty eight iugera, instead of eight, or else in
his proportion of the side, to the area of the basis he has erred.

The ascent to the top of the Pyramid is contrived in this manner. From all the
sides without we ascend by degrees: the lowermost degree is near four feet in
height, and three in breadth, This runs about the Pyramid in a level; and at
the first, when the stones were entire, which a^^ now somewhat decayed, made on
every side (...) it a long, but narrow walk. The second degree, is like the
first, each stone amounting to almost four feet in height, and three in
breadth; it retires inward from the first near three feet, and this runs
about the Pyramid in a level, as the former. In the same manner is the third
row placed upon the second, and so in order the rest, like so many stairs rise
one above an other to the top. Which ends not in a point, as Mathematical
Pyramids do, but in a little flat, or square. Of this Herodotus has no where
left us the dimensions: But Hen. Steph. in 2 lib. Herodoti.
Henricus Stephanus, an able, and deserving man, in his Comment has supplied
it for him. For he makes it to be eight orgyiae. Where if we take the orgyia,
as both (...). Hesych.
Hesychius, and (...)^ Suid.
Suidas do, for the distance between the hands extended at length, that is for
the fadome, or six feet, then should it be forty eight feet in breadth at the
top. But the truth is, Stephanus, in this particular, whilst he corrects the
errors of Valla's interpretation, is to be corrected himself. For that
latitude which Herodotus assigns to the admirable bridge below (of which there
is nothing now remaining he has carried up, by a mistake, to the top of the
Pyramid. Diodor. l. 1.
Diodorus Siculus comes nearer to the truth, who describes it to be but nine
feet Plin l. 36. c 12.
Pliny makes the breadth at the top to be twenty five feet. Altitudo (I would
rather read it latitudo) a cacumine pedes XXV. By my measure it is XIII feet,
and 280 of 1000 parts of the English foot. Upon this flat, if we assent to the
opinion of Procl. comm. l. 1. in Timaeum Platonis.
Proclus, it may be supposed that the Egyptian Priests made their observations
in Astronomy; and that from hence, or near this place, they first discovered,
by the rising of Sirius, their annus (...), or Canicularis, as also their
periodus Sothiaca, or annus magnus (...), or annus Heliacus, or annus Dei, as
it is termed by Censorin. de die Natali. Quen. Graeciaenus* (...). Lat^ne
canicularem vocamus. Hic annus etiam heliacus a quib usdam dicitur, and ab
a^i^s, (...)*
Censorinus, consisting of 1460 sidereall years: in which space their Thoth
Vagum, and fixum, came to have the same beginning. That the Priests might near
these Pyramids make their observations I no way question, this rising of the
hill being, in my judgment, as fit a place as any in Egypt for such a
design: and so much the fitter by the vicinity of Memphis. But that these
Pyramids were designed for observatories, (whereas by the testimonies of the
Ancients I have proved before, that they were intended for Sepulchers,) is no
way to be credited upon the single authority of Proclus. Neither can I
apprehend to what purpose the Priests with so much difficulty should ascend so
high, when below with more ease, and as much certainty, they might from their
own lodgings hewn in the rocks, upon which the Pyramids are erected, make
the same observations. For seeing all Egypt is but as it were one continued
plain, they might from these cliffes have, over the plains of Egypt, as
free, and open a prospect of the heavens, as from the tops of the Pyramids
themselves. And therefore Tully writes more truly. Cicer. de Divin. lib. 1.
Aegyptii, aut Babylonii, in camporum patentium oequoribus habitantes, cum ex
terra nihil emineret; quod contemplationi coeli officere posset, omnem curam in
siderum cognitione p^suerunt. The top of this Pyramid is covered not with Les
voyages de Seign, Villa no^t.
one or Sands Travels.
three massy stones, as some have imagined, but with nine, besides two which
are wanting at the angles, The degrees by which we ascend up (as I observed in
measuring many of them) are not all of an equal depth, for some are near four
feet, others want of three, and these the higher we ascend, do so much the more
diminish: neither is the breadth of them alike; the difference in this kind
being, as far as I could conjecture, proportionable to their depth. And
therefore a right line extended from any part of the basis without, to the top,
will equally touch the outward angle of every degree. Of these it was
impossible for me to take an exact measure, since in such a revolution of time,
if the inner parts of the Pyramid have not lost any thing of their first
perfection, as being not exposed to the injury of the The air of Egypt is
confessed by the Ancients to be often full of vapors. Which appears both by
the great dewes, that happen after the deluge of Ni^us for several months: as
also in that I have discovered at A^^xan^ria, in the winter time, several
obscure stars in the constell^tion of Vrsa mayor, not visible in England: the
which could not be discerned there, were there not a greater re^raction at that
time, th^n with us, and consequently a greater condensation of the m^dium, or
air, as the opti^kes demonstrate. But I cannot sufficiently wonder at the
Ancients, who generally deny the fall of rain in Egypt. Plato in his ^imaeus
speaking o^ Egypt, where h^ had lived many years, writes thus: (...)
Pon^^nius Meta in express terms relates, that Egypt is ^er^^expers imb^^^m,
mire tamen sertilis. Whereas for two months, namely December, and January, I
have not known it rain, so constantly, and with so much violence, at London,
as I found it to do at Alexandria, the Winds continuing North North West.
Which caused me to keep a diary, as well of the weather, as I did of my
observations in Astronomy. And not only there, but also at Grand Cairo, my
very noble, and worthy ^riena Sir William Paston, at the same time observed,
that there fell much rain. And so likewise about the end of march following,
being at the mummies, some what beyond the Pyramids, to the South, there fell a
gentle rain for almost an whole day. But it may be the Ancients mean the upper
parts of Egypt beyond Thebes, about Siene, and near the Catadupa, or Cataracts
of Nilus, and not the lower parts; where I have been told by the Egyptians
that it seldom raines. And therefore Seneca (lib. 4 nature. Quaest) seems to
have writ true. In ea part quae in Aethiopiam vergit (speaking of Egypt) aut
nulli imbres sunt, aut rari. But where he after says, Alexandriae nives non
c^dunt, it is false. For at my being there in January at night it snowed.
However farther to the South then Egypt, between the Tropickes, and near the
Line, in Habassia, or Aethiopia, every year for many weeks there falls store
of rain, as the Habassines themselves at Grand Cairo relate. Which may be
confirmed by Josephus Acosta lib. 2. de natura Orbis novi. Where he observes in
Peru, and some other places (lying in the same parallel with those of
Aethiopia) that they have abundance of raines. This therefore is the true cause
of the inundation of Nilus in the summer time, being then highest, when other
rivers are lowest, and not those which are alleged by Herodotus, Diodorus,
Plutarch, Aristides, Heliodorus, and others: who are extremely troubled to give
a reason of the inundation, imputing it either to the peculiar nature of the
river, or to the obstruction of the mouth of it by the Et^siae; or to the
melting of snowes in Aethiopia (which I believe seldom fall in those hot
Countries, where the natives by reason of the extreme heates are all black,
and where if we credit Seneca, argentum replumbatur, silver is melted by the
scorching heates) or to some such other reasons of little weight. In Diodorus I
find Agatharchides Cuid^us to give almost the same reason assigned by me; But
those times gave little credit to his assertion. Yet Dio^orus seems to assent
to it. His words are these. ( Diod. lib. 1.) Agatharchides Cnidius has come
nearest to the truth, for he says, every year in the mountains about
Aethiopia, there are continual raines from the summer solstice, to the
autumnall equinoxe, which cause the inunda^ion. The time of this is so
certain, that I have seen the Egyptian Astronomers to put it down many
years before, in their Ephemerides: That such a day, of such a month, the
Nilus begins to rise.
air, and fall of raines, yet the outward parts, that is these degrees, or
rows of stone, have bin much wasted and impaired by both. And therefore they
cannot conveniently now be ascended, but either at the South side, or at the
East angle, on the North, They are well styled by Herodotus (...), that is
little altars. For in the form of altars they rise one above an other to the
top. And these are all made of massy, and polished stones, hewn according to
Herodotus, and Diodorus, out of the Arabian mountains, which bound the upper
part of Egypt, or that above the Delta, on the East, as the Libyan mountains
terminate it on the West, being so vast, that the breadth, and depth of every
step, is one single, and entire stone. The relation of (...), Herod. l. 2
Herodotus, and Pyramides tricen^m pedum lapid^bus exstructae. Pomp. Mel. l. 1.
c. 9.
Pomponius Mela, is more admirable, who make the least stone in this Pyramid to
be thirty feet. And this I can grant in some, yet surely it cannot be admitted
in all, unless we interpret their words, that the least stone is thirty
square, or to speak more properly, thirty Cubicall feet; which dimension, or a
greater, in the exterior ones, I can without any difficulty admit. The number
of these steps is not mentioned by the Ancients, and that caused me, and two
that were with me, to be the more diligent in computing them, because by
modern writers, and some of those too of repute, they are described with much
diversity, and contrariety. The degrees, says Bellonius lib. 2. observe. c. 42.
Bellonius, are two hundred and fifty, each of them single conteines in height
forty five digits, at the top it is two paces broad. For this I take to be the
meaning of what Clusius renders thus: A basi autem ad cacumen ipsius
supputationem facientes, comperimus circiter, CCL gradus, singuli ^ltitudinem
habent V solearum calcei IX pollicum longitudinis, in fastigio duos passus
habet. Where I conceive his passus is in the same sense to be understood here
above, as not long before he explains himself in describing the basis below,
which in his account is CCCXXIV passus paululum extensis cruribus. Albertus
Lewenstainius gradus ad cacumen numerat CCLX, singulos sesquipedali altitudine,
Johannes Helfricus CCXXX Raderus in Martial. epigr. Barbara Pyramidum sileat
mitacula Memphis, etc.
Albertus Lewenstainius reckons the steps to be two hundred and sixty, each of
them a foot, and an half in depth, Johannes Helfricus counts them to be two
hundred and thirty. Il numero de pezzida alla basa fino alla sommita sono da
CCX, e sono turtid' una altezza talmeute che l'altezza di tutta la massa e
quanto la sua basa. Sebast. Serl. li. 3. delle Antichita.
Sebastianus Serlius upon a relation of Grimano the Patriarch of Aquileia, and
afterward Cardinal, (who in his travailes in Egypt measured these degrees)
computes them to be two hundred and ten, and the height of every step to be
equally three palms, and an half. It would be but lost labor to mention the
different, and repugnant relations of several others. That which by
experience, and by a diligent calculation, I, and two others found, is this,
that the number of degrees from the bottom to the top is two hundred and
seven; though one of them in descending reckoned two hundred and eight.

Such as please may give credit to those fabulous traditions of Bellon. observe.
lib. 2 cap 42 et Ali^. Peritissimus atque validissimus Sagittarius in ejus
fastigio existens, atque sagittant in ^erem emittens, tam valide eam ejaculari
non poterit, ut extra moli^ basim decidat, sed in ipsos gradus cadet, adeo
vastae magnitudinis, uti d^ximus, est haec moles Bellon.
some, That a Turkish archer standing at the top cannot shoot beyond the
bottom, but that the arrow will necessarily fall upon these steps. If the
Turkish bow (which, by those figures that I have seen in Ancient monuments, is
the same with that of the Parthians, so dreadful to the Romans) be but as
swift, and strong, as the English: as surely it is much more, if we consider
with what incredible force some of them will pierce a planke of six inches in
thickness (I speak what I have seen) it will not seem strange, that they
should carry twelve-score, in length; which distance is beyond the basis of
this Pyramid.

The same credit is to be given to those reports of the Ancients, that this
Pyramid, and the rest, cast no shadows. Iul. Solin. polyh. c. 45.
Solinus writes expressly. mensuram umbrarum egressae nullas habent umbras. And
Auson. edyllio 3.
Ausonius.

Quadro cui in fastigia cono
Surgit et ipsa suas consumit Pyramid umbras.
Ammia. Marcel. lib. 22.
Ammianus Marcellinus has almost the same relation. Vmbras quoque mechanica
ratione consumit. Lastly, Ca^^iodor Var. 7. formula 15.
Cassiodorus confirms the same. Pyramides in Aegypto, quarum in suo statu se
umbra consumens, ultra constructionis spacia nulla part respicitur. All which
in the winter season I can in no sort admit to be true. For at that time I have
seen them cast a shadow at noon: and if I had not seen it, yet reason, and the
art of measuring altitudes by shadows, and on the contrary of knowing the
length of shadows by altitudes, does necessarily infer as much. Besides, how
could Thales Milesius, aabove two thousand years since, have taken their
height by shadows, according to Pliny, and Laertius, as we mentioned before,
if so be these Pyramids have no shadows at all? To reconcile the difference:
we may imagine, Solinus, Ausonius, Marcellnus, and Cassiodorus, mean in the
summer time; or which is nearer the truth, that almost, for three quarters of
the year, they have no shadows: and this I grant to be true at midday.

The description of the inside of the first Pyramid.
Having finished the description of the superficies of the greater Pyramid,
with the figure, and dimensions of it, as they present themselves to the view
without: I shall now look inwards, and lead the Reader into the several
spaces, and partitions within: of which if the Ancients have been silent, we
must chiefly impute it to a reverend, and awful regard, mixed with
superstition, in not presuming to enter those chambers of death, which
religion, and devotion, had consecrated, to the rest, and quiet of the dead.
Wherefore Herodotus mentions no more but only in general, that some secret
Vaults, Herodot. l 2.
are hewn in the rock under the Pyramid. Diodorus Siculus is silent; though
both enlarge themselves in other particulars less necessary. Strabo l 17.
Strabo also is very concise, whose whole description both of this, and of the
second Pyramid, is included in this short expression. Forty stadia (or
furlongs) from the City (Memphis) there is a certain brow of an hill, in which
are many Pyramids, the Sepulchers of Kings: three of them are memorable, two of
these are accounted amongst the seven miracles of the world, each of these are
a furlong in height: the figure is quadrilaterall, the altitude somewhat
exceedes each side, and the one is somewhat bigger then the other. On high as
it were in the midst between the sides, there is a stone, that may be removed,
which being taken out, there is an oblique (or shelving) entrance (for so I
render that which by him is termed (...)) ledding to the tomb. Plin. l. 36. c.
12.
Pliny expresses nothing within, but only a well (which is still extant) of
eighty six cubits in depth, to which he probably imagines, by some secret
aquaeduct, the water of the river Nilus to be brought. Aristid. (...).
Aristides in his oration intiled (...)* upon a misinformation of the Egyptian
Priests, makes the foundation of the structure, to have descended as far below,
as the altitude ascends above. Of which I se no necessity, seeing all of the^
are founded upon rocks, His words are these: Now as with admiration we behold
the tops of the Pyramids, (...) etc. Aristid. (...).
but that which is as much more under ground opposite to it, we are ignorant of
(I speak what I have received from the Priests.) And this is that which has
been delivered to us by the Ancients: which I was unwilling to pretermit, more
out of reverence of Antiquity, then out of any special satisfaction. The
Arabian writers, especially such as have purposely treated of the wonders of
Egypt, have given us a more full description of what is within these Pyramids:
but that has been mixed with so many invetions of their own, that the truth
has been darkened* and almost quite extinguished by them. I shall put down
that which is confessed by them, to be the most probable relation, as it is
reported by Ibn Abd Alhokm, whose words out of the Arabic are these. (...)
The greatest part of Chronologers agree, that he which built the Pyramids was
Saurid Ibn Salhouk King of Egypt, who lived three hundred years before the
flood. The occasion of this was because he saw in his sleep, that the whole
earth was turned over with the inhabitants of it, the men lying upon their
faces, and the stars falling down and striking one another, with a terrible
noise, and being troubled with this he concealed it. Then after this he saw the
sixth stars falling to the earth, in the similitude of white foul, and they
snatched up men, and carried them between two great mountains, and these
mountains closed upon them, and the shining stars were made dark And he
awaked with great fear, and assembled the chief Priests of all the Provi^ces
of Egypt, an hundred and thirty Priests, the chief of them was called
Aclimun. He related the whole matter to them, and they took the altitude of the
stars, and ma^e their prognostication, and they foretold of a a deluge. The
King said will it come to our Country? They answered yea, and will destroy it.
And there remained a certain number of years for to come, and he commanded in
the mean space to build the Pyramids, and that a vault (or cesterne) should be
made, into which the river Nilus should enter, from whence it should run into
the countries of the West, and into the land Al-Said; and he filled them with
Telesmes] The word used by the Arabians is derived from the Greek (...) by an
aphaeresis of (...). By the like aphaeresis together with an epenthesis, the
Arabians call him Boch^on^ssar, whom Ptolemy names Nabona^^ar: as by an
aphaeresis, and Syncope the Turks call Constantinople, S^anpo^, or (...), from
whence some of our writers term it Stambol, though the Arabians more fully
express it by Const^^tin^^a, and Buzantiya that is, Constantinopoli^, and
Byzantium. The various signifi^ations of (...) or (...)* See in Mr. Seldens
learned discourse de ^iis Syri^, and in Scaligers annotations in Apore
esma^i^um Moni^^i. That which the Arabians commonly mean by Telesmes, are
certain S^g^ll^, or Ama^^ta, made under such and such an aspect of the Planets,
or configuration of the heavens, with several characters accordingly inscribed.
telesmes* and with strange things, and with riches, and treasures, and the
like. He ingraved in them all things that were told him by wise men, as also
all profound sciences, the names of Alakakir] amongst other significations is
the name of a precious stone, and therefore in Abulfeda it is joined with
yacu^, a rubie. I imagine it here to signify some magical spell, which it may
be was engraven in this stone.
alakakirs, the uses, and hurts of the^. The science of Astrology, and of
Arithmeticke, and of Geometry, and of Physic. All this may be interpreted by
him that knows their characters, and language. After he had given order for
this building, they cut out vast columns, and wonderful stones. They fetch
massy stones from the Aethiopians, and made with these the foundations of the
three Pyramids, fastening them together with lead, and iron. They built the
gates of them 40 cubits under ground, and they made the height of the Pyramids
100 royal cubits* which are 500 of ours i^ these times; he also made each side
of them an hundred royal cubits. The beginning of this building was in a
fortunate horoscope. After that he had finished it, he covered it with colored
Satin, from the top to the bottom and ^e appointed a solemn festival, at
which were present all the inhabitants of his Kingdom. Then be built in the
Western Pyramid thirty treasuries, filled with store of riches, and utensils,
and with signatures made of precious stones and with instruments of iron, and
vessels of earth, and with arms which rust not, and with glass which might be
bended, and yet not broken, and with strange spells, and with several kinds of
akakirs, single, and double, and with deadly poisons, and with other things
besides. He made also in the East Pyramid, diverse caelestia^ spheres, and
stars, and what the severally operate in their aspects: and the perfumes which
are to be used to them and the books which treat of these matters H^ put also
in the col^ured Pyramid, the commentaries of the Priests* in chests of black
marble* and with every Priest a book, in which were the wonders of his
profession, and of his actions, and of his nature, and what was done in his
time, and what is, and what shall be, from the beginning of time, to the end of
it. H^ placed in every Pyramid a Treasurer: the treasurer of the westerly
Pyramid was a statue of marble stone standing upright with a lance, and upon
his head a Se^pent w^eathed. He that came near it, and stood still, the
Serpent bit him of one side and wreathed round about his throat, and killed
him, and then returned to his place. He made the treasurer of the East Pyramid
an idol of black Agate, his eyes open, and shining, sitting upon a throne with
a lance; when any looked upon him, he heard of one side of him a voice, which
took away his sense, so that he fell prostrate upon his face, and ceased not
till he died. He made the treasurer of the colored Pyramid a statue of stone,
(called) Albut, sitting. He which looked toward it was drawn by the statue,
till he stuck to it, and could not be separated from it, till such time as he
dyed. The ^optites write in their books, that there is an inscription engraven
upon them, the exposi^io^ of which in Arabicke is this. I King Saurid built the
Pyramids in such, and such a time, and finished them in six years. He that
comes after me, and says that he is equal to me* let him destroy them in six
hundred years, and yet it is known, that it is easier, to pluck down, then to
build up. I also covered them, when I had finished them, with Satin, and let
him cover them with mats. After that Almamon the Calife entered Egypt, and saw
the Pyramids, he desired to know what was within* and therefore would have them
opened: they told him it could not p^ssibly be done: he replied, I will have it
certainly done. And that hole was opened for him, which stands open to this
day, with fire, and vinegar. Two smiths prepared, and sharpened the iron, and
engines, which they forced in, and ^here was a great expense in the opening of
it: the thicknes of the wall was found to be twenty cubits, and when they came
to the end of the wall behind the place they had dug, there was an ewer (or
pot) of green Em^aula, in it were a thousand dinars very weighty, every dinar
was an ounce of our ounces: they wondered at it, but knew not the meaning of it.
Then Almamon said, cast up the account, how much has been spent in making the
entrance: they cast it up, and lo it was the some sum which they found, it
neither exceeded, nor was defective. Within they found a square well, in the
square of it there were doors, every door opened into an house (or vault) in
which there were dead bodies wrapped up in linen. They found toward the top
of the Pyramid a chamber in which there was an hollow stone: in it was a statue
of stone like a man, and within it a man, upon whom was a breast plate of gold
set with jewels, upon his breast was a sword of unva^uable price, and a^ his
head a Carbuncle, of the bigness of an egg, shining like the light of the
day, and upon him were characters written with a pen, no man knows what they
sign^fy After Almamon had opened it, men en^red into i^ for many years, and
descended by the slippery passage, which is in it; and some of them came out
s^fe* and others dyed. Thus far the Arabians: which traditions of theirs, are
little better then a Romance, and therefore leaving these, I shall give a more
true, and particular description out of mine own experience, and observations.

On the North side ascending thirty eight feet, upon an artificial bank of
earth, there is a square, and narrow passage leading into the Pyramid, thorough
the mouth of which (being equidistant from the two sides of the Pyramid) we
enter as it were down the steep of an hill, declining with an angle of twenty
six degrees. The breadth of this entrance is exactly three feet, and 4^^ parts
of 1000 of the English foot: the length of it beginning from the first
declivity, which is some ten palms without, to the utmost extremity of the
neck, or straight within, where it contracts it self almost nine feet
continued, with scarce half the depth it had at the first entrance (though it
keep still the same breadth) is ninty two feet, and an half. The structure of
it has been the labor of an exquisite hand, as appears by the smoothness,
and evenesse of the work, and by the close knitting of the joints. A property
long since observed, and commended by Diodorus, Diodor. Sic. lib. 1.
to have run thorough the fabric of the whole body of this Pyramid. Having
passed with tapers in our hands this narrow straight, though with some
difficulty (for at the farther end of it we must serpent-like creep upon our
bellies) we land in a place somewhat la^ger* and of a pretty height, but lying
incomposed: having been dug away, either by the curiosity or ava^ice of some,
in hope to discover an hidden treasure; or rather by the command of Almamon,
the deservedly renowned Calife of Babylon. By whomsoever it were, it is not
worth the inquiry, nor does the place merit describing, but that I was
unwilling to pretermit any thing: being only an habitation for bats, and those
so ugly, and of so large a size, (exceeding a foot in length) that I have not
elsewhere seen the like. The length of this obscure, and broken space,
contains eighty nine feet, the breadth and height is various, and not worth
consideration. On the left hand of this, adjoining to that narrow entrance
thorough which we passed, we climb up a steep, and massy stone eight or nine
feet in height, where we immediately enter upon the lower end of the first
^allery. The pavement of this rises with a gentle acclivity, consisting of
smooth, and polished marble, and where not smeared with dust, and filth,
appearing of a white, and alabaster color: the sides, and roof, as Titus
Livius Burretinus, a Venetian, an ingenious young man, who accompanied me
thither, obserserved, was of impolished stone, not so hard, and compact as that
on the pavement, but more soft, and tender: the breadth almost five feet, and
about the same quantity the height, if he have not mistaken. He likewise
discovered some irregularity in the breadth, it opening a little wider in some
places, then in others; but this inequality could not be discerned by the eye,
but only by measuring it with a careful hand. By my observation with a line,
this Gallery contained in length an hundred and ten feet. At the end of this
begins the second Gallery, a very stately piece of work, and not inferior,
either in respect of the curiosity of Art, or richness of materials, to the
most sumptuous, and magnificent buildings. It is divided from the former by a
wall, through which stooping, we passed in a square hole, much about the same
bigness, as that by which we entered into the Pyramid, but of no considerable
length. This narrow passage lies level, not rising with an acclivity as does
the pavement below, and roof above, of both these Galleries. At the end of it,
on the right hand, is the well mentioned by Pliny: the which is circular, and
not square, as the Arabian writers describe: the diameter of it exceeds three
feet, the sides are lined with white marble, and the descent into it is by
fastening the hands, and feet, in little open spaces, cut in the sides within,
opposite, and answerable to one another, in a perpendicular. In the same manner
are almost all the wells, and passages into the cesterns at Alexandria
contrived, without stairs or windings but only with inlets, and square holes,
on each side within: by which, using the feet and hands, one may with ease
descend. Many of these cesternes, are with open, and double Arches, the
lowermost Arch being supported by a row of speckled, and Thebaick marble
pillars, upon the top of which stands a second row, bearing the upper and
higher Arch: the walls within are covered with a sort of plaster for the
color white; but of so durable a substance, that neither by time, nor by the
water is it yet corrupted, and impaired. But I return from the cesternes, and
wells there, to this in the Pyramid; In Pyramide maxima est intus puteus ^.
XXXVI cu^itorum, flu ^en ill^ admissum arbitrantur. Plin. l. 36* cap. 12.
which in Plinies calculation, is eighty six cubits in depth* and it may be was
the passage to those secret vaults, mentioned, but not described by Herodotus,
that were hewn out of the natural rock, over which this Pyramid is erected.
By my measure sounding it with a line, it conteines twenty feet in depth. The
reason of the difference between Plinie's observation and mine, I suppose to be
this, that since his time, it has almost been dammed up, and choked with
rubbage, which I plainly discovered at the bottom, by throwing down some
combustible matter set on fire. Leaving the well, and going on straight upon a
level, the distance of fifteen feet, we entered another square passage, opening
against the former, and of the same bigness. The stones are very massy, and
exquisitely jointed, I know not whither of that gli^tering, and speckled
marble, I mentioned in the columns, of the cesterns at Alexandria. This
leads (running in length upon a level an hundred and ten feet) into an
arched vault, or little chamber: which by reason it was of a gravelike smell,
and half full of rubbage, occasioned my le^^er stay. This chamber stands East
and West: the length of it is less then twenty feet* the breadth about
seventeen, and the height less then fifteen. The walls are entire, and
plastered over with lime, the roof is covered with large smooth stones, not
lying flat, but shelving and meeting above in a kind of Arch, or rather an
Angle. On the East side of this room, in the middle of it, there seems to have
been a passage leading to some other place. Whither this way the Priests went
into the hollow of that huge Sphinx, as Strabo and Pliny term it, or
Androphinx, Plin. l. 36, cap. 12.
as Herodotus calls such kinds (being by Plini's calculation CII feet in
compass about the head, in height LXII, in length CXLIII: and by my
observation made of one entire stone) which stands not far distant without the
Pyramid, South East of it, or into any other private retirement, I cannot
determine; and it may be too this served for no such purpose, but rather as a
theca, or nichio, as the Italians speak, wherein some idol might be placed; or
else for a piece of ornament (for it is made of polished stone) in the
architecture of those times, which ours may no more understand, then they do
the reason of the rest of those strange proportions, that appear in the
passages, and inner rooms of this Pyramid. Returning back the same way we came,
as soon as we are out of this narrow, and square passage, we climb over it,
and going straight on, in the trace of the second Gallery, upon a shelving
pavement (like that of the first) rising with an angle of twenty six degrees,
we at length come to another partition. The length of the Gallery, from the
well below to this partition above, is an hundred fifty and four feet: but if
we measure the pavement of the floor, it is somewhat less, by reason of a
little vacuity (some fifteen feet in length) as we described before, between the
well, and the square hole we climbed over. And here to reassume some part of
that, which has been spoken, if we consider the narrow entrance at the mouth
of the Pyramid, by which we descend; and the length of the first. and second
Galleries, by which we ascend, all of them lying as it were in the same
continued line, and leading to the middle of the Pyramid, we may easily
apprehend a reason of that strange Echo within, of four, or five voices,
mentioned by Plutarch in his fourth book De placitis Philosophorum: (...) Plut.
lib. 4. de Philos. plac. cap. 20.
or rather of a long continued sound, as I found by experience discharging a
musket at the entrance. For the sound being shut in, and carried in those
close, and smooth passages, like as in so many pipes, or trunks, finding no
issue out reflects upon it self, and causes a confused noise, and circulation
of the air, which by degrees vanishes, as the motion of it ceases. This
Gallery or Corridore (or whatsoever else I may call it) is built of white, and
polished marble, the which is very evenly cut in spacious squares, or tables.
Of such materials as is the pavement, such is the roof, and such are the side
walls, that flank it: the coagmentation, or knitting of the joints, is so
close, that they are scarce discernable by a curious eye, and that which adds a
grace to the whole structure, though it makes the passage the more slippery,
and difficult, is the acclivity, and rising of the ascent. The height of this
Gallery is 26 feet, the breadth is 6 feet, and 870 parts of the foot divided
into a 1000. of which three feet, and 435 of 1000 parts of a foot, are to be
allowed for the way, in the midst: which is set, and bounded on both sides with
two banks (like benches) of sleek and polished stone; each of these has one
foot, 717 of 1000 parts of a foot in breadth, and as much in depth. Upon the
top of these benches near the Angle, where they close, and join with the wall,
are little spaces, cut in right angled parallel figures, set on each side
opposite to one another: intended no question, for some other end then
ornament. In the casting, and ranging of the marbles in both the side walls,
there is one piece of Architecture, in my judgment, very graceful, and that
is that all the courses, or ranges, which are but seven (so great are those
stones) do set, and flag over one another, about three inches: the bottom of
the uppermost course oversetting the higher part of the second, and the lower
part of this overflagging the top of the third, and ^o in order the rest, as
they descend. Which will better be conceived by the representation of it to the
eye in this figure, then by any other description.



Having passed this Gallery, we enter another square hole, of the same
dimensions with the former, which brings us into two anticamerette, as the
Italians would call them, or anticlosets (give me leave in so unusual a
structure to frame some Sunt enim rebus novis, nova ponenda nomina. Cicero lib.
1. de natura Deorum.
unusual terms) lined with a rich, and speckled kind of Thebaick marble. The
first of these has the dimensions almost equal to the second: the second is
thus proportioned, the area is level, the figure of it is oblong, the one side
containing seven feet, the other three and an half, the height is ten feet. On
the East and West sides, within two feet and an half of the top, which is
somewhat larger then the bottom, are three cavities, or little seats, in this
manner.

This inner Anticloset is separated from the former, by a stone of red speckled
marble, which ha^gs in 2 mortices (like the leaf of a sluice) between 3 walls,
more then 3 feet above the pavement, and wanting 2 of the roof. Out of this
closet we enter another square hole, over which are five lines cut parallel,
and perpendicular in this manner.



Besides these I have not observed any other sculptures, or ingravings, in the
whole Pyramid. And therefore it may justly be wondered, whence the Arabia is
borrowed those vain traditions I before related, that all Seie^ces are
inscribed within in hieroglyphics: and as justly it may be questioned, upon
what authority Dio, or his epitomizer Xiphilinus, reports that Cornelius Gallus
(whom Strabo lib. 17.
Strabo more truly names Aelius Gallus, with whom he travailed into Egypt, as
a friend, and companion) Xiphil. in Caes. Aug. (...).
ingraved in the Pyramids his victories, unless we understand some other
Pyramids not now existent. This square passage is of the same wideness, and
dimensions, as the rest, and is in length near nine feet, (being all of
Thebaick marble, most exquisitely cut) which lands us at the North end, of a
very sumptuous, and well proportioned room. The distance from the end of the
second Gallery to this entry, running upon the same level, is twenty four
feet. This rich, and spacious chamber, in which art may seem to have contended
with nature, the curious work being not inferior to the rich materials, stands
as it were in the heart, and centar of the Pyramid, equidistant from all the
sides and almost in the midst between the Basis, and the top. The floor, the
sides, the roof of it, are all made of vast, and exquisite tables of Thebaick
marble, which if they were not veiled, and obscured by the steame of tapers,
would appear glistering, and shining. From the top of it descending to the
bottom, there are but six ranges of stone, all which being respectively sized
to an equal height, very gracefully in one, and the same altitude, run round
the room. The stones which cover this place, are of a strange, and stupendous
length, like so many huge beams lying flat, and traversing the room, and
withal supporting that infinite mass, and weight of the Pyramid above. Of
these there are nine, which cover the roof; two of them are less by half in
breadth then the rest; the one at the East end, the other at the West. The
length of this These proportions of the chamber, and those which follow, of the
length and breadth of the hollow part of the tomb, were taken by me with as
much exactness as it was possible to do: which I did so much the more
diligently, as judging this to be the fittest place for the fixing of measures
for posterity. A thing which has been much desired by leareed men, but the
manner how it might be exactly done has been thought of by none. I am of
opinion that as this Pyramid has stood three thousand years almost, and is no
whit decayed within* so it may continue many thousand years longer: and
therefore that after times measuring these places by me assigned, may hereby
not only find out the just dimensions of the English foot, but also the feet of
several nations in these times, which in my travailes abroad I have taken from
the originals, and have compared them at home with the English Standard. Had
some of the ancient Mathematicians thought of this way, these times would not
have been so much perplexed, in discovering the measures of the Hebrews,
Babylonians, Aegyp^ians, Greeks, and other nations. Such parts as the English
foot contains a thousand, the Roman foot on Cossutius monument commonly
called by writers Pes Colotianus) conteines nine hundred sixty seven. The Paris
foot a thousand sixty eight. The Spanish foot, nine hundred and twenty. The
Venetian foot 1062. The Rhinland fo^t, or that of S^ell^us, 1033. The Bracio at
Florence 1913. The Bracio at Naples ^100. The Dera^ at Ca^r^ 1824. The greater
Turk^sh lake at Constantinople, 2200.
chamber on the South side, most acurately taken at the joint, or line, where
the first and second row of stones meet, is thirty four English feet, and 300
and 80 parts of the foot divided into a thousand (that is 34 feet and 380 of
1000 parts of a foot.) The breadth of the West side at the joint, or line,
where the first, and second row of stones meet, is seventeen feet, and an
hundred and ninety parts of the foot divided into a thousand (that is 17 feet,
and 190 of 1000 parts of a foot.) The height is nineteen feet and an half.

Within this glorious room (for so I may justly call it) as within some
consecrated Oratory, stands the monument of Cheops, or Chemmis, of one piece of
marble, hollow within, and uncovered at the top* and sounding like a bell.
Which I mention not as any rarity, either in nature, or in art (For I have
observed the like sound, in other tombs of As appears by a fair, and ancie^^
monument, b^ought from Smyrna to my very worthy F^iend Mr. Rolt E^quire, which
stands in his Park at Woolw^ch.
marble cut hollow like this) but because I find modern Authors to take notice
of it as a wonder. Some write, that the body has been removed hence, whereas
Diodorus has left above sixteen hundred years since, a memorable passage
concerning Chemmis the the builder of this Pyramid, and Cephren the Founder of
the next adjoining Although (says he) these Kings intended these for their
Sepulchers, D^od. Si^. lib. 1: (...), etc.
yet it hapened that neither of them were buried there. For the people being
exasperated against them, by reason of the toilsomnesse of these works, and for
their cruelty, and oppression, threatened to tear in pieces their dead bodies,
and with ignominy to throw them out of their Sepulchers, Wherefore both of them
dying commanded their friends privately to bury them, in an obscure place. This
monument in respect of the nature, and quality of the stone, is the same with
which the whole room is lined: as by breaking a little fragment of it, I
plainly discovered, being a speckled kind of marble, with black, and white, and
red spots, as it were equally mixed, which some writers call Thebaick marble.
Though I conceive it to be that sort of Porphyry which Pliny calls
Leucostictos, and describes thus. Plin. lib. 36. cap. ^
Rubet Porphyrites in eadem Aegypto, ex eo candidis intervenientibus punctis
leucostictos appellatur. Quantislibet molibus caedendis sufficient lapidicinae.
Of this kind of marble there were, and still are, an infinite quantity of
columns in Egypt. But a Venetian, a man very curious, who accompanied me
thither, imagined that this sort of marble came from mount Which may also be
confirmed by Bellonius observations, who describing the rock, out of which,
upon Moses striking it, there gushed out waters, makes it to be such a speckled
kind of Thebaick marble Est une gross pierre massive dro^cte de mes^^g* ain
and de ^a couleur, qu' est la pi^^re Theba^que.
Sina, where he had lived amongst the rocks, which he affirmed to be speckled
with party colors of black, and white, and red, like this: and to confirm his
assertion, he alleged that he had seen a great column, left imperfect, amongst
the cliffes, almost as big as that huge, and admirable The compass of the
Scapus of this column at Alexandria near the t^rus is XXIV English feet: the
compass of the scapus of those at Rome is fifteen English feet and three
inches. By these proportions, and by those rules, which are expressed in (...),
and in other books of Architecture, the ingenious reader may compute the true
dimensions of those before the Pantheon, and of this at Alexandria, being in my
calculation the most magnificent column, that ever was made of one entire
stone.
Corinthian pillar standing to the South of Alexandria, which by my measure is
near four times as big as any of those vast Corinthian pillars, in the
Porticus before the Pantheon at Rome; all which are of the same colored marble
with this monument, and so are all the obeliscks with hieroglyphics, both in
Rome, and Alexandria. Which opinion of his does well correspond with the
tradition of Aristides, who reports that, in Arabia there is a quarry of
excellent Porphyry. The figure of this tomb without, is like an Altar, or more
nearly to express it, like two cubes finely set together, and hollowed within:
it is cut smooth, and plain, without any sculpture, and ingraving; or any
relevy, and imbossement. The exterior superficies of it conteines in length
seven, feet three inches and an half. Pervenitur in elegans cubiculum
quadrangulum sex passus longum, and quatuor latum, quatuor vero vel VI orgyiis
altum, in quo marmor nigrum solidum in cistae formam excisum invenimus XII
pedes longum, V altum, and totidem latum, sine operculo. Bellon. obser. lib. 2.
cap: 42.
Bellonius makes it twelve feet, and Les vay ages de Monsieur de Breves.
Monsieur de Breves nine; but both of them have exceeded. In depth it is three
feet, three inches, and three quarters, and is the same in breadth. The hollow
part within, is in length, on the West side, six feet, and four hundred
eighty eight parts of the English foot divided into a thousand parts (that 6
Feet 488/1000
is 6 feet, and 488 of 1000 parts of a foot) in breadth, at the North end, two
feet, and two hundred and eighteen parts of the foot divided into a thousand
parts (that 2 Feet 218/1000. In the reiteration of these numbers, if any shall
be offended, either with the novelty, or tediousness of expressing them so
often, I must justify my self by the example of Vlug Beg, nephew to Timurlanc
the great (for so is his name, and not Tamerlane) and Emperor of the Moguls,
or Tatars (whom we term amiss the Tartars) For I find in his Astronomicall
Tables (the most accurate of any in the Fast) made about CC years since, the
same course observed by him, when he writes of the Grecian, Arabian, Persian,
and Gelalean epocha's: as also of those of Cataea and Turkistan. He expresses
the numbers at large, as I have done, then in figures, such as we call Arabian,
because we first learned these from them; but the Arabians themselves fetch
them higher* acknowledging that they received this useful invention from the
Indians, and therefore from their Authors they name them Indian figures: Lastly
he renders them again in particular Tables. Which manner I judge worthy the
imitation, in all such numbers as are radical, and of more then ordinary use.
For if they be only twice expressed, if any difference shall happen by the
neglect of Scribes, or Printers, it may often so fall out that we shall not
know which to make choice of: whereas if they be thrice expressed, it will he a
rare chance, but that two of them will agree: which two we may generally
presume to be the truth.
is 2 feet, and 218 of 1000 parts of a foot.) The depth is 2 feet, and 860 of
1000 parts of the English foot. A narrow space, yet large enough to contain, a
most potent, and dreadful Monarch being dead, to whom living, all Egypt was
too straight, and narrow a circuit. By these dimensions, and by such other
observations, as have been taken by me from several imbalmed bodies in Egypt,
we may conclude that there is no decay in nature; ( though the question is as
ol^ as Iam vero ante annos pro. ^ mill, vates ille Homerus non cessavit minora
corpora mortalium quam pr^sca conqueri. Plin. Nam genus hoc vivo jam
decresc^b^^ Homero. Terra m^los homines nunc educat atque p^sillos. Iuven. ^
Sat ^5.
Homer) but that the men of this age are of the same stature, they were near
three thousand years ago; notwithstanding Saint August. de ^iv. Dei. l. 15.
cap. 9.
Augustine, and others, are of a different opinion. Quis j^m aevo isto non
minor suis Parentibus nascitur? says Solinus.

It may justly be questioned how this monument could be brought hither, since
it is an impossibility that by those narrow passages before described, it
should have entered. Wherefore we must imagine that by some machina it was
raised, and conveyed up without, before this oratory, or chamber, was finished,
and the roof closed. The position of it is thus* it stands exactly in the
Meridian, North and South, and is as it were equidistant from all sides of the
chamber, except the East, from whence it is doubly remoter, then from the West.
Under it I found a little hollow space to have been dug away, and a large stone
in the pavement removed, at the angle next adjoining to it: which Sand's
traviles*
) Sands erroneously imagines, to be a passage into some other compartiment: dug
away no doubt by the avarice of some, who might not improbably conjecture an
hidden treasure to be reposited there. An expensfull prodigality, out of
superstition used by the Ancients, and with the same blind devotion taken up,
and continued to this day in the East Indies. And yet it seems by Iosephu's
relation, that by the wisest King, in a time as clear, and unclouded as any, it
was put in practice, who thus describes the funeral of King David. Ios. lib.
7. Ant. Iudaic. cap 12. (...), etc.
His son Solomon buried him magnificently in Jerusalem, who, besides the
usual solemnities at the funerals of Kings, brought into his monument very
great riches, the multitude of which we may easily collect by that which shall
be spoken. For thirteen hundred years after, Hyrcanus the high Priest being
besieged by Antiochus surnamed Pius, the son of Demetrius, and being willing
to give money to raise the siege, and to lead away his army, not knowing where
to procure it, he opened one of the vaults of the Sepulcher of David, and took
thence three thousand talents, part whereof being given to Antiochus, he freed
himself from the danger of the siege, as we have elsewhere declared. And again
after many years King Herod opening another vault, took out a great quantity
of money; yet neither of them came to the c^ffins of the Kings, for they were
with much art hid under ground, that they might not be found by such as entered
into the Sepulcher.

The ingenious reader will excuse my curiosity, if before I conclude my
description of this Pyramid, I pretermit not any thing within, of how light a
consequence soever. This made me take notice of two inlets, or spaces, in the
South and North sides of this chamber, just opposite to one another; that on
the North was in breadth 700 of 1000 parts of the English foot, in depth 400 of
1000 parts: eevenly cut, and running in a straight line six feet, and farther,
into the thickness of the wall. That on the South is larger, and somewhat
round, not so long as the former* and by the blackness within seems to have
been a receptacle, for the burning of lamps. T. L^vius Burretinus would gladly
have believed, that it had been an hearth for one of those eternal lamps, such
as have been found in Tulliola's tomb in Italy, Cambdeni Br^t.
and, if Cambden be not misinformed, in England, dedicated to the Urnes, and
ashes of the dead; but I imagine the invention not to be so ancient as this
Pyramid. However certainly a noble invention: and therefore pity it is, it
should have been smothered by the negligence of writers, as with a dampe. How
much better might Pliny, if he knew the composition of it, have described it,
then he has done the linum asbestinum, a sort of linen spun out of the
veins, as some suppose, of the Carystian, or Cyprian stone (which in my
travailes I have often seen) Though Salmasius, with more probability, contends
the true asbestinum to be the linum vivum, Salmasii exercit. Plinian.
or linum Indicum: in the folds and wreaths of which, they enclosed the dead
body of the Prince (for says Pliny, Regum inde funebres tunicae: and no
wonder, Plin lib. 18. cap. 1.
seeing not long after he adds, aequat pretia excellentium margaritarum)
committing it to the fire, and flames, till it were consumed to ashes: while in
the same flames, this shroud of linen, as if it had only been bathed, and
washed (to allude to his expression) by the fire, became more white, and
refined. Surely a rare, and commendable piece of skill, Pancirol. titul. 4.
^erum deperditarum.
which Pancirollus justly reckons amongst the Deperdita; but infinitely
inferior either in respect of art, or use, unto the former. And thus have I
finished my description of all the inner parts of this Pyramid: where I could
neither borrow light to conduct me, from the Ancients: nor receive any
manuduction from the uncertain informations of modern travailers, in those
dark, and hidden paths. We are now come abroad into the light, and Sun, where
I found my Janizary, and an English Captain, a little impatient to have waited
above That I and my company, should have continued so many hours in the
Pyramid, and live (whereas we found no inconvenience) was much wondered at by
Doctor Harvey, his Majesty's learned Physician. For said he, seeing we never
breath the same air twice, but still new air is required to a new respiration
(the Succus alibilis of it being spent in every expiration) it could not be but
by long breathing we should have spent the aliment of that small stock of air
within, and have been stifled: unless there were some secret tunnels conveying
it to the top of the Pyramid, whereby it might pass out, and make way for
fresh air to come in, at the entrance below. To which I returned him this
answer. That it might be doubted whither the same numericall air could not be
breathed more then once; and whither the Succus, and aliment of it, could be
spent in one single respiration: seeing those Vrinato^es, or diverse under
water, for spunges in the Mediterranean sea, and those for perles in the Sin^s
Arabitus, and Persicus, continuing above half an hour under water, must needs
often breath in, and out, the same air. He gave me an ingenious answer, that
they did it by help of spunges filled with oil, which still corrected, and fed
this air: the which oil being once evaporated, they were able to live no
longer, but must ascend up, or dye. An experiment most certain, and true.
Wherefore I gave him this second answer, that the fuliginous air we breathed
out in the Pyramid, might pass thorough those Galleries we came up, and so
thorough the straight neck, or entrance, leading into the Pyramid, and by the
same fresh air, might enter in, and come up to us. Which I illustrated with
this similitude: as at the streights of Gibraltor, the sea is reported by some
to enter in on Europe side, and to pass out on Africa side; so in this
straight passage, being not much above three feet broad, on the one side air
might pass out, and at the other side fresh air might enter in. And this
might no more mix with the former air, then the Rhodanus, as Mela, and some
others report, passing through the lake of Geneva, or tacus Lemanus, does mix,
and incorporate with the water of the lake. For as for any tubuli, to let out
the fuliginous air at the top of the Pyramid, none could be discovered
within, or without. He replied, they might be so small, as that they could not
easily be discerned, and yet might be sufficient to make way for the air,
being a thin, and subtle body. To which I answered, that the less they were,
the sooner they would be obstructed with those tempests of sands, to which
these deserts are frequently exposed: and therefore the narrow entrance into
the Pyramid is often so choked up with driffes of sand (which I may term the
rain of the deserts) that there is no entrance into it. Wherefore we hire
Moors to remove them, and open the passage, before we can enter into the
Pyramid: with which he rested satisfied. But I could not so easily be satisfied
with that received opinion, that at the streights of Gibraltor, the sea enters
in at the one side, and at the same time passes out at the other. For besides
that, in twice passing those streights, I could observe no such thing, but only
an inlet, without any outlet of of the sea: I inquired of a Captain of a
ship, being Captain of one of the six that I was then in company with, and an
understanding man, who had often passed that way with the Pirates of Algier,
whither ever he observed any outlet of the sea on Africa side, he answered no.
Being asked, why then the Pirates went out into the Atlantic sea always on
Africa side, if it were not as the opinion is, to make use of the current. He
answered, it was rather to secure themselves from being surprised by the
Christians, who had near the mouth of the streights the port of Gibraltor, on
the other side to harbor in. Wherefore, when I consider with my self the
great draught of waters that enter at this straight, and the swift current of
waters, which pass out of the Pontus Euxinus by the Bosphorus ^hracius into
the Mediterranean sea (both which I have seen) besides the many rivers, that
fall into it, and have no visible passage out: I cannot conceive, but that the
Mediterranean sea, or urinall (as the Arabians call it, from its figure) must
long since have been filled up; and swelling higher, have drowned the plains
of Egypt, which it has never done. Wherefore I imagine it to be no absurdity
in Philosophy, to say that the earth is tubulous, and that there is a large
passage under ground from one sea to another. Which being granted, we may
easily thence apprehend the reason why the Mediterranean sea rises no higher;
notwithstanding the fall into it of so many waters: and also know the reason
why the Caspian sea, though it has not in appearance any commerce with other
seas, continues salt ( For so it is whatsoever Poli^letus in Strabo says to
the contrary) and swells not over its banks, notwithstanding the f^ll of the
great river Volga, and of others into it. That which gave me occasion of
e^tring into this speculation was, that in the longitude of eleven degrees, and
latitude of forty one degrees, having borrowed the tackling of six ships, and
in a calm day sounded with a plummet of almost twenty pounds weight, carefully
steering the boat, and keeping the plummet in a just perpendicular, at a
tho^^^nd forty five English fadomes that is at above an English mile, and a
quarter in depth, I could find no land, or bottom.
three hours without, in expectation of my return: who imagined whatsoever
they understood not, to be an impertinent, and vain curiosity.

A description of the second PYRAMID.
FRom this Pyramid we went to the second, being scarce distant the flight of an
arrow from it: where by the way I observed, on the West side of the ^ir^t, the
ruins of a pile of building, all of square, and polished stone: such as Pliny
calls Basaltes, and describes to be ferrei coloris, Plin. l. 35. cap 7.
and duritiae, of an iron color, and hardness: Formerly it may be some
habitation of the Priests, or some monument of the dead. To the right hand of
this, tending to the South, stands this second Pyramid, of which besides the
miracle, the Ancient, and Modern writers, have delivered little. Herod^t. lib. 2.
Herodotus relates, that Cephren, in imitation of his brother Cheops, built
this, but that he fell short in respect of the magnitude. For (says he) we
have measured them. It were to be wished for fuller satisfaction of the Reader,
he had expressed the quantity, and also the manner how he took his measure. He
adds, it has no subterraneous structures, Diodor. Sic. lib. 1. (...).
neither is the Nilus by a channel derived into it, as in the former. Diodorus
somewhat more particularly describes it thus: that for the architecture it is
like unto the former, but much inferior to it in respect of magnitude: Each
side of the Basis conteins a stadium in length. That is, to comment on his
words, of Grecian feet six hundred, of Roman six hundred twenty five. So
that by this computation, each side should want an hundred Grecian feet of the
former Pyramid. Pliny makes the difference to be greater, Plin. l. 36. cap. 12.
Alterius intervalla singula per quatuor angulos pare^ DCC XXXVII [ pedes]
comprehendunt.
for assigning eight hundred eighty three feet to the former, he allows to the
side of the Basis of this, but seven hundred thirty seven. By my observation,
the stones are of color white, nothing so great, and vast, as those of the
first, and fairest Pyramid; the sides rise not with degrees like that, but are
smooth, and equal, the whole fabric (except where it is opposed to the South)
seeming very entire, free from any deformed ruptures, or breaches. The height
of it, taken by as deliberate a conjecture as I could make (which it was easy
to do by reason of the nearness of this, and the former, being both upon the
same plain) is not inferior to it; and therefore Strabo has rightly judged
them to be equal. The sides also of the Basis of both are alike, as, besides
the authority of Strabo* the Venetian Doctor assured me, Strabo lib. 17.
who measured it with a line. There is no entry leading into it, and therefore
what may be within, whither such spaces, and compartiments, as I observed in
the former, or whither different, or none, I must leave to every man's private
conjecture, and to the discovery of after times.

The second Pyramid.


This is bounded on the North, and West sides, with two very stately, and
elaborate pieces; which I do not so much admire, as that by all writers, they
have been pretermitted. About thirty feet in depth, and more then a thousand
and four hundred in length, out of the hard rock these buildings have been
cut in a perpendicular, and squared by the chessell, as I suppose, for lodgings
of the Priests. They run along at a convenient distance, parallel to the two
sides, we mentioned of this Pyramid, meeting in a right angle, and making a
very fair, and graceful prospect. The entrance into them is by square
openings, hewn out of the rock, much of the same bigness, with those I
described in the first Pyramid. Whither these were symbolicall (as the Theology
of the Egyptians consisted much in mysterious figures) and the depressure, and
lownes of these, were to teach the Priests humility: and the squarenes, and
eevenes of them, an uniforme, and regular deportment in their actions, I leave
to such as have written of their hieroglyphickes to determine. The hollow space
within, of them all, is somewhat like to a square, and well proportioned
chamber, covered, and arched above with the natural rock: in most of which
(as I remember) there was a passage opening into some other compartiment, which
the rubbage, and darkness, hindered me from viewing. On the North side without,
I observed a line, and only one, engraven with sacred and Egyptian characters,
such as are mentioned by Herodot. lib. 2.
Herodotus, and (...). Diod. l. 1.
Diodorus, to have been used by the Priests, and were different from the vulgar
characters in civil affairs: in which former kind (...), etc. Just. Martyr.
quaest. and resp. ad Orthodoxos.
Iustine Martyr makes Moses to have been skillful: as the Scripture makes him
to have been learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. These ran not
downwards, as the Chinese in our times write, but were continued in a straight
line, as we use to write: and are to be read (if any understand those
mysterious sculptures) by proceeding from the right hand to the left, and as it
were imitating the motion, and course of the Planets. For so (...). Herodot.
lib. 2.
Herodotus expressly informs us, that the Grecians write, and cast account,
going from the left hand to the right, the Egyptians from the right hand to
the left. And this is that which in an obscure expression is also intimated by
Pompon. Mel l. 1. c. 9.
Pomponius Mela: Aegyptii] suis literis perverse utuntur. A manner practiced by
the Hebrews, Chaldaeans, and Syrians to this day: and not unlikely to have
been borrowed by them from the Egyptians: to whom the Chaldaeans also allowed
their first skill in Astrology, as the Graecians did their knowledge in
Geometry; the former being attested by Diodor. Sic. l. 1.
Diodorus, and the later confessed by ^ lib. Commen. Procli. in 1 lib. Eucl.
Proclus, and other Grecians. And surely in imitation of these, or of the
Jews, the Arabians neighboring upon both, have taken up this manner of
writing, and continued it to our times: communicating it also by their
conquests, to the Persians, and Turks.

A description of the third PYRAMID.
FRom this Pyramid we went unto the third, standing distant from the second
about a furlong, upon an advantageous height, and rising of the rock, whereby
at a good distance it seems equal to the former; though the whole pile is
much less, and lower. The time was so far spent with my other observations,
that I could not take so exact a view, as I desired, and the work deserved;
yet I took so much of both, as to be able to confute the errors of others. But
before I perform this, I shall relate what the Ancients, and some one or two
of our best writers, which have traveled thither, have delivered concerning
this. Herodotus discoursing of it, Herodot. lib. 2. (...). Diodor. Sic. l 1.
tells us, that (Mycerinus) left a Pyramid much less then that of his father,
wanting of all sides (for it is quadrangular) twenty feet: it is three hundred
feet on every side, being to the middle of it built with Aethiopicke marble.
Diodorus Siculus is somewhat larger, and cleerer. Every side of the basis
(Mycerinus) caused to be made three hundred feet in length, he raised the walls
fifteen Stories, with black stone, like Thebaicke marble, the rest of it he
finished, with such materials as the other Pyramids are built. This work
although it is exceeded by the rest in magnitude, yet for the structure, art,
and magnificence of the marble, it very far excels them. In the side toward
the North, Mycerinus the name of the Founder, is engraven. Thus far Diodorus.
To whom I shall adjoine the testimony of Strabo: Farther, Strabo l. 17. Geog.
upon a higher rise of the hill is the third (Pyramid) much less then the two
former, but built with a greater expense: For almost from the Foundation of it
to the middle, it consists of black stone, with which they make mortars,
brought from the remotest mountains of Aethiopia, which being hard, and not
easy to be wrought, has made the work the more costly. Pliny also, not as a
spectator, Plin. l. 36. c, 12. Tertia minor praedictis, sed multo spectatior.
Ae^hiopicis lapidibus assurgit CCCLXIII pedibus inter a^gulos
and eyewitness, as the former, but as an Historian writes thus. The third
(Pyramid) is less then the former we mentioned, but much more beautiful: it
is erected with Aethiopicke marble, and is three hundred sixty three feet
between the angles. And this is all that has been preserved of the Ancients
concerning this Pyramid. Amongst modern writers, none deserves to be placed
before Bellonius, or rather before P. Gillius. For Thua. hist. l. 16.
Thuanus makes the other to have been a plagiarius, and to have published in
his own name the observations of P. Gillius: a man very curious, and
inquisitive after truth, as appears by his topography of Constantinople, and
his Bosphorus Thracius, to whom Bellonius served as an amanuensis. The third
Bellon. observe. l 2. c. 44. Tertia Pyramid duabus superioribus long minor.
tertia ^st autem part major ea quae apud ^estaceum montem est Romae, qua ad D.
Pauli eundum est. itinere Ostiensi. Adhuc integra est, nec magis ^amis
corrupta, quam si jam ^ecens ^xstr^cta esset. Mar^oris enim gene^e (...), quo:
Basaltes nuncu^a u^, vel lapi Aethiopicus, ipso fe^ro dorio c.
Pyramid is much less then the former two, but is a third part greater then
that which is at Rome, near the mons testaceus, as you pass to Saint Paul's in
the Ostian way. It is still perfect, and no more corrupted, then as if it had
been newly built, For it is made of a kind of marble, called basaltes, or
Aethiopicke marble, harder then iron it self.

The third PYRAMID.


It will be in vain to repeat the traditions, and descriptions of several
others: all which by a kind of confederacy, agree in the same tale for the
substance, only differing in some circumstances: So that I shrewdly suspect,
that Diodorus has borrowed most of his relation from Herodotus: and Strabo,
and Pliny, from Diodorus, or from them both: and the more learned neoterickes
from them all. For else how can it be imagined, they should so constantly agree
in that, which if my eyes, and I have since co^ferred with an English Captain,
who having been four times at Alexandria, and as often at the pyramids,
assures me that I am not mistaken.
memory extremely fail me not, is most evidently false? And therefore I have a
strong jealousy, that they never came near this third Pyramid; but that they
did, as I have observed all travailers in my time in Egypt to do, fill
themselves so full, and as it were so surfeit with the sight of the greater,
and fairer Pyramid, that they had no appetite to be spectators of the rest:
where they should only see the same miracle (for the Pyramids are all of the
same figure) the farther they went, decreasing, and presented as it were in a
less Volumne: Or if they did view this, it was quasi per transennam, very
perfunctorily, and slightly; and that through a false, and colored glass.
For they have mistaken both in the quality of the stone, and color of the
Pyramid. I begin with Herodotus, Herodot lib. ^.
who by a notable piece of forgetfulness, if it be not a (...) in the copies,
makes the dimensions of each of the sides, in the basis of this, to be three
hundred feet, and yet to want but twenty of the first Pyramid, to which he
assigned before eight hundred feet* an impossibility in arithmeticke. And
therefore it will be no presumption to correct the place, and in stead of
(...), to write (...). I know not how to palliate, or excuse his other error,
where he makes this Pyramid to be built as far as to the middle of it, with
Aethiopicke marble. If this sort of marble be ferrei coloris, Plin. l 36. c, 7.
Diodor. l. 1. Strab. l. 7. Geog.
as it is described by Pliny, and granted by Diodorus, and Strabo, both of them
expressing the color to be black, and the latter bringing it from the
remotest mountains of Aethiopia, where the marble has the same tincture and
color, with the Inhabitants, then can this relation of Herodotus no way be
admitted. For the whole Pyramid seems to be of clear, and white stone,
somewhat choicer, and brighter, then that in either of the two other Pyramids.
And therefore I wonder that Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny, and amongst latter
Authors, Bellonius, Gillius, and several others, should have all followed
Herodotus: when with a little pains, and circumspection, they might have
reformed his, and their own error. It may perhaps be alleged in their
defense, that they mean the buildings within are erected with black, and
Aethiopicke marble: and yet if this be granted, since there is no entrance
leading into this, no more then is into the second Pyramid, what may be within
depends upon the incertainty of tradition, or conjecture, both which are very
fallible, Though it cannot be denied, but that close by this, on the East side
of it, there are the ruins of a pile of building, with a sad, and dusky
color, much like that we described in passing to the second Pyramid, which
might be the ground, and occasion of this error. I cannot excuse the Ancients,
but Bellonius, or Gillius (For it is no matter which of them ownes the
relation, when both of them have erred) are far more inexcusable, Because it
might have been expected from them, T. Live. lib. 1.
what Livy supposes, Novi semper scriptores, aut inrebus certius aliquid
allaturos se, aut scribendi art rudem vetustatem superaturos credunt. Whereas
these on the contrary, have depraved, what has been, in this particular, with
truth delivered by the Ancients. For whereas Herodotus, and Diodorus, equal the
side of the basis to three hundred feet, and Pliny extends it to three hundred
sixty three, these make it only a third part greater then the Pyramid at Rome
of C. Caestius, near the mons testaceus. So that either they have much
enlarged that at Rome, or shruncke, and contracted this. For the Pyramid at
Rome, exactly measured on that side, which stands within the City, is
completely seventy eight feet English in breadth: to which if we add a third
part of it, the result will be an hundred and four: which should be equal to
this Egyptian Pyramid, in the notion, and acception of Bellonius. An
unpardonable oversight, no less then two hundred feet, in a very little more
then three hundred. For so much, besides the authority of Herodotus, and
Diodorus, before cited, I take the side of this Pyramid to be, and the altitude
to have much the same proportion.

I would gladly have seen in this, the name of Mycerinus the Founder of it
engraven, as Diodor. l. 1.
Diodorus mentions: or that other inscription in the first, whereof Herodotus
procured the interpretation: but both have been defaced by time. His words are
these: Herodot^ l. 2. (...), etc.
In the Pyramid there are Egyptian characters inscribed, which show how much
was expended upon the workmen, in radishes, onions, and garlic, which an
interpreter (as I well remember) said was the sum of a thousand and six
hundred talents of silver, which if it be so, how much is it credible was spent
in iron, and in meat, and in clothes for the laborers? Hereby I might have
known what to determine of the ancient Egyptian letters: I mean not the
sacred ones (for those were all Symbolical, expressing the abstractest notions
of the mind, by visible similitudes of Phoenices primi, famae si creditur,
a^si, Mansuram rudibus vocem signa, re figuris. Nondum flumineas Memphis
contexere biblos N^ verat, and saxis tantum volucresque feraeque Sculptaque
servabant magicas animalia linguas Lucan. lib. 3.
birds, and beasts, or by representations of some other familiar objects) but
those used in civil affairs. By such sculptures, which I have seen in gemmes
found at Alexandria, and amongst the Mummies, I can no way subscribe to the
assertion of Kircherus, though an able man, who, in his Prodromus Coptus,
contends that the present Egyptian, or Coptite character (which certainly is
nothing but a corruption, and distortion of the Greek) is the same with that
of the ancient Egyptians.

Of the rest of the PYRAMIDS in the Libyan desert.
I Have done with these three Pyramids, each of them being very remarkable, and
the two first reckoned amongst the miracles of the world. The rest in the
Libyan desert lying scattered here, and there, are (excepting one of them) but
lesser copies, and as it were models of these: and therefore I shall neither
much trouble my self, nor the Reader, with the description of them. Though to
speak the truth, did not the three first standing so near together obscure
the luster of the rest, which lie far scattered, some of them were very
considerable. And therefore I cannot but tax the omission of the Ancients, and
the inaduertency of all modern writers, and travailers, who with too much
supinenes have neglected the description of one of them: which in my judgment
is as worthy of memory, and as near a miracle, as any of those three, which I
have mentioned. And this stands from these South, and by West, at twenty miles
distance, more within the sandy desert, upon a rocky level like these, and not
far from the village whence we enter the Mummies. This as the Venetian Doctor
assured me, and as I could judge by conjecture at a distance, has the same
dimensions, that the first, and fairest of these; has graduations, or ascents
without, and of the same color like that, (but more decayed, especially at the
top) and an entrance into it on the North side, which is barred up within; and
therefore whatsoever is spoken of the first, in respect of the exterior
figure, is appliable to this. Plusquam centum per came ^laniciem hinc inde
sparsae consp ciuntu. Bellon. l. 2. c 44.
Bellonius extremely exceeds in his computation of the number of the^, who thus
writes. Above an 100 others are seen dispersed up and down in that plain, I
could not discover 20. And long since, Ibn Almatoug in his book of the miracles
of Egypt, reckons them to be but XVIII. There are in the West side no more
famous buildings then the Pyramids, the number of them is XVIII: of these,
there are three in that part which is opposite to Fostat (or That Fostat,
Metzr, and Cahira (or as we usual^y term it Cairo) are three dist^^ct names,
as it were of one and the ^ame City, appears by the Geograph^ Nubiensis, and
Abu^feda in Arabicke; though Abu^feda more pa^ticularly descr^bes Alkahira to
be on the North side of Fostat, and F^statio be seated upon the river Nilus.
Cairo.)

In what manner the PYRAMIDS were built.
WE had ended our discourse of the Pyramids, but that I find one scruple touched
upon by Herodotus, Diodorus, and Pliny, which is worth the discussion, as a
point of some concernment in architecture: and that is, in what manner these
Pyramids were built, and with what art and contrivance the stones, especially
those vast ones in the first, were conveied up. (...), etc. Herod. l. 2.
Herodotus who first raised the doubt, gives this solution. They carried up the
rest of the stones with little engines made of wood, raising them from the
ground upon the first row: when the stone was lodged upon this row, it was put
into another engine, standing upon the first step, from thence it was conveied
to the second row by another. For so many rows, and orders of steps, as there
were, so many engines were there: or else they removed the engine which was one,
and easy to be carried, to every particular row, as often as they moved a
stone. We will relate that which is spoken of either part. Therefore those in
the Pyramid were first made, which were the highest, then by degrees the rest,
last of all those which are nearest to the ground, and are the lowest. The
first part of this solution of Herodotus is full of difficulty. How in the
erecting, and placing of so many machinae, charged with such massy stones, and
those continually passing over the lower degrees, could it be avoided, but that
they must either unsetle them, or endanger the breaking of some portions of
them; which mutilations would have been like scars in the face of so
magnificent a building? His second answer is the sounder; but I conceive the
text to be imperfect. (...) Diodor. Bi^lio^h. Histor. lib* 1^ Quaest^o^um ^umma
est quanam ratione in ta^tam al itu^in^m subvecta sint cement^. Alii en^m nitto
ac ^sa^e adagg^ra^^^ cum crescente opere, ac peracto, flum^nis irrig^tione
dil^^is: alii ^ateribu^ e l^to fa^^^s extrustos pontes, peracto opere in
privatas domos distributos. N^lum enim non putant rig^re potuisse multo
humiliorem.
D^odorus has another fancy: The stones (says he) at a great distance off
were prepared in Arabia: and they report that by the help of Aggeres (engines
not being then invented) the work was erected. And that which begets the
greatest admiration is, that so vast a structure was perfected in that place,
which is all about replenished with sand where there appears not any relics,
either of the aggeres, or of the hewing, and polishing of the stones. So that
it seems not peece-meale by the industry of men, bu^ altogether, and at once,
the whole pile, as it were by some God, was erected in the midst of the sands.
Some of the Egyptians relate wonders of it, and endeavor to obtrude I know
not what fables; namely, that these aggeres consisting of salt, and nitre, were
dissolved by letting in the river, which wholly consumed them without the
labor of hands, leaving this structure (entire.) But the truth of the buisines
is not so, but that those multitudes of men, which were employed in raising the
agggeres* carried them away unto their former places. For as they report three
hundred and sixty thousand men were employed in these offices, and the whole
work was scarce finished in the space of twenty years. Pliny partly agrees
with him, and partly gives another answer. The question is, by what means the
cement was con^eied up to such a height (he rather might have questioned, how
those vast stones were conveied up) some say that banks of nitre, and salt were
made up, as the work rose, which being finished, they were washed away by the
river (Nilus) Others imagine that bridges were made with brick: which, the
work being ended, were distributed into private houses. For they conceive that
the Nilus being much Plin. l. 36 c. 12
lower, could not come to wash them (away.) If I may assume the liberty of a
travailer, I imagine that they were erected, neither as Herodotus describes,
nor as Diodorus reports, nor as Pliny relates: but that first they made a
large, and spacious Admitting this supposition we may easily apprehend, how
those huge stones might by engines be raised in a perpendicular, as the work
rose, with less difficulty, and expense, then either in a slope, or traverse
line, upon banks of nitre, or bridges of brick, according to the traditions of
Diodo^u^, and Pliny: both which must have been of a stupendous, and almost
incredible height.
tower in the midst reaching to the top; to the sides of this tower, I conceive
the rest of the building to have been applied, piece after piece, like so many
buttresses, or supporters, still lessening in height, till at last they came to
the lowermost degree. A difficult piece of building taken in the best, and
easiest projection: And therefore it is no wonder, if it were not often
imitated by the Ancients, and no where expressed, or commended, by the great
master of Architecture Vitruvius. Yet surely if we judge of things by the
events, and if we reflect upon the intention of monuments, which are raised by
the living to perpetuate the memory of the dead, then is this as commendable a
way as any. And therefore we see at Rome, that though by the revolution of so
many ages the Mausoleum of Augustus be almost decayed, and the Septizonium of
Severus be utterly lost, both intended for lasting and stately Sepulchers; yet
the Pyramid of C. Caestius stands fair, and almost entire: which is no more to
be compared, either for the vastnes of the stones, or the whole bulk, and
fabric of it, with these, then are the limbs, and body of a dwarf, to the
dimensions of a giant, or some large colossus.

I have done with the work, but the Artizans, deserve not to be pretermitted:
concerning whom the observation of Diodor. Sic. l. 1 (...),
Diodorus is as true, as it is boldly delivered by him. It is confessed, that
these works (speaking of the Pyramids) far excel the rest in Egypt, not only
in the massinesse of the structures, and in the expenses, but also in the
industry (and skill) of the Artificers. The Egyptians think, the architects
are more to be admired then the Kings, who were at the expense. For they by
their abilities, and study, these by their wealth received by inheritance, and
by the labors of others erected them.

The Conclusion,
ANd thus much of the Sciography, or of the artificial, and architectonicall
part: I shall shut up all with one observation in nature for the recreation of
the Reader, recited by Strabo in these words. (...). Strab. l. 17. Geog.
We ought not to omit one of the strange things seen by us at the Pyramids.
Some heaps of stone, being fragments hewn off lie before the Pyramids,
amongst th^se are found little stones, some in the similitude, and bigness of
lentils, some as of grains of barley, which appear half unscaled: they report
these are some relics of the provisions, which were given to the workmen, and
have been petrified: which seems probable enough.

These, if there were ever any such, are either consumed by time, or scattered
by the winds, or buried with those tempests of sand, to which the deserts are
perpetually exposed: But Diodorus, who not long preceded him, was not so
curious, as to deliver this relation. And were not Strabo a writer of much
gravity, and judgment, I should suspect that these petrified grains (though I
know such petrefactions to be no impossibility in nature. For I have seen at
Venice the bones and flesh of a man, and the whole head entirely transmuted
into stone: and at Rome clear conduit water, by long standing in aquaeducts,
has been turned into perfect Alabaster) are like those loafes of bread, which
are reported to be found by the red sea converted into stone, and by the
inhabitants supposed to be some of the bread the Israelites left behind them,
when they passed over for fear of Pharaoh. They are sold at Grand Cairo
handsomely made up in the manner of the bread of these times, which is enough
to discover the imposture. For the scripture makes them to have been unleavened
cakes: Exodus 12 39.
and they baked unleavened cakes, of the dough which they brought forth out of
Egypt. Or else Strabo's relation may be like the tradition of the rising of
dead men's bones every Sands in his travailes writes, that they are seen to rise
on Good Friday. A Frenchman at Grand-Cairo, who had been present at the
resurrection, showed me an arm, which he brought from thence: the flesh
shrivel^d, and dried like that of the mummies. He observed the miracle to have
been always behind him* once casually looking back he dicovered some bones,
carried privately by an Egyptian under his vest, whereby he understood the
mystery.
year in Egypt: a thing superstitiously believed by the Christians: and by the
Priests, either out of ignorance, or policy, maintained, as an argument of the
resurrection. The possibility and truth of it, Metrophanes the Patriarch of
Alexandria thought (but very illogically) might be proved our of the Prophet
Esaias. Esaias 66.24.
And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcaises of the men that have
transgressed against me, for their worm shall not dye, neither shall their
fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.

But I have digressed too far. The confutation of these, and the description
of the mummies, or of the rest of the Egyptian Sepulchers (for from thence
comes the matter of this their supposed resurrection) and that infinite mass,
and variety of hieroglyphics, which I have either seen there, or bought, or
transcribed elsewhere, may be the An argument intended by me, and for which I
made a collection of several antiquities in my travailes abroad; but these
(and would only these!) have unfortunately perished at home amidst he sad
distractions of the time.
argument of another discourse.

FINIS.

