An ALARM FROM The Holy Mountain of the Lord to the Inhabitants of the EARTH,
AND The word of the Lord sounding out of Sion, let all the Inhabitants tremble.
With a Warning to the wicked, calling them to Repentance.
As also two VISIONS shown and Revealed by the Lord unto his Servant Richard
Greenway, one showing how the Head of the Wicked one shall suddenly be dashed,
the other how the spirit and power of darkness is caught in its own Snare. And
something that was sent to Richard Brown in particular, who is Commander of the
Train-bands of London.
O Earth, Earth hear the word of the Lord, and incline an ear hereto; All you
great high and exalted Mountains, you little Hills, and hard stony Rocks; and
all you that lift up your selves against him that formed you, (even as if the
Ax, or staff, should set it self against the hand that lifs it up.) And
consider this all you Inhabitants of the Earth, hear I say and dread and fear
before the Lord of Hosts, the mighty God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
all that is therein, for he will suddenly dash the head of the wicked, with the
stroke of his mighty terrible hand (even as when a Potters Vessels are feircely
stricken with an Iron rod) for unto him all the Nations of the Eath, are but as
a very small thing, in his mighty hand of power is the breath of all that
lives upon the face of the Earth, therefore all you tall Ceaders bend, and
come down, and all you stirdy Oaks, stoop and be you bowed, (unto the Ax which
is laid unto your root, which is the word of the Lord, the sound thereof is
gone out to the ends of the Earth) for the Lord of Hosts the mighty Jehovah,
will lay you level, for by his fire, and by his terrible sword he will plead with
all flesh, and all you scraching Briars, Intangling Brambles, and prickelly
Thorns, who set your selves in battle against the Lord that Created you, fear I
say and dread before his most holy name least you be consumed by his Eternal
Unquenchable fire, or his jealousy is kindled, which burns as an Oven, and
verily all the wicked (that are lifted up in Pride and Lust, in which the Lord
is forgotten) will be turned into Hell, they are appointed as the fuel thereof;
(except they repent) therefore all you stout hearted ones that think to stop
the work of the Lord, if you continue striving therein, you will be confounded,
the month of the Lord has spoken it: And he has commanded me to publish the
same, and to tell you, in vain do you all strive; For thus says the Lord, all
you that set your seves against my work and appearance in my people, try if you
can stop the Sun from going its course, or if you can stop my Thunder claps, or
my Lightnings from breaking through the Clouds, or the Moon or Stars from
giveing light unto the Night, or can you stop the tide of the Sea from flowing
and ebbing, or the Rain from descending down upon the earth: If you can do any
of these things, then, (and not till then) will you be able to stop that which
I am bringing to pass, or hinder that which I have d^ed to do; which is to
Establish Righteousness in the earth, and to set up the Throne of Truth above
iniquity deceit and unrighteousness, and to advance Mercy, Justice, true
Iudgemnt, and Equity above Injustice, Cruelty and oppression, it is already
begun, And you think to stop me in my work, but your Imaginations are all in
vain, and will turn to your own confusion, except in time you stay your hands,
and thereof Repent.

The Lord, who hides his Counsels from the wise and prudent ones of the earth,
and reveals them to Babes and Sucklings, such as fear his name, and tremble at
his Word, he has spoken to me therein, and has revealed his secrets by his
spirit.

While I was kept a Prisoner in the Poultrey Counter (London,) for the word of
God and testimony of Jesus: Upon the 17th. day of the 3d. Month, toward break
of day I saw a Vision as I lay upon my bed, which I was made to take great
notice of, my thoughts I saw a Creature like unto a Cat, but much bigger then
any of that kind, that ever I had seen, it was very fat and of a lightish
color, it was very nere me, yet some distance from me, and it stood just
before me, with the hinder parts toward me, and with the face it looked back
upon me steadfastly, and a on sudden the head was struck flat, and squashed as
if it had been struck by a strong and mighty hand with some great thing, the
blood dropping, so that it was sad to me to b^hold, and though the head thereof
was so squashed and bruised, yet the hinder part thereof stood up and moved to
and fro, but lying down with the former part of the body, it put forth one of
its four paws at me, but could not reach me, at which I rejoicing said, It
cannot touch my life, and so it was taken out of my sight, but the remembrance
thereof was very fresh in me, and the Lord commanded me to set it down in
writing, and to note the time, and his word spoke thus in me, this Vision is
for an appointed time.

Again about the middle of the 4th. Month, while in that place, and for the
cause aforesaid I saw another Vision, my thought I was standing before a very
large flood gate, which stood in the side of a great stream, and my thoughts I
was standing on that side next to the stream of water, with my back toward
the openning part of the floodgate, and there were some other men with me, but
it was not showed me who they were, only we were together in peace, they seemed
to me to be fishermen, the waters seemed to me to be but low, and we stood
upon the waters; and between the waters under our feet were spars of wood, like
paling which lay some distance one from another and some little sticks of wood
in some places besides, and underneath that which we stood upon, there seemed
to be much fish, and my thought one Ele very big and long came up to the top of
the water, with a yallow wier snare (of many doubles well twisted) and fastened
about the middle thereof, and the snare of wier came up through the spars of
wood, And I took hold of it (as I thought) with my hand, and I pulled it pretty
hard, but the Ele was so big that I could not get it through the spars of wood,
so I let it go with the snare fastened about the middle, then I put down my
hand into the Water, and took up a handful of other Eles, some bigger and some
lesser, and they twisted and twined in my hand, and they were very hard to be
held and my thought I cut them on the head, and then I could hold them very
well, (this I was commanded to set down also.)

And when the Sessions was come which was held at the Old Bayley on the 26th.
of the 4th, Month, 1662. being the fifth day of the week, I was brought before
them, it being the first day of their sitting, and not long after the Court was
come together; As I was brought before the Court they cried take off his Hat,
which was done, and T. A. that committed me to Prison, pointed to the Officer
that brought me, to put me among the Fellonious persons, who were in their
Irons, (to be numbered among transgressors,) and as I was put into that place
they put my hat into my hand, and I put it upon my head again, without any
contempt to any, but in the fear of the Lord: It was not long before R. B.
being on the Bench, cried be uncovered in the Court, but I did not so mind his
words as to take off my hat thereat, then he reproved the Officers of the
Goal, and I was hastily brought forth of the place (where I was put,) before
the face of the Court, and there my hat was taken from me, and the Goalor chid
and railed at me, saying why will you not pull off your Hat, but we must be
chid for you, then they put me again where I was before, (the Court having
spoke nothing to me,) and as they were putting me in, R. B. said put him in the
Common Goal, and then he commanded my hat should be given me again, (which
seemed to me to be to try me, and in the fear of the Lord, and in Conscience I
durst do no other but put it on, and I was made to look toward R. B. who
shook his head at me with a feirce look, and turned himself to the next man to
him on the Bench, and seemed to speak something in his ear, then his back part
was toward me, and after a little time, some were going again to pull off my
hat, and then he said with a loud voice let it alone, and after that none was
disturbed with me or offended at my hat being on, (when R. B. had said let it
alone) though I kept it on before them several hours and as I was standing in
the innocence waiting in the fear of the Lord, and looking when I might be
called, what I had formerly seen, was brought fresh to my mind, and compared
to the aforesaid passage, I said in my heart sure there is something in this,
when the Court brake up for that day, it was so ordered that I was put into
Newgate, with the rest of my friends notwithstanding what R. B. had said, as to
the putting of me in the Common Goal, and I was called three times more before
them in the time of the Sessions; But had little or no Trial as to the matter
for which I was first committed, but instead thereof had the Oath tendered me as
a Snare; and because I was not willing to break Christ's Command, who says
swear not at all: I was returned to Newgate Prison there to remain till I
should take the said Oath, as is expressed in the Goalors Bill or Calendar.

And as I was in that place (of Newgate aforesaid) upon the 17th. day of the
5th. Month, 1662. The word of the Lord came unto me about the middle time of the
day, saying go lay thee down in private upon thy bed and wait quietly with thy
mind turned in unto me, and hear what I will say unto thee: After I had laid
down for some time, without the least motion to sleep, the fire of the powerful
word of God Almighty kindled in me, and the Lord spoke by his word of power
thus in my heart, (by which he opened my understanding, and silenced all other
thoughts) and said; The Creature which thou saw, which was in the fashion
like unto a Cat which was very big fat and of a lightish color with the head
thereof, which was suddenly struck, and quashed thou know not how, It was
the figure of that spirit of wickedness, which is very big, and highly exalted
against my truth, and people, which I will suddenly dash as flat as thou saw
the head thereof, which I smote with my own hand alone, then a pity rose in me
toward Richard Brown and I said surely it may be well for me to warn him by a
Letter in writing, but the Lord said nay his heart is hard and he is
desperately set against my way, he will do by it as he did by that which I
caused to be sent already, do thou publish this which I have and shall show
thee, and then let that be published also, it may be a warning to some other,
and he may take it, (after he has heard thereof,) by some other hand.

And the Lord said the large Floodgate which thou saw, and stoodest before,
was the Court which thee and thy brethren were brought unto, which if thou
comparest was as thou have seen, the waters (which were but low) are people,
that which moved in the Waters (was the spirit and power of darkness) that
which you stood upon, was that which was between the Court and you, the great
Eele that appeared above the waters was the chiefest that was there, the wier
Snare which came up through those spars which was fastened about the middle
thereof of which thou hadest hold and and did pull with thy hand was the
promises which have been made by the King which were sent and delivered, unto
the Judge his hand, and as thou saw the wier snare was fastened about the
great Eles middle, so are those promises fastened, thou had hold thereof with
thy hand, being one employed in the sending of them, and as a Snare or Cord of
wier double is hard to be broken (being well twisted) so shall they be hard to
be broken, they which stood upon the water with thee before the Floodgate, were
thy brethren, the other Eeles which thou tookest up with thy hand, were as
those thou wast before the second time, which were lesser in power then some
the day before, and as thou could hold those Eeles when they were cut on the
head, so were they cut, and stopped by my power, that is manifest, so that they
could do nothing farther against thee; with many more not convenient here to
insert.

These sayings are faithful and true, Let him that has an ear hear what the
spirit says, and set all whom this may concern, consider of their ways, and
repent of the evil of their doings, while they have time, least this with the
many other warnings, which they have had from the Lord, be brought upon them
one day, to aggrevate their condemnation when to repent it will be to late.

G, R.

Pro. 29. and 19. Where there is no Vision the people perish; And thus says
the Lord Joel 2. and 28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your
Sons and your Daughters shall Prophesy, and your Old men shall dream dreams,
and your Young men shall see Visions.
AWake Awak Oh Arm of God thou that have cut the Whore,
And wound the Dragon and the Beast that they may rise no more;
Thy Lambs and Babes do praise thy name and call thee ever blessed,
For when the Wolves would them devoured thou wast their fould of rest,
When as the roaring Beasts of the field did seek them to devour,
Thou did appear for them, and was their strength and Tower.
The wicked were swelling like the Sea, and foaming as the flood,
But thou have stopped them by thy Arm, and rebuked them by thy word,
Eternal is thy truth O God, blessed are all that do the same,
They have a strength to fly unto, they know thy holy Name,
Which in the earthly darkness yet lies hid, and long time so has been,
But in thy light and day that is bright, it is and has been seen.
To the confounding of all Lies, and such as Truth oppose,
For he is risen that will plead it is cause against his soes,
Since it is so let all know Truth is strongest of all,
And when the lofty have done all they can, like Ceders they must fall,
Unto the Earth as void of breath, any longer to contend
Against the strong and powerful Rock, that never will have end.
That Is Gods word which is a Sword the Wicked for to slay,
It will be well for all that in it dwell, in this his mighty day,
They that thereof possessors are will feel a strength and stay,
When as the wicked shall be tossed like Chafe that's driven away,
Which intoth' fire at last will come to be consumed with heat,
Therefore let all in time Repent before it be to late.
G. R.

A Copy of this following Letter in obedience to the Lord was written, and
delivered into the hand of Richard Brown, (who is Commander over the
Trained-B^nds, and Soldiers of the City of London;) but before he either read
it or looked into it he put it into the fire with his own hand, by which it was
burnt, Mary Cooper the barer thereof being present, the Lord who moved to write
and send it unto him, has commanded to Print it, that yet he and others may
come to see what that spirit that rules in him would stif^le and burn.
HEar the word of the Lord why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a
vain thing, the Kings of the Earth do set themselves, and the Rulers take
Counsel, against the Lord and his Anointed, (thus says the Lord) who art
thou, that set thy self against me, how long shall I suffer thee, the cries
of the oppressed are entered into mine ear, have thou an intent to proceed
against me and my people to provoke me to anger against thee, did I not let
thee alone when thou were chief Magistrate (so called) last year when thou
shamefully abused my people, having done thee no wrong by word nor deed, yet
many hundred men and women did thou cast into Prison while some of them fell
sick and dyed, shall I not require their blood at thy hands: And now thou
having not repented, do still proceed to root out my people and to vex and
torment them who have none to take their parts but me alone, my word stands
written to thee do violence to no man, and must thou needs set thy self against
them, who are my Inheritance, art thou not afraid, that I shall meet thee and
dismount thee, verily I say unto thee, were it not that some of my people have
sought my face in thy behalf, that I might spare thee, I had cut thee off ere
this, and if they once lift up their voice against thee, I will soon cut off
thy remembrance from the face of the earth, do thou still proseed to
imprison, (well) Vengeance is mine I will repay it (says the Lord) ye though
Noah, Daniel, and Job, were here to pray for thee I would bid them let me
alone, that I might take Vengeance of thee, thou must suddenly Receive of the
fruit of thy doings, my spirit shall not always strive with thee: can I not
take thee away in a moment, thy measure is near full, thou think those
people have none to take their parts, and indeed they have not in the Earth,
but I the Lord have undertaken their cause; And weeping, and howling, and
nashing of teeth, shall be the portion of all their Enemies for I will
overturn, overturn overturn all powers and people, till he comes to Reign
whose right it is to Reign, I will contend with all flesh, till they
acknowledge my righteous Judgments, now if thou shall be ashamed of what thou
have done, and shall repent before me the Lord God who has raised this people,
it shall be a happy day for thee for thou may asuredly know that this is my
people because they pray to me in thy behalf and wish as well to thee as to
their own souls.

Oh man I do advise thee for thy own good look to thy precious time before thou
go to thy long home, from hence no more to be seen; the God of Heaven grant
thee repentance as says my soul (O Lord save this man) from the fatal blow;
which is the desire of him that has a love to thy soul.

From Newgate Goal the 23d. of the 4th. Month. 1662. Solomon Eccles.

By reason of our cruel close imprisoment, where we are thronged in nasty holes
through thy means, diverse of our friends have fallen sick, and one of them is
departed this life, which thou may feell the burden and weight off, when God
accounts the death of his Martyrs upon his persecutors.
O God that art poor Jacobs lot;
And ISREAL'S Portion,
Thy love is never to be forgot
Upon thy Mount ZION,
Oh that all knew how good thou art
That do thy ways oppose,
So that thy love might turn their hearts
That yet are but thy foes.
For they oppose thy people poor
Whom thou have called and blessed,
I would they might do so no more
But with us may have a Rest.
In that which yet with thee remains
For them that will thee fear,
Or else they will have naught for their pains
But wrath, sore plagues, and fire.
Richard Greenway.

London Printed for the Author, 1662.

The END.

