

THE Pleasant Companion: OR NEW LESSONS and INSTRVCTIONS For the FLAGELET.

By Thomas Greeting, Gent.

London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Inner Temple, near the Church. 1675.

Directions for Playing on the FLAGELET.
THe Flagelet is an Instrument that may very fitly be termed a A Pleasant
Companion, for it may be carried in the Pocket, and so without any trouble bear
one company either by Land or by Water. It has this advantage over other
Instruments, that it is always in Tune, which they are not: And for those whose
Genius leads them to Music, I know not a more easy and pleasant Instrument:
And though at first it may seem difficult to Beginners, yet with the Practice
of a few Hours, observing these following Directions, and a little assistance
of a skilful Master, the knowledge hereof may be readily obtained.

Of Holding the Flagelet.
THere are two ways of Holding the Flagelet usually taught by the Professors on
this Instrument: The first way is to hold it with the left hand next the mouth,
the thumb and three fingers thereof on the four first Holes, and the thumb and
first finger of the right hand on the two last, holding the End of the Flagelet
between the second and third finger. The second way of Holding it (which I
conceive is the best) is to hold it with the left hand next the mouth as
before, but with this difference, the thumb and two first fingers thereof
stopping the three first Holes, and the thumb and two first fingers of the
right hand stopping the three last Holes; so that as the Flagelet has four
Holes above, and two below, so they are stopped above with the four first
fingers, and beneath with the two thumbs; and for the better staying it to ones
mouth, the end of it is to be held between the third and little finger, placing
the third finger above, and the little finger underneath, as is expressed in
the Figure before the Title.

Of the manner of playing on the Flagelet.
ALL Tunes or Lessons for the Flagelet are pricked upon six Lines, answering to
the six Holes on that Instrument, by certain Characters called Dots: These Dots
direct what Holes are to be stopped, there being so many and the same holes to be
stopped on the Flagelet each breath, as there are dots placed perpendicularly on
the six Lines; as suppose a dot upon the first or uppermost Line, the first
hole on the Flagelet (agreeing with that first Line) must be stopped; and if
there be two dots one over another, as on the first and second, or first and
third Lines, then the first and second, or first and third holes on the
Flagelet are to be stopped: For instance, in pricking the Tune called Maiden
Fair, for the two first Sounds or Breaths is made a dot upon the first and
third Line twice over, and accordingly the first and third hole of the Flagelet
must be stopped, and then blown gently twice. The like is to be understood of all
the rest; observing, that as many rows of dots as there is from top to bottom
on the six Lines, so many several sounds must there be on the Flagelet. Above
the six Lines over the dots are placed Notes for expressing the Measure of
Time, slow or swift; of which Notes or Time, I shall give you a certain Rule to
know the Proportion on in its due place.

1st. Example of the plain Notes=Assending and Desending^

Your Flagelet being held as is directed, and your fingers on the six Holes,
your first Stop or Note is 6 Dots, the second 5, the third 4, the fourth 3, the
fifth 2, the sixth 2 divided, the seventh 1, the eighth a Cipher [o] which is
all open. Blow gently, and take your Breath at every Note or Sound. Example of
these in their order.

Directions for Playing the Eight Notes Up or Ascending.
1 Blow gently, all six Holes being stopped, is 6 Dots. 2 Up with the second
finger of the right hand, is 5 Dots. 3 Off with the thumb of the right hand, is
4 Dots. 4 Up with the first finger of the right hand, is 3 Dots. 5 Up with the
second finger of the left hand, is 2 Dots. 6 Up with the first finger on the
left hand, and down again with the second finger, is 2 Dots divided. 7 Up with
the second finger of the left hand, is 1 Dot. 8 Off with the thumb of the left
hand is the Cipher [o] upon the first or uppermost Line, which is all open.
To Play the Eight Notes Down or Descending.
1 Blow gently all Holes being open, is the Cipher [o] upon the uppermost Line.
2 Stop with the thumb of the left hand, is 1 Dot. 3 Stop with the second finger
of the left hand, the thumb remaining, is 2 Dots divided. 4 Stop with the first
finger of the left hand, taking up the middle finger, is 2 Dots. 5 Stop with
the second finger of the left hand again, the rest remaining, is 3 Dots. 6 Stop
with the first finger of the right hand, the rest remaining, is 4 Dots. 7 Stop
with the thumb of the right hand, is 5 Dots. 8 Stop with the second finger of
the right hand, and now all is stopped, which is 6 Dots.
Practice to Play these Eight Notes ascending and descending, till you are
perfect in them, always observing this Rule, that in Notes ascending gradually,
you must increase your Breath by degrees; and contrary in Notes descending, and
in Notes that Rise or Fall by Skips, you must suddenly increase or diminish
your Breath, as the Notes require: The taking off a Finger raises, and the
stopping down the contrary. Always remember to stop the Holes close, and to hit
every Note distinctly with the tip of your Tongue.

In the next place is set down an Example of the Pinching Notes, as also an
Example of the several Graces on this Instrument, together with a Table of the
Notes Flat and Sharp, ascending on the Violin and Flagelet: I shall say
somewhat to explain these two Examples, and proceed to the Names of the Notes,
their Proportions and Time.

Example of the Pinching or higer Notas ^Notes Assending Notes Desending

3 d. Example of shaks and Beats ^a Beat: a shak: a slur: a slur and beat.

A Table of the Notes flat and sharp Assending on the Violin and on the
Flagilet^

Of the Pinching Notes on the Flagelet.
The Pinching Notes ascend eight Notes higher than the Plain Notes, and are
distinguished from them by a dash drawn through the first or highest Dot,
making it a Cross, as in the foregoing Example. To play it on the Flagelet you
must do thus: Bend your left thumb, and let it be but half over the first Hole
(on which the Pinch is always made, by pinching your Nail hard over half the
Hole) then give it a stronger Breath than the former Notes had, and you shall
find the Sound of the Flagelet to be eight Notes higher. All the other Stops
are the same with the former.

Of the several Graces on the Flagelet.
In the former Example of the Graces, the Mark or Character of a Beat and Shake
is all one, but in playing them there is this difference: When the Mark is on
the same Line even with the Dot, then you are to lift up that Finger and shake,
and lay it down again before you play any other Note; this is called a Beat.
But when the Mark stands alone upon any other Line underneath the Dot, then
with the Finger belonging to that Line on which it is set you must shake,
taking it off again before you play any other Note; and this is called a Shake.
The third Mark or Character is for a Slur or Slide, that is, when two Notes are
tied together by a crooked dash underneath, then those two Notes are to be
expressed with one Breath. There is another not much unlike this, which
concludes with a Beat, and is played thus: Hit the first Note with the tip of
your Tongue, and continuing your Breath, take up the second and bring on the
first beating.

The Names of the Notes, their Proportions and Time.
Semibreve. Minim. Crotchet. Quaver. Semiquaver.^

THe Mood for the Common Time is thus Marked *, and is multiplied by 2, as one
Semibreve is two Minims, one Minim two Crotchets, one Crotchet two Quavers, etc.

If what is said here concerning the Common Time be not sufficient to instruct
a Beginner, I refer him to Mr. Playford's Introduction to the Skill of Music,
where he may not only be instructed in this, and the Triple Time, but in all
the Grounds of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental.^

The Mood for Triple Time is thus Marked *3, and is multiplied by 3, (the Note
having a Prick added to it) as one Minim with a Prick is three Crotchets, etc.^

^

I shall conclude all at present with an Example directing what Key or Note any
Tune pricked for the Violin is proper for the Flagelet; in which observe, that
all Lessons beginning on the Violin in A re, F fa vt, C sol fa, and D la sol,
have the same Key on the Flagelet.

Violin^

Flagelet^

Tho. Greeting.

BOOKS lately Printed and Sold by JOHN PLAYFORD.
THe Dancing Master, containing Rules for Dancing Country-Dances, with the
Tunes over each Dance for the Treble-Violin. Bound 2 s. 6 d.

Musicks Recreation on the Viol Lyra-way, containing choice Lessons for the
lone Lyra-Viol, with Instructions for Beginners; newly Reprinted with large
Additions. 2 s. 6 d.

Apollo's Banquet for the Treble-Violin, set forth in new Theater Tunes, Airs,
Corants, etc. to which is added the Tunes of the new French-Dances; also Rules
and Directions for Practitioners on the Treble-Violin. 1 s. 6 d.

Musicks Solace, containing Lessons and Instructions for the Cithren; newly
Printed in a more easy method than it was formerly. Bound 1 s. 6 d.

Musicks Handmaid, presenting new Lessons for the Virginals, fitted for the
practice of young Beginners. 2 s. 6 d.

An Introduction to the Skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental; newly
Reprinted and Enlarged. Bound 2 s.

Psalms and Hymns to the Common Tunes used in Parish Churches, Composed in Four
Parts, in Folio; a Book far more useful than that of Mr. Ravenscrofts formerly
published. 3 s.

Choice Songs and Airs for one Voice to Sing to a Theorbo-Lute or Bass-Viol,
being most of the newest Songs sung at Court, and at the Public Theaters. 2 s.
6 d.

An Antidote against Melancholy, compounded of merry Ballads and Songs. Bound
2 s.

The Cabinet of Mirth, containing merry Tales, Jests, and Bulls, being the
Second Part of the Antidote against Melancholy. Bound 2 s.

Lessons for the Flagilett



















^A Theater Tune

































^A Horn Pipe

^A Tune by mr J: Banister.













^Princess Royal

^The Gallyard

^Courante Mr Babtista



















Finis.





^

^

^

^Saraband by mr John Banister



Mr. John Banister



Mr. John Banister













mr Robert Smith



^A Mock Tune to Aminda

FINIS.

