Apographe orges. OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THE PASSION OF LOVE. DEMONSTRATING Its
Orignal, Causes, Effects, Signs, and Remedies.

By Will. Greenwood, (...).

Omne meum. Nil meum.
Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius.
LONDON, Printed for William Place at Grayes Inne-gate in Holborn, 1657.

To the Service and Delight of all truly Noble, Generous and Honest Spirits of
both Sexes; The AUTHOR Dedicateth these his Exiguous Devoyres.
NOBLE HEARTS,
BEing invited with several pleasing Considerations, and delightful Motives to
appear the second time upon the slippery stage of this World; I here present to
your view a Description of a Passion too much regent in this britle age. The
work is of no great substance, not much Satirical nor Critical; only glances,
like the Dogs of Nilus, taking a touch here and there. It may happily appear at
the first view, a mere congested Chaos, and somewhat indigested and
promiscuously handled; I can assure you my meaning was methodical; but I hope
your favorable opinions will dissipate the foggy mists of erroneous
misprision, and be really clarified in your considerate censure. I cannot
conceive what more acceptable present may be offered unto you, then that which
with an appar^nt brevity compriseth the Original, ^enerality, Definition,
Causes, Effects, Signs, etc. of Love. For which purpose, and your greater
contentment, I have madly rambled in every one of them. If I have over roaved,
gone wide, or fallen short, it is not unlike you may impute it to my folly of
precipitancy. In this (to forge an excusive answer) I shall not unfittingly
resemble the Painter, who being to figure forth the fury of a mad Dog, the
better to express it, stood long curiously pidling about the froth or foam
issuing from his mouth; but finding nothing frame fitly to his invention,
rashly takes up his pencil* dashes it against the Picture, with an intent to
spoil it; howbeit this sudden accident prevailed to make his work more
excellent. So may I in these sudden touches pencil out this Passion with a
more lively tincture, then if I had been tediously curious in contriving, or
vaingloriously to embellish them with quaint ear-pleasing Elocution. To speak
the real truth, you must not expect any additional ornaments of Rhetoric, nor
neat flourishes of Eloquence, or wyre-drawn phrases, mere inke-pot terms, or a
hodgpodge of a labored contexture: but a plain and smooth style which best
becomes our subject. I am not passionately enamoured on pety Courtships, like
to those Helena's all of gold, where we can behold nothing but Drapery; but my
sole aim is to speak to be understood: I have more labored at the reality of
the matter, then ornament of words; for he that courts his pen, and neglects
the matter, shall always have trouble enough to defend himself from Moths,
Rats and Oblivion. Fine heads will pick a quarrel with me; but this is my
mind, let him that finds a fault amend it, and he that likes it use it. I
submit my self to the judgment of the wise, and little esteem the frowns of a
censorious brow.

I dedicate this unto you, not because either by virtue of a long experience,
or of an exact judgment, I make profession to be Master in this Science, but
to manifest that by the Pole Star of methodical observations, one may furrow
the deepest Seas of unknown discipline. And to vindicate my self with that of
Mr. Burton, Vita verecunda est, Musa jocosa mihi.
However my lines err, my life is honest.
But I presume, I need no such apologies, for no man compos mentis, will make
me culpable of Lightness, Wantonness, and rashness in speaking of the Causes,
Effects, Signs, etc. of Love; I speak only to tax and deter others from it;
not to teach, but to demonstrate the vanities* and errors of this heroical and
Herculean passion, and to administer apt Remedies. I cannot please all men; for
the same cause that made Democritus laugh, made Heraclitus weep: It is
impossible for an Angler to please all fish with one bait; so if one write
never so well, he cannot please all; and write he never so badly, he shall
please some. I know there are some counterfeit Cato's that will pish at me,
cannot abide to hear of Love toys, they hare the very name of Love in
detestation; Vultu, gestu, and oculis, in their outward actions averse, and yet
in their cogitations they are all out as bad, if not worse then others.

Whatsoever I speak in this Treatise of the one sex, may be also said of the
other, mutato nomine. I determine not to run with the Hare and hold with the
Hound, to carry fire in one hand, and water in the other, neither to flatter
Men as altogether faultless, nor be critical with Women as altogether guilty;
for as I am not desirous to intrude into the favor of the one, so am I
resolved not to incur the disfavour of the other.

Honored Ladies, I commit my self to the Candor of your courtesies, craving this
only, that if you be pinched in the instep, you rather cut the shoe then burn
the last. If I discover the Legerdemaine, and subtle trains Women lay to
inveigle their Lovers, and unvail the furrows of Women's dispositions; you ought
no more to be vexed with what I have said, then the Mint-master is to see the
Coyner hanged; or the true Subject, the false Traitor arraigned; or the honest
man the thief condemned. I grant it an act somewhat uncivil, to run
inconsiderately into invectives against the sex; so it is an unworthy servitude
of mind to be obsequious to them: but I deal with them, as he who slew the
Serpent, not touching the body of his Son twined* up in folds; so I strike the
vice, without slandering the sex. I hope this Book will insensibly increase
under the favor and good opinion of virtuous Ladies, as Plants sprout under
the Aspects of the most benign Stars.

What I here declare (Candid Readers) is not in the least to extinguish a pure
and real love, or to detract from the honor of marriage; for my stomach will
not digest the unworthy practices of those who in their Discourse and Writings,
plant all their Arguments point blanck to batter down Love, and the married
estate, using most bitter invectives against it, as the Author of the Advice to
a Son, and such like, whose behavior speaks nothing but Satyrs against this
divine Ordinance, and the whole sex of Women. But such do it out of mere
dissimulations, to divert suspicion, being defatigated in a vigorous pursuit of
their desires are made incompetent Judges of that which they undertake to
condemn; or else out of revenge, having themselves formerly light upon bad
Women (yet not worse then they deserved) they curse all adventures because of
their own Shipwreck.

Here my Book and my self march both together and keep one pace; one cannot
condemn the Work without the Workman; who touches the one, touches the
other; what I speak is truth, not so much as I could, but as much as with
modesty I dare. Let that which I borrow be surveyed, and then tell me whether I
have made good choice of Ornaments to beautify and set forth the Work; for I
make others to relate (not after my own fancy, but as it best falls out) what
I cannot so well express, either through unskill of language, or want of
judgment. I have purposely concealed the Authors of those I have transplanted
into my soil, and digested them with my own, thereby to bridle the rashness of
the hasty knit brown'd censurer. I will honor him that shall trace and
unfeather me, by the only distinction of the force and beauty of my discourse.
Look how my humors or conceits present themselves, so I shuffle them up; for
these are matters which Juniors may not be ignorant of. But not to tire you
with a tedious preamble, like the Pulpit Cuffers of this age; and a long
discourse argues folly, and delicate words incur the suspicion of
obsequiousness; I am determined to use neither of them; only entreating your
mild and charitable censure, of this my rude and hirsute labor: until the
next occasion, I conclude,

Your Friend, W. G.

To his Honored and Ingenious Friend, Mr. W. G. on his Description of the
Passion of Love.
WHen Critics shall but view the title, they
Will carp at this great enterprise, and say,
It was too boldly done, thus to comprize
In this small tract, Loves passion, and true size
To set upon it; but the learned will
Excuse thy little Book, and praise thy quill;
Thy aim being only to instruct the youth:
In male and female thou discover'st truth.
Thy pencil in live colors has limm'd out,
Erotick passion from its very root.
Causes, Effects, and Signs (thou here discovers)
The jealousies and fears of wanton Lovers;
Physician-like thou here prescribest cures
To ease poor Lovers of their Calentures.
My worthy friend, In either Hemisphere,
Where ere I go, thy praise I Will echo there.
W. B.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 19. dele. 1. p. 19. l. 9. r. osculis. p. 26. l. 19 r. conducted.
p. 30. l. 2. r. froward. p 33. l. 30 r. magno sua. p. 38 l. 10. r. torment. p.
40. l. 4. r. can. p. 42. l. 3. ^. to l. 14. r. never. p. 44. l. 29. r.
vollyes. p. 48. l. 33. r. Mistress. p. 51. l. 11. r. fairest. p. 55. l. 15. r.
sighs. p. 64. l 7. r. heart. p. 70. l. 26. r. specter. p. 85. l. 20. r. prae
se ferat cum pharetr^.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE PASSIONS OF LOVE.
Of Love, the Original, the Universality, and the Definition of it.
THe nature of the whole Universe (according to the primo-geniture) tends to
that which we are now determined to treat o f; for it was Love that moved God,
not only to create the World, but also to create it beautiful in every part;
the name whereof in Greek yields a testimony of Loveliness and Beauty, (...),
Mundus, signifying a beautiful and well decked Ornament. Therefore seeing God
has created and framed it by Love, then indubitably Love is dispersed
throughout the whole World, and invested into every creature, as well Mineral
and Vegetable, as Animal, all obeying the statute of the great Lawgiver,
instituted in primo Adami. The which causes a Sympathy or Love in all things.

Now to demonstrate this in Man. He having by nature imprinted in his soul an
affected desire or earnest inclination to that which seems good, is drawn as
it were by necessity to search it out in every thing which he esteems fair
and good, finds nothing so apt to be the center of his Affections, and to
correspond with his nature (her creation solely tending to that) as Woman. For
after God had created Man, and placed him in the Garden to dress it, It is not
good (says he) that Man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him:
and to demonstrate how this help was not only meet, but also necessary for Man;
Moses adds, that amongst all those living creatures, he found no help meet
for Adam: For although all the Beasts, and the residue of creatures were given
to Man to assist him, so that being in the state of innocence, wherein he was
then, he might receive all service and ready obedience from them; nevertheless
he had not yet an help of his kind, for he could not have the familiarity and
society with Beasts, nor receive such help from them, as he could from a
Creature of his own nature.

Now seeing Man was created for this end, he could not continue without
generation, which could not be unless he were joined to a Woman; which was
before his fall a most pure and innocent love. But now because of his
corruption, his affections are irregular, and are made extreme; there is
nothing so greatly exciteth and carries away his mind, nor comes more near
to his destruction, then this foolish passion endangereth his life. To prove
which, many presidents might be produced. Galacea of Mantua declairing
oftentimes to a Maid of Pavia, whom he courted and made love to, that he would
suffer a thousand deaths for her sake, which she imagining was but spoken
coggingly and in jest, commanded him to cast himself into the River; which he
presently performed and was drowned. But we shall more fitly allege such
testimonies of the effects of Love, when we discourse more particularly of
every Vice that proceeds from them.

Yet, as well as Man, this amity (as I have said) is ingraffed into every
creature; this love, appetite, or universal inclination, or complacency, given
to them at the creation likewise, and inciteth them to desire and search out
that which is consentaneous to, and agrees and sympathizeth with their own
nature; so that there is nothing so insensible, which has not in it self this
amity innate, propending and moving to its proper object, as Amber and Straw,
Iron and Adamant, and the Palme-trees of both sexes, express not a sympathy
only, but a love passion; according to that of the Poet;

Vivunt in Venerem frondes, omnisque vicissim
Foelix arbor amat, nutant ad mutua Palmae
Foedera, Populeo suspirat Populus ictu,
Et Platano Platanus, Alnoque assibilat Alous.
Which is thus paraphraz'd;

Leaves sing their loves, each complemental tree
In Courtship bows, the amorous Palms we see
Confirm their leagues with nods, Poplers inchaine
Their arms, the Plane infettereth the Plane.
Now the better to illustrate this by example, Florentius tells us of a Palm
that loved most fervently, and would receive (if properly it may be so said) no
consolation, until her Love applied himself to her; you might see the two trees
bend, and of their own accord stretch out their boughs to embrace and kiss
each other. They (says he) marry one another, and when the wind brings their
odor unto each other, they are marvellously affected; they will be sick and
pine away for love, which the husbandman perceiving, strokes his hand on those
Palms which grow together, and so stroaking again the Palm that is enamored,
they carry kisses from one to the other, or weaving their leaves into a
Love-net, they will prosper and flourish with a greater bravery. No creature is
to be found quod non aliquid amat, which does not love something, no stock nor
stone, which has not some feeling of its effects; yet it is more eminent in
Vegetables.

To prosecute our discourse, let us define what this Amorous Love is;
Theophrastus demonstrateth it to be a desire of the Soul, that easily and very
speedily gets entrance, but retireth back again very slowly. Another says, It
is an invisible fire kindled within the hidden forges of the breasts of Lovers,
scorching and consuming their miserable hearts, and burning in the flames of
desire, yielding no other sign or testimony thereof, then an ardent desire of
the thing beloved. Montag. lib. 3. cap. 5. says, that Love is nothing but an
insatiate thirst of enjoying a greedily desired object. Socrates says, It is
an appetite of generation by the mediation of beauty. Others will have it to be
a motion of the blood getting strength by little and little, through the hope
of pleasure, almost a kind of Fascination or enchantment. Tully thought it to
be a wishing well to the party affected. Seneca, a great strength of the
understanding, and a heat that moves gently up and down the spirits. And
others say, that this Erotical passion is a kind of dotage, proceeding from an
irregular desire of enjoying a lovely object, and is attended on by fear and
sadness (common symptoms of Love) according to Ovid; Res est solliciti plena
timoris amor.


Thus have we been carried away by the current of other men's judgments, and
now have watched our advantage to swim back again, and show our private
opinion; and that is, That Love is an expansion of the soul toward it object;
which is, what ever is attractive; and that naturally Man loves himself best
and first, and all other things in subordination to himself; and whatsoever
has most similitude of Man in nature, is the proper object of his love; then
consequently (in my opinion) no object so proper as the princess of the female
sex, viz. Woman, it being ordained and constituted for the propagation and
preservation of every species.

We will illustrate this with that pretty piece of policy of Paris, which
prompted him to the disposal of the Golden ball, he being made umpire between
three Deities, Juno, Pallas, and Venus, whereof he was to make one his friend,
and two his enemies; it was his wisdom to win favor with the most potent, for
his own safety, which is Venus, if we may take an estimate of power from the
extent of Dominions, and largeness of command and conquest, all which are so
clearly Cypria's as they leave no place for opposition. It is true, Juno
commands the world by Riches, and Pallas by wisdom, but Venus monarchizeth in
the most unlimited manner of sovereignty over millions of Worlds, if it will
pass for sterling, that every Man is a microcosm, or a little World, the
epitomy of the macrocosm, or the greater World: She is that powerful Planet,
that makes not only the rational, but irrational; not only the animate, but
inanimate creatures, and Vegetables feel her influxious power. Lucr. l. 1. 22.

Tu dea, tu rerum naturam sola gubernas,
Nec sine te quicquam dias in luminis oras
Exoritur, neque fit laetum, nec amabile quicquam.
Goddess, thou rul'st the nature of all things,
Without thee nothing into this light springs,
Nothing is lovely, nothing pleasure brings.
Therefore they that submit not to the Scepter of the Paphian Queen, are Rebels
against nature, and but the shadows of Men; but such stubborn ones are as rare
as a Horse in the streets of Venice, or a beggar in Holland. I know not (says
Montag. in his Essays lih. 3. cap. 5.) who could set Pallas and the Muses at
odds with Venus, and make them cold and slow in affecting of Love; as for me,
I see no Deities that better suit together, nor are more indebted one to
another. Whoever shall go about to remove amorous imaginations from the Muses,
shall deprive them of the best entertainment, and of the noblest subject of
their work. And who shall debar Cupid the service and conversation of Poesy;
shall weaken him of his best weapons. But for so much as I know of it, the
power and might of this God, are found more quick and lively in the shadow of
Poesy, then in their own Essence: It representing a kind of air as lovely as
Love it self.

Thus (equally tendering all these opinions to the Readers discretion, to
reject or accept which of them he shall conclude most probable) I proceed on to
demonstrate the Causes of this passion in the subsequent Chapter.

The Causes of Love.
WE will now express what special causes and motives tend most to the increase
of this Passion. The Sages have sought the true causes which dispose the wills
of Men to love; and have delivered many different opinions in this point. Some
hold, it is a quality which God imprinted on nature: for it pleased him to
create Adam on earth as his own image, and has drawn Eve to be nnto Man a
spirit of peace, and a love of a perpetual lasting; this indubitably is the
first; for we must ingenuously confess, that there is no real love, no true
delight, but proceeds from the supreme Divinity, the pure and immaterial
Essence of the omnipotent Protector, and sole Ruler of all Celestial and
Terrestrial creatures: It is a communicative delight, whose chief propriety is
perpetually to stream into the hearts and souls of all that are capable
thereof. Others imagine (and it is real) it comes from the influence of the
Stars at their Nativities, and these (in my opinion) are the second causes.

Prima Deus causa est* causae sunt astra secundae.
God is (of all created) the prime cause:
The second (in spite of Holmes) are starry laws.
Others say, it proceeds from Parents and Education, and that is very probable.
Others from a certain harmony and consonance of hearts which meeting in accord
upon the same tone, having a natural correspondencie. The Maxim of Divines,
and moral Philosophers says, That fair and good (otherwise that which seems
to be so) make all loves. And lastly, Money.

Now it is our intent and purpose to treat of every one of these causes
distinctly (the first excepted, being explained in the first Chapter, and
likewise in the beginning of this Section) therefore we will proceed to the
second cause, which is the Stars.

The fairest and enticing objects that proceed from Men and Women, that most
frequently captivate, allure, and make them dote beyond all measure one upon
another, aret by the force and power of the Stars (quod me tibi temperat
astrum) such a Woman does singularly dote upon such a Man, and likewise such a
Man upon such a Woman; hate such again, and give no reason for it, it being too
high for the vulgar capacity to attain to the knowledge of it. They by their
influence act upon the humors and bodies, and by their secret qualities tie
creatures with the knot of love; for how many are there who love things which
are neither lovely nor good? I mean, not only in effect, but in their own
opinion and judgment, yet are they fastened by some tie (unknown to any but
the real sons of art, and those which are acquainted with the sublime
sciences) nor can they free themselves from it but by the absolute power of
reason. Do we not daily find by experience, that a Man who is, and who knows
himself to be deformed and wicked, yet by nature falls not in love with
himself? so through a love of Concupiscence, he may love things which have
neither beauty nor goodness, although he daily has a blind feeling of
something suitable to sensuality and an unperceptible attractive. For there may
be a sympathy in Nature, and an antipathy in Complexion; and a sympathy in
Complexion, and an antipathy in Nature; as in animals, there is amity betwixt
the Blackbird and the Thrush, betwixt the Crow and Hern, betwixt Peacocks and
Pigeons, Turtles and Parrats. Whence Sappho in Ovids Epist. writes to Phaon; To
Birds unlike oft-times joined are white Doves;
Also the Bird that is green black Turtle loves.
For of what sort the amities and enmities of the superiors be, such are the
inclinations of things subject to them in these inferiors. These dispositions
therefore of Love, are nothing else but certain inclinations of things, of one
toward another, desiring such and such a thing if it be absent, and to move
toward it, and to acquiesce in it when it is obtained, shunning the contrary
and dreading the approach of it. He that knows the amities and enmities the
superiors have one toward another, knows my meaning, and will quickly give
you a reason, and that none of the worst, let the Priests say what they please.

The third Cause is from Parents and Education. This cause is from our first
Parents, for the preservation and propagation of the Species, and will so
continue till nature shall be no more. It is according to the old Adage, Qualis
Pater, talis Filius; like Father, like Son. Cat to her kind; if the Dam trot,
the foal will not amble. Experience and nature approves it, that the fruit will
relish of the tree from whence it sprung. Consider how Love proceeds from
Parents, and gradually descends; that so soon as we are come to maturity, and
that our blood begins to boil in our veins, we devote our selves to a Woman,
forgetting our Mother in a wise, and the womb that bare us in that which shall
bear our image. This Woman blessing us with Children, our affection leaves the
level it held before, and sinks from our bed unto our issue and picture of
posterity, where affection holds no steady mansion: they applying themselves to
a Woman, take a lawful way to love another better then our selves, and thus run
to posterity.

But Education is more potent, for Themistocles in his youth (as himself
confesses) for want of Discipline, was carried away by the lascivious and hot
passion of Love, like to a young unbridled Colt, until that by Miltiades
example, who was then famous among the Grecians, he caused the heat of his
courage to be cooled, and the lasciviousness which was naturally in him, to
attend upon virtue: he fed delicately and highly, Qualis cibus, talis sanguis
and membrum; such as the meat, such is the broth; for luscious fare, is the
only nurse and nourisher of sensual appetite, the sole maintenance of youthful
affection, the fuel of this inordinate passion, nothing so much feeding it,
nor insensates the understanding by delighting in it. He was very idly
educated, which is one main branch that causes love, and the first arrow that
Cupid shoots into the hot Liver of a heedless Lover. For the Man being idle,
the mind is apt to all uncleanness; the mind being void of exercise, the Man
is void of honesty. Does not rust corrode the hardest Iron, if it be not used?
Does not the Moth eat the finest garment, if it be not worn? Does not impiety
infect the clearest and most acute wit, if it be given to idleness? Does not
common experience make this common unto us, that the fertilest ground brings
forth nothing but weeds, if it be not tilled? The particulars of idleness, as
immoderate sleep, immodest play, unsatiable drinking, does so weaken the senses
and bewitch the soul, that before we feel the motion of Love, we are resolved
to lust. Cupid is* a crafty Gentleman, he follows those to a hair that studdy
pleasure, and flies those that stoutly labor. Likewise though their natural
inclination be to virtue, if they be Educated, in Dancing-schooles, Schools of
Music, lead a riotous life, they will be much subject to this passion, they
will prefer fancy before friends, lay Reason in the water, being too salt for
their taste, and follow unbridled Affection suitable to their education.

But let their inclinations be never so strong, if they have been well brought
up and instructed, they are in some sort forced to moderate themselves, not
suffering Love to have such pernicious effects in them, as naturally they are
inclined to; whereupon (in my opinion) that old proverb was not spoken without
reason, That Education goes beyond Nature: so that Quintilian would not have
Nurses to be of an immodest or uncomely speech; adding this cause, Lest (says
he) such manners, precepts, and discourses as young children learn in their
unriper years remain so deeply rooted, as they shall scarce ever be
relinquished. Sure I am, that the first impressions, whether good or evil, are
most continuate, and with least difficulty preserved.

Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem
Testa diu. --
A pot well seasoned, holds the primitive taste
A long time after. --
Socrates confesses in Plato, that by nature he was inclined to vices, and yet
Philosophy made him as perfect and excellent a Man, as any was in the world.

Besides Education and custom have power not only to change the natural
inclination of some particular Men, but also of whole Countries, as the
Histories of most Nations declare unto us; and namely that of the Germans, who
in the time of Tacitus (and Lycurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians) had neither Law
nor Religion, knowledge nor form of Commonwealth (but were led and carried on
by the current of their own inclinations, and as their wills was inclined by the
influence of the superiors) whereas now they will give place to no Nation for
good institution in all things. To reform the Lacedaemonians, Lycurgus used this
piece of policy; He nourished two whelps both of one Sire and one Dam, but in
different manner; for the one he trained up to hunt, and the other to lie
always in the chimney-corner at the porridge-pot; afterward calling the
Lacedaemonians into one assembly, he said, Ye Lacedaemonians, to the attaining of
virtue, education, industry and exercise is the most noble means; the truth of
which I shall make manifest to you by trial; Then bringing forth the whelps,
and setting down a porridge-pot and an Hare, the one run at the Hare, and the
other at the pot: the Lacedaemonians not understanding the mystery, he said,
Both of these be of one Sire and one Dam, but you see how Education alters
Nature.

Let us therefore (that seeing our flexible nature is assaulted and provoked to
the acting of any thing which is not good) endeavor to accustom and exercise
our selves in virtue, which will be as it were unto us another nature; let us
use the means of good Education and instruction in Wisdom, whereby our souls
shall be made conquerors over these hot passions, and our minds moderated and
stayed in all our actions.

We will now proceed on to the next, and fourth cause, which is a certain
harmony and consonancy of hearts, which meeting accord upon the same tone,
having a natural correspondency. For it is Man's nature to affect all harmony,
and sure it is (where Cupid strikes this silent note (for Love is the music,
the harmony, complexion, the genus, and very soul of nature) more sweet and
melodious then the sound of any instrument; for there is music wheresoever
there is an harmony. And thus far we maintain the music of the spheres: for
these well ordered motions, and regular paces, though they give no sound unto
the ear, yet to the understanding of the parties affected, they strike a
love-note most full of harmony. I desire leave to insist a little upon this.

Every body has its projections and unperceiveable influences, as we find in
the power of Amber and the Adamant, which attract Iron and Straw, by the
expiration they scatter in the air, to serve as instruments and hands to their
attractions. This being common to other natures of Plants, Metals, and living
creatures, we must not think but that the body of Man participateth therein, by
reason of its vivacity and multitude of pores which give a more easy passage
to such emissions. There then comes forth a spirituous substance, which is
(according to Marcilius Ficinus): vapor of blood, pure, subtle, hot and clear,
more strong or weak according to the interior agitations of spirits; which
carries along with it some friendly, convenient, and temperate quality, which
insinuates it self into the heart and soul, does (if it there find a
disposition of conformity) abide, as a seed cast into the earth, and forms
there an harmony, and this love of correspondency, with an admirable promptness
and vigor; so it happens that the spirits, being transpired from one body to
another, and carrying on their wings qualities consonant, do infallibly excite
and awaken the inclinations. The eye is principally interessed herein,
breathing thence the most thin spirits and darting forth the visual rays, as
the arrows of Love which penetrate the heart, striking a most dulcisonant
harmony, and are united one within another; then heating the blood, they strike
upon the imagination, and attract the will, which are linked one to another,
that they are tied together with an unperceiveable knot; and so by this means
Love enters into the heart.

The fifth Cause is that of the Divines and moral Philosophers, That beauty
and goodness make us love. Which two if they be found both in one Woman (she is
rara avis, a very rare thing indeed) are most availeful advantages. Love varies
as its objects vary, which is always good, beautiful, amiable, gracious, and
pleasant, or at least which seems to be so; from Goodness comes Beauty, from
Beauty Grace and Comeliness, which result as so many rays from their good
parts, makes us to love, and so covet and desire it: for were it not pleasing
and gracious in our eyes, we should not seek it. Omne pulchrum amabile, and
what we love is fair and gracious in our eyes, or at least we do so apprehend
or esteem it. Suum cuique pulchrum.

The perfections of his Mistress are most rare,
In all men's eyes, yet in his own most fair.
Amiableness is the object of love, the scope and end is to obtain it, for
whose sake we love, and with our minds covet to enjoy. Likewise Grace and
Beauty are so wonderfully annexed, do so sweetly and gently win our souls, and
strongly allure, that they confound our judgment, and cannot be distinguished.
And this makes the Poets still put the three Graces in Venus company, as
attending on her and holding up her train. As the needle of a Dial being
touched with an Adamant, does always turn toward the Pole Star, because the
Philosophers hold that to be the element of the Lodestone or Magnet, and by a
natural sympathy does attract every part of it self unto it self; so a Lo^ers
heart being touched with the beauty and goodness of his Mistress does turn it,
and all its thoughts toward her: Poetically to explain this conception let us
add,

The needle of a Dial Northward turns,
If touched by Adamant:
His heart touched by his Mistress burns,
And after her does pant.
As this Magnet draws the heavy Iron, and the Harp the swift Dolphin; so
beauty allureth the chaste mind to love. In that exquisite Romance of Clytiphon
and Lucippe, where Clytiphon (being captivated with her beauty) speaking of
himself, ingenuously confesses, that he no sooner came in Lucippe's presence,
but says he, Statim ac eam contemplatus sum, occidi; oculos a Virgin avertere
conatus sum, sed illi repugnabant. He was wounded at the first sight, his heart
panted, he could not possibily turn his eyes from her.

This Beauty has great power to procure love; for where it appears in the
exterior parts in any body, it is as it were a witness and testimony of the
beauty in the soul. For the Creator created all things in such manner that he
has commonly joined beauty and goodness together; in the beginning there was
nothing made, but it was very good and beautiful in his kind, therefore there
is an agreement between the body and the soul; for bodily beauty is as it were
an image of the beauty of the soul, and promises after a sort some good thing
of the inward beauty; for internal perfection breeds the external; whereupon
the internal is called goodness, and the external, beauty. Many would willingly
die for the beauty of others, and are so tormented and tossed, that they become
senseless and phrenetick, being captivated with looking upon a beautiful face,
which has such a sting that it pierces even unto the liveliest part of their
heart and soul. Whereupon it falls out that poor silly Lovers are so full of
passions, that they stand altogether amazed; making their souls so subject to
their desires, that she must obey them, as if she were some poor Chambermaid
or drudge. It is the Witch of Nature, as gold is the god of the World; for a
Woman without beauty has as few followers, as a Man without money has friends.

The reason why Women's beauty is of such force, that it overcomes men, is that
the sense being too much fastened upon it, does not only (as if it gazed upon
an object above its strength) remain dazzled with the rays thereof, but reason
it self is darkened, the heart is fettered, and the will by love made a
prisoner. And I must needs tell you in plain terms, that beauty without the
indowments of a virtuous mind is stark naught* Yet most commonly, the beauty
of the mind is manifest in the face, as it were in a looking-glass; for in it
is seen a modest blush the vail of shame fac'dness, the true ornament of an
honest mind, the treasure of Chastitity, the splendour of Clemency, the riches
of Silence, the majesty of Virtue, the lodge of Love, and the nest of Grace;
because the face (amongst all the other corporal parts) is the more noble,
where the mind by those senses that are in it exercises its effects and
operatious.

Having discoursed thus much of beauty in general, we will now descend to the
particulars of beauty, and demonstrate their force in causing Love. For there
is not any that loves, but there is some particular part, either in form or
condition, which pleases most, and inflameth him above the rest.

And first of the Eyes, which Scaliger calls Cupids arrows; the black, round,
quick sparkling eye, is the most fair, amorous and enticing, the speaking,
courting, enchanting eye. Hesiod calls those that have fair lovely eyes, (...);
and Pindarus (...), by a Metaphor borrowed from the Greek word (...),
signifying the young tender sprigs or branches of Vines, for as these always
embrace the neighboring bough, twining about it with many various circles; in
like manner, the eyes of a beautiful woman apply their beams, and endeavor to
entangle the hearts of those that earnestly behold her. The Poet Propertius
calls the eyes the conductors and guides in Love. Si nescis, oculi sunt in amore
duces.
It is the eyes that infect the spirits, by the gazing upon an object, and
thence the spirits infect the blood. To this effect the Lady in Apuleius
complained, Thou art the cause of my grief, thine eyes piercing through mine
eyes into mine inward parts, have set my bowels on fire, therefore commiserate
me that am now ready to die for thy sake.

The eye is the judge of beauty, and is as it were the looking-glass of the
soul, in which are described all the affections of the Soul, as Love, passion,
anger, disdain, etc. The eye exceedingly lusts after beauty (and whilst it
contemplateth the colors, forms, features, comeliness, grace, laughter, and
whatsoever excellent quality appertains unto beauty) is deemed fittest to be
the principal judge thereof; the eye being an Organ by which a Lover does best
discern the perfection of all those principal parts, which are required to the
framing of a complete beauty; for we often times see, by the bare report of
virtue, in any honorable breast love imperfectly; but if report be once
confirmed by an interview, and the eye be made judge as well as the ear, it
gathers strength, and exceedingly increases; which proceeds from no other
cause then from the great force that the eye has in the true judgment of
sensible things, besides the power thereof extending it self more then all the
other senses to the multitude of objects, and more speedily apprehending them.
Pardon me for stepping a little out of the way, but I shall quickly be in again.

Secondly, Fair hair, as the Poets say, are the prisons of Cupid; that is the
cause (as I suppose) that Ladies make Rings, and Bracelets, and love-locks to
send to their Lovers. And that is the cause too (for I must handle both sexes)
that Men curle and powder their hair, and prune their pickativants, making the
East side correspond to the West.

Thirdly, the Tongue, is called by Scaliger, the lightning of love. But we will
take all the actions and gestures of the mouth together with it; what a
bewitching force has a gracious laughter, a pleasant and eloquent delivery, a
modest courting, a Sirens song, or any other comely carriage or manifestation
of the mind, a corral lip, a comely order and set of two Ivory rails? How
great force and enticements lie in kissing? Balthazer Castilio says, Jam
pluribus oculis labra crepitabant, animarum quoque mixturam facientes, inter
mutuos complexus animas anhelantes: They breath out their souls and spirits
together with their kisses, changing hearts and spirits, and mingle affections
as they do kisses, and it is rather a connection of the mind then of the body.
What Is a kiss of that pure fair?
But Loves lure, or Adonis snare.


Fourthly, some are enamoured of an handsome tall and slender body; some again
are taken with one of a middle size and plump; but many are captivated with a
handsome leg and foot.

Fifthly, their breasts and paps are called the tents of Love; for which cause
Women do so much discover them, (for Women, says Aristotle, are Natures
Errata, continually studying temptations) together with their naked necks,
shoulders and arms, having all things necessary and in readiness, that may
either allure the mind to love, or the heart to folly. What is the meaning of
their affected carriages, those Garments so pompous, those guizes so sought
after, those Colors so fantastic, the Jewels and Pendants so sumptuous, that
painting so shameless, those Curles and Patches, their silk and Bow-die
stockins, with their coats tucked up that their neat leg and foot may be seen,
their laced shoes, those courtesies, salutations, cringings and mincing gates;
but to cut the throat of Chastity, and are springes to catch Wood-cocks. A Ship
is not so long a rigging, as a young Lady is in trimming her self against the
coming of her Sweetheart. Eye but the dresses of Women which are now in use,
and thou shall not only see the carved vizard of a lewd Woman, but the
incarnate visage of a lascivious wanton; not only the shadow of love, but the
substance of lust.

Sir Philip Sydney in his Arcadia, says that Apparel (though it be many
degrees better then the wearer) is a great motive and provocation to love, and
nothing like unto it: Which does even Beauty beautify,
And most bewitch a wretched eye.
And as another Poet says; -- Love-locks and clothes which speak
All Countries, and no Man. --
He lays all that ever he has upon his back, making the Meridian of his
Estate stoop to his shoulders, judging that Women are captivated with and
married to Bravery.

Add hereunto the painting practiced by Harlots, adulterated complexions well
agreeing with adulterous conditions. They especially use to paint their eyes
(understand their eyebrows and eyelids) with Stibium, to make them look
black, conceited by them an extraordinary comeliness. Hereupon was Solomon's
caution, Neither let her take thee with her eyelids, as one of her principal
nets to catch wantons therewith. When aged they use in vain to make themselves
fair by renting their faces with painting, though more cause to rent them with
their nails out of penitent indignation. Thus painting used to reconcile, in
time widens the breaches in their faces; and their flesh tainted, at least,
with the poison thereof, like rotten vessels spring the more leaks the more
they are repaired. And the truth is, I would have such as these to join
themselves with Soldiers, for so both may fight under their colors.

Sixthly, Pleasant and well composed looks, glances, smiles, counter-smiles,
plausible gestures, pleasant carriage and behavior, affable complements, a
comely gate and pace, daliances, plays, revels, maskes, dancing, time, place,
opportunity, conference, and importunity, are materials of which Loves torch is
made; also no stronger engines then to hear and read of Love toys, fables and
discourses, so that many by this means become distracted, for these exercises
do as well open the pores of the heart as the body. And truly such heart-traps
are laid by cunning beauties, in such pretty ambuscadoes, that he must be a
crafty Fox that can escape them; for there is still some peculiar grace in a
Woman, as of beauty, good discourse, wit, eloquence, or honesty, which is the
primum mobile, or first mover, and a most forcible loadstone, to attract the
favors, and good will of Men's eyes, ears and affections unto them. It is a
plain ornament becomes a Virgin or virtuous Woman, and they get more credit in
a wise man's eye and judgment, by their plainness, and are more comely and
fair* then they that are set out with their patches, bables, puffed up, and
adorned like Jayes in Peacocks feathers. Ladies, let the example of Lucretia be
set before you, who stamped a deeper impression of affection in the heart of
the virtuous beholder, by addressing herself to houswifery, and purple
spinning, then others could ever do with their rare banquets, and riotous
spending. All are not of Aegisthus mind, who was taken with a complement of
lightness. This argued, that a youthful heat had rather surprised his amorous
heart, then any discreet affection preferred him to his choice. This love is
fading; for where virtue is not directrice in our choice, our minds are ever
prone to change; we find not what we expected, nor digest well what we
formerly affected; all is out of square, because discretion contrived not the
building. It is a decent and comely habit best becomes Ladies to be wooed in,
and contents discreet Suitors most to have them won in. Conform then your
generous dispositions to a decency of fashion, that you may attract to your
selves, and beget in others motives of affection: whose private virtues render
you to the imitation, and public to the admiration of all.

Seventhly, a tender and hot heart, lucid spirits, vegetous and subtle blood,
are causes of amorous fires, a small beauty makes a great impression in them.

Eighthly, Obsequious love letters, to insinuate themselves into their
Mistresses favor, are great incitements, they are the life of Love.

The pen can furrow a fond females heart,
And pierce it more, then Cupids feigned dart.
Letters a kind of Magic virtue have,
And like strong Philters humane souls inslave.
Ninthly, Words much corrupt the disposition; they set an edge or gloss on
depraved liberty; making that member the vent and spout of their passion, and
making the hearts of credulous Women melt with their ear-charming Oratory.

The tenth, Love is caused very often by the ear, as Achilles Tacitus says, Ea
enim hominum intemperantium libido est, ut etiam fama ad amandum impellantur,
and audientes aeque afficiantur ac videntes; such is that intemperance and
passion of some Men, that they are as much inamoured by report, as if they see
them. Ofttimes the species of Love are received into the fantasy, as well by
relation as by sight, for we see by the eyes of our understanding. No face yet
seen; but shafts that Love lets fly,
Kills in the ear as well as in the eye.
Also; The pleader burns his books, disdains the Law,
And falls in love, with whom his eyes never saw.
Lycidas declaring to Cleon his Love toward Astrea, said, Whether she was
really fair or no, I know not, but so it was, that so soon as ever I heard the
report of her, I loved her. Some report (says he) that Love proceeds from the
eyes of the party loved; but this cannot be, for her eye never looked upon me,
nor did mine see her so much as to know her again. For an illustrious name is a
strange course
To attract Love, and good report has force.


We purpose now to treat of Money causing Love. That is the general humor of
the world, and in this Iron age of ours, and in that commodity stears our
affections, the love of riches being most respected; for now a Maid must buy
her husband with a great dowry if she will have him, making Love mercenary; and
it is the fashion altogether in use, to choose Wives as Chapmen sell their wares,
with Quantum dabitis? what is the most you will give? Witty was that young
Gentlewomans answer to an inconsiderate Suitor, who having solicited the
Father, and bargained with him for the affection of his Daughter for so much,
and covenants of marriage concluded: This undiscreet wooer unseasonably imparts
his mind to the Daughter; who made strange with it, saying, she never heard of
any such matter: yea but (replied he) I have bargained with your Father, and he
has already consented: And you may marry him too (quoth she) for you must hold
me excused. Covetousness and filthy lucre mars many a good match, or some such
by-respect. Veniunt a dote sagit^ae, it is money that makes the Mare to go; it is
money and a good dowry, lights Hymen's torches. They care not for beauty,
education, honesty, or birth; if they hear that she is a rich heir, or has
ready cash, they are frantic and doting upon such a one, more then if she were
natures masterpiece in beauty. If she be never so ugly and stinking, it is
money makes her kiss sweetly. Has she money? (that is the first question) O how
they love her! Is she mula auro onusta? nay then, run Dog, run Bear, they will
venture hanging to compass their desire. Auri sacra fames, quid non mortalia
cogis
Pectora? --
What will not this desire of money compel a Man to attempt? Is she as old as
Saturn, deformed, vicious, blear-eyed, though they be like two powdering tubs
either running over or full of standing brine, and her brows hang ore her eyes
like fly flaps, though her nose be like a Hunters horn, and so bending up,
that a Man may hang a hat upon it, and her cheeks may serve boys for
cherry-pits, does her teeth stand like an old park pale, if she have any? has
she a tongue would make a deaf man bless his imperfections, that frees him
from the plague of so much noise; and such a breath (heavens shield us) as
out-vies the shambles for a sent? Yet if she have cash, Oh how amiable is she!
without doubt she has no less then twenty Suitors, never rack she is good
enough. Est natura hominum, to love those that are fortunate and rich, that
thrive, let them get it as they will, by hook or crook, all is one so they have
it. De moribus ultima fiet qnestio; to enquire of her conditions and Education
is the last interrogatory. But let me assure you these being joined together,
the seen is altered on a sudden, their love is converted into hate, their
mirth into melancholy, having only fixed their affections upon this object of
commodity; the desire of which in excess is mere covetousness; and on the
otherside their hate is furiously bent upon the Woman, she becomes an abject,
and an odious object unto them.

Now to turn the current of our discourse to the other sex; for this desire of
lucre is not adherent to men only, but that there are some of the female train
of the same temper. Let the Man be what he will, let him be cast in Esops
mould, with his back like a Lute, and his face like Thersites, his eyes broad
and tawny, his lips of the largest size in folio, able to furnish a Cobblers
shop with clouting-leather; if he have but a golden hand, Midas's touch, or
loadened with golden pockets, immediately they salute him with an easement, Ego
te hoc fasce levabo: and it is reason you should do it, replies the Woodcock;
yielding up the souls of his pockets for the hopes of a smile, embrace or a
kiss: And having emptied them, stuff them up again with frowning looks, and
serve him like a sheep in June, turned forth for a bare neck'd Ewe, to seek a
ruff for the piece next below his coxcombe. Money has a significant voice,
semper ad placitum, always pleasing, always grateful.

He that will learn to win by smooth persuasion,
Must practice much the Topic called Donation,
Strowing the path by which he means to pass,
With the sweet flowers of yellow-fac'd Midas;
So shall he find all easy to his will;
Come in at's pleasure and be welcome still.
But the truly handsome, complete, and meritorious, that cannot show the face
of a Jacobus, that has not pocket Angels for his gardians, shall live at a
distance from gratia dei, the grace of her good liking; he shall pass by for
vas vacuum, and be embarked in the ship of Scorn, to be conpucted to the haven
of heaviness, and thrust upon the shore (as an exile) of never return again.
Yet, I would rather wish Ladies to let the picture of Love be the emblem of
their hearts, and not these inferior pictures, which we call money; which are
so far from satisfying the affection, as they are only for the Mold or
Worldling; whose grosser thoughts never yet aspired to the knowledge of Loves
definition. Also it shows a servile nature, to cashire a faithful Lover
because he is poor, and to prefer another less desertfull because he is rich.

We will now declare what the Poets say is the cause of Love. They say that
when Jupiter first formed Man, and all souls, he touched every one with
several pieces of Loadstone, and afterward put all the pieces in a place by
themselves; likewise, the souls of Women after he had touched them, he put them
in a Magazine by themselves: afterward when he had sent the souls into bodies,
he brought those of the Women to the place where the Load-stones were which
touched the Men, and made every one to take one piece; if there were any
theevish souls, they took several pieces and hid them. Now when that Man meets
with that Woman that has the piece which touched his soul, it is impossible
but he must love her; the Loadstone which she has does attract his soul: And
from hence does proceed the several effects of Love; for those who are loved of
many, are those theevish souls who took many pieces of the Loadstone; if any do
love one who loves not him aagain, that was one who took his Loadstone, but he
not hers. And from hence (say they) comes it to pass, that we do often see
some persons love others, who in our eyes are nothing amiable. Also from hence
proceed those strange loves which sometimes falls out, as that a Gaul brought up
amongst many beauties falls in love with a barbarous stanger.

Fonseca holds (and I am of the same mind) there is something in a Woman
beyond all humane delight, a magnetic virtue, a charming quality, and a
powerful motive. To illustrate this; There is a story recorded in the Lives of
the Fathers, of a Child whose Education was in a Desert from his infancy, by
an old Hermit; being come to man's estate, he accidentally spied two comely
Women wandering in the Woods; he enquired of the Hermit (having never seen
such before in his life) what creatures they were, the Hermit told him that
they were Fairies; after some tract of time, being in discourse, the Hermit
demanded of him which was the pleasantest and most delectable sight that ever
he saw in his life? He readily replied (without any pause or further
consideration) the two Fairies he espied in the Desert. So that indubitably,
there is in a fair and beautiful Woman, a magnetic power, and a natural imbred
affection, which moves our concupiscence. And this surely proceeds from the
particular institutes of nature, and the perfections a Man imagins in another
creature of his likeness, which he thinks may become another self: for with the
distinction of sexes which nature has bestowed on man, as well as irrational
creatures; she has put certain impressions in the brain (as in this young
man) which makes a Man at a certain age, and at a certain season, to look on
himself as defective, and as if he were but the half of an whole, whereof a
person of the other sex ought to be the other half* so that the acquisition of
this half is represented to us confusedly by nature, as the greatest of all
imaginable goods; and although he see many persons of the other sex, he does
not therefore desire many at the same time, by reason Nature makes him conceive
that he has need of no more but one half; but when he observes some thing in
any one, that likes him better then any thing he has marked at the same time
in the rest; that fixes the soul to feel all the inclination which nature has
given him to seek after that good, that she represents to him, as the greatest
he can possibly possess, on that Woman only; and this is it which furnishes
the Romancers and Poets with stuff.

To conclude this Chapter; It may be, that some will expect, that I should
prescribe some things to cause love; as to teach them how to temper and spice
an amatorious cup, and what time may be elected for the administering of it; or
how Love may be caused by natural Magic: but not knowing into whose hands the
Book might come, neither do I write it to be an instrument ready tuned for
every wanton eye, tongue, and hand to play upon; I forbear, lest more hurt then
good come thereby: For Pliny reports that Lucullus a most brave General and
Captain of great execution, lost his life by a Lovepotion. -- Love has used
against frail hearts
Unlawful weapons, shooting poisoned darts.


That there is things that have power and virtue to cause Love is not to be
doubted; for the Soul of the World (according to Corn. Agrip.) by its virtue
does make all things that are naturally generated, and artificially made
fruitful, by infusing into them Celestial properties, for the working of these
effects; then, those things themselves not only administered by potions, or any
other such like way, but also when they being conveniently wrapped up, and
bound to, or hanged about the neck, or any other way applied, although by never
so small a contact, do impresse their virtue upon us. For by those applications
or contacts the accidents of the body and mind are changed, causing them to
whom they are administered to love, and render them that carry them to be
beloved. But if these be not done under a suitable and proper Constellation, you
may as well go about to pick stravvs, as effect any thing by them; no more but
verbum sat sapienti. Also there are certain seasons (which I will conceal for
modesties sake) when Women (though never so forward at other times) may be won,
in the which moment they have neither will to deny, nor wit to mistrust; such a
time is recorded in History a young Gentleman found to obtain the love of the
Duchess of Millaine; such a time a poor Yeoman elected, and in it purchased
the love of the fairest Lady in Mantua. Sed vulgo prodere grande nefas. If I
have displeased any fools in concealing such things as are to be concealed, I
hope the wise will hold me excused, whilst I proceed to declare unto them in
the next Chapter, the Power and Effects of Love.

Of the Power and Effects of Love.
THe Reader shall pay nothing but his pains in following me, whilst I show him
the great power and various effects of Love; and yet I think I may as well go
about to number the leaves of trees, and sands of the Sea, the grass piles
upon the Land, and the stars in the firmament, as enumerate the different
effects and disorders that Love produces in mortals. What poison may be
dissolved which Love mingleth not? What weapons can be forged and filed, to
transfix the sides of innocent creatures which Love hammereth and polisheth not
in his shop? or what precipices are there which Love prepares not? All the
mischiefs and crimes which have in former ages been perpetrated, Love has
acted and daily invented them. Plato calls it Magnus Demon, or the great
Devil, for its vehemence and soveraingty over all other passions. For says
one, I had rather contend with Tigers, Wolves, Dragons, Lions, Bulls, Bears, and
Giants, then with Love, he is so powerful. Regnat, and in superos jus habet
ille Deus,
says Ovid; he enforces all to become tributary to him, he domineers over
all, and can make mad and sober whom he list, and strikes with sickness, and
cures whom he list; he is of such power and majesty, that no creature can
withstand him; he is to be seen in creatures void of reason: for the Pelican
gores her breast to feed her young ones, and the Storke is not unkind to feed
her old one in her age. We are informed by common experience, how violently
brute Beasts are carried away with this passion, Lions, Bulls, Dogs and Cocks
are so furious in this kind that they will kill one another; but especially
Hearts are so fierce that they may be heard fight at a great distance. Pliny
says, Fishes pine away for love and wax lean; For (says he) a Dolphin so
loved a Boy, that when he dyed the Fish came on Land, and so perished. This
Love is the most fatal plague amongst all the passions, it has the shiffering
and heat of Fevers, the ach and striking of the Meagrim, the rage of Teeth, the
stupefaction of the Vertigo, the furies of Frenzy, the black vapors of the
Hypochondry, the stupidities of the Lethargy, the fits of the Mother, and
Spleen, the faintness of the Ptisick, the tremblings and palpitations of the
heart. It is wills darling, the trial of patience, passions torture, the
pleasure of melancholy, the sport of madness, the delight of varieties, and
the deviser of vanities. After all this it is made a God called Cupid, to whom
Poems, Elogies* Hymns, Songs, and Victimes are offered. Empire over the heart
is given to it. There are many millions of Men in the World, who would be most
fortunate and flourishing, if they knew how to avoid the mischievous power of
this passion. What a sweet poison is the beauty and comeliness of one sex to
another? which enters in by the eye and makes a strange havoc. I wonder not
at all why the Scriptures compare it to a Panther (a savage and cruel Beast)
which with teeth, teareth those she has amazed with the mirour-like spots of
her skin, and drawn to her by the sweet exhalation of her body. Love has
walked on Scepters, parched the Laurels of Victors, thrown trouble into States,
Schisms into Churches, corruption among Judges, and furies into Arms. It
assaulteth in company, in solitude, at windows, at Prison gates, at Theaters,
and in Cabinets, at sports, in a feast, at a Comedy, and many times at Church,
(like the simple old woman belull'd with a sleepy zeal, had a mind to go to
Church purposely to take a nap; so many of our dainty ones, desire nothing
more, then to go to the Temple to present to the deluded eye a new dress, and
captivating Love-tainted hearts) and who can assure us against it? When it once
gets the master-head of reason, and passion prevails, there is nothing left,
but wandering of the soul, a Fever, a perpetual Frenzy, a neglect of
operations, of affairs, of functions, sadness, languor and impatience, they
think business is done when it is but thought on. Amor ordinem nescit; Love
knows nor keeps no order. O the inexpressible variousnesse of this Love! in
some it is sharp and violent; in others, dull and impetuous; in others, toyish
and wanton; in others, turbulent and cloudy; in others, brutish and unnatural;
in others, mute and shamefaced; in others, perplexed and captious; in others,
light and transitory; in others, fast and retentive; in others, fantastic and
inconstant; in others, weak and foppish; in others stupid and astonished; in
others, distempered; and in some furious and desperate. Magna suo ardent furore
pectora. It inflameth the blood, it weakens the body, it wanneth the color, it
holloweth the eyes, it totally subverts the mind; it has somewhat of being
possessed, something of Idolatry; for those that are thus Love-stricken, make
lust the idol of their souls, and the person loved the idol of their lust.

You may behold in those that are far entered into this passion, floods and ebbs
of thoughts, fits and countenances of persons possessed, and it is in all of
them to deifie the creature on whom they are so passionately enamored, and
would willingly place them among the Stars, yea upon the Altars. Chains and
wounds are honorable if they come from a beloved hand, making their heads
cushions for their Mistresses feet, showing that they find more force in their
eyes, then in their own hearts. They would die a thousand deaths for them, so
they throw but so much as a handful of flowers, or distill but a poor tear on
their tombs. This Love awakeneth (excludes none) all other passions, and
garboyles them, and makes them all Lacques to wait upon it: It makes Lovers
(through immoderate watching) giddy brained, having their spirits troubled, and
become very fools. Fears and joys, hopes and desires, mixed with despairs and
doubts, do make the sport in Love; they are the very Dogs by which the Hare is
hunted; and being fleshed in the chase, neither stop nor give ore (passion
being in a hot sent) till they have killed her. It is a natural distemper, a
kind of Smalpox; every one has had it, or is to expect it, and the sooner the
better. It is of so great force and authority, that it subjugateth unto its
will the greatest power of the mind; that is Will which rules and governs
all the other, both interior and exterior powers, and yet the will is
constrained many times, for the better pleasing and content of Love, to follow
those things which it does altogether abhor and detest: so that having so
wonderful an Empire and command over all the powers both inward and outward, of
the body and of the mind, no wonder if Love both will and can do what it will.

It was Love that betrayed Sampson by Dalila; it was Love made Colomon brutish
by his Concubines and turn Idolater; 'twas Love caused Ahab to be rooted out
through Jesabel; Marc. Anthony slew himself for the love of Cleopatra; the
destruction of Troy was caused by Helena, the Pandora of Hesiodus, the pitiful
death of Hercules by Deianira, and many other miserable events procured through
the Love of Women, and plentifully declared in Histories. How was Loves
great-master Ovid, inamoured of bright Julia (the jewel of his soul) and
celebrated her excellencies, and their love stealths under the mask of Corinna?
Nay, Apollo himself, the inventer of Poesy, Music, and Physic, elated for
his victory over the ugly Python, found Cupids shaft the most prevalent, when
he pursued the too much loved, but overmuch hating Daphne, over the uncouth
rocks, craggy cliffes, and untrod mazes of the Woods. Cupid is more then
Quartermaster among the Gods, (Capiumque Jovem coelo traxit) he made Jupiter
metamorphose himself for Europa into a Bull (and put himself to graze, that he
might lick her hands who fed him with flowers) for Danae into a shower of gold,
for Astrea into an Eagle, for Leda into a Swan, for Antiope into a Satyr, for
Egina into a flame, for Mnemosyne into a Shepherd, for Dois into a Serpent, for
Calysto into a Wood-nymph or Nun; so by this you may see that Love made him
esteem his pleasure above his state, so as Lucian Juno called him Ludus Amoris,
Cupids whirligig. Sen. in Herc. Oet.

Tu fulminantem saepe domuisti Jovem.
Likewise all feigned Romances do continually chant forth the complaints of
millions of Lovers, and the infidelity of their Mistresses; on the other side
Women waging war with Men cease not to accuse their inconstancy, which were
able to tire spirits any thing serious.

A Lovers heart is Cupids quiver, an inextinguishable fire; more hot and
vehement then any material fire, it is the quintessence of fire, no water can
quench. Sen. Hippol. -- Quis meas miserae Deus,
Aut quis juvare Daedalus flammas queat?
-- What God can ease?
What Daedalus can quench such flames as these?
Or according to the eloquent poesy of another; For Love has nets there laid
to serve his turn,
And in the water, will his wildfire burn.
O! how many Men do wander in this way? how many persons in this age are
corrupted too much with the extremity of this passion, lulling themselves
asleeep in the laps of such as seek to strangle them? How many excellent
spirits are recorded in History, which were in excellent state and in full
vigor of the functions of an intellectual life; who by approaching over-neer
to this sex, have entered into affections of fire and flames, which like little
creeping Serpents have stolen into their hearts. I cannot sufficiently admire
at the sottishness and drowsinesse of many Noble spirits, who are so delighted
and captivated with the vain dreams of their own fancies, that they employ all
the gifts and graces of the mind, and incline to some beautiful object. What a
ridiculous thing is it, to see Men fall from their primitive goodness, as to
lose their selves in dotage, and that dotage on one creature, and that creature
a Woman? really, next to a miracle is my only admiration. O traitresse Dalila,
which seek by thy inticings to deliver Man's soul to an enemy far worse then
the Philistines! Such pleasures are like gilded pills, which under their
external beauty include bitterness. They are also like fresh Rivers that end
their course in the Sea, losing their sweet relish in an Ocean of saltness. Man
cannot love and be wise both together, the very best of them is betwixt hawke
and buzzard, if once they be overtaken with this passion: It being the first
and chief mistress of all the passions, the most furious and severest of all;
he that suffers himself to be seduced by it, he is no more himself; his body
endures a thousand labors in the search of his pleasure; his mind a thousand
hels to satisfy his desire, and desire it self increasing grows into fury. As
it is natural, so it is violent and common to all: It makes all the wisdom,
resolution, contemplation and the operation of the soul brutish.

It is impossible to reckon up the many great dangers and hazzards they
undergo; they undertake single combats, venture their lives, creep in at
windows, gutters, go down chimnies in ropes, and climb over walls to come to
their Sweet-hearts; anoint the doors and hinges with oil, lest they should
make a noise, tread softly, whisper, etc. and if they be surprised, leap out at
windows, and cast themselves down headlong. What a passionate speech was that
of Callicratides in Lucian. Dial. amorum. Mihi o dii coelestes ultra sit vita
haec perpetua exadverso amicae sedere, and suave loquentem audire, etc. si
moriatur, vivere non sustinebo, and idem erit sepulchrum utrisque The which we
thus paraphase; O ye Gods celestial, grant me this life for ever to sit
opposite to her I love, that I may continually be an auditor of her mellifluous
speeches, to go in and out with her; he that frowns upon her, shall frown upon
me; if she should die, I would not live, and one tomb should contain us both.
When the King of Babylon would have punished one of his Courtiers, for loving a
young Lady of the Royal blood, far transcending his fortunes, Apollonius being
in his presence, by all means persuaded him to let him alone; For to love and
not enjoy, was most inexpressible tornent.

Loves force is shown in the continuation of a design, in spite of all
impeachment and crosses* how great was that of Psyche in the search of Cupid?
she saw three Goddesses set against her pretensions, Juno, Ceres, and Venus,
and yet her passion became victorious over their malevolence* she did things
that seemed impossible, she went down to hell and spoke to Preserpina, passing
without much difficulty many obstructions in the way. But where it cannot
effect its designs, it causes revenge. For when Edward Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, being released by Queen Mary, long detained prisoner in the Tower,
a Gentleman of a beautiful body, sweet nature, and royal descent, intending
him (as it was generally conceived) to be an husband for herself. For when the
said Earl Petitioned the Queen for leave to travel, she advised him rather to
marry, assuring him, that no Lady in the Land how high soever, would refuse him
for an husband, and urging him to make his choice where he pleased; she pointed
out her self unto him as plainly, as might stand with the modesty of a Maid,
and the Majesty of a Queen. Hereupon the young Earl (whether because his long
durance had some influence on his brain, or that naturally (as I rather
suppose) his face was better then his head, or out of some private fancy and
affection to the Lady Elizabeth, or out of loyal bashfulnesse, not presuming
to climb higher, but expecting to be called up) is said to have requested the
Queen for leave to marry her Sister the Lady Elizabeth; unhappy was it, that
his choice either went so high or no higher; for who could have spoken worse
treason against Mary (though not against the Queen) then to prefer her Sister
before her? and she innocent Lady did afterward dearly pay the score of this
Earls indiscretion; for the Queen having no cause of revenge against the Earl,
yet she under a color imposed greater affliction, and closer imprisonment
against Elizabeth.

Love causes him that does love, to ingrave and imprint in his heart, that
face and image which he loves; so that the heart of him that loves is like
unto a looking-glass, in which the image of the party beloved shines and is
represented; and does as it were deprive himself of himself, and gives himself
to whom he loves; for the delights of love are commonly more in the
imagination, then in the thing it self; and the soul does cast her eye upon
those images which remain in the fancy, and looks upon them as if they were
present.

When Venus commands, all things lose their antipathy, such is the power of
Love, that for the thing beloved, they neglect their own good, they fear not to
expose their bodies to the edge of the sword, deny unto themselves whatsoever
to them is profitable, as sleep to their eyes, quietness to their minds, rest
to their members, ease to their bodies; yea, more then all this, they glory in
those vain glorious attempts, those labors, sweatings, watchings, wounds,
burnings and freezings, all which they endure and undergo for their Mistresses;
as Sir Jo. Suckling sings;

Ah cruel Love, how great a power is thine!
Under the Pole although we lie,
Thou make us fry:
And thou cast make us freeze beneath the line.
Yet this amorous passion is not more frequent with Men and Women, then it is
with the airy quiristers, the nimble birds, who are overtaken with Cupids
nimbler wings, annually electing their Valentines. What a perfect harmony of
affection is there betwixt the Turtle and his dear mate? whose continual
billing shames Diana and her frigid train. What a zealous adorer of Venus is
the wanton Sparrow (as Pliny reports in his Natural History) who empties
himself of all his radical moisture in her rites, and at three years end (when
the Column of his life fails him) offers up his dry bones a sacrifice to her.
Aristotle will have Birds sing ob futuram venerem, for joy and hope of their
Love stealth to come. Cupid is as familiar with Lions, as children with cosset
Lambs, and oftentimes mounts on their backs, holding by their brisly mains, and
riding them about like Horses, whilst they fawn upon him with their tails. He
blunts the horns of the Bull, and muzzels the fierce Tiger, and makes the
sluggish Bear nimbly dance a Corranto.

Omne adeo genus in terris hominumque ferarumque
Et genus aequoreum, pecudes pictaeque volucres
In furias ignemque ruunt, amor omnibus idem.
All kind of creatures on the earth, beasts grim,
And Men, and Fish with golden fins that swim,
And painted Birds alike to rage does fly.
Thus Love bears equal sway in earth, sea, sky.
It is Love makes old Men and Women, that have more toes then teeth, dance and
frisk like Goats; it makes old Gowty fellows break their Cruches, I, and shins
too, and dance after Fiddlers Hei go mad: and it is no new thing, take the Poets
reason, which seems to me to be as true as ever fiction was, and that is, Cupid
and Death met in an Inn, and being merrily disposed, they did exchange some
arrows out of eithers quiver, which is the cause that young men die, and
oft-times old men dote. And who can withstand the force of it? (says Mr.
Burton) if once it pricks us at the heart, young or old, though our teeth shake
in our heads like Virginal jacks, or stand parallel asunder like arches in a
bridge; there is no remedy, we must dance and caper Candlestick height, leap
over tables, chaires, and stools, though we be 60 years above waste, scarce 30
below.

Maids when they get together (pardon me Ladies, for it is my design to touch
all) are still either reading or telling of Love-stories, singing Love-songs or
Sonnets, talking of this or that young man, such a Man is proper, fair, and
handsome, says one; and such a Man is black and comely; O! what a pearl is he
in mine eye, says another; and thus they chat when they meet, never thinking
or willingly discoursing upon any other subject. And forfoorh they must fast
St. Agnes Eve, to see who must be their first husbands, and flock to the Artist
to know who they shall marry, and how many husbands they shall have; nay, what
would they not give if they might but see him in a glass? This is no Court
complement or allegation, but a downright truth.

We will now turn to the enamorate; and suppose one should endeavor to reform
him (then which, one had better strive and tame a Panther) immediately he will
burst out in Choler, saying, Do you think that Love that thinks the whole
Universe too narrow a compass to be confined unto, and who disposes of all
our wills according to his pleasure, be hemmed up in such strait limits as you
prescribe? will Love be ruled and governed by the will of any but himself? he
will confess his fault, yet will not insist upon any other argument or reason
but his extreme affection, and will not argue with you any where but before the
throne of Love, and there he will prostrate himself upon his knees, and vow by
all eternity, ndver to rise so long as he lives, unless he be ingratiated into
his Mistresses favor. And such a one is this who sues for an office in fools
Paradise; but let him take it, for my part I Will never ride (like one for the
County-Clerk ship when a new Sheriff is elected) nor strive with him for it.
What (says he) would you have me inconstant? Oh no, not for a world! What,
would you have me mad? (as he is no better) No, I will be constant till death;
startling more at the word inconstancy, then at a Devil: so that I have often
smiled at those who condemn inconstancy, and are professed enemies against it;
considering that they themselves are not able to be as they say, nor more
constant then those whom they brand with the vice of inconstancy. For when they
fall in Love, do they not fall in love with beauty, or something which seems
pleasing unto them? now when this beauty does fade, as time doubtless will
make all beauty do, are they not then inconstant, still loving those faces that
are now grown ugly, and retain nothing of what they were, but only the very
name of a face? If to love that, which is contrary to that which was loved, be
constancy; and if ugliness be contrary unto beauty, then he that did love a
fair face, and continues loving when it is ugly, must be concluded inconstant.
This consideration makes me think, that the way to avoid inconstancy, is always
to love beauty, and when it fades farewell Love, find some other that is fair,
and still love beauty (if you will be loving and accounted constant) and not
its contrary, unless you be unconstant to your first Love. I know this is
point blanck against the opinion of the vulgar, but if they gainsay it, I
cannot help it.

Likewise (says this Love-simplician) did you know what it is to be a fool in
such occasions, you would confess that all the wisdom in the world is not
comparable to this pleasing folly; were you able to comprehend it, you would
never ask what pleasure and contentment those faithful Lovers (whom you phrase
melancholy and pensive) do receive; for you then would know that they are so
ravished in the contemplation of the party whom they love and adore, as
scorning all that is in the whole Universe; they do not repent of any thing
more, then the loss of that time, which they spend any where else; and their
souls not being well able to contain the grandeur of their contentment, they
stand astonished at so much treasure, and so many felicities which transcends
their knowledge. But I am so far from thinking them felicities, as my opinion
of the contrary is much fortified.

Had I a quill plucked from Cupids wing, and dipped in the milk of Venus, I
could not record all the delight Lovers take in displaying the beauty of their
Mistresses, with obsequious Hyperboles, and things most excellent, comparing
their eyes to those of night, to the Sun, and call them spheres of light,
flaming and strongly enkindling all others, they compare her to Aurora, or the
morning, to the Snow, Lilly, Rose, to the whiteness of the Swan, sometimes to
the Myrtle, sometimes to Gold, Rubies, Diamonds, Crystal, sometimes they
parallel her with the Heavens, the Spring, and whatsoever is in any degree
excellent; and yet, they think those but beggarly similitudes, and would go
higher if they could tell how. They suppose their cheek two fair gardens
planted with the choifest flowers of Paradise, making the Lilly and the Rose as
obscure types and shadows of those delicate tinctures laid on their blooming
cheeks by natures pencil. They imagine their necks towers of Alabaster, their
breasts hillocks of snow inlaid with saphires, their mouths musicks temple
decked with rails of pearl, their voices the Harmony of the spears. And these
they count as faint Metaphors of them, to represent whom (in their thoughts)
words are too narrow, and freshest colors too dim.

Oh! how She-lovers fry under the torrid zone of Love, hourly in that Elysium,
quenching and renewing their heats, and letting themselves loose to the
freedom of uncontrouled embraces. Expressing themselves in these or such like
Raptures, viz. My Dearest, unless thou be'st frosty spirited, unless Alecto
's cold poison fills thy veins, I Will melt thee into amorous thoughts, and speak
charms to all thy senses, and make thee all flame. And thus they besiege and
seek to storm Loves-fort, with whole volly of obediential Oaths, and the
hollow Granado's of complement; crying out to their obstinate Sweet-hearts, to
tell them (for Loves sake) if it be not better and more lovely to lie intwin'd
in their folding arms, freely enjoying their embraces, like Lillies imprisoned
in goales of snow, or Ivory in bands of Alabaster, then to sit muffled in furs
like a bedridden Miser? They lie open to the touch, the warm snow and soft
polisht Ivory of their breasts, which excels in softness the ranging clouds,
the Indian cotton, and in sleekness the smoothest cut Diamond, and these are
lures to catch buzzards. Thus wounds they give, and wounds they take again,
Nor does it grieve them slaying to be slain.


Now to return again to our Loves weather-beaten widgeon, he hugs and embraces
all his Mistresses friends and followers, her picture and what ever she wears
he adores as a relic, her Dog he makes his constant companion, feeding him at
his table, verifying the proverb, Love me love my Dog. If he get a Ring, a
Ribband, a shooe-tie, her Garter, a Bracelet of hair of hers, he wears it (ut
pignus amoris) for a favor about his arm, in his hat, finger or next his
heart. How many of such like, would not let to hazard their very souls for
their Mistresses sake? forsake heaven with Venus for the love of an Adonis?
There is no Man so pusillanimous, so very a dastard, whom Love would not
incense, making an heroical spirit; For (says Sir. Phil. Sydney) they imagine
that Valor toward Men, is an emblem of ability toward Women, a good quality
signifying a better. Nothing draws a Woman like to it. Nothing is more
behooveful for that sex; for with it they receive protection, and in a free way
too without any danger. Nothing makes a shorter cut to obtaining; for a Man of
arms is always void of ceremony, which is the wall betwixt Pyramus and Thisbe,
that is, Man and Woman; for there is no pride in Women, but that which rebounds
from our own baseness (as Cowards grow valiant upon those that are more
Cowards) so that only by our pale asking we teach them to deny, and by our
shamefacednesse we put them in mind to be modest. This kind of bashfulnesse
is far from Men of valorous dispositions, and especially from Soudiers; for
such are ever Men (without doubt) forward and confident, losing no time, lest
they should lose opportunity, which is the best factor for a Lover. And because
they know Women are given to dissemble, they will never believe them when they
deny. They will defend their Mistresses even in a wrong and unjust cause; for
from the first moment that they fastened their affections upon that object,
they prize it above their own proper essence, and therefore how justly soever
an injury or violence may be offered unto it, they think no injustice in
themselves to defend it; or because winking at the wrong offered their Sweet
hearts, they make themselves unwortby of their grace. Plato is of opinion that
it was the Love of Venus, made Mars courageous and valorous: and (truly) who
would not be valorous to fight under such colors? Before this cowardly age,
there was no way known to win a Lady but by tilting and turning, and riding, to
seek adventures through dangerous Forests; in which time these slender small
bon'd striplings with little legs, were held but of strength enough to marry
their widows. And even in our days there can be given no reason of the
inundation of Servingmen upon their Mistresses, but only that usually they
carry their Masters weapons, and their valor. It is better to be admitted to
the title of valiant acts; at least that imports the venturing of mortality;
and all Women delight to hold him fast in their arms, who has escaped thither
through many dangers. To speak at once, Man has a privilege in valor. In
clothes and good face, we do but imitate Women. So then these whiffling skips,
these Women in Men's apparel, are too near a Woman to be beloved of her. A scar
in a Man's face, is the same that a mole is in a Woman's, and a mole in a Woman's
face, is a jewel set in white, to make it seem more white; so a scar in a Man
is a mark of honor, and no blemish; for it is a scar and a blemish in a
Soldier to be without one. A good face avails nothing, if it be on a Coward
that is bashful, the utmost of it is to be kissed, which rather increases, then
quenches the appetite. She cares not for a Man that wooes by Letters, and
through cowardlynesse dares not come into her company; no Woman takes advice of
any in her loving, but of her own eyes, and her waiting maids; and there is no
clothes fits so well in a Woman's eye as a suit of steel, though not of the
fashion: and no Man so soon surprizeth a Woman's affections, as he that is the
subject of whisperings, and has always some twenty stories of his own
achievements depending upon him.

There is one Love-simplician who is so led by the nose into fools Paradise,
that if he see an handsome maid smile and laugh upon him, or show a pleasant
countenance, or look (obliquis ocellis) asquint upon him, or use some gracious
words, or amorous gestures (as many are too full of) he applies it all to
himself, as done in his favor, thinking that surely she loves him; to the
Tavern he runs, looks big, erects his Mouchatoes, stampes, stares, and calls the
Drawer Rogue, drinks to his Venus in a Venice-glace, and thinks he sees the
smile she gave him in it, and to moralize her sex, throws it over his head and
breaks it. This fellow is like to Mullidor (in Greenes never too late) who said
to his Mother, that he compared the Church to a looking-glass, for as a Man
may see himself in the one, so in the other the wenches eyes are a Certificate;
for upon whom you see all the Girls look, he for foot and face carries away
the bell, Phillida solus habet: And I am sure (says he) for these two years I
never came into the Church, and was no sooner set, but the Maids began to wink
one upon another, to look on me and laugh. Oh! war Mother, when a Dog wags his
tail he loves his Master, and when a wanton laughes, for my life, she is over
head and ears in Love.

Another Gull seeks to win his Mistresses affection with gallant and costly
apparel, putting all he has on his back, thinking Women are married to fine
clothes; making his Tailor his Baude, and hopes to inveagle her love with such
a colored suit; surely the same Man hazzards the loss of her favor upon
every change of his clothes. Another with an affected pace. Another with
Music. Another with rich gifts, and pleasant discourse. Another with Letters,
Vows, and Promises, to be gracious in her eyes, struts like a Peacock, with
his train before her.

But there are many other, who every moment declare their fervor, their
torment, and martyrdom; they serve, they sooth, they continually frequent, they
spy out all occasions, they silently practice all the ways they can, to come
to the end of their designs; and often it happens, that as drops of water
incessantly falling, do hollow Rocks; so ceaselesse Complements soften the most
inaccessible rigors. Yet some are so sottishly overcome, as to waste ten years
of service to kiss a Woman's hand, and suffer for a shameful servitude, that,
which (I profess) I would not endure one year for an Empire.

Fond Novices, you pule, and continually strive to please your Mistresses,
which is the only way to make her fly you, nothing so tiring and tedious; such
as thus love, must needs perpetually be imprisoned, never at liberty, always
present, continually talking with her, she cannot stir a foot, but you must do
the like. If she chance to be at any time ill, or frown, and do not smile upon
you, nor please you, then must you forsooth put the finger in the eye and cry,
cry tears. Do you think this is the way? no, no, it is in Love as in all things
else, the mean is the best measure; so as to avoid all frivolous follies and
troubles (as they are no other when you have made the best of them) the only
way is but to love indifferently; and if you will be silly fools, and must
needs have Mistresses, your best way is never to tie your self to one; for to
love one only, gives her an occasion to think that it is for want of courage,
that you dare not attempt to love any else, and therefore she will scorn such a
fainthearted Lover: whereas, did you Love all you look upon (or at least a good
many of them) she will not think you came to her, because you know not whither
to go else; but she will then prize you the higher, and will be obliged to love
you, especially if you particularize her above any other; and once a week is
often enough to tender your service to her, for oftener is a palpable doting.

But because I say a mediocrity in Love is the best, (me thinks) I see one of
these melancholy Lovers, setting a frowning, tart, Saturnine face upon me;
Objecting, that he that loves not in the highest point of extremity, does not
love one jot; he that can be indifferent and love all alike, cannot love one as
he ought to do; or he that can measure, or think any greater then his own, is
not a Lover worth a rush; for to enjoin a mediocrity in Love, is to impose an
impossibility. And then (poor soul) he shakes his head at me, saying, Ah, you
little know what belongs to Love! and then having recovered his breath, for
(through the vehemence of anger toward me) he had almost lost it, he begins to
object again, saying, Those effects which belong to an extreme Love, and one
that knows, what Sacrifice and Duties belong unto the Altars of Love, is so
far from calling those effects, troubles, or follies (as you term them) as
they think them felicities and perfect contentments; Likewise he says, that
Love is to die in ones self, that he may live in another; Never to love any
thing but what is pleasing and agreeable to the party loved. The will must be
transformed into a night toy he calls a Mistress. And can you think (says he)
that one who Loves thus, will ever be troubled with the presence of her whom he
loves. If you did but know what it is to Love, you would never think that he
who loves, can do any thing to displease. If he chance to commit any fault, the
fault it self pleases, considering with what intention it was committed. The
very desire of being amiable has such a vigor in a right Lover, as though he
be rough to the World in general, yet will he be sure smooth and spruce up
himself toward her he loves. Nay, he thinks himself in the Orchard of Adonis,
or the Elysium fields, if he enjoy her company, he is so taken with delight.
And these, and an hundred such like whimsical Chym^raes, hot brained Lovers
conceive, and do affect a vainglorious humor, which Lovers use to attribute to
themselves, and it is to be reputed constant. They suffer themselves wholly to
be led by sense, and are so far from repressing these rebellious inclinations,
that they give all encouragement unto them, leaving the reigns, and using all
provocations to further them; bad by nature, worse by art, education, and a
perverse will of their own; they follow on wheresoever their unbridled
affections will transport them, doing all out of self-will, casting reason at
their heels; this stubborn-will of theirs perverts judgment, which sees and
knows what should and ought to be done, and yet will not do it, slaves to their
lusts and appetite, they precipitate and plunge themselves into a Labyrinth of
cares blinded with lust.

For her they do depart even from their reason,
Bids welcome unto Manacles and Prison:
In sharpest torments think themselves at ease,
So they thereby their fair Saint shall please;
And all without expectance of reward;
To love her is the honor they regard.
But if this be Love, heaven shield us from it, and preserve our eyesight.

This love gathers its heat, and redoubleth its force by hope, which
inflameth with the soft and gentle air thereof our foolish desires, kindles
in our minds a fire from whence arises a thick smoke, which blinds our
understanding, carries with it our thoughts, holds them hanging in the clouds,
and makes us dream waking.

Although she be all sovereignty,
As high as heaven, and be a Deity:
Yet still my high-blown hopes will have the glory,
To enterprise an act beyond all story.
If you narrowly survey the Palace of this amorous passion (the plague and
frenzy of the soul) you shall find it to be built all upon hopes. The Stairs
are of ice, made in such wise, that he who most ascends, most descends; the
Hals, Chambers, and Wardrobes, are all furnished and hanged with idleness,
dreams, desires and inconstancies; the Seats and Chaires are made of false
contentment. It has affliction, torment, and fraud for engineers; uncertainty,
fear, false opinion and distrust for guard. The Court being all composed of
heartlesse, soft, and effeminate men; the Counselors are lying and deceit; and
the Steward, suspicion. It is a play-game wherewith Nature busieth our minds;
contrariwise when despair is once londged near us, it torments our souls in
such a sort, with an opinion of never obtaining that we desire, that all
business besides must yield unto it. And for the love of that which we think
never to obtain, we lose even the rest of whatsoever we possess. This passion
is like unto little children, who to be revenged of him who has taken one of
their play games from them, cast the rest into the fire. It is angry with it
self, and requires of its self the punishment of its own folly and (seeming)
felicity; and hence it is, that many despairing of ever having them whom they
affect, make themselves away either by strangling or drowning, or some such
like miserable end, or continually deploring their dysasterous condition.

Plant me where nothing grows but cruelty,
'Amongst Lions, Bears, and other savage Beasts;
To see if they that mercy will deny,
Which I in vain implore from humane breasts.
How justly are those cruel Ladies to be condemned, who being rich in beauty
(scorning art) suffer their loyal amorists to die for love of them unpityed.
They are so nice they scorn all Suitors, crucify their poor enamoratoes, and
think no body good enough for them, as dainty to please, as Daphne herself;
they take a pride to prank up themselves, to make young men enamored: but it is
a lamentable thing to see a silly soul so profuse of Love, as to confer it upon
such ingrate and disdainful Women* as if one took delight to feed and flatter
Owls. And on the other side (to make neither barrel better herring) some
young men are so obstinate, and as curious in their choice, and tyrannically
proud, insulting, deceitful and false hearted. Therefore let these go together,
for love and hanging go by destiny.

Yet there are some feminine humors so tractable, that they are won with a
small entreaty, according to that of the Comedian, Such rape thou act'st upon
my soul, and with such pleasing violence do enforce it, that when it should
resist, it tamely yields; making a kind of haste to be undone, as if the
victory were loss, and conquest came by overthrow.

Wounded with Love, they yield up Natures treasure,
To be all ransackt at the victors pleasure.
There are others, who are more taken with a soothing observance, or handsome
congie making, then all the fair qualities or good parts can be in a Man, or
the faithfullest service can be rendered them. There are others, who lay snares
and keep always a kind of order in the receipt of such as they intend to in
register in the number of their subjects. But at length, this Idalian fire
kindles in them, and then are they unable to suffer the absence of their Lover,
yet modesty will not suffer them to intrrude into his presence, they desire
with all impatience to see him, yet shun all occasions of seeing him, seeking
and fearing in one and the same time to meet him, a troublesome passion, that
brings them to will and not to will in the same time one and the same thing.
She is peevish and sick till she see him, discontent, heavy, sad, and why comes
he not? where is he? why bteaks he promise? why tarries he so long? sure he is
not well; he has some mischance certainly, he forgets himself and me. And when
he comes, then with a seeming coyness she looks upon him, with a cold look,
though she be all flame within.

Some are as Sappho, who was subtle to allure, and slippery to deceive, having
their hearts made of wax, ready to receive every impression, not content till
they have as many Lovers as their hearts have entrances for Love, their hearts
being like Pumice stones, light and full of holes.

Some are as inconstant as Cressida, that, be Troylus never so true, yet out of
sight out of mind; and so soon as D^omede begins to court, she like Venetian
traffic, is for his penny current, a currendo, sterling coin; passable from
man to man in way of exchange.

Others are as Lydia cruel, whose hearts are hammered in the forge of pride,
thinking themselves too good for all, (when as in truth they are too bad for
any) and none worthy of them, and oft-times nestling all day with the Beetle,
are at night contented with a Cowsherd for a shelter. These have eyes of
Basilisks that are prejudicial to every object, and hearts of Adamant not any
way to be pierced.

Some are as if they were votaries unto Venus, and at their nativities had no
other influence, take no pleasure but in amorous passions, no delight but in
Madrigals of Love, wetting Cupids wings with Rose Water, and tricking up his
Quiver with sweet perfumes; they set out their faces, as Fowlers do their
Daring-glasses, that the Larkes that sore highest may stoop lowest; as soon as
the poor loving fools are wrapped within their nets, then they sue with signs
and plead with Sonnets, faign tears, and paint out passions to win her, that
seeming to be coy comes at the first lure.

There ate others taken as School boys catch Squirrels, hunting them up and
down till they be weary and fall down before them.

All melted in pure love languidly sweet,
She lets her self fall at the Victors feet.
The coyest she that is may be won by fair opportunity, being the strongest
plea in the Court of Venus, able to overthrow her be she never so coy; (for it
is more easy for some Maids to suffer themselves to be martyred by Tyrants in
defense of their Chastity, then (if opportunity, pleasing courtship and
importunity serve) not to yield that to a Lover, which they would have denied
to an Executioner; and there are some so strongly inclined by nature, and
assaulted with such violent temptations, that if they resist and become victors
over passion, may well be recorded among noble and heroic Women) yet time may
be so elected, that he that takes it wisely, shall be sure never to miss: he
that can temper toys with art, she being in a merry vein, may bring that Love
which swimmeth in her eyes, to dive into her heart; but other times they are so
squeemish, so skittish, and demure, that one may better catch and tame a wild
Horse, then win their favor; no not a look, not a smile, not a kiss for a
Kingdom: this being one of their subtle arts, as one wittily says, Quanquam
natura and art eram formosissima, isto tamen astu tanto speciosior videbar,
quod enim oculis cupitum agree praebetur, multo magis affectus humanos incendit.
Though I was by Nature and Art most beautiful, yet by those tricks, I seemed
to be far more amiable then I was; for that which Men earnestly seek and cannot
attain, draw on their affections with a most furious desire. And to gull their
Lovers the more, and fetch them over, they will show them Rings, Gloves,
Scarffes, etc. saying, that such a Gallant sent them, when there is no such
matter, but merely to circumvent them. O the subtilty of Women to whet their
Lovers appetite! they will fall out and quarrel with them on set purpose, pick
quarrels upon no occasion, because they would be reconciled unto them again,
according to the old Grammar rule, Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est. The
falling out of Lovers is a renewing of love.

The blunt Country wench did as eloquently as she could express her self in
these words; There is something runs in my mind, I wish it were out; but I
wish somebody loved me, as well as I love somebody: Poor girl, both at milking,
walking, and working, still something troubles her: at last she cries out,
Hai-ho, for an husband, a bad husband, nay the worst that ever was is better
then none. How earnestly do they seek marriage and are never well till they
have effected it! O how sweet is the contemplation of marriage to them! And
likewise we Batchelours, when we see and behold those angelical faces, observe
their pleasant gestures and graces, lend an ear to their Siren-like Songs, see
them dance, etc. we think their conditions are as fine as their faces, we are
taken with dumb signs, we rave, we burn, and how gladly would we be married?
but when we feel the cares and miseries of it, then we wish to be single again;
as the story goes of a Good Fellow, which whilst he was a Batchelour, was a
Boon companion, and would spend his money freely, and therefore with his
hostess he was termed a Good Fellow; but so it happened, that at length he was
married, and coming not so frequently to his Hostess as formerly, nor spending
his cash so freely when he came, was by one of them demanded the reason of this
his unwonted strangeness and great change; who replying said, I am now
married; why then quoth she, Thou art now an honest Man; but he sighingly made
answer in these words, Ha, but if I were once a Good Fellow again, I would
never be an honest Man whilst I lived. If this be true, as some out of
disconsolate experience will inform us; farewell wiving for my part. But to
put a period to this Section; Volumes would not be sufficient for him, who
should write all the passions which daily arise as members from this passion,
all pens would be weak, words would be dried up, and wits lost therein.

The Power and Effects of Love in Widows.
REader, I pray thee smile, but do not jear at my curiosity in describing the
Effects of Love in Widows (who, like Heralds Herse-clothes, serve to many
Funerals with a little altering the color) and the wily lures they lay to
bring on their Suitors. It would make a Dog laugh to hear how they will belie
their age, saying, they are little past 30 when they have scarce a tooth in
their heads. As one reports, who loved a Widow of 50 years of age, she swore
she was but 32 the next December, and it is a thing more familiar with stale
Batchelours; but Venus haec perjuria ridet: Venus laughes at these perjuries.

They will artificially discourse of their former Husbands, saying, they have
no memory of life, unless it be to think of, and to live in him; thinking
thereby to engage their Lovers the more, and to let them see how much they do
deserve to be beloved, in showing them how capable they are of Love, and how
much they can cherrish the affections of a living Man, since they so long
retain those of dead ones; imitating such Decoyes, as to gain another Man's
money, do willingly deposite some of their own. O heavens! says she,
(relating her Love to her former Husband) how do I resent his loss, and have
ever since preserved so lively a memory of him in my soul (for I did love him
with most perfect affection) that me thinks I see him every hour before mine
eyes, and me thinks I hear him every minute bid me love him still; making a
dead Man a ground bait to draw Suitors* on; delights in the multitude of
them; for by them she gains: one serves to draw on another, and with one at
last she shoots out another, as boys do pellets in Elder-guns.

She has a trick to commend to them a single life; just as Horse-coursers do
their Jades to put them away. While she is a Widow (observe her) she is no
morning Woman; the evening and a good fire may make her listen to a Husband;
but if ever she be made sure, it is upon a full stomach to bedward.

They (all of them) are full of suspicion of their Lovers, extremely jealous,
lest they be deceived by young wenches, exceeding hard to be won, and very
easily lost, quickly offended, but abominably hard to be pleased.

Really, I admire at those Men, who take delight to Court Widows. What a
fantastical stomach must he needs have, that cannot eat of a dish of meat,
till another have cut of it? Who would wash after another, when he might have
fresh water enough for asking? or what a pitiful thing is it, for a Man that is
about to go a long journey, to be tied to Ride on a Beast that is half tired to
his hand? Men will say he is benighted, and is now glad of any Inn. Therefore
I wish you never to marry any Advowson that has had other Incumbents; for he
that takes her, has but a Reversion in tail, and if she prove good, he may
thank Death for his aim; if evil, upbraid him, and not unjustly for his
occasion. But hold, a Churchman she dares not venture upon, for she has heard
Widows complain of dilapidations. Never (with the Philosopher) drink of that
Fountain another has dyed in.

Wherefore it is a resolution of the Spaniard, of what mean quality soever he
be, he will not marry a Widow, although she be very young and wealthy, and it
has been a resolution of theirs from antiquity, and continues to this day:
and to this effect one of them made this answer, I will no Widow wed, my
reason's sound,
I Will drink no water wherein one was drowned.


He that takes her half worn, makes account she has that will pay for new
dressing; she seems to promise security in her peace, yet invites many times to
a troublesome estate; when the conquest achieved, scarce countervails the
Wars, the principal of her love is perished with the use.

But (indeed) rich Widows were ordained for younger brothers; for they being
born to no Lands, must plough in another Man's soil. But I expect no thanks from
them for this, having trespassed a little too much upon their patience.
Wherefore I will proceed on to the next Chapter; and discover to you the Signs
of Love.

The Signs of Love.
HAving entered thus far within this melancholy Devils territories; It is our
purpose to set before thee (Courteous Reader) in this Section (as in a glass)
a clear representation and image of a Lovesick soul, and an account of those
various gestures, and actions Lovers have, as few Books of this nature do so
copiously demonstrate. Love though it be never so close and kept private, may
be discovered, if prudence and artifice be used. Yet I wish every one, who
deposites his judgment in the discovering of an enamorato, not rashly to give
credit to one testimony of contingent signs, but join many, and consider them
together for the perfection of your judgment; therefore Aristotle advises,
Vni signo non fidendum, sed pluribus inter se collatis. And first, how it may
be discoveted by Physiognomie.

We commonly call Physiognomie the science, whereby Men judge of the nature,
complexion and manners of every one, by the contemplation of all the members of
the body, and chiesly of the face and countenance: but there is no Physiognomie
so certain, as that we are about to touch, whereby Men may be easily convinced
of that which they think to hide in their hearts, which notwithstanding is
quickly discovered in their countenances, as if we read it in a Book; according
to Ovid; Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu!
How hard is it a fault with face not to bewray?
And to the same effect, the Wise man says, Ecclus. 13. 26. Cor hominis
immutat faciem sive in bono sive in malo: The heat of Man changes his
countenance, whether in good or evil; for in anger and fear we see Men, either
extreme pale or high colored; in melancholy and sadness, the eyes are heavy;
in joy and pleasure, the motions of the eyes are lively and pleasant, according
to the Diverb, Cor gaudens exhilarat animum; A rejoicing heart makes merry the
face. And it is a received opinion, that Vultus est index animi; the
countenance is the discoverer of the mind. So that one affirms that those
that are in Love, semper conniventes, have a continual motion or winking with
their eyelids. Tears are signums of this passion, which may be observed by the
Poets so often representing unto us Lovers weeping and lamenting* because Love
is delighted in tears; but this sign is not pathognomical, nor very certain,
especially in Women, who have the command of their tears, and can unsluce the
floudgates of their eye when they please.

But as this passion enters first into the internal parts by the eyes; so they
send forth the first assured and undoubted tokens of the same (for there is no
passion but some particular gesture of the eyes declare it): So soon as ever
the malady has seized upon the patient, it causes a certain kind of modest
cast of the eyes; but if it begin to get strength upon the party, then the eyes
begin to grow hollow and dry, and you may observe them to stand, as if they
were in some deep contemplation, or else were fixed in beholding something that
much delights them. Jonadab discovered by the languishing countenance of Amnon,
David's son, that he was in love with some great Princess or personage. The
hair of his eyebrowes stand upright and grow hard, he rubs his eyes very much
as though he were sleepy, he rols his eyes much. His eyes are all white, either
to wear the livery of his Mistress complexion, or to keep Cupid from hitting
the black.

Hair growing thick behind the ears, and besides the temples, is a sign of a
vehement inclination to love. Valescus de Tarenta the most famous Physician of
his age, observes the chopping of lips in Women to be a sign of their
inclination to this malady; for that it denotes the intemperate heat of the
matrix. They cannot endure to look any in the face, because they think, that
through their eyes they see their hearts.

His arms are carelessly used, as if their best use were nothing but
imbracements. He is untrust, unbuttoned, ungartered, not out of carelessness,
but care; his farthest end being but going to bed. Her favors lift him up as
the Sun does moisture; when she disfavours, unable to hold that happiness, it
falls down in tears. If you ask him a question, he answers not, or not to the
purpose; and no wonder, for he is not at home, his thoughts being gone a
wool-gathering with his Mistress. Straggling thoughts are his content, they
make him dream waking. Speak to him, he hears with his eyes, ears follow his
mind, and that is not at leisure.

Ovid says, that palenesse is a constant color with Lovers. Pallidus omnis
amans, color hic est aptus amanti.


One trembles at the sight of his Mistress, tremor cordis, palpitations of the
heart; another sweats, blows short, his heart is at his mouth, leapes, he
burns, freezes, and sometimes through violent agitation of the spirits bleeds
at nose. He denies nature her due in sleep, and pays her with watchfulness,
he lies upon a bed of thorns, he has no order or equality at all in his
gestures, motions or actions; he thinks of business, but never does any; he is
all contemplation and no action; nothing pleases him long, but that which
pleases his own fancy. They are the consuming evils, and evil consumptions
that consume him alive. He perpetually sighs to the hazard of his buttons,
and complains without any evident cause.

Poor soul, he is inflamed with fits of Love,
So violently hot, as they do move
His pulse to beat a Madmans temper: he
Does sigh, does langish, and half dead is he,
And ever in such violencies swell,
As ask him what he ailes, he cannot tell.
As the old Woman catechized her Son Mullidor; Thy cheeks are lean, and now
thou looks like Leuton pale and wan, I saw thy stomach to night, thou art not
thine own Man; thou had of late (God save thee) a lovely plump pair of
cheeks, and now thou looks like a shotten Herring. Tell me Mullidor, and fear
not to tell me, for thou tellest it to thy Mother, what ailest thou? is it a
grief of body, or of mind, that keeps thee on the Holy Days from frisking at
the football? thou art not as thou were wont, and therefore say what thou
ailest, and thou shall see old Women have good counsel. At these speeches of
his Mother, Mullidor fetched a great sigh; and with that, being after supper,
he brake wind; which his Mother hearing, Oh Son (quoth she) it is the Colic
that troubles thee, to bed man, to bed, and we will have a warm Pot lid. The
Colic Mother, no, it is a disease that all the cunning Women in the Country
cannot cure, and strangely it holds me; for sometimes it holds me in my head,
and sometimes in mine eyes; my heart, my heart, oh there (Mother) it plays the
Devil in a Mortar; sometimes it is like a frost, cold; sometimes like a fire,
hot; when I should sleep, then it makes me wake; when I should eat, then it
troubles my stomach; when I am alone, it makes me cry right-out, I can wet one
of my new Lockeram napkins with weeping. It came to me by a great chance; for
as I looked on a fair flower, a thing I know not what, crept in at mine eyes,
and ran round about all my veins, and at last got into my heart, and there ever
since has remained, and there (Mother) so wrings me that Mullidor must die,
and with that he fell on weeping. His Mother seeing him shed tears, fell to her
hempen apron, and wiped her bleared eyes, and at last demanded of him if it
were not Love. At that question, he hung down his head and sighed. Ah my Son
(quoth she) now I see it is Love, for he is such a sneaking fellow, that if he
but leap in at the eyelid, he dives down into the heart, and there rests as
cold as a stone, and yet touch him and he will screek.

Erasistratus discovered the love of Antiochus to his Stepmother, for so soon
as ever she entered the Chamber, his color changed, his speech stopped, his
looks were pleasant, his face burned, and he was all in a sweat, his pulse beat
very disorderly, and lastly his heart failed him; with other such like
symptoms, which are wont to appear in melancholy lovers. Galen says, that by
these forementioned signs joined together, he discovered the miserable doting
of the wife of Justus upon Pylades, because says he, at the naming of Pylades,
her color changed from white to red, and from red to white, alternis vicibus,
her pulse beat unequally and with diverse motions. It is undeniable, but that a
passionate Lover may be known by the pulse, by reason of the stirrings of the
spirits; for which cause, says Avicen, if one would know the name of such a
ones Mistress, he must feel his pulse, and at the same instant name the party
whom he suspects to be the cause of his malady, and take some occasion or other
to commend her beauty, sweetness of behavior, attire, or qualities of the
mind; for at the same time, Pulsus diversicabitur in varietate magna, and fiet
similis intersecto; you shall perceive (says he) a strange alteration in the
motion of the pulse, and it will be very unequal, swift and often interrupted.

Mr. Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy says, the best conjectures are taken,
from such symptoms as appear when the parties are both present, all their
speeches, amorous glances, actions, and gestures will bewray them, they cannot
contain themselves, but they will be still kissing, joining hands, treading on
one another toes, embracing, pinching, diving into their bosoms, etc. Though
it be so that they cannot come near and have the opportunity to dally, yet if
they be in presence, their eyes will bewray them: Ubi amor, ibi oculus, where I
look I like, and where I like I love. They will be still gazing, staring,
winking, nodding, stealing faces, smiling and glancing at her, with much
eagerness and greediness, as if their eyes should never be satisfied with
seeing her.

It is affirmed by some, that those that are sick of love melancholy, are
generally lean throughout the whole body, facit amor maciem, as well by reason
of their little eating and drinking, as also for their bad digestion, by reason
that the spirits, and natural heat are withdrawn from the stomach to the brain.
Another will have leanness to be caused in a Lover, by reason of too much
intention of the mind, pensiveness and anxietie; the Lover loses the
fullness of flesh, and good liking of his body, that before he enjoyed. A third
will have leanness caused in Lovers, by a direction of vital heat from the
circumference to the Center, thereby consuming the vital spirits, drying the
body and causing leanness.

They are troubled with immoderate watchings, wakings, and sighings, because in
Lovers are diverse imaginations, and fancies, that steal into the brain, and
never suffers them to take any quiet repose; whence the brain becomes dry and
cold; and if by chance they be surprised by any light slumber, which is the
provision Nature has made for the repairing of the animal spirits, which in
them are wasted and much impaired, by the violence of their imagination and
excessive wakings; that slumber is attended on by a thousand phantasmes and
fearful dreams, so that they awake oft-times more discontented, sad, pensive
and melancholy then before; and for the most part they find themselves more
tormented sleeping then waking. They are vexed with immoderate sighings, by
reason that they many times are oblivious of drawing their breath, being wholly
taken up with the strong imagination, that they love either in beholding the
beauty of their objects, or else in their absence contemplating on their rare
perfections, and contriving the means how to come to their desires: so that
recollecting themselves, Nature is constrained to draw in as much air at once,
as before it should have done at two or three times* And such a respiration is
called a sigh; which indeed is nothing else but a double respiration. Observe
one tranfixed with violent Love (whose mind is bewitched, brain dislocated,
and reason eclipsed) and you shall find that all he holds, all he meditateth
on, all he speaks, all he dreameth, is of the creature he loves. He has her
in his head and heart, painted, graved, carved in the most pleasing forms. For
her he enters sometimes into quakings, sometimes into faintings, another
while into fits of fire, Ice; he soreth in the air, and instantly is drenched
in the abyss; he attends, he espieth, he fears, he hopes, he despaires, he
sighs, he blushes, he waxes pale, he doteth in the best company, he addresses
his colloquiums to Woods, Groves and Fountains; he writes, he blots out, he
teareth, he lives like a spittler estranged from the conversation of Men:
Repose which charmeth all the ears of the World, is not made for him, still
this fair one, still this cruel one, tormenteth him. Plutarch says, the heart
of a Lover was a City, in which upon one and the same day, were seen sports and
banquets, battles and funerals.

You shall see another of Cupids slaves burden himself with News of no value;
he makes a secret of every thing, and gives out those for mysteries to his
Mistress, which are proclaimed with a trumpet.

Another is so extremely open breasted (that you need look for no other sign)
he tells all his thoughts, and as if his heart were a Sieve, it keeps nothing
which it sends not out by the lips. He becomes an extreme babbler, which
proceeds from the influence of the heart; for Plutarch says, that Love is
naturally a great babbler, chiefly when it chances to light upon the
commendation of those things that are its objects. For that Lovers have a
strong desire to induce others to give credence to that whereof themselves are
already persuaded; which is, that they love nothing but what is absolutely
perfect, both for goodness and beauty; and they would willingly have these
opinions of theirs confirmed also by all other judgments. He is importunate
and unseasonable in complements; he pratles with his friends whilst he has a
fever; he tells extravagant tales, wherein he makes himself very facetious,
although at the latter end of the discourse, he asks where the conceit to be
laughed at lies. He is very merry, and then within a moment he falls to be very
melancholy and extreme sad, pensive and dejected; then by and by he entertains
himself with some merry pleasant conceits, and then within a small tract of
time the contrary; by this weather cock you may perceive in what quarter the
wind is. This passion makes him very simple, next door to sottishness, and
makes him do many extravagancies; so that through these fooleries, he brings to
himself a turbulent life, a continual torment, a hasty death, and his salvation
doubtful.

All of them are restless, casting their weari^d members upon their loathed
beds in their solitary Chambers, filling the air with a thousand throbs and
interrupted sighs, sometimes disturbed with the rivality of others, sometimes
afflicted, and fear those manifold mischances that may befall the person
beloved; so that the many passions that multiply in the breast of a Lover, do
bring with them an extenuation and impairing of the complexion; and sometimes a
strange kind of alteration in the individual essence, from whence do arise
those furies of Love, and potent frenzies, and insensible astonishments, which
happen many times to those that love, either because they make not reason the
forerunner of their sense, or because they directed not their loves by the
rules of wisdom, which teaches the only means to the attaining of all other
virtues. They are guided with the blind Lantern of sense, whilst rambling in
the streets, they leave reason sleeping with the Constable. Never raged Alcides
on mount Oeta, nor fierce Orlando for his Angelica more then these Vtopian
Lovers, for their imaginary shadows. You may observe this passion drawn to the
life by Virgil in his Dido Aeneid. 4. Uritur infelix Dido, totaque vagatur
Urbe furens, etc.
She was so tormented with the heat of her love, that she ran up and down the
City as if she had been distracted. For Lovers through despair of obtaining
their desires, through the inflammation of the vitals become nelancholy, which
is (to speak truth) a madness; for all passions that produce strange and
unusual behavior, are called by the general term of madness. And of the
several kinds of madness caused by Love, he that would take the pains might
enroll a legion.

By reason of these perturbations of the mind, the blood becomes adust, as in
all other violent passions, excepting joy, according to Galen, by which means
diverse have fallen into strange and desperate diseases, growing foolish, mad,
Cynicall and Wolvish. The learned Avicen reports in his Chapter de amore,
that from this passion proceeds the Green sickness in Women, (which is
sometimes accompanied with a gentle Fever, called by our modern Writers an
amorous Fever) Suffocations, Headache, Epilepsies, and diverse other desperate
symptoms, which* for the most part (says he) admit neither cure nor
mitigation.

The poor inamorato loves to be in melancholy Saturnine places, where he may
best contemplate the beauty of his* Mistress, and not be obstructed by other
objects, where he may best remember any one action of hers; nay, the very place
where he last saw her; for love breeds melancholy, and melancholy requires
solitariness, and solitariness sets the thoughts on work. Do you think he
would change his contentment, for any thing in the whole Universe? he is so
jealous and so careful to entertain this very thought, that lest he should make
any a sharer with him, he will retire unto the most solitary and unfrequented
places that he can find; he cares not for the society of Men, or all the
delight that Men can devise and use to court with such care, so he may enjoy
his own thoughts.

He may be styled an Astronomer, for he fixes the eye of his meditation upon
the wandering Venerean Planet. If you go into his study, you shall find ten
amorous volumes, for one pamphlet of Theology, and scarce that too. O! how the
shelves are stuffed with Romances, and his pockets with Songs and Sonnets; he
longs to be graduate in the University of Venus; he accounts himself already
Master in this art in actu designato, and thinks long till he be in actu
exercito; nothing now in his judgment is wanting to complete his degree but a
Pone manum in manum maritae.

If you observe a Lover in the presence of his Mistress, you shall see him
either struck dumb, or when he speaks it is but stammeringly, not knowing how
to speak. And this is, because the sense of a Lover being too earnestly intent
and settled in the contemplation of the beauty of his Mistress, he does as it
were altogether forget himself, and being lulled asleep in his beloved object;
the over vehement intention of the mind, takes away the outward use of the
tongue; for experience the best Schoole-mistris, whilst a Man attentively
hearing any delightful music, all his other senses are out of joint and
useless, the powers being hindered from their due operation, by the concourse
of the vital spirits to that power only, which so attentively works, and
therefore it is no great wonder, if Men stand as mute as Fishes in the presence
of their Mistresses, when they have most need to speak. Or because (as an
Amorist says) that a Lover fearing that he should not speak so as may please,
and tickle the ears of his Mistress, chooses rather to be silent (making his
tongue more a stock then a Lambs tail) then to utter his mind imperfectly;
and if he dare proceed so far as to open his mouth, still fearing that he
cannot speak as he should, nor so eloquently as he would, utters his mind
stammeringly and interceptedly. Also at that present he is of a flushing
color, and looks as though he were drunk, because the object from which his
love takes greatest force being present; he by reason of the great joy that he
feels in the presence thereof, sends forth those lively flames, which being
plainly descried in the superficial parts of the face, do commonly give such a
vermilian tincture, that the whole countenance seems to be covered with a
flashing kind of ardor, and that by reason of the great store of spirits
gathered into that place.

An unfortunate Lover speaks of nothing but his Mistress and his flames, he is
always in the fire like the Salamander, he has a perpetual Mount Aetna in his
breast; nay, says he, I will touch a Forest with my finger, and it will
totally burn and waste it. But contrarily, he that prospers and speeds in his
love, or gets a pleasing answer from his Mistress, he always shows a merry
cheerful countenance, jocond and laughing, full of spirit, quick eyed,
eloquent, and in his whole carriage full of joy and consolation.

This passion cannot be concealed, for amorous passions do prick and wound the
hearts of inamoratoes, and therefore provoked by the sharpness of such a
spur, they cannot but manifest their grief; for it is some comfort to him that
is assailed, to vent that which went in at the eye by the mouth, by the help of
his tongue, by sighing, by making complaints to senseless creatures, many
times to his bed-curtains.

It requires much subtlety and craft to discover this passion in Women, they
conceal and smother it so closely, that they will seem to be in a great fury
and hatred, when they most of all love, giving peevish answers, and refuse
seemingly the affections presented unto them; but -- Licet ipsa neget,
Vultus loquitur quodcunque teget.
They are like those Physicians and Lawyers, that refuse a fee, yet put out
their hand to take it. Or,

She Will fly away, and yet would fain
With all her heart be overtain.
She will deny, yet seem to dant
A Lover when she fain would grant.
She will resist, that you at length
May seem to vanquish her by strength.
For thus her honor does ordain,
She should resist, and yet but faign.
Yea, (Ladies) you shall see some of your own sex so surprised with affection,
as it bursts out into violent extremes; their discourse is semibrev'd with
sighs, their talk with tears; they walk desperately forlorn, making Woods and
Groves their disconsolate consorts. Their eyes are estranged from sleep, their
weakened appetite from repast, their wearied limbs from repose. Melancholy is
their sole melody; they have made a contract with grief, till grief bring them
to their graves. And truly those poor Maids are to be pityed, because their
own tender hearts brought them to this exigent; have either set their
affections where they thought verily they might be requited, and were not; or
else where they received* like seeming tender of affection, but afterward
rejected; what they wished to effect, they could not. So as in time they fall
in a poor Maudlins distemper by giving rains to passion, till it estrange them
from the sovereignty of reason. I could say more, but modesty will not permit
me.

Yet, some there are, who are not such kind souls, nor half so passionate,
more discreet in their choice, and in the passages of Love more temperate.
These will not daigin to cast a loose look upon their beloved; but stand so
punctually upon their terms, as if they stood indifferent for their choice,
albeit constantly (though privately) resolved never to admit of any change.
These scorn to paint out their passions in their colors, or utter their
thoughts in sighs, or shed one dispassionate tear for an incompassionate
Lover. Their experience has taught them better notions; they will seemingly
fly (as I have said) to make them more eagerly follow, and to take them by
whom they are most taken. They can play with the flame and never singe their
wings, look Love in their face, and preserve their eyes, converse where they
take delight, and color their affection with a feigned disdain. These are they
who can walk in the clouds to their intimatest friends, making their eyes
strangers to their hearts, and conclude nothing more foolish then love if
discovered, and nothing more wise if artificially shadowed.

Some Artists will undertake to judge who are in Love by Chiromancy, by the
lines of the hand. For say they, If a little cross be upon the line of life
(in the hand) near the angle, it portends maladies of Love. Also, if the table
line join it self with the middle natural line, so as both do make an angle,
this does demonstrate one to be variously troubled with Love, rendering the
parties life very displeasing.

It seems to some (how true it is I know not) to be possible for a man to know
whether one be in Love or no, by their natural and animal dreams, if the party
will but relate them at his awaking; for the fancy in sleep is most taken up
with those things that the mind has been busied with in the day; according to
that in the Poet;

Judicibus lites, aurigae somnia, currus:
Vanaque nocturnis meta cavatur Equis.
Gaudet amans furto, etc.
The Lawyer pleads in's sleep; the careful swains
Manage their pransing coursers over the plains.
Lovers dream of their stolen delights, etc.
And indeed dreams do sometimes so far engage them, as they cannot dissemble
nor deny them.

They say, that those Lovers who are very melancholy through the extremity of
this passion, are accustomed to horrible and fearful dreams, by reason of the
melancholy vapors that ascend up into the brain. And because this affection of
all others does most disturb and afflict the spirits, and from that
disturbance and purturbation these monstrous and horrible dreams do arise; so
that many times by reason of their (little) sleep, they bewray a strange kind
of horror and astonishment in their countenances.

Also, to dream of traveling through Woods, sticking in Bushes, and Briars
does signify much trouble and crosses in love.

To dream of Angling and Fishing signifies a difficulty, and the party
despaires of obtaining the party beloved. But to dream of Banquets and Feasts,
does signify the hopes of the party loving, and that his proceeding in love
shall be prosperous.

To dream of winds, storms, and showers of rain, does signify Love passion.

To dream of riding on a tired Horse, or drawing water out of a Well, or
climbing upon a steep hill, is a sign of a vebement Love passion.

To dream of seeing ones Mistress in a glass, is an infallible token of Love,
and that there shall be reciprocal affection between the parties.

To dream of being a Husbandman or Plowman, to sow, plant, or dig, is a sign
of being in Love.

But Sanguine-complexioned Lovers, use to dream of pleasant and delectable
things, as fair Gardens, Orchards, flowers, green meadows, bedeck't with the
pride of Flora, pleasant Rivers, dreaming that they sit culling and playing
with their Sweet-hearts upon their pleasant bancks, often thinking they see
many little Cupids flying in the air; and all delightful dreams they say,
proceed from an amorous and love pierced soul. As to dream of singing or
playing on any instrument, does signify that Love has seized upon the party.
For if dreams and wishes had been all true, there had not been since Popery one
Maid to make a Nun of. But whether dreams are only the working of the fancy
and imagination, upon such things as have been seen and thought upon, or
presages of things future, it is not our present purpose to determine.

We will now see what we can discover in a Lovesick mind, by the sublime
science of Astrology, maugre all its Antagonists. First diligently inquire
whether the party has had any crosses or troubles which might cause a
dejection of the soul in him, and whether they do not suspect the party to be
in Love; these being considered then you may safely go on to judgment.

Saturn generally signifies melancholy, and by consequence alienation of the
mind, madness, etc. and therefore always when you find him to be
significator of the malady, or in the ascendant, or in the sixth house, the
sick is afflicted with care and grief, and be sure the Lovesick mind suffers
for it.

Also if Venus be author of the disease, and she Lady of the ascendant sixth or
twelfth houses, the distemper comes from Love, or something else of this nature
is the cause.

If the or or Lord of the ascendant, or two of them at the least be afflicted,
the disease is in the spirits, together with an indisposition of the mind; the
reason whereof is, because the Lord of the ascendant, and dispositor of the,
are properly the significators of the animal faculties, which do cause
infirmities in Man, or which may chance unto him; a deprivation of sense,
madness, or frenzy through Love melancholy.

Venus significatrix and afflicted, argues a great desire to Women, wherewith
both body and mind are disturbed.

Wheresoever you find Mercury afflicted and significator, shows doting
fancies.

If the Planet who rules the sign, wherein the Lord of the ascendant is, and he
who is dispositor of the be unfortunate and in their fall, detriment or
otherwise very much afflicted, the disease reigns and rages in the mind.

At what Age we begin to be in Love. What Complexions do best sympathize. What
Complexions are most subject to this Malady; and at what time more then another.
IT is most certain, that there is nothing more impatient of delay then Love,
nor no wound more incureable whilst we live. There is no exemption, no age, no
condition are more ignorant of it, then of their bread, all have a taste of
this potion, though it have several degrees of operation, and at several
seasons.

Look all about you, who so young that loves not?
Or who so old, a comely feature moves not?
But the most received opinion is, that Men and Women are subject to this
passion, as soon as they are entered into those years in which they come to
their puberty; which appears in Men chiefly by their voice, which at that
time grows great and harsh; it may be known also in Women by observing their
breasts, which about this time begin to swell and grow bigger, and that for the
most part about the age of 12 and 14; so likewise it is the justice of nature,
that those creatures that soonest meet their period, do as suddenly arrive at
their perfection and maturity; as we may observe in Women, who as they are ripe
sooner then Men, so they commonly fail before them.

Some there are that would deprive men of this power, or Love to have any power
over them, so long as they are under the age of twenty years; for Homer says,
Love pricks not till such time as the chin begins to bud: which is altogether
repugnant to truth and daily examples; for we see many to rage furiously before
they come to years of discretion; especially Women. Quartilia in Petronius
never remembered that she was a Maid. Rahab the Harlot began to be a professed
Queen at ten years of age, and was but 15 when she hid the spies, as some
report. Leo says, that in Africa one shall scarce find a Maid at 14 years of
age; for when the vehemence of Adolescency (which is betwixt the age of 14 and
28) begins to tickle them, and when they have greatest need of a bridle,
then they let loose the raines, committing themselves to the subjection of this
passion.

There are many forward Virgins of our age are of opinion, that this commodity
can never be taken up too soon, and howsoever they neglect in other things,
they are sure to catch time by the forelock in this; if you ask them this
question, they will resolve you 14 is the best time of their age, if 13 be not
better then that, and they have for the most part, their Mothers example before
them to confirm and prove their ability; and this withal they hold for a
certain ground, that be they never so little, they are sure thereby to become
no less; yet let me tell these forward Girls, the effects that (most
commonly) ensue, are dangerous births, diminution of statute, brevity of life,
and such like.

This passion is more tolerable in youth, and such as are in their hot blood;
and shall I be bold to speak it without offense to the stale Batchelors, that
Love is not properly nor naturally in season, but in that age next unto infancy.

-- Nunc grata juveni Venus.
Venus to young men is a welcome guest.
But for an amorous complexion to cover glowing fires beneath the embers of a
gray-beard; to see an old man to dote upon Women, what more odious? what more
absurd? yet in some this Idalian fire flameth more in their old age then in
their youth. Aristotle says, that old men are not out of the reach of Cupid,
nor bid defiance to Venus till they have passed the age of 70 years. And truly
a gray-head and a wanton-heart are ill suited; it is more ridiculous to see it
in Women then men. It rages in all ages; yet is it most common and evident
among young and lusty persons, in the flower of their age, high fed, and living
idly; for such as are continually employed, it scarce touches them till they
come to be 24 or 25 years of age, and then but very lightly, according to the
speech of Lyndamor to Pallemas, that he had arrived to the age of 25 years,
before he ever felt any effects, as Love uses to produce in hearts of his age.
Not but that he was of his natural inclination as much devoted servant unto
Ladies, but being continually exercised in business much different from
idleness, he had no pleasure to let Love sow any seeds in his soul; for ever
since he was able to bear arms, moved by a generous instinct, which invites
noble spirits unto dangerous enterprises, he was perpetually in wars, where he
did most heroically signalize himself.

Some have given two reasons, why youth is more subject to this illimited
passion, then any other age.

The first is, That natural heat or vigor which is most predominant in youth,
provoking him to attempt the greatest of difficulties, rather then suffer the
repulse where he affects.

The second is, Want of employment, which begets this distemperature; Vacuo
pectore regnat amor, Love plays hai-day in an idle person. Amor otiosae cura
est solicitudinis, says Theophrastus, it is an affection of an idle mind.
Also it fosters it self by a writ of Privilege in the hearts of young men, who
abounding with much blood, and consequently with great store of Vital spirits,
are more fiery and ardent, making them full of wanton and youthful desires.

I have many times observed a great sympathy and affection young boys and
girls have one to another; and (indeed) there is a pretty pleasing kind of
wooing, drawn from a conceived, but concealed fancy, which suits well with
these amorous younglings; they could wish with their hearts, ever to be in the
presence of those they love, so they might not be seen by them. Might they
choose, they would converse with them freely, consort with them friendly, and
impart their truest thoughts fully; yet would they not have their bashful loves
find discovery. They would be seen, yet seem obscured; Love, but not disclose
it; see whom they love, but not be eyed. Yea (which has struck me into more
admiration) I have known diverse, whose unripe years half assured me, that their
green youth had never instructed them in the knowledge, nor brought them to
conceit of such vanities; excellently well read in Love Lectures, and prompt
enough to show proofs of their reading in public places. The amorous toys of
Venus and Adonis, with other Poems of like nature, they peruse with such
devotion, and retain with such delectation, as no subject can equally relish
their unseasoned palats, like those lighter discourses.

If this passion begin in infancy, and so continue, it is more affectionate and
strong, because that custom which is taken in that age, does by degrees become
a nature, which growing up with years, grows solid and unalterable.

Fronutus says of Love, Juvenis pingitur, quod amore plerumque Juvenes
capiuntur; sic and mollis, formosus, nudus, quod simplex and apertus hic
affectus; ridet, quod oblectamentum prae ase ferat, cum phiretra, etc. The
reason why Love was painted young is because young men are most apt to Love;
soft, fair and fat, because such folks are soon captivated; naked, because all
true affection is simple and open; he smiles, because merry and given to
delights; has a Quiver, to show his power, and none can escape him, old nor
young; is blind, because he sees not where he shootes, nor whom he hits, etc.

Let us now Demonstrate what temperatures and complexions do sympathize
together, and are most prone and apt to receive the impression of this Passion.
THe diversity of complexions, breeds a diversity of desires: whereby they
judge diversely of things present, and follow those which do best agree with
their constitutions, whereby we see that in the election of any thing
whatsoever, the appetite does accommodate it self to the temperature of the
body; for we see Men fit themselves in their customs and carriages to their
corporeal temperature, ever desiring to converse with their like; for Nature
would so have it, to this only end that every one should be esteemed, and be
loved; and they that are not absolutely fair in every part, should not be
despised* but being received into grace and favor with their Lovers might live
honestly, in mutual society, and in good esteem with them. Every like
desires, and loves his like; whereby ever for the public good, there
remains nothing despised, because there is nothing but has its like. And
therefore to the eyes of a Moor, the black or tawny countenance of his Moorish
Damosel pleases best; and yet such a one would almost turn the stomach of a
Sanguine complexioned English man to look upon.

Now to discover those who are most prone and apt to love. The fairest are
inclined to love, because the cause of love is beauty; and he or she that has
the cause in potentia, does easily produce the effect: And therefore says the
divine Plato, that Love reigns most in the hearts of those young men (the
which, he that has but half an eye may daily see) that are honorably born, and
tenderly brought up, who as apt receptacles receive into them that passion. Or
more probably, Venus being the giver of beauty, likewise inclines those to
love, upon whose nativity she cast her influence; for it seldom falls out
that beauty is separated from the force of love, and for as much as custom in
all things has the force of Love, they that are beautiful following custom
cannot but Love. Galen says, that the manners of the mind do follow the
temperature of the body. We see those that are of a sanguine complexion, are
generally very amorous. Hairinesse, says Aristotle, is a sign of abundance of
excrements, and therefore much addicted to this passion, Venus tickling them
with a delight of emptying of their seminal vessels; for a Woman cannot endure
a Man with a little beard, for that they are commonly cold and impotent.

The air, Climate, and place of ones birth, are of very great consideration in
this particular.

And now being in the bowels of Love, some will ask, Whether Men or Women be
soonest allured, and whether be most constant, the male or the female?

I answer, That most Women are to be won with every pleasing wind, in whose
sex there is neither force to withstand the assaults of Love (as we shall
hereafter more fully declare) neither constancy to remain faithful; therefore
Women are the soonest allured, and most inconstant.

Likewise, a hot and dry temperature, or else such a one as is only hot, is
much inclined to love; for a Man that is hot is hairy, high colored, with a
black thick curled head of hair, great veins and big voice; (and what a
precious thing a black Man is in a Woman's eye, I will refer to the judgment of
their own sex) I dare boldly affirm, that that man has a hot and dry Liver,
and his generative parts are also of the same temper, and so consequently very
much inclined to this passion; which is also confirmed by that of Galen, that a
hot complexion, or such a one that is hot and dry, is much more prone and
subject to a violent and irregular love, then any other temperature or
complexion whatever: from whence we may infer, that Men are oftener and more
grievously tormented with this malady then Women, whose temperature is less
hot and less dry. But Women are naturally of meaner spirits and less courage
then Men, having weaker reasons: and therefore are less able to make
resistance against so strong a passion. And hereto accords that of Hero in her
Epist. to Leander in Ovid.

Vrimur igne pari: sed sum tibi viribus impar;
Fortius ingenium suspicor esse viris.
Vt corpus, teneris sic men's infirma puellis.
Our flames are equal: but your kinder fate
Has lent you strength, your hearts to temperate.
But in our weaker sex, our passions find,
A feeble body bears a feeble mind.
Women often become frenetick, and mad for Love, but rarely men; unless it be
some effeminate weak spirited fellows. Upon this, I took occasion one day to
visit Bedlam, and for one Man that was there for Love, I found five Women; and
those Men that were there, were such as had lived effeminately, idly, and
dieted themselves riotously and delicately.

Ficinus cap. 19. Comment. in convivium Platonis, says, Irretiuntur cito
quibus nascentibus Venus fuerit in Leone, vel Luna Venerem vehementer
aspexerit, and quia eadem complexione sunt praediti. They are most prone to
burning lust, or the vehement scorching of the Idalian flame, that have in in
their Horoscope, when the and be mutually aspected, or when is in a or aspect,
with the or, especially if it happen in the second or fifteenth day of the; or
such as be of the complextion of, and that is a white ruddy complexon, fair and
lovely eyes, a little black, a round and fleshie face, fair hair and smooth, a
rolling eye, and one desirous of trimming and making himself neat both in
clothes and body. In whose geniture and are in, or, Plerumque amatores sunt,
and si foemina, meritrices, they are undobtedly inclined to love and erorick
melancholy, and if Women, Queans; for Martialists and Men of War are easily
taken prisoners by Cupid. Cardan says of himself in the judgment of his
geniture, that a of and in the dignities of, perpetually troubled him with
venereal thoughts, that he could never rest, so strong was their influence upon
him. In whose genesis shall be in a masculine sign, and in the terms or of,
signifies the parties to be very much inclined to the sports of.

Phlegmatic persons are rarely captivated, and those who are naturally
melancholy less then they; but if they once be catched in the snare (unless
they hang themselves, which they will be much inclined to) they will never be
free. But (as Mr. Burton says) the Colts evil is common to all complexions,
whilst they are young and lusty. And some refer it adtesticulorum crisin, to
the hot temperature of the resticles.

Now to declare what time is most fit and delightful to Lovers; It is that
time of the year, when the longest days make the evenings most delightful, and
dispose Lovers to accommodate their ears, to the chirping melody of the airy
Quire, which awakeneth a mavelous desire in their hearts. May is called Loves
month, either because the temperature of the season which is hot and moist, of
the nature of Venus, does incline all creatures to choose and select their
mates; or because Venus at that time does usher in Aurora, and by her influence
does excite the hearts of Lovers to rise early to view the richness of Flora,
and the ear-pleasing harmony, and love-exciting melody of the Nightingale.

In what principal part of the Microcosme or Body of Man is the seat of Love.
LOve having his first entrance in at the eyes, which are the faithful spies
and intelligencers of the soul, stealing gently through those sluices, and so
passing insensibly to the liver, it there presently imprinteth an ardent desire
of the object, which is either really lovely, or at least appears to be so. But
distrusting its own strength, and fearing it is not able to overthrow the
reason, it presently lays siege to the heart; of which having once fully
possessed it self, as being the strongest fort of all, it assaults so violently
the reason, and all the noble parts of the brain, that they are suddenly forced
to yield themselves up to its subjection. So that now the poor enamorato, or
Loves weather*beaten widgeon thinks of nothing but his Mistress. So that
through the eye it seizes upon the liver, which is the first receptacle of
Love, then the heart, then the brain and blood, and then the spirits, and so
consequently the imagination and reason. The Liver to be the seat of Love is
grounded upon the saying of Solomon (in Prove. 7.) That a young man void of
understanding goes after a strange woman till a dart strike through his Liver.
Cogit amare jecur, the which being affected and inflamed sets all the other
principal parts on fire; according to Senec. in Hippol.

-- Pectus insanum vapor
Amorque torret, intimas saevus vorat
Penitus medullas, atque per venas meat
Visceribus ignis mersus and venis latens,
Vt agilis altas flamma percurrit trabes.
Now Love within my raging bosom fumes,
And with a cruel fire my reins consumes.
The flame within my bowels hid remains,
Thence shoots up and down my melting veins,
As agile fire over dry Timber spreads.
Valesius lib. 3. Contr. 13. says, that that Love which is in Men, is defined
to be an affection of both powers, appetite and reason. The rational resides
in the brain, and the appetite in the Liver, and the heart is diversely affected
of both, and carried a thousand ways by consent, being variously inclined,
sometimes merry and jocond, and sometimes sad and dejected. The sensitive
faculty overruling reason, carries the soul hoodwink't, and hurries the
understanding to Dawfair to eat a Wood-cock pie.

Of Jealousy in Lovers; the Defininition, the Signs, and Symptoms of it.
IT is described and defined to be a certain suspicion which the Lover has of
the party he chiefly affects, lest he or she should be enamoured of another.
Or an eager desire of enjoying some beauty alone, and to have it proper to
himself only. It is a fear or doubt lest any forainer should participate or
share with him in his love; still apt to suspect the worst in such doubtful
cases. This passion of Jealousy is more eminent among Batchelours, then
Marryed-men. If it appear among Batchelours, we commonly call them Rivals or
Corrivals, a similitude having its original from a River, Rivales a rivo; for
as a River divides a common ground betwixt two Men, and both participate of it:
So is a Woman indifferent betwixt two Suitors, both likely to enjoy her; and
thence comes this emulation, which breaks out many times into tempestuous
storms, and produces lamentable effects, murders it self with much cruelty,
many single combats.

Ariosto calls it a fury, a continual Fever, full of suspicion, fear and
sorrow, a mirth-marring monster. (Ecclus. 28. 6.) The sorrow and grief of heart
of one woman jealous of another is heavier then death. But true and pure Love
is without jealousy, for this affection springs from the love of
concupiscency, for jealousy is a fear (as I have said) which a Man has, lest
another should enjoy the thing he desires: the reason thereof is, because we
judge it hurtful either to our selves, or to those whom we love, if others
should enjoy it. And if they have any interest in the party beloved, they have
a special care that no other have the fruition thereof but themselves, taking
the matter heavily if it fall out otherwise; being very much offended and full
of indignation, against him that should attempt any such thing; being very
suspicious, and carrying within themselves matter of jealousy, and tormenting
themselves and others without cause; for Love with Jealousy and a madman are
cozen*germans in understanding; for questionless immoderate love is a
madness: and then had Bedlam need be a great and spacious house; for he that
never was in that predicament is either blind or babish.

When jealousy once seiseth on these silly, weak, and unresisting souls; it is
pitiful to see, how cruelly it tormenteth them, insultingly it tyrannizeth
over them. It insinuates it self under color of friendship: but after it once
possesses them, the same causes which served for a ground of goodwill, serves
for the foundation of mortal hatred. Of all the minds diseases, that is it,
whereto most things serve for sustenance, and fewest for remedy. This consuming
Fever blemisheth and corrupts all that otherwise is good and goodly in them.
But as the most firm in Religion, may have doubts; so the most confident in
Love, are capable of some suspicion. The strongest trees are shaken by the
wind, though the root be fixed, whilst the leaves and branches be tossed. Why
should we not rest our selves, and abandon all suspicious Ideas, after having
had a trial of a person, and many effects for testimonies of the affection?
yet all these proofs and trials keep us not from vexing and tormenting our
selves; because fear, which is not in our power to restrain, interprets ill the
least appearance, and buries it self in false objections, where it finds no
true ones. O weak jealousy, did ever thy prying and suspicious sight find thy
Mistresses lip guilty of any smile? or any lascivious glance from her eye?
do not thou see the blushes of her cheeks are innocent? her carriage, sober?
her discourse all chaste? no toyish gesture? no desire to see the public
shows, or haunt the Theater? she is no popular Mistress, all her kisses do
speak her Virgin? such a bashful heat at several tides ebbes and flows; flows
and ebbes again, as it were afraid to meet our wilder flame? what is it then
that stirs up this hot passion in thee? Some will object and say, All this is
but cunningnesse, (as who knows the sleights of Sirens?) It is these Idiots
that have these symptoms of jealousy, as fear, sorrow, suspicion, strange
actions, gestures, outrages, lockings up, oaths, trials, with a thousand more
devises then any pen is able to enumerate. It Is a vehement passion, a furious
perturbation, a bitter pain, a scorching fire, a pernicious curiosity, it fills
the mind with grief, half suspicion, accidental brawles, compassionate tears,
throbbings of the heart, distracted cogitations, inconstant desires, and a
thousand the like lancing razors, that cut and wound the hearts of Men (as Gall
corrupting the Honey of our life) more then ordinarily disquieted and
discontented.

Next time you see a jealous Lover, do but mark him, and you shall see
(without a pair of Spectacles) how he misinterprets every thing is either said
or done, most apt to mistake or misconster, he peeps into every corner,
follows close, observes to an hair all the postures and actions of his
Mistress, he will sometimes sigh, weep, and sob for anger, swear, slander, and
belie any Man, sometimes he will use obsequious and flattering speeches, and
ask forgiveness, condemning his rashness and folly, and then immediately
again, he is as impatient and furious as ever he was; therefore I wish
(Gentlewomen) to beware of such infidels, who wax and wane an hundred times in
an hour, as though they were got in the change of the Moon: so strange is the
inferences of this malicious jealousy, that it never makes a good Logician. He
pries on all sides, accurately observing on whom she looks, and who looks on
her. Argus did not so keep his Cow, the watchful Dragon the golden Fleece, or
Cerberus, Hell gates, as he does her, toyling and wasting away himself in
pursuit of so concealed a mystery, and so obscure a verification. If he see
her discourse familiarly with another, if by nod, wink, smile or message, he
think she discloseth her self to another, he is instantly tormented, none so
dejected as he is, he thinks himself utterly undone, a cast away, the scorn of
fortune.

There are some, (though their hearts be violently assaulted with jealousy and
false suspicion, insomuch that they can never rest in quiet) make show
outwardly of a happy life, and a careless neglect of their best beloved; yet
in despite of themselves and their best endeavors, they cannot dissemble it. It
is the natural course of this passion, for it is with those who are in the
highest pitch of Love, as those who are on the tops of great elevations, their
heads grow dizie, and though no body touch them, they reel till they fall of
themselves, merely by the fear of falling. And this is the passion that ruins
Loves reputation, and disorders* the souls tranquillity. Therefore,

If Lovers needs must jealous be,
And from this venom never be free,
Then fie upon it; my prayer shall be,
From Love (good Jove) deliver me.
Now as touching Women, they have the symptoms of this passion more
vehemently, their wills being stronger then their reason, there is no counsel
to be given them against this evil of jealousy, their nature being wholly
suspicion, vanity and curiosity. If you seek to persuade them, they will fly
out against you like so many Lyonesses, objecting, How can they moderate their
passions? how can they but be jealous, when they see themselves manifestly
neglected, contemned, loathed, unkindly used, and their unkind Lovers court
Ladies to their faces? There is a tree in Mexicana which is so exceedingly
tender, that a Man cannot touch any of its branches, but it withers presently:
so Women are so subject to this passion, that (like tinder) they will take fire
at the least spark of suspicion, and a small touch will wound and kill their
love.

This passion is most predominant in old Men (as says the Author of the
Accomplished Woman) which very properly be compared to Ivy, because that grows
ordinarily upon old heaps or ruins; so this passion wreathes it self most
commonly about old tortured and dejected spirits, such as marry young wenches,
and how can they be otherwise, all things considered? We see Ivy flourishing
upon dry, withered, and saplesse trees: so in old Men this passion is very
potent and youthful; and becomes the stronger in such, as age, or crazinesse
of wit infeebles or stupefies. It is no great miracle, if jealous ones be lean,
their passions feeding on nothing but faintness; and nothing like melancholy
to entertain jealousy. Therefore I exhort Gentlewomen not to bestow themselves
upon fools, or apparent melancholy persons, jealousy being a symptom of that
disease, and fools have no moderation.

It is an enemy with poisoned weapons, and his approach is enough to overthrow;
when the memory has once received it, reason often comes too late for a
resistance. I hope I shall not be thought a vagrant from my subject, if I tell
married couples that suspicion of it self is able to make one fly out that was
otherwise honest. If we consider that jealousy and Cuckolds differ no
otherwise then a City Sheriff and Alderman, a little time makes the one the
other; for it is as common as the Moon gives horns twice a month to the
world, for a jealous Man to wear Actaeons badge; the Miller sees not all the
water that goes by his Mill: sometimes Sweetheart and Cuckold are reciprocal
terms: many a good Gentleman has worn a plume of Bulls feathers in his crest,
being set in by his arrant honest Mistress.

There was a Roman named Cydippus, who took so great a delight to see Bulls
baited, that it set such an impression in his Idea, as he thought so much of it
over night, that he arose in the morning with a horned head. This spectacle
pleased him, for that he had entertained his fancy with it, and in the end his
imagination did him this ill office. There is no malice sufficiently black to
blind this passions capacity; it gives subtlety and craft to the dullest, and
perverts the most virtuous to seek satisfaction for the injury: if has no bound
to inventions, it brings ruin to its fosterer, as it did to Procris, jealous
of her husband Cephalus, she imagined he had a Mistress besides her self;
which (she thought) he went to seek in the woods under pretense of hunting; she
hid her self behind a bush, thinking to hear the discourse of his solitary
thought; he hearing a stir and a noise in the thicket, and believing it was a
Deer, shot an arrow at it and struck her to the heart; she dying cried
Cephalus, which word made him know he had taken his Wife for a beast; and I
think he was not very much mistaken. Also Mr. Brathwaith in his English
Gentlewoman records a matchless president of Jealousy acted in England, with
the like tragical conclusion; He has it in these words:

IT sometimes pleased a young Gentlewoman, whose fortunes had swelled her high,
to settle her affections on a Gentleman of deserving parts, which he
entertained with a generous requital: nothing was omitted that might any way
increase their respect, or second the height of their joys. Continual resort
and frequent made them inseparably one; no day so pleasing as when they were
together, no hour so tedious as when they were asunder. But short is that
moment of fading happiness, which has in it a relish of lightness, and is
not grounded on essential goodness. Long had they not thus lived, and
sociably loved, but the Gentlewoman conceived some private suspicion that her
self was not the sole soveraignesse of his heart; but that another was become
sharer in his Love. Neither was this Competitrice, whom she suspected, any
other then her own attendant, whose Casket she secretly opened, where she found
a Ring of especial note, which she had formerly bestowed on him. This
confirmed her conceit, changed her real love into mortal hate; which she
seconded with this Tragic act. Inviting him one day into a Summer Arbor,
where in former times, they were wont to repose, amidst of an amorous
discourse, she casually fixed her eye upon three Lennets, one whereof picking
some Privet leaves, purposely to build her nest, flew away, whilst the two
which remained, lovingly billed one with another; which she intentively
observing, used these words, How tenderly and intimately do these poor fools
mate it? were it not pity they should be ever divided? Which words she had no
sooner uttered, then the she Lennet flew away, and left the male alone, till
another returned; with whom the he Lennet billed, and amorously wooed, as he
had done before; which she more seriously eyeing, O, quoth she, How light these
Males are in their affection! This may seem to you an easy error, but were I
judge of Birds, it should receive due censure. Why Lady (replied he) these poor
Birds do but according to their kind. Yea but what do ye Men then, who engage
your selves, interest your selves, empawn your souls to be constant where you
profess Love, and perform nothing less then what you profess most. Nor would
her long intended revenge admit more liberty to her tongue; for with a
passionate enterbreath, she closed this speech with a fatal stab; leaving so
much time to her unfortunate and dysasterous Lover, as to discover to one of
that sorrowful family the ground of her hate; the occasion of his fall, which
hastened on the doleful Scene of her Tragedy. And these are the products of
that Hell-born fiend Jealousy.

An Astrologer may give a probable conjecture, by every Man's Nativity (if it
may be had) whether he will be jealous or no, and at what time, by the
direction of the Significators to their several promissors; of which you may
read many Aphorisms in Sconer, Junctine, Pontanus, Ptolemy, Albubator, etc.

The Remedies of Love.
THat we may use the Method of Art; To cure the effects, is first to take away
the cause. Cessante causa, cessat effectus, take away the cause, and the effect
cease. It was the scope of our discourse in the second Section of this
Treatise, to discover the Causes (those incendiaries and fomenters of this
inordinate passion, or this intoxicating poison) in the third Section we
demonstrated the Effects arising from them; now in this last Section it is our
purpose to treat of the Cure and Remedies of them.

We will begin at the second cause, viz. the Stars (for the first cause
instituted by the Creator was moderate and good.) As the mind has its natural
principles of knowledge, so the will has her natural inclinations and
affections from the influence of the Stars; for they do incline the will to
love, but do not compel it; agunt non cogunt; of their own nature they are
good, as they are taken from the first nature created of God; neither would
they be at any time hurtful, if there were not excess in us proceeding from
nature corrupted; which afterward by the force of their influence, breed in us
such inclinations and affections as are these passions. For God in the
beginning made all things good; neither does he forbid and condemn this love
and affection in his Law, so far forth as it is ruled thereby, but approves it
being instituted in the Creation. But when this love and affection is
disordered in us, and is inflamed, giving way to the power of the superiors to
work together with it, it is not only vicious, but is as it were the original
and fountain of all vices, (for what vice, would a Man, whose reason is
governed by will, and that will inclined by the Stars, leave unperpetrated to
effect them?) whereas if it were well ordered, and ruled according to the will
and institutes of God, it would be the original and wellspring of all virtues.
Sapiens dominabitur astris; a wise man through grace, and the strength of
reason can moderate and divert theit evil influences, and convert them into
good seeds of virtue; but if they be not well ordered and ruled, they corrupt
and degenerate. As if Venus be Lady of the Nativity, she gives to the native a
sanguine complexion, whose nature is blood, and bears greatest sway among the
other humors and qualities; or if she be in a,, or of, inclines the native
naturally to love; if this be not moderated and well guided by reason, but
lets the will receive their influence, and their work upon it without any
obstruction, it easily passes measure, and falls into this foolish doting
passion of Love. Therefore seek for grace of him that can give it, and that he
will grant strength of reason to divert the influxious power of the superiors,
and to moderate the vehement heat of this Idalian fire.

Let us now remove the third cause, and that is, Education. (for to remove that
which comes gradually from Parents we cannot, unless we seek to subvert
Nature, and utterly extinguish the race of Man; but according to the old
proverb, That which is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh.) If you
find that your Parents have been addicted to this folly, and that they brought
you up delicately and idly, and that you feel in your self an inlcination to
the same passions; Corripite lora manu; take up the slackned rains in time,
before you run your selves past recovery. Addict your selves to the study of
good letters, flying idleness as a mortal enemy, reading of Love books,
Comedies, looking upon immodest Pictures, feasts, private familiarities, loose
company, and have in derision even the shadow of impurity. Love has no subject
so apt to work upon as idleness, therefore handle the matter so, that he may
always find you busied; for Vitia otii negotio discutienda sunt, the vices of
idleness should be shaken off with business; and to this effect speaks the
Poet; Otia si tollas, frangis Cupidinis arcum.
-- An idle life forsake.
What made thee love, a lover makes thee still:
The cause of nourishment of that sweet ill,
Shun idleness, and Cupids bow will break,
His slighted flames fly out, disarmed and weak.
As Reeds in Marshes affect their site;
As Poplars in the running brooks delight;
So Venus joys in sloth: Let Cupid be
By action tamed; live busy, and live free.
Faint ease, long sleeps, which no command controls,
Time spent in sport, and drench't in flowing bowls,
Without a wound the enfeebled mind surprise:
Then in unspi'd insidious Cupid flies.
That sloth-affecting boy, does toil detest:
Do something to employ thy empty breast.


Witty and proper was that elegant invention of Lucian, who feigned Cupid to
invite the Gods to an amorous feast, prevailed with all of them to give way to
Love, till he came to Pallas, but she was found conversing with the Muses, and
would admit of no time to enter parley with Cupid. By this you may see that
exercise draws the mind from effeminacy; and remissness feeds the desire,
and adds fuel to Loves fires. And no less occasion gives wanton discourse or
lascivious books to the enraged affections of distempered youth. Therefore as
Love is entertained with idleness and feasts, subdue him with austerity and
exercise. He will fall upon some object, scatter and confound him. As he
labors to find out a loose and unbridled spirit, hold yours extended upon
the study of some good science. He requires liberty, private places, and night,
let him have witnesses, and enlighten him on every side. He will be governed by
fantasy, keep him obedient both by admonition and menaces; so by this means
you will banish the wanton Jack of Apes out of house and harbor.

The bed being a sensitive nourishment, renders many lascivious fancies,
therefore no sooner wake but arise, and expel such cogitations with pious
meditations. I could advise Maids (as the only remedy for this passion) to
walk early into the fields, and keep themselves continually both head and hand
in motion in some good exercise; and not always pricking a clout, for many
times (their thought being gone a wool-gathering with Cupid) they chance to
prick their fingers, and Cupid their hearts too if they be not aware. This
sedentary life is the cause of the disease called the Greensicknesse, and it
having seized upon their sloth affecting bodies, makes them laizie, and as
quick as Snails in all their operations, and then it is more difficult to make
them marry, then cure the disease.

St. Cyptian found nothing more powerful to conquer the temptations of Venus,
then to turn the otherside of the medall. But above all it behooves us to use
the example of an Arabian, who presented to himself perpetually over his head,
an eye which enlightened him, an ear which heard him, a hand which measured out
all his deportments, and demeanors, and guards of chastity, which daily blunt a
thousand arrows shot against the impenetrable hearts of brave and undaunted
champions: that you may not fall into the fire, it is good to avoid the smoke,
not to trust our selves too much to petty dalliances, which under pretext of
innocence, steal in with the more liberty: for to court and dally with beauty
(as we shall hereafter declare) is an enterprise of danger; for some I have
known, who upon their access to beauty have been free men, but at their return
have become slaves.

We now intend to extinguish the heat and vehemence of Love in the fourth
cause, which is mere beauty, and the particulars of it. Be not so sensual as to
love only the body, and to dote upon an outside, but look higher, and see
something in the person loved of an Angelical nature; that is, a free and
virtuous mind, which to an understanding soul appears to be of a divine
essence, and to which he mingles his soul in love, which is (if really
considered) a far more excellent and permament love, then that of an external
and fading beauty, and consequently much more pleasant. Do we not commonly see,
that in painted pots of Apothecaries are contained the deadliest poison? that
the Cypress tree bears a fair leaf, but no fruit? That the Estrich carries
fair feathers, but rank flesh? How frantic then are those Lovers, who are
hurried headlong with the gay glistering of a fine face? the beauty whereof is
parched with the Suns blaze, and chapped with a Winters blast: which is of so
short continuance, that it fades before we see it flourish; of so small
profit, that it poysoneth those that possess it; of so little value with the
wise, that they account it a delicate bait with a mortal hook; a sweet Panther
with a devowring panch, a tart poison in a silver pot.

But hark, one word with you, Love Symplicians. Let your humane imaginations
think and assemble into one subject whatsoever is most beautiful and delicious
in nature. Do you imagine a Quire of Sirens, and do you join in consort, both
the harp of Orpheus, and the voice of Amphion. Let Apollo and the Muses be
there to bear a part; and do you search within the power of nature, rifle up
her treasure, and all the extreme pleasures which it has produced in the world
hitherto, to charm our souls, and to ravish our spirits; what permanency and
felicity do you find in all these? They are mere Chimeraes, and as a vain
Idea; a mere shadow of a body of pleasure in comparison of virtues, and those
divine thoughts and pleasures which may be enjoyed in the contemplation of the
Almighty, and his infinite beauty, glory, and love, and of the felicity of
felicities which he has prepared for them that love him. So that happy are
those (but too few are they) who with wise Ithacus hudwink themselves, and stop
their ears to those soul-tainting, and sin-tempting Sirens.

What a great example of continency and neglect of beauty was that of Mahomet
the great, toward the fair Greek, Irene; whom albeit he entirely loved; yet to
show to his Peers, a princely command of himself, and his affections; as he had
incensed them before by loving her, so he regained their love by slighting her;
whence the Poet,

With that he drew his Turkish Cymeter,
Which he did brandish over the Damsels head,
Demanding of such Janizers were there,
If 't were not pity she sh'd be slaughtered?
Pity indeed; but I perforce must do
That which displeases me, to pleasure you.
Many such instances, ancient and modern Histories afford, but I must not
insist on each particular lest I should enlarge my self too much, and swell
that into a volume, which I intend but a Pamphlet.

How many do we find, who having their spirits possessed with other passions,
one of Ambition, another of Avarice, another of Revenge, another of Envy,
another transported by the solitude of a Law suite, and the turmoile of a
family, who think very little upon Love? how many others are there, from whom
study affairs, charges, (wherein they strive supereminently to transcend) free
their minds from all other thoughts, not suffering them to have any
complements with Cupid? And how many Ladies do we see in the World, with
countenances ever smiling, of humors cheerful, and conversation most
pleasing, who make love to wits and spirits, as Bees to flowers; but have with
the body no commerce at all? The Author of the Theater of Nature, holds, that
the Basilisk alone among Serpents cannot be enchanted: and I dare really
affirm, that there are Men who have the like privilege, and have their eyes
love proof, and their hearts shut up and defended as with a palizado against
the piercing darts of Cupid, and the fiery assaults of the Idalian flame.
Democritus made himself blind voluntarily, by steadfastly beholding the
Sunbeams, to free himself from the charming beauties, and enticing
opportunities of Women: And (seriously) I think he shut up two gates against
Love, to open a thousand to his imagination. For some affirm that this malady
or Love melancholy, is cherished by the presence of the party affected: and
that the contrary, to wit, absence is the best remedy. And this they seem to
prove by resembling our passions with Echoes: (but omne simile non est idem,
every like is not the same thing) For (say they) do you not see the Echoes,
the further you go from them, the less repercussion there is, they diminishing
and losing themselves in the air; so the affection which is caused by the
reflection of the countenance, which you daily behold with so much
entertainment, will quickly vanish by a little absence.

But may I be so bold as to whisper my opinion in your ear, craving leave to
insist a little upon this; To prove that absence does more augment then
decrease the heat of this passion. I will be brief.

I confess eyes may conceive and produce a green infant affection, but there
must be something more solid and substantial to make it grow unto perfection;
and that must be by the knowledge of the virtues, merits, (as well as beauty)
and a reciprocal affection of the party loved. Now this knowledge does take
indeed its original from the eyes, but it must be the soul which must
afterward bring it to the test of judgment, and by the testimonies both of
the eyes and ears, and all other considerations concoct a verity, and so ground
upon it. If this verity be to our advantage, then it produces such thoughts,
whose sweetness cannot be equalled by any other kind of contentment, then the
effects of the same thoughts. If it be advantageous to the party affected, then
doubtless it does augment our affection; but yet with violence and inquietude;
and therefore no question but absence does augment love, so that it be not so
long, as that the very image of the party loved be quite effaced; whether it be
that an absent Lover never represents unto his fancy but only the perfections
of the person loved; or whether it be that the understanding being already
wounded will not fancy any thing but what pleases it; or whether it be that
the very thought of such things does add much unto the perfections of the party
loved: yet this is infallibly true, that he does not truly love, whose
affection does not augment in absence from the party loved. For in absence
nothing can content the real Lover; not sweet harmony, not beautiful Gardens,
or Groves, not pleasant Company, not eloquent tongues, not civil
entertainment, but every sweetness is converted into sowrenesse, all
ear-pleasing harmony is turned into an obstreperous jangling, and nothing can
content but the wished object, which being far distant from their enflamed
desires, do engender a vehement grief in the heart, which cannot be expressed
by them that prove it; much less by my pen which is not acquainted with such
miseries. Now it is objected, That absence is the greatest and most potent and
dangerous enemy that Love has. But (with their favor) presence without
comparison is much more, as we may daily see by experience; for you may see a
thousand loves change in presence for one in absence; for in presence, some
imperfections may be found, which may cause a detestation, which absence could
never do; and to illustrate and confirm this by example. The excellent
Philosopher Raymund Lullius, was passionately enamoured of a Lady, wise,
prudent and honest; she purposely to cure his frenzy, showed him one of her
breasts eaten and knawed through with a Canker, and extremely hideous to
behold, Stay simple Man (said she) behold what you loved; he at that instant
coming to himself uttered; Alas! was it for this I lost so many good hours,
that I burned, became entranced, that I passed through fire and water? All
Lovers would say the like if the scarffe were taken from their eyes. Consider
that if one absent cease from loving (which is very rare) its cessation is
without any violence or noise of struggling, and the change (through a long
tract of time) is only because the memory is by degrees smothered with
oblivion, as a fire is with its own ashes. But when Love breaks off in
presence, it is never without a noise and extreme violence, and (which is a
strange argument to prove my assertion) converts that love into a greater
hatred then if love had never been: which proceeds from this reason; a Lover is
always either loved or hated, or held in a degree of indifferency; if he be
loved, as an abundance is apt to glut, so love being loadened in presence with
too many favors, grows weary. If he be hated, then he meets with so many
demonstrations of that hate every moment, as at length he is forced to ease
himself. If he be in a degree of indifferency, and finds his love still
slighted, he will at length, if he be a Man of any courage, make a retreat and
resist the continual affronts which are put upon him; whereas in absence, all
favors received, cannot by their abundance glut, since they do rather set an
edge on desire, And the knowledge of hatred entering into our souls only by the
ear, the blow smarts not so much as that which is received by sight; and
likewise disdain and slight be more tolerable in absence, then presence;
doubtless absence is then more fit to preserve affection, then presence; for
there is a vast difference betwixt the love that is nourished by the eyes, and
a love that is nourished by the understanding. As much as the soul is superior
to the body, so much is the understanding to be preferred before the eyes. And
absence is so far from diminishing love, that it augments and begets fresh and
violent desires to augment it; and the contemplation of a beauty, does imprint
it deeper in the fancy, then any eye can. Therefore (you Love simplicians) make
a little resistance, cast away those idle toys that afflict you; let not
absence be so troublesome, that you must torture your bodies, vilify your
spirits, and yield up your reputations as preyes to slander. If you know what
you desired, you would be ashamed of your selves, you would be amazed that so
noble spirits should suffer themselves to be transported with such follies.
Represent to your selves that a thousand undanted courages, have set themselves
free, at liberty, and enjoyed tranquillity of spirit; and you for want of a
little resolution, tumble and involve your selves faster and faster in these
fetters. Will any man in his wits be thus deluded? can he be so silly as to
consume himself in seeking such a toy? Do you call this Love, forsooth? may it
not rather be called madness and folly? What, languish in the lap of an
ungrateful Mistress? fie, fie, it is an error far unworthy of a man, that
pretends unto any wisdom or courage. Put a stop to your passions, and
courageously contend against them. You shall no sooner have put the wedge of
courage into the block, but it shall be done; you shall have your souls
victoriously elevated over passion, which shall rejoice amidst the trophies
thereof. Never stay upon thoughts and imaginations of love; but so soon as it
presents it self, chase it away, and extinguish it in your hearts, no otherwise
then you should extinguish a hot Iron in a River. If it be in presenim restrain
your eyes, for they are the windows, the allurements, the snares and the
conducts of Love. It buddeth in the eyes, that it may at leisure blossom in
the heart; therefore divert your sight from objects which dart a sting into the
mind apt to receive, and sensible of such penetrations. Likewise lest it get
entrance at the ear, stop them against the enchanting melody of Sirens songs,
and charming music of their tongues, never open them to be auditors of any
lascivious discourse. But if you be already tainted with these charms, unloose
your selves, stoutly take your selves off, dispute not any longer with your
passions; fly from it, cut the Cable, weigh Anchor, spread sails, set forward,
go, fly, look not for any more letters, regard not their pictures, no longer
preserve favors, let all your endeavors be to preserve your reason. I add one
advice (which I think very essential) which is infinitely to fear a relapse
after health, and to avoid all objects that may re-inkindle the flame. For Love
oftentimes resembles a Snake enchanted, cast asleep and smothered; which upon
the first occasion awaketh and becomes more strong, and more outrageous then
ever. You must not only fortify your bodies against it, but also your souls.
But my discourse like Nilus overflowes, it shall return within its banks;
concluding with this, that Terrestrial beauty is like a shadow, and therefore
we are not to fix the eyes of our understanding upon it, but to turn them to
that sovereign beauty which is permament and free from all change and passion.

We will now endeavor our selves to remove the cause of Money causing Love,
which is mere Covetousness (the root of all evil) and to satisfy their own
voluptuousness, having their only delights upon earth; who desire not the
woman but her riches to make his houses the larger, to fill his chests fuller,
being respectlesse of a virtuous Woman, and the supreme good wherein all
happiness consists. And this, he says, is to raise a fortune for his (I say
seldom thriving) posterity; studying how he may become an eternal affliction to
himself. His mind is so fixed on money (not on the woman) as he finds no time
to erect it to heaven. He employes so much time in getting and gathering of
goods, as he reserves no time for doing good. He runs on still in desire (not
of his Mistress) laboring of a disease incurable till death cure him. He
increases his cares with his substance, (not his love to his Wife) and the
more he adds to his estate, the more he detracts from his content, and love
toward her. But consider (you Money-lovers) and seek for a remedy while it is
to be had, lest you repent your delay when it is too late) How secure was the
Rich-man (as he thought) when he invited his wretched soul to take her rest,
having much goods laid up for many years! but this self-security, was the
occasion of his succeeding misery; for that night was his soul to be taken from
him. O how terrible will the approach of death seem to you, being to be divided
from the staff of your confidence, from thence to descend without the least
hope of comfort to the land of forgetfulness; for as the Scorpion has in her
the remedy of her own poison, a receipt for her own infection; so the evil and
covetous carry always with them the punishment of their own wickedness, the
which does never leave (so incessant is the torment of a guilty conscience) to
wound and afflict the mind, both sleeping and waking: so as to what place he
betakes him, he cannot so privily retire, but fear and horror will awake him;
nor fly so fast, though he should take the wings of the morning, but fury and
vengeance will overtake him. Consider this (I speak to both sexes) and let not
money and riches be the sole object of your love; but look at that which is far
more noble, that which is more permanent, that summum bonum, that chief good,
which will direct you the way to all felicity.

Before we proceed any further, we will (hoping such variety will prove the
more pleasant) turn our discourse a little in particular to the female sex,
such whose kind hearts, like wrought Wax, are apt to receive any amorous
impression. Therefore to you (loving souls) do I recommend these necessary
cautions; which if carefully observed, will preserve you from the causes and
consequently the effects of Love, and may make you wiser then you thought of;
and to have a tender care of that, which before you had never mind of.

The best preservative and soveraignest receipt is, to fortify the weakness
of your sex with strength of resolution, for the imagination of Love is strong,
and works admirable effects on a willing subject. Give not power to an
insulting Lover to triumph over your weakness, or which is worse, to work on
the opportunity of your lightness. Ram up those portals which betray you to
your enemy, and prevent his entry by your vigilance. Keep at home, and let
neither you nor your thoughts stray abroad, lest by gadding you incur Dinah's
fate. Check your madding, and to Love inclining fancy, and if it use
resistance, curb it with restraint; forbear to resort to places of public
meeting, till you have drawn up and sealed a Covenant with your eyes, to see
nothing that they may lawfully covet. This will yield you more liberty then the
whole worlds freedom can afford you. Be not too liberal in bestowing your
favors, nor too familiar in public converse. Presume not too much on the
strength of a weak fort. Make a contract with your eyes, not to wander abroad,
lest they be caught in coming home. Treat not of love too freely; be not too
bold to play with the blind boy; he has a dangerous aim, though he has no
eyes; the Cat plays with the Mouse, but at last bites off her head; the Fly
plays with the Candle, till at last her light wings are sindged. Sport not
with him, that will hurt you; play not with him, that would play on you; your
sports will turn to a bad jest, when you are wounded in earnest. If this
wanton frenzy has never surpised you; prevent the means, and it will never
invade you; be not such foes to your selves as to purchase your own disquiet.
If Love issue out in too violent a stream, it is to be cooled by a temperate
expostulation with fancy, or else fix your eyes upon some more attractive
object; divert the course of that madding passion, as Physicians do to their
patients who having a violent efflux of blood in one place, cut a vein in
another to turn the course of it another way. Expostulate with fancy (as
Brathwaite advises in his English Gent.) thus; How is it with me? me thinks it
fares with me otherwise then it has done formerly. A strange distemper I find
in my mind; and might seem to resemble Love, if I knew the nature of it. Love!
can Virgin modesty return that accent and not blush? yes, why not? If the
object I affect he worth loving. (If the party affected have more virtues then
money, and not more money then virtues) And if not, what then? Is not the Lover
ever blind in affection toward his beloved? He who may seem a Thersites to
another, may be a Paris in mine eye. Yea, but a little advice would do well.
Art thou persuaded that this Non-parallel, thou thus affectest, has dedicated
his service only to thee? that his affection is really toward thee? that his
protests, though delivered by his mouth, are engraven in his heart? yea, his
protests have confirmed him mine. That hour is tedious wherein he sees me not.
His eye is ever fixed on me; his sole discourse is to me. These I must confess
are promising arguments of Love; yet these may deceive you, and consequently
leave you in a miserable error. He may prove a false-hearted Jason, Demophoon,
or Theseus, and leave you in the briers for all your confidence. You say his
vows and protests have confirmed him yours; and he has attested heaven to
bear record of his love. But take heed he play not the part of the Ridiculous
actor in Smyrna, who pronouncing, O heavens, pointed with his finger to the
ground. Therefore I wish you, ground your fancy with deliberation; and do not
affect, before you find ground of respect. Entertain not a Rhetorical Lover,
whose protests are formal complements, and whose promises are gilded pills,
which cover much bitterness. Many men are flattering Gnatho's, dissembling
Chamelions, mere outsides, hypocrites that make a show of great love, (but it is
no more then from the teeth outward) pretend honesty, zeal, modesty, with
affected looks, and counterfeit gestures, full of lip-love, feigned vows,
stealing away the hearts and favors of poor silly souls, deceiving them,
Specie virtutis and umbra, when as (in truth) there is no worth of honesty at
all in them, no reality, but mere hypocrisy, subtilty and knavery. Therefore
(Gentlewomen) trials in affairs of this nature, have ever a truer touch then
protestations. For I am confident there are some (yea, I really know many) who
make it their only study, how to tip their glozing tongues with Rhetorical
phrases, ear-charming Oratory, vows, and protestations, purposely to gull
credulous*creatures, for the purchase of an unlawful pleasure; which obtained,
they leave them to bewail their lost honor. I exhort you to sift him narrowly
to see what bran there is in him, before you choose him. Task him before you
take him. As thus; Has his fair carriage got him estimation where he lives?
Has he never enured his tongue to play the hypocrite with his heart? Has he
kept a fair quarter, and been ever tender of his untainted honor? Has he
never boasted of young Gentlewomens favors, nor run descant on their kindness?
Has he ever since he vowed himself your servant, solely devoted himself yours,
and not mixed his affection with forain beauties? If so, then choose him, he well
deserves your choice. Be like the Juniper tree, whose coal is the hottest, and
whose shadow is the coolest; be hot in your affection, but cool in your
passion. Set before your eyes the difference betwixt a wise and a wild
passion; the one ever deliberates before it love, and the other loves before it
deliberate: therefore let your fancy be grounded with deliberation. If you be a
Maid, ever fear to become a Woman, and cast not the garland of your Virginity
under the feet of Hogs. Give not a hair of your head to those who promise you
golden mountains, for such will deceive you, and when they most desire you in
the quest of marriage, then is the time you must least be for marriage: for all
you grant to their importunities, will be the subject of your disgrace; and
when they shall have married you, though you should live as chaste as Susanna,
they will be jealous, and continually imagine you will be liberal to others* of
that whereof you were prodigal to them. If you desire to marry by fancy, rather
pursuing your own wanton humors, then the reasonable commands of those to whom
you owe your being; hold it as a crime the most capital you can undertake, and
confidently believe if so you do, you will open a floud-gate to a deluge of
miseries and cares, which will flow upon you through all the parts of your life.
Account the resolutions you make to this purpose, as treasons, and think
whatsoever shall to you suggest the ex cution of them, will poison you by the
ear to murder your chastity. But I fear (Reader) I have too much trespassed
upon thy patience, in insisting so long upon this branch. And I know there are
some Enamoratoes will account my precepts too difficult to be followed, and set
my persuasions at naught; they will not desist from their melancholy thoughts,
not want the least Idea of their Lovers, so much pleasure they take in it.
Therefore I will instruct their friends, and see if they can withdraw their
affection; the which take as follows.

The Arabians do advise us to take occasion to discourse of the party affected,
in the patients hearing, and to enumerate all her imperfections and vices,
making-them more and more, and far greater then they really are; and to set out
her perfections and virtues in the colors and shape of vices; and to labor by
probable arguments to prove unto him, that that which he judges to be comely
and handsome, is in the judgment of those that are more quick sighted, both
ugly and deformed; telling him that Cupid is blind, and makes all enamoratoes
so too. Endeavor with what possibility you can, to convert his love either into
hate of jealousy, by preswading him, that his Mistress does not love him so
well as she makes him believe she does, and that all her entertainments,
favors, kisses, dalliances, and embraces, are only baits and enticements to
keep him from slavery: but if the party be of the other sex, then may be
pleaded the obsequiousness and dissembling of M^n, (which is as frequently
found in them, as inconstancy in Women:) The Parthians, to cause the youth to
loath the alluring trains of Women's wiles, and deceitful inticements, had most
exquisitely carved in their houses, a young Man blind, besides whom was
adjoined a Woman so exquisite, that in some men's judgment, Pigmalions image
was not half so excellent, having one hand in his pocket as noting her theft,
and holding a knife in the other hand to cut his throat.

Injuries, slanders, contempts, and disgraces are very forcible means to
withdraw Men's affections; for Lovers reviled or neglected, contemned or abused,
turn love into hate. Mr. Burton advises you to tell him she is a fool, an
idiot, a slut, and many time so nasty that one cannot touch her with a pair of
tongues, and that always against the time of his coming, she tricks and trimmes
her self up to allure him, and will not be seen by him, but in an enticing
dress; that she is a scold, a devil incarnate; that she is come of a light
heel'd kind; or that he or she has some loathsome incurable disease; that she
is bald, her breath stinks, that he or she is mad and frenetick hereditarily;
to tell her that he is an hermophrodite,, an Eunuch, imperfect, impotent, a
spendthrift, a gamester, a gull, his Mother was a Witch, his Father was hanged,
that he will surely beat her, that he is a desperate fellow, and will stab his
bedfellow, and that no body will lie with him. If she be fair and wanton, tell
him she will make him a Cornuto, and to sing an April song. If she be virtuous,
that it is but a cloak for her more secret vices, a mere outside, a whited
Sepulcher. If he be enamoured on a Widow, that she will still hit him in the
teeth with her first husband, that she has cast her rider, and will endanger
him too, and that a wife and children are a perpetual bill of charges.

Endeavor to divert the patients thoughts from his former Mistress, by making
him fall in love with another; upon whom when once his affection begins to take
root, make him hate that, and fall in love with a third; following this course
with him still, till at length he begins of his own accord to be weary of
loving: for (I Will assure you) he that is in love with many Women at once, will
never run mad for any of them; for the mind being thus disunited, the desires
are less violent; so one love takes away the force of another. Love is of the
nature of a burning-glasse, which kept still in one place fireth; but changed
often it does nothing, not so much as warm: or a kind of glowing cole, which
shifted from hand to hand, a man easily endures.

A young man (says Lucian) was pitifully in love, he came to the Theater by
chance, and by seeing variety of objects there, was fully recovered, E theatro
egressus hilaris, ac si pharmacum oblivionis bibisset; and went merrily home,
as if the had drunk a dram of oblivion. A Mouse (says the Fabulist) was
brought up in a chest, and there fed with fragments of Bread and Cheese,
thought there could be no better meat, till at last coming to feed on other
varieties, loathed her former life: just so it is with a silly Lover, none so
fair as his Mistress at first, he cares for none but her; yet after a while
when he has compared her to others, he abhors her name, sight, and memory.

If all this will do no good, let us see what may be done by Physical means;
Yet, some there are, who exclaim and cry with open throats against the Gods,
for ordaining for every malady a medicine, for every sore a salve, for every
pain a plaster; leaving only Love remediless, and then exclaiming with the
Inventer of Physic Apollo.

Hei mihi quod null is amor est medicalilis herbis!
Did you (Oye Gods!) deem no man (say they) so mad as to be entangled with
desire? or thought you them worthy to be tormented, that were so misled? have
ye dealt more favorably with brute beasts then with reasonable creatures? No
simple lovers you want not medicines to cure your maladies, but reason to use
the means.

Of Physical means therefore we will treat as follows.

First, It is good to take away the superfluity of blood, (if age and the
strength of the patient will permit) by opening the Liver vein. I should have
said, Vena hepatica, (but I speak as well to those that do not understand
Latin, as them that do) in the right arm, let the quantity taken be according
to the constitution and strength of the patient; and if you see cause, open the
Saphaena or ankle vein; for phlebotomie makes those that are dejected merry,
appeaseth those that are angry, and makes Lovers come to themselves, and keep
in their right minds, amantes ne sint amentes: for (says one) amantes and
amentes iisdem remediis curentur; Lovers and madnen are cured by the self-same
remedy: affirming that Love extended is mere madness* Aelian Montaltus says,
Love makes the blood hot, thick and black (being converted into black choler
and melancholy) and if the inflammation get into the brain, with continual
meditation, it so dryes it up, that a madness follows, or they make away
themselves, as diverse in that case have done.

Let him have change and variety of place, for that does awaken the spirits of
melancholy Lovers; let him not be without company and frequent conversation,
for many times that diverts the mind of a doting Lover, and cheeres him up,
making him see his error*

It is good for the Patient to be in a cold and moist air; and not to use in
his diet such things as do heat the blood and provoke lust.

Let him use to fast often, and feed often on bread and water: Sine Cerere and
Baccho frig^t Venus; Love takes not up his lodging in an empty stomach; but on
the contrary Venus delights in dainties.

Let him use these simples in his broth and sallads; Purslane. Sorrel.
Endive. Woodbine. Ammi. Succory.
And Lettice, which is so sovereign a remedy against this malady, that Venus
desiring to forget all her unchaste desires, buried her dear Adonis under a bed
of Lettice.

Likewise the syrup or conserve of Red-roses, or Province-roses; the same
virtue is attributed to Mints.

Let him also use to eat, Grapes. Mellons. Cherries. Plums. Apples. Pears.
Cowcumbers, etc.


It is good to take sometimes, Hempeseed. Seed of water Lillies. Hemlock.
Tu^san. Camphire. Cominseeds. Coriander seeds.
Agnus Costus, or the Chaste tree, not only the seeds of it used and taken in
what manner soever does restrain the instigation to venery, which it does by a
specific property, seeing it is of the same te^perature with Pepper, which
works contrary effects* and therefore the Athenian Matrons in their
Thesmophoria did use the leaves as sheets to lie on, thereby to preserve their
thoughts (if it were possible) from impurity.

Rue is an excellent remedy, but of different operation in Men an Women. One
quality thereof commend I must,
It makes Men chaste, and Women fills with lust.


Let his Sauces with his meat be, Vinegar, Orenges, or Verdejuyce. Lemmons,
Sorrel,

Let him abstain from all Aromaticall things, and all fried or salt meats;
because that salt by reason of its heat and acrimony, provokes to lust, those
that use to eat it in any great quantity.

Let him abstain from meats that are nutritive, hot, flatulent, and melancholy:
as, Soft Eggs. Partridges. Pigeons. Sparrows. Testicles of creatures. Quails.
Rabbets. Hares. Greengeese especially.


Let him not eat, Pine nuts. Pistachoes. Small nuts. Artechokes. Turnips.
Greenginger. Eringoes. Mustard.
Coleworts. Rapes. Carrots. Parsnips. Chestnuts. Pease. Sweet Almonds. Satyrion.
Onions. Water nuts. Rocket. Cich-pease. Beans. Syrrups. Electuaries.


Let him not lie upon a soft bed.

Also from all manner of Fish And that is the cause why women love fish better
then flesh, for they will have Plaice what ever they pay for it.
, etc. And Oysters. Prawnes. Lobsters. Crabs. Muscles. Cockles, etc.


Let him exercise usque ad sudorem, till he sweat again; provided that the
disease be not already grown to madness.

Often bathes are good.

Eye the heart, and be sure what ever you do, have a care to keep that on
wheels, for all melancholy vapors afflict that especially. Therefore to
fortify that, take Conserve of Roses. Borrage flowers. Buglosse flowers.
Rosemary flowers. Marigold flowers.
Saffron. Green walnuts preserved. Juniper berries. Bettony. Citron pills
candied, etc.


Thebane Crates says, there is no other remedy for Love then Time, and that
must wear it out; if time will not, the last refuge (says he) is an halter.
And that is a speedy and sure remedy, very quick of operation.

But when all fails, apply that Cordial salve to your corroding sore made by
loves wounding weapon, that excellent remedy, that sovereign balm, that
universal medicine, which if seasonably administered, will give you comfort when
you are most distempered. The Recipe is, Divine Contemplation; for certainly
those spirits which are truly raised to the study and knowledge of divine
things, and do well know the art of celestial contemplation, are elevated
above all terrestrial pleasures, in as much as eternity is above time, and
infinite felicities above vanities. And not finding any thing on earth worthy
our desire, and to fix our affections upon, let the object of our love and
felicities be in the Empyreall heaven. And while we are in these divine
ecstasies, let our spirits be so strong, as they may be conquerors of our
bodies; so heavenly, that they may esteem the chiefest pleasures of the body
(as this of heroic love) but as dung and dross, nay worse if worse may be, in
comparison of those sublime and celestial pleasures we enjoy in our souls. And
in such comparison we may rejoice more in contemning these corporeal delights,
and being above them, then in the fruition of them. Therefore in stead of
placing our affections on terrene objects, let us seek after that fountain and
wellspring of all love, loveliness, beauty, sweetness, and excellencies of
the Creator; which is infinitely more permanent, and does as much transcend all
other beauties and excellencies in the world, if they were all united in one:
so that when a soul is possessed with the beauty and love of God, it will have
the eye of its imagination fixed on him, often soaring and mounting up to
heaven as its center, on the wings of contemplation; and a sa vapor exhaled by
the Sun, often gliding after its love, being thereunto attracted by the
allurements of his most amiable, fair and divine luster and loveliness;
insomuch as it will be enlightened with glorious Ideas, touring apprehensions,
ardent affections, and celestial raptures. We will conclude with that Poetical
and Divine strain of the Nightingale of France. If wanton Lovers so delight to
gaze
On mortal beauties brittle little blaze;
That not content with (almost) daily sight
Of those deer Idols of their appetite;
Nor with the Ideas which the Idalian Dart
Has deep imprinted in their yielding heart;
Much more should those, whose souls, in sacred love
Are rapt with Beauties*proto-type above.


FINIS.
The Postscript.
READER,
I Know I shall come under the lash of a Satirical dijudication, and be boy'd
out of countenance, for presuming to appear in this Subject, which would have
become the neat flourishes of a more elegant pen. Therefore I will acknowledge
that Philomus as one of my most energetical palizadoes, who will defend this
Enchiridion against the malevolous aspersions of the venomous tongues of
detractors, that will endeavor to derogate its worth by calumny. But I have
Herculean hopes, that some will vindicate me (where I cannot answer for my
self) against the viperous brood of backbiters. And as I love not to come
within the jaws of such blackmouth'd Plutonian Curs; so I desire not to be
bandied up and down in the Tennis Court of this World with the Racket of
praise; for there is a Herb called Lingua pagana (I translate it) a double
tongue; the Devil that crafty Gardner has got a slip of it, and has set it
in the heart of the G^athonical Reader; for Bilinguis was none of Gods making;
no, it was of the Devils marring, he loves to make that double which God made
single: So there will be some Cloven tongues that will disallow of that in the
Writers absence, which before did approve of and commend in his presence; and
if such distastful Critics shall misinterpret the innocence of my harmless
meaning, I shall but reply, and play with their sporting Censures, as does Ben.
Johnson in his Play works, Their praise or dispraise is to me alike,
The one does not stroke me, nor the other strike.


I will conclude with one word to Momus, who like a cowardly Cur will fawn in a
Man's face, but bite him by the heels when his turned back has given the
farewell, or like the Choleric Horse-rider, who being cast from a young Colt,
not daring to kill the Horse cut the Saddle.

Think* (Momus) speak do what thou will, thou art free;
Thy thoughts, thy words, thy deeds are naught to me.
FINIS.
The Contents.
Of Love, the Original, the Universality and the Definition of it* page 1.
THe whole Universe tends to love* and that it was love which caused God to
create the World. page 1. Man's inclination to a seeming good, and the cause of
Woman's creation. 2. The sympathy that Minerals and Vegetables have one to
another. 3. The Definition of amorous love, and the several opinions of
Theophrastus, Montagne, Socrates, Tully, Seneca, and others. page 4, 5.
The policy of Paris, in the disposal of the golden ball to Venus. 5. The power
of the Planet Venus. page 6. The Concord betwixt Pallas, the Muses and Venus.
ibid. The Conclusion. 7.
The Causes of Love. page 7.
THe first cause from God. ibid. The second from the influence of the Stars. 8,
9. Parents and Education. 9, 10. The example of Themistocles. 10. Idleness.
ibid. Luscious fair. ibid. Dancing Schools, and Schools of Music. 11.
Quintilians opinion of Nurses. ibid. The example of Socrates. 12. A Harmony and
Consonancy of spirits, etc. 13. That beauty and goodness make us love. 14. The
great power that beauty has in procuring Love. 16. The particulars of beauty
causing Love, 1. The Eyes. 17. 2. Fair hair. 18. 3. The Tongue, a gracious
Laughter, Songs, Kissing, etc. 19. 4. A tall slender body, etc. ibid. 5.
Breasts and paps, affected carriages, garments, guises, colons, jewels,
pendants, painting, etc. 19. Apparel. 20. 6. Pleasant looks, glances, etc. 21.
Good instruction to Ladies. 21.
7. A tender and hot heart. ibid. 8. Love Letters. 23. 9. Words. ibid. 10.
Ear. ibid.
Lysidas love to Astrea. ibid. Money causing Love in Men. 23. Money causing
Love in Women. 25. What the Poets say are the causes of Love. 26. Fonsecas
opinion of the cause of Love. 27. The Conclusion. 29.
Of the Power and Effects of Love. 31.
WHat Plato calls Love. ibid. The effects of love in Animals. 31, 32. Diseases
caused by Love. 32. Powers and assaults of Love. 33. The variousnesse of it.
ibid.
Diverse examples of the Effects of Love. 35. The many dangers and hazzards
Lovers undergo. 37. Loves force is shown in the continuation of a design. 39.
The effects of love in Birds, etc. 40. The effects of love in old persons. 41.
In Maids. ibid.
Constancy in Lovers inconstancy. 43. How Lovers display the beauty of their
Mistresses. 43. The effects of love in She-lovers, with their earcharming
notes. 44. A loves simplician described. 47. A description a great many Guls.
48. Instructions to Lovers. 48, 49. Love strengthened by hope, etc. 51. A
description of the Palace of Love. 57. The effects of love in Women. 53, 54,
55, 56, 57. The conclusion. 58.
Of the Power and Effects of Love in Widows. 59
WIdows compared to Heralds Hearse-clothes, and how they will belie their age,
etc. ibid. The artificial discourse of Widows. ibid. Widow Courters, etc. 61.
The cause why Spaniards will not mary Widows. 61. Widows were ordained for
younger brothers. 62.
The Signs of Love. 63.
CAutions before you judges of signs. ibid. What Physognomie is. ibid. Various
signs of Love are from page 64. to 69. Signs of Love in Women. 75, 76, 77.
Signs of Love by Chiromancy. 77. Signs of Love by Dreams. 77, 78. Signs of
Love by Astrology. 79, 80.
At what Age we begin to be in Love. What Complexions do best sympathize. What,
etc. 81.
WHen it begins in men. 81, 82. When in Women. ibid. 83, 84, 85. What
temperatures and complexions do sympathize together, and are most prone to
receive the impression of this passion. 86, 87, 88, 89, 90.
In what principal part of the Body of Man is the seat of Love. 91.
WHere Love first enters. 91, 92.
Of Jealousy in Lovers. 93.
THe Definition of it. 93, 94. The Effects, Signs and symptoms of it. 94. 95,
96, 97, 98, 99. How it may be known who will be subject to jealousy by every
man's Nativity. 101.
The Remedies of Love. 102.
HOw to take away Love caused by the stars. 102, 103. How to remove it caused
by Parents and Education. 103, 104, 105, 106. How to extinguish it, caused by
beauty. 106, 107. That Love is sooner extinguished in presence then absence.
109. How to take away the cause of Money causing Love. 113, 114. A preservative
and sovereign receipt for Women to fortify themselves against the contagion of
this pussion. 115, 116, 117, 118, 119. How to extinguish Love according to the
way of the Arabians. 119. And the Parthians. 120, 121. Several other
instructions to divert the patients thoughts. 120. Physical cures, by letting
of blood* change and variety of places, and what air is best; How to diet him,
as what simples to use in his broaths. What Syrups and Conserves he must take*
What fruit he may eat, etc. What Sauces to use with his meats. 122, 123, 124.
What the patient must abstain from. 124. His Exercise. 125. Fortify the haart.
ibid. The remedy of Theban Crates. ibid. The Conclusion. 126, 127.
FINIS.

