DIONYSIUS GRANVILLE DECANUS DUNELMENSIS. AET. SVAE 54

Beaupoille pinxit

G. F. Edelinck Sculp.

J^pe^sis Thom^^ Hacquet

(...) h^s pitis sui anno Dom. 1693.

Serenissimum Dominum Jacobum Secundum Magnoe Britanioe Regem secutus est in
Galliam Anno 1688.

Propter fidelitatem Suam Domino Regi, Principe Arausiacensi Coronam Anglioe
Vsurpante, depriva^tus fuit anno 1691.



THE RESIGNED and RESOLVED CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL and UNDAUNTED ROYALIST.

In two Plain Farevvell-Sermons, and a Loyal Farevvell-Visitation-Speech.
Both delivered amidst the Lamentable Confusions occasioned by the Late FOREIGN
INVASION and HOME-DEFECTION of his Majesty's Subjects in England.

By DENIS GRANVILLE D. D. Deane and Archdeacon of Durham, (now in Exile)
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Whereunto are added Certain Letters to his Relations and Friends in England
showing the Reasons and manner of his withdrawing out of the Kingdom.

VIZ

A LETTER TO HIS BROTHER THE EARL OF BATHE.

A LETTER TO HIS BISHOP THE BISHOP OF DURHAM.

A LETTER TO HIS BRETHREN THE PREBENDARIES.

A LETTER TO THE CLERGY OF HIS ARCHDEACONRY.

A LETTER TO HIS CURATS, AT EASINGTON ET SEDGEFEILD.

Printed at Rouen by WILLIAM MACHUEL, rue S. Lo, near the Palace for JOHN
BAPTISTE BESONGNE, rue Escuyer, at the Royal sun, and are to be sold by
AUGUSTINE BESONGNE in the Great Hall of the Palace at Paris.

In the year of our Lord God M. DC. LXXXIX.

TO THE READER.
THE Subject Matter of these ensuing sheets, concerning Christian Resolution,
and Humble Submission to the will of God, in times of distress, (according to
the example of the holy Patriach Jacob) and Hearty subjection to the King,
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and our many Indispensable
ties of Conscience, will, with all those few who truly Fear God and Honor the
King, sufficiently a pologize, I hope, for the publication of them, in a
Juncture, and an Age, advanced to the highest contempt and defiance both of
Loyalty and Religion.

That Incensed God, who has for our manifold provocations, and more
particularly (we have reason to believe) for our Carnal Confidence in the
Arm of Flesh, and Disobedience to Gods Vicegerent, powered out the vialls of
his wrath on three Kingdoms, is not like to be appeased, without the serious
practice of the contrary Graces, in a manner, as Universal, and general, as
has been our late notorious Defection toward the King, by an abhorred and
detestable Violation of the many sacred, and often repeated Oaths, whereby all
subjccts were obliged to support his Crown and Dignity.

Such is my sense of what is past, and Dread of Allmighty Gods future
Indignation, when I consider that I am (how weak and unworthy soever) advanced
to a public station in the Church of England, that I cannot satisfy my self,
with mourning in secret, but conceive it my indispensable duty to proclaim
(after such a Stupendous Revolution) as soon, and as well, as I am able, to
all persons in the Kingdom, my unfeigned Resolution to adhere to my Sovereign,
in his distress; least I may, by silence, contribute to the increase of that
dangerous Lethargy, which has seized on the People of England, who, by
Resisting, and at length Deserting, their Prince, have Apostatized from their
Religion.

I have helped, possibly* as little as any one of my Brethren, or
fellow subjects, in the Nation, to the first growth of this disease, having for
six and tuentie years together openned my mouth widely* on Topics, which would
have prevented (had they met with due regard) our present misery: and for the
truth whereof, I appeal to the whole Jurisdiction whereto I have long related.

But however I cannot think my-selfe perfectly disengaged to ioyn in attempting
the Cure, or, at least, to help on what is, God be thanked, in some sort
begun, and vvhereto the contradictory, and preposterous, proceedings of the
Kings enemies have assisted; I mean to the oppenning the eyes of thousands in
England, to see already the madness of their Change, and the Errors of their
late method to redress Grievances; by laboring to bring their Sovereign to
Terms (all that was aimed at, I do in Charity believe, by the Church of
Englands fallen sons) and to deliver the Nation from Domestic Evils by
calling for Foreign Assistance.. The number of souls committed to my charge,
in the Cathedral, in my Archdeaconry, and in the Peculiar Jurisdiction
depending on the Church of Durham, are too many, and too considerable, to be
forgotten, or neglected by me, now, incapacitated otherwise to Preach to them.

Therefore in this low Ebb of Loyalty, when Instances of firm fidelity to
ones Prince are so rare, the Dean of Durham, it is hoped, will be pardonned,
if he sets so much value on his own Example, as to make use of it, as well as
his words and vvritings, toward the Extricating the People, with whose
souls he has been Entrusted, out of the Labyrinth whereinto they are Run,
by Noncompliance with their Lavvfull and Gracious Sovereign, and ready
Concurrence with a Foreign Usurper, or, at least, toward the Hindering them
from Running farther yet into it, and remaining stupidly in so sinful and
deplorable a state and condition.

This induces me to vvish, that I could bring the last words, I spoke to the
Clergy and Ecclesiastic Officers of my Archdeaconry, and to the Members of the
Cathedral and City of Durham (contained in the ensuing Discourses) to the
view and consideration of the whole County and Diocese* that those, who
were absent when I utterd them, may, as well as those present, partake of my
poor zeal and endeavors for their spiritual Advantage; which is all the
Return, I can at present make, for the temporal Benefits I have reaped in
that country, during my enjoyment of sundry considerable Preferments among them.

If such Communication of my* Papers cannot be so soon, and so successefully,
effected, as I would, by reason all Intercourse betwixt the Kingdom of England,
and this wherein I reside, is stopped, I am willing, in the mean while, to let
the world see, that I am not Idle, or Unconcerned, but do all that in me lies,
toward this honest End, whereby if no proffit accrews to them, or others, I
shall ease my mind and deliver my soul.

If any are pleased to censure, contemn, or reject my writings, because they
find nothing in them Learned, or Elaborate, ot (where of the Age is over-fond)
Controversial, I desire them to consider, that Polemik Learning and Divinity,
are things I never did, nor shall pretend to. And that in the month of November
88. when I spoke to the Clergy, and in the first week of December following,
when I preached in the Abbey, at Durham (as ill as things did portend) I little
dreamt, that my Sovereign, or self, should be put under an unavoidable
necessity to fly in to an other Kingdom; or that I should be obliged to make
use of such means, and methods to Evidence my sincerity in my Religion (the
first thing I should strive to Evince to all those to whose spiritual
Assistance I administer) otherwise more (...) Regard would had been had to the
Penning and Composure.

But since I am reduced to such hard circumstances (whereto, in conformity to
my own Doctrine I Heartily submit) and that the ensuing Discourses, how slight
soever and little worth, in themselves, are abundantly sufficient to
demonstrate, that both my Religion and Loya^^y are not of the New Cut, but of
the old Royal stamp, and carry whith them, I trust, the true Touch of the
Tower, Providence invites me to exposes them to public view, being ambitious
of nothing in ^^e world more, than to approve my self (in this Day of Rebuke)
to my Sovereign, and his rigth Loyal subjects, for one who thinks that he
obliged to be as Faithful to a Roman Catholic, as a Protestant, Prince, and
as true to him in Adversity, as Prosperity.

As far any Censures of vanity arising from my Title Page, as if I did there
set forth my self a Pattern of humility and Loyalty, they ought not to sway
with me so far, as to stop me, in my Endeavors to be so, or to persuade
others to become such, since thereto Heaven, at this time, loudly summons all
the Nation.

This I can truly say, without Pride or Boasting, that I have labored to
practice, what I have preached to others, and that I was never more, than at
this very instant, aspiring toward those Excellent (but rare) virtues
mentionned in the following discourses, which I commend to Gods Blessing, and
the Candid Readers Charity; desiring all persons in England, who have labored,
either by Kind Invitations, or Threats of deprivation to prevail with m^, to
return, and submit to the new Government; to receive this as my final Ansver.

TO WIT
If I be DEPRIVED, I am DEPRIVED; or to approach a little neaver to the Phrase
of Good Father Jacob. IF I BE BEREAVED (OF MY PREFERMENT,) I AM BEREAVED.

D. G.
From my study in Rouen Nov. 15. 1689.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author having been necessitated, for the discharge of his Conscience and
his own Justification, hastily to print these pieces (as before mentioned) in a
Foreign Country, where the Printer did not understand the language, and was
very little acquainted with the character all persons must understand, that it
was not possible to avoid a multitude of faults, in the Orthography and
Pointing, as well as sundry rules observed by Printers in England; tho^,
possibly, upon perusal they will find the Errors so inconsiderable, and
little hindering the sense, that they will rather wonder (as does the Author)
how the Printer should, all things considered, so well succeed in his
Undertaking.

ERRATA.
SERMONS.
PAGE 1. Line 2. requisire for requisite. p. 2. l. 14. out for our. p. 4. l. 5.
Hovever for Hovvever. l. 21. libetis for liberis. l. 22 Englist for English. l.
26. perisch for perish. p. 5. l. 5. theve for there l. 36. exptession for
expression. l. 37. pieus for pious. p. 6. l. penult. knavv for gnavv. p. 7. l.
19. effectts for effects. p. 8. l. 21. botomo for botomme. p. 9. l. 11. Savioar
for Savior. p. 11. l. 27. necessatily for necessarily. p. 13. l. 5.
familiarily for familiarity. l. 16. me^. for men. p. 15. l. ult. vvberedome for
whoredom. p. 19. l. 9. svvee for svveet. p. 26. l. 30. armed for aimed.

VISITATION-SPEECH.
PAge 8. Line 7. that repetition for that that repetition. p. 11. l. 27.
Stateholder for Stadthouder. p. 13. l. 10. danger for dangers. l. ult. princs
for prince. p. 14. l. 7. nee for we. l. 18. second remaining for second and
remaining. p. 16. l. 5. dot for does. l. 17. Conscience. Excess for Conscience
and Eccss. p. 17. l. 22. Incroacment for Incroch^ment. p. 18. l. ult. dvvdls
for dvvels. p. 19. l. 2. Horrid vices, are usually for Horrid vices! usually.
p. 21. l. 20. Cerent for Count. p. 22. l. 29. which among for among. p. 23. l.
12. hardhearted Jews for hard-hearted Jews.

LETTERS.
IN the Advertisement. Page 1. Line 26. (...) together for together. p. 2. l.
27. on all times for in all places. p. 3. l. 2. n 88. for in 88. l. 3. it for
is. The Date, to wit: Rouen Nov. 27. 1689. wanting in the conclusion.

TO THE EARL OF BATHE.
PAGE 3. l. 2. 700 for 700 lib. ster. p. 4. l. 15. thd for the. l. 16. entere
for entered. p. 5. l. 34. right. So for right, and so. p. 6. l. ^4. with in for
with his Grace in l. 32. h^vve for have. p. 10. l. ^4. 40. for 40. lib. ster.
l. 35. 40. for 40. sh. p. 29. l. 5. gs for it.

TO THE BISHOP OF DURHAM* etc.
PAGE 2. l. 18. with for with. p. 6. l. 16. was for were. p. 14. l. 16.
town had for town that had. l. 29. so for to. p. 31. l. 3. risdiction for
Jurisdiction* p. 43. l. 1. forgoing* page 38. for foregoing letter page 38. l.
12. bey for they. p. 46. marginal note. l. 3. Dearn's for Dean's. l. 18. the
for he. The smaller faults with may occur they Reader may easily correct in
reading.

FINIS.
TO THE QUEEN OF ENGLAND.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR MAJESTY.
ALLMIGHTY GOD having enabled me, by his grace, to resist those temptations
which have overcome the greatest number of the members of my own Church and
Country, and being now incapacitated here a bread to render my Sovereign, and
your Majesty, better service than to own your Righteous Cause, I think my
self obliged to give the world a more than ordinary Testimony of my sincere
Loyalty and Resolution, in all times and Changes, to adhere unalterably to the
Crown. Having therefore already sacrificed my Revenue by quitting the Nation
rather than submit to the Usurpation, and exposed my self to Censure and
Obloquy in that part of England wherein I have Lived, by Refusing to Head, or
Join with those my dependants there, Ecclesiastical and Secular, who have
departed from their Allegiance, I know of no better and more Convincing
Instance yet remaining to be given by me of my stedfastness to stick to, and
serve, the Royal family, than to proclaim that I dare speak truth here a
broad from the Press as well as from the Pulpit at home, tho every one must
foreknow that such an honest Boldness will unavoidably render me incapable of
the favor and good opinion of all those persons, in the Nation (High and Low
Spiritual and Temporal) who have Shipwrackt their Faith and Consciences by
ceasing to yield (after often swearing) Allegiance and Fidelity to their
Sovereign. And it is easy to foresee, that the Printing these, and some other
Papers, at this time, in mine own name, will thus render me obnoxious (as I
am Contented to be) to all those Builders, who employ themselves in Erecting a
New Monarchy and Church in England. But the Aspersions of them that forsake
their Religion, as far as they desert their Lavvfull Liege Lord, (as I hope the
follovving sheets will evidence) will be no intolerable Load to me, who
desire no greater Honor and satisfaction, than to share with my King, Queen,
and hope-full young Prince, in their Misfortunes, and thereby to demonstrate
that my poor distressed Mother, in the greatest and most general defection (as
this seems to be) that ever was among any King of Englands subjects, will
never want some to bear testimony to the truth of her Doctrine; who,
according to the Exemple of Christ and his Apostles, does maintain the
practice of Allegiance, and entire submission and subjection to all Lavvfull
supreme powers, deputed by God as his Vicegerents to Govern the world. How
great a contradiction hereof soever, the last years transactions in England
have proved (which has given the greatest vvound that was ever yet given to
our Church) the Doctrine of Non-resistance Remains on such authentic Record
in the Church of Englands Printed Homilies against Rebellion (which I have in
some sort Epitomized in the conclusion of my discourse) that your Majesty, as
well as the King, vvil, I hope, be pleased to continue your Charity to our
Ecclesiastic Constitution, with liberty to its members to Exercise their
Religion, and think no worse of the Parent for the disobedience of the
Children, but render that Justice to the Church of England, which is due to
all Churches, to wit, to be Judged by her Doctrine, Discipline, and Order
(which I am sure never did carry a long with them any Rebellion) and not by
the practice or Conversation of its Members. Whereby if the whole Christian
Church was to be Judged it would, in many things, appear more vile then
some parts of the world overrun with Turcisme and Paganism.

Offerring to God my most fervent devotions for the preservation and
Restoration of the King, the Life and Happiness of the Prince, and (out of
Gratitude to Heaven) in a most particular manner for your Majesty, who have
been Isntrumental to the Greatest blessing which has been these many years
conferred on the Kingdom, in bearing and bringing forth an Heir male for the
support of the Monarchy, I do, with all humility, implore yours, together
with his Majesty's Patronage, as well as beg Pardon for this Presumption, and
with the most profound respect imaginable subscribe my self

YOUR MAJESTY'S, MOST DUTIFUL and EVER FAITHFUL SERVANT and SUBJECT DENIS
GRANVILLE.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNINC CHRISTIAN RESIGNATION AND RESOLUTION, WITH SOME LOYAL
REFLECTIONS ON THE DUTCH INVASION.

Preached in the Cathedral Church of Durham on the 1. Wensday in Advent, and
the sunday follovving, being the 5. and 9. of December 1688.

By DENIS GRANVILLE D. D. Deane and Archdeacon of Durham, (now in Exile)
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

TWO SERMONS CONCERNING CHRISTIAN RESOLUTION And Humble Submission to the Will
of God in Times of Distress, on the Holy Patriarch Jacobs Farevvell Words to
his sons at Parting.
IF I BE BEREAVED OF MY CHILDREN, I AM BEREAVED. Genesis chapter 43. v. 14. FOR the
better Understanding of the Story it Will be requisire to read the precedent
Words from the 11. verse to the text. v. 11. If it must be so now, do this,
take of the best fruits of the Land, in your Vessels, and carry down the man
a Present, a little balm, a little honey, spices, and mirrhe nuts and almonds.
v. 12. And take double money in your hands: and the money which was brought
again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure
it was an Oversight. v. 13. Take also your Brother, and arise go again unto
the man. v. 14. And God Almicghty give you Mercy before the Man, that he may
send away your other Brother and Benjamin: IF I BE BEREAVED OF MY CHILDREN, I
AM BEREAVED.

Introduction.
THe Approaching Holy Feast of CHRIST'S NATIVITY, or Coming in the Flesh, does
Every year require, a Solemn preparatory time of Devotion. And that it may
not want such due respect the Church takes care in its preceding Exercises.
Every Sunday service during ADVENT has an Eye to that pious End and purpose.
In pursuance whereof we have in this Cathedral revived an Ancient Religious
Custom. Two days of every week throughout this season, to wit wednesdays and
fridays, are Sermon Days and dedicated to Prayer and Fasting, to accompany
those Exercises of Repentance which are always thought a necessary part of
out Preparation. But Gods Impending Judgments for our sins which at this time
threaten Blood and Confusion, do summon us to add to those exercises, and by
some voluntary impositions of Daily Devotion, and Mortification, to turn this
Advent in to A little Lent, giving up our selves wholly to the Exercise of Piety
and Prayer, beseeching God that he will not Enter into Judgment with us, and
for our provocations give us up as a Prey unto our Enemies, making us a scorn
and derision to them that are round about us. It is lawful, nay Religious, by
Devout Prayer, to Use Violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, and if we did in this
our Distress betake our selves to so sure a Refuge, making use of the Holy
Weapons of the Ancient Christians, PRAYERS and TEARS, crowding up to the horns
of the Altar, and rendering all our Devotions more prevalent by the weekly
Reception of the Lords Supper, we that meet in Gods House (if we came with
that spirit Which we ought) might do our King and Country better service than
those who fight for him in the Field. What has been said I premise in regard
to the present Season of ADVENT and the Ensuing Feastivall of CHRISTMAS, by
reason my text does not respect Either of them, so particularly, as the Storm
and Danger Which is imminent, and does loudly call for the Holy Resolution,
asvvell as submission of Pious Jacob. And having so done, I shall (before I
enter on the Words) Move you to Pray, according to the Canonical Exhortation
of the Church.

Ye shall pray for the Holy Catholieck Church of Christ, that is, for the
whole Congregation of Christian people dispersed throughout the World; more
espetially for the Churches of Great Britain and Ireland. And here in I am to
require you more particularly to pray for our Dread Soudraigne Lord, James by
the Grace of God King of England etc. Ye shall likewise pray for our Gracious
Queen Mary, Katherine the Queen dovvager, his Royal Higness the Prince of
Wales etc.

Concluding your Devotions always with the Lords Prayer. Our Father. etc.

THe PATRIARCHS were now returned from their first journey Egypt, and (as they
little thought) from full-filling their Brother Joseph's dream. They had Bovved
to him, whom they thought they had Robbed of all Honor, and been Fed by him
whom they once conspired to Starve. So inviolable is Gods purpose in things to
man impossible.

OLD JACOB here at first with greatest Joy wellcomes home his weary sons, but
excess of gladness is commonly attended on with Grief, and the end of Joy is
Mourning. Whiles he is yet congratulating their good success in their
Journey, the sad news of Simeons Imprisonment, silenceth his mirth. Which
Grief too is attended on by a greater; the necessity of his Dear Benjamins
going into Egypt. Crosses in Gods Children just like Billows in the sea follow
one on the neck of another.

The GOOD FATHER is not less troubled with this Nevves, than at the sight of
Joseph's Bloody Coat, And Cruel Famine pressing violently on him we may
Conceive him to take up his son Reubens note in the 27. chapter of this Book, and
at the 19. v. The Child is not, and vvhither shall I go? What shall I do,
miserable man that I am! My Dearest Rachel is dead, my beloved Joseph is not,
Simeon is not, and can I leave Benjamin also? I remember my sons, What news
you brought me of Joseph, and Should you Do the like of Benjamin too, You
would bring down my Gray hairs with Sorrovv to my Grave. And yet vvoe is
me, I must send him or perish, no redemption of Simeon, no food without
Benjamins going into Egypt, and without food no life. I had better venture one
than dravv destruction upon my whole house. Thus then my sons* seeing it must
be so, On God will I rely for your safeties, his Providence be your Guide,
Benjamin shall go with you. Hovever Gods Providence must not stop your
diligence, nor his Care for you prevent yours for your selves; but use all
possible means to excuse your selves and content the Ruler v. 11. If it must
be so now, do this, take of the best fruits of the Land, in your Vessels and
carry down the man a Present, etc. v. 14. And God Almighty give you Mercy
before the Man, that he may send away your other Brother and Benjamin, IF I
BE BEREAVED OF MY CHILDREN, I AM BEREAVED.

I need not stand long on the words: the Story is well known, and it gives
you some light in to the sense and Occasion of them.

The Difference between Interpreters is more in words than substance.

Ari^^ (...) nearest to the Original, does translate them, Et Ego qu^modo
Orbatus sum, Orbatus sum.

(...) says the Septuagint.

Near this S. Ambrose and others, Ego autem quasi orbatus, absque libetis ero.

^^ni^^ as also our late English Translation to the same sense, but more fully
render it, Quum Orbatus fuero, Orbatus fuero. IF I BE BEREAVED OF MY CHILDREN I
AM BEREAVED.

A speeeh, much like to that resolute speeech of Queen Hester. Hest: 4. 16.
Quum periero, periero. If I perish, I perisch.

S. Chrysostom in his 64. Homily on Genesis, makes Joseph's absence the cause of
this speech, as if Jacob had accounted he had in a manner lost all his
Children when he had lost him. Another will have Benjamin the Chief motive.
Calvin and Musculas put all the brethren for the ground of it, Who seeing their
Fathers great care and sorrovv, might themselves be the more careful in their
Journey.

How probably soever these seem reasons of his former complaints, in his
discourse with Reuben at the 36. v. of the chapter immediately before, and with
Judah at the 6. v. of this chapcer, Yet, they are no certain grounds for this
Speech.

Fidelis vox est non desperati non eiulautis.

Luther.


It is the voice of a faithful soul, says Luther, and not of a desperate man
complaining, for, we shall find on Enquiry, that it savours more of Constancy
than fear. Affection laments, but Faith rejoices. Though he seems to doubt,
yet the Event tells us, his Prayer was not without Faith. True indeed a great
combat theve was for a time, Affection fighting with Discretion, Nature with
Necessity, but all this was but ad Luctam, no Conquest ensued. Plangi^
affectus, sed fides exultat. id.


He does but dispute the cause, and forecast the worst. Extreme Power is here
conjoined with Extreme infirmity. When he was vveake, like the Apostle,
then he was strong. Gods never failing Spirit contents him at the last, he
puts off all further Care to Gods Providence, resolving to endure what ever
happend. As if he should say, Gods will be done. Benjamin shall go with the
rest, and I IF I BE BEREAVED OF MY CHILDREN, I AM BEREAVED.

You see (Brethren) my text is a faithful submission of a Resolved Patriarch
to the Will of God: A meditation which I recommend to all your most serious
thoughts as suitable to this Day of Calamity, and State of Affairs. To improve
the same, by rendering it Exemplary to us Christians in General, and more
particularly by so authentic and Godly a Pattern to persuade you who hear
me to imitate the laudable Resolution of this Man of God; in parting with your
Beloved Benjamins, that is your Dearest Delights in times of Temptation, rather
than Forsake your Integrity, shall be the Design of my remaining Discourse.

By the Godly Example of the Good Father Jacob, we may learn in all Adversity,
to rely faithfully on Gods merey, to hearken to the voice of right Reason, and
to Keep a Good Conscience, without giving ear to Flesh and Blood; not doubting
if we do so, but that we also, in the Conclusion, like old Jacob here, shall
receive a Revvard.

The best men are as he was, liable to all manner of Afflictions, even to
Poverty, Scorn, and Contempt; yea they may be cast down, but if they can in
Patience ^ossesse their souls, and will wait Gods leisure, they shall rise
again. God backs their Conflicts with irresistible Power. Though Sorrovv,
Extremest Sorrow, endure for a night, Yet Joy, says the Psalmist, shall come
in the Morning. When Israel laments for the absence of all his other sons; he
is comforted with the recovery of them and Joseph. A Joy as far beyond his
sorrow, as that before Exceeded his exptession.

That I may the more effectually persuade you to such Pieus Resolutions, and
faithful Submissions to the will of God.

CONSIDER.
1. THe Necessity of them we must submit our selves to the will of God,
according to the Example of Jacob, whensovever we are, as he was, afflicted
or Tempted. 2. The Quallity or Nature of them. How we must Submitt our selves.
3. The Benefit Redounding from them, why we ought to do it. Which last head,
(the two first affording matter enough for one Discourse,) I shall reserve for
another Sermon.

Of these particulars by Gods assistance, (which I beg at this instant, in an
Extraordinary manner) I intend to treat at this time.




Necessity of them, and here I must take my Rise from Nature.

So careful is Nature in providing for her own safety, that every shadow of
Danger affrights her; and too Jealous of Adversity oftentimes becomes most
dangerous to her self; like the Partridge in the nett, entangles her self the
more by her own flutterring. Man is never more plunged into the troubled sea of
Calamity, than when, in his own strength he most struggles to get out of it.
It is in vain for him to fight against Nature. Her degenerated weaknesses
beget our greatest miseryes; and they having so near a Relation to her, she
cannot put them off! Man may discover, not Expel, them, but (which is the
chiefest misery) the nearer he pries into them, the worse, so doing he makes
a new wound, by too deep a search into the Old. Just as if he dug in some
putrid Grave, or went into some darksome Cell. The Deeper he digs, the more
noisome the Stench, and the farther he goes the greater the Horror. In which
perplexity he is made such a slave to his passion, that he is unfit for any
employment: unsettled in his thoughts, inconstant in his actions; his whole
course of life (like a skene of ruffled silk) inextricably entangled in the
world, either the loss of wealth, or care of getting it, trouble him.

He has no sooner secured himself from a foreign Enemy, but a domestic
sets upon him. Ambition of Rising, or Fear of Falling, the loss of one
friend, or danger of another still know upon him, you shall sooner find him not
a Man, than not some way or Other distracted.

This Continual Involving of all things, and winding of men's minds with them,
drove the Stoics of Old to their Fatum, making, as it were, an immutable law
of Mutability in natural things. But their ground we may be sure, was
Pride, not Faith, who tho they felt themselves daily crostvvith contrary
Motions, yet scorned to Confess their Natural Weakness, in not subjugating,
or rather not eradicating their Passions. And therefore put off all events from
themselves to Destiny, whatever happend, they resolved to endure it, as tho
not to be avoided, and sought no farther for any Cause of a Calamity, than
sic* Fata velint. No Evil they supposed could proceed from their impassionate
souls, theyvvere in their own Opinion absolute men, and therefore whatever
came amiss (Casus in culpam transeat) it was not they did amiss, but Fortune.

Such Heathenish resolutions need no confutation in a Christian auditory; we
have changed their Fate into Providence, looking more to the first than the
second Causes; to these only as they are disposed by the former, in which all
things consist, and by which all things are Governed. But did the Heathens
then so firmly rely on natural Causes, whose effectts though certain, (as
by the first cause the God of nature before determined) yet they eould not,
without injury to Experience, but expect uncertain? It were a double shame
for a Christian, not to submitt more resolutely to divine Providence, which
he believes un changeable. Such a Resolution is the strongest Fort, that can
defend a Good man's Heart (and let us now fly unto it in our present
visitation) No Engine of Satan can reach it, No storm of Fortune shake it,
nor Calm betray it. Whereas without it Man shakes at the first sight of Every
Cloud of temptation, and like a hot iron hisses (as it were) at every drop of
Affliction which touches him.

I need stand no longer to prove so Granted a principle. We will conclude
Christian Warfare must be under the Banner of divine Providence. Whosoever
desires peace of Conscience and true Comfort, must resolutely submit himself
in all things to the Will of God.

But is this all Says the Stoicall Christian? Men may live then as they list.
Gods Providence is inevitable, my best endeavors cannot prevent it. If I shall
be saved, I shall be saved. If damned I shall be damned. A Desperate
Doctrine of Satan, and the height of Iniquity, like that of the Devil to our
Savior, Mat. 4. 6. Cast thy self down Headlong, for he has given his
Angels Charge over thee. Christ's Answer to the Devil there, must be ours to
his Disciples here. Scriptum est. It is written thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God. God will not have his Decree brought to man's unjust Determination, and
hates all unnecessary trials of his Power. We may not Trust to his Promises,
except we Obey his Commands, nor Rely on his Power only, when he affords
us means to use our own.

Natural Quest. l. 2. c. 37.
The very Heathens were not so senseless in their Destiny. Some things, says
Seneca, were so determined of the Gods, that the prayers of the people should
conduce to their Events. And this very thing he adds, is not contrary but
according to Fate. And Gods Providence as it has absolutely decreed all things
to their proper End, so has it ordained means to those Ends, to use which is
not against Providence but of it, As he that is ordained to be a Scholar, is
by the same Omnipotent Power ordained to bestovv his Time in Learning; And he
that shall avoid dangers, shall use means to pacify Gods wrath by the same
decree. These are Senecas Instances in his book de Fato.

Learn of him whoever thinks it an Easy way to Heaven, by mere hanging on
Gods Decree. Neglect of Ordinary means is a sign of the want of Grace. While
we stand gazing on the stars, let us bevvare lest our feet slip into the
water under us, and vvhiles we are diving to the botomo of the Rock for the
more Rich Pearls least we loose both our selves and them. Let us not dispute
dovvnvvards from Gods Election, but Upvvards from our own Sanctification,
dravv our Arguments a posteriori from the Effect to the Cause. Not say
presumptuously, I am Elected, and there fore I must be saved, but with modesty
rather begin at home, Saying, I feel the Operation of Gods holy Spirit,
inclining me to seek the Ordinary means of Salvation through JESUS CHRIST,
and therefore I trust I am Eleeted, and by necessary Consequence, Conclude thou
may be Saved.

To avoid this dangerous Shelfe in the business of our Salvation, we have
need of a tvvofold Pilott to direct our Course, Faith and Fear, which well
temperd together declare the Quality, or Nature of a Christian Resolution, How
we ought to rely on Gods Providence the second thing I am to show you, to
wit, That Christian Resolutions are mixed with Fear and Faith.

Fear and Faith? It will be very natural to Question. Fear perturbs us
through the Apprehension of future Evil, says the Philosopher; and can any
evil happen to those who are in CHRIST JESUS, demands the Divine, as we are
by Faith Romans 12. 15. A plain Contradiction, it may seem, to fear Evil and
believe none shall happen to us. Fear not, says your Lord himself Luke 12.
32. and shall we cross his precept by trembling? Cast your care on him for
he cares for you 1. Pet. 5. 7. and can we think his care insufficient? why
should we fear?

There is a Comentatour which casily cuts this knott, (...) vetat Apostolus non
(...). The Apostle says he forbids not a studious Industry, but an inordinate
Carking Care, whose only fruit is destruction. And our Savioar Condemns not all
fear, but that of punishment, carnal and servile fear, steps to despair.
His own practice approves of both timorem Cultus and Culpae; a devout and
filial fear in holy worship and careful fear of Offending, who in the
days of his Flesh, off rd up prayers and supplications, with strong Cries,
and Tears unto him, which was able to save him and was also heard in that
which he feared. Heb. 5. 7. Our Blessed Lords Practice is the best warrant for
ours, he himself being the Architype of all righteousness, whose life ought
to be the Canon and Rule of his Disciples.

These two Joined in CHRIST JESUS, our Grand Exemplar, who is the Way, the
Truth and the Life, serve as two stars to direct his followers unto him. Fear
stirs us up to seek all possible means for the prevention of Evils, Faith
keeps us from despair. Fear is linked with the beginning of wisdom, without
which your best actions are but as th^se Apples of Sodom which being touched
vanish into smoke, or as Trees without fruit, or shells without kernel.

As an ignorant Careless Mariner without his Compass, we should be driven
upon all the shoales and rocks of temptation, were not this fear placed in our
Hearts, as a watchman to forewarne our drowsy souls of approaching danger. And
as Gideon on Zeba and Salmunna Judge. 3. 11. Satan would surprise us unawares,
and rob us of our very Hearts and Consciences while we sleep in security. But
where the Heart is well fraught with fear, there is no room for Satan and
his train. It quickly espies and prevents his most cunning Plotts, putting to
flight those armies of temptations, with which he uses to beseige man's
wounded Conscience. The holy Psalmist does well inform us of the Power and
Force of Fear, when he tells us that it fights with Angels strength. Ps. 34.
7. The Angel of the Lord, says David, stands round about them that fear
him, and delivers them. So that we may here without crime presume to cross
our Saviors speech in another Case of servile fear (understand me of an holy
fear) O men of little faith why are ye not afraid?

Cum crescerit Gratiae time, ^u^ abierit time, eum revertetur time.

S. Bern.


Whensoever the Grace of God shall begin to increase in thee, Fear: When it
shall depart from thee, Fear. And when it shall return to thee, Fear. Says
S. Bernard. When thou first feel Gods holy Spirit to move within thee, fear
thine own unvvor thinesse, that thou receive it not in vain; A Gift not used
at all, or not well employed, is a dishonor to the Donour. When thou feel
any decay, or suspension of the Operation of Grace within thee, fear Gods
displeasure, who for some Cause, or other, suffers thee thus to fall. But most
of all must thou fear when Gods Grace is revived within thee, for the relapse
is worse than the former disease, Therefore thy Fear must increase with thy
danger, least being made clean thou should sin again and a worse thing
happen unto thee.

In adversity let us humbly acknowledge with Job the punishment of God is
fearful. In prosperity with David, there is mercy with God that he may be
feared. In all estates let his Essential presence beget an awful Fear and
Reverence in all our Actions; since there is nothing more fearful in the
Saints and Servants of God than not to fear. Jer. 32. 40.

However scruple not hence (ye sincere, tho imperfect, Christians, ^ver
subject sometimes to despondency) the certainty of your Salvation. "An holy
fear does not make us more scrupulous but more certain says S. Bernard, in
his 15 Sermon upon the Psalms. For this Fear (as Hope) is the fruit of an
holy Faith, and S. Paul joins it with Faith. Romans 11. 20. as an Antidote to a
high Mind, thou stand by faith be not highminded but fear, and indecd is
the ground of our assurance of Salvation, which we cannot have but by faith, I
say by faith, not as if that were not certain; but to exclude that certainty
of Evidence and sense, which requires an absolute assent, both in respect of
the truth of the thing, and of our knowledge, because it is so, and because we
can demonstrate it to be so. As when we say 4. is more than 2. the whole is
greater than part; perfect knowledge of sense and Experience absolutely
conclude it most certain.

The certainty of our Salvation is a faithful cleaving to the sure promises of
CHRIST JESUS. Tho this in respect of it self be more absolute than that of
sense, as faith is more certain than any science, yet man's mind not thoroughly
purged, from the foggy Mists of Original pollution, cannot clearly determine.

CHRIST indeed has broken down the Partition Wall between God and his
people, yet has he set the Register of his Elect, beyond the ken of any
mortal eye. Neither can we assure our selves any otherwise of our Salvation,
than by trusting in him, by applying particularly what he (that cannot lie)
has spoken in General. Whosoever believes in me shall be saved. And this
is in no man so perfect, but that the best may still pray, adjuva me Domine,
Lord help my unbeleife. He that does not thus fear, has no faith and then
no certainty.

As the Spirit of God witnesses we are the sons of God, so Fear testifies
we have the Spirit. No man more surely relyes on his Savior, than he that
most fears to Offend him; so is it no paradox at the same time to tremble and
rejoice in the Lord. The frailty of our nature and the subtilty of the Devil
conspire for our Ruin; here is good Cause to fear. But JESUS CHRIST is our
Castle and Defense, here is greater Cause to rejoice.

A man on the top of an high tower looking down and considering the danger of
a fall trembles to think thereon, but looking back on his feet and seeing
himself environned on every side with battlements rejoices that he is so
secure of the danger. So the most steady beleiver tho he know that under the
protection of the Allmighty he cannot miscarry, yet he (sometimes) trembles
to reflect on the deplorable Estate of Falling away. Allbeit his principle be
true, the Word of God cannot fail in any tittle, Whosoever beleiveth shall
be saved, yet is he Jealous of misapplying it to himself. Tho he thinks
he stands, he must take heed least he fall. For it is the Condition of
Grace and Faith as of Nature, still to desire increase and perfection, which
necessatily requires earnest prayer, and this implies a sollicitous Fear.

So then we may say of a Christian, as scipio sometimes spoke of Rome, it was
more secure when it stood in awe of Cartbage. The Church was never freer from
Herisies than in the time of Persecution, and the End of Persecution was the
beginning of Herisy, We are most certain, when we are most tempted. When
Satan desires to vvinnovv S. Peter as wheat, then Christ's prayer assures him
of Salvation. Christ's Intercessions are more prevalent than any temptation, and
unless we render them ineffectuall by impenitency, they are never in vain.
Nevertheless his Prayer may not hinder ours, nor his Allsufficiency exclude
our labors. We must pray to him, and he will pray for us. Let us fulfill
his Commandments, and he will fulfill his Promises. If we Love him, let us
fear to offend him. If we have Confidence of our Election in him, then let us
use all diligence to make our Calling and this our Election sure, by adding
good works to our Faith, in doing where of we shall never fall. It was an
Heathen Cannon, that Fortune should not be prayed unto, but with hands in
Motion; intimating that no Sacrifice could be accepted from a sluggard. And it
is the Apostles Rule, we all know, to add Virtue to Faith, industry to Prayer.
For to cry God help, and not to put to our helping hand, is as vain as to
labor without Gods Help. Not as if his Power were insufficient, but because
our Endeavor is required to entitle us to his blessing.

Shall the Plovvman burn his Plow, or Mariner his ship? because God has said
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Shall we not provide decent
clothing? because we must not take inordinate care for Raiment. Because
CHRIST says, take no Care what ye shall eat, shall we therefore expect
another white sheet from Heaven? Or with the suggard in the Fable, lie on the
ground, and expect the falling of the figgs with Open mouth. Which is not to
serve God, but to tempt him. Such idleness becomes none worse than a soldier
of CHRIST'S band. The vvatch-man must vvatch, though it be God that preserves
the city. His vineyard must be husbanded, and his Garden dressed. Paul must
plant, and Apollos water, before God give the increase. God could have healed
Hezekiah without a Bunch of figs. Our Savior, no doubt, could have spoken the
word to the blind man, and he should have received his sight; but that his
actions might be our Examples, he uses means for the Cure, he anointed his
eyes with clay, bad him vvash in the poole of Siloam before he could see. And
in the 27 of the Acts of the Apostles, he gives S. Paul all the souls in the
ship. His promise could not fail, yet their own sedulity was required to
their Safety; by svvimming and using broken pieces (you will find by the
story) they all came safe to the Land. For how certain soever things are in
respect of him who knovveth the End of all things, as well of those which
shall be, as those which are or have been, they are not so in respect of our
knowledge (as you have heard) wherefore we must not idly Cast our selves
upon his Providence, but humbly submit our selves unto it, always shevving
our devotion in Prayers against an Evil, tho we cannot our Power in
overcoming itt.

Discreet Diligence must accompany our Affection; Faith must be our Anchor, and
we must Row with Fear, even with Fear and Trembling, in the least
matter of our Salvation. Not like those whose Faith dares speak as boldy to
their Maker as their Neighbor, and hear his Embassage with less reverence,
nay with like familiarily, as the Message from an Acquaintance, searching into
the very secrets of God, and presuming to learn, what God has refused to
teach; A Generation which may beknovvn by their Boldness, who take Christ's
Office upon themselves, and will weed out those tares which he said should
grow with the wheat till the Harvest. And like true Pharisees they separate
themselves from the Congregation of their Btethren, thinking themselves more
Holy than they, and more skillfull in Gods Counsels than if they were
imediately inspired from on high, intrepreting Gods Deepest Mysteries without
an (...), at first sight, yea and that more sanctifiedly too than with a
Months preparation.

Daniel (I doubt not) as wise a man and as holy as any of these meu,
Ecclesiastic or Layick^, will not presume to intrepret so much as a Dream
without respite and consideration; He first Prays, you will find, with
his Company to God for Mercy concerning the secret. Nor will Hester speak
unto her King, until she be assisted with the prayers of all the Jews in
Shushan. And S. John (as S. Jerome reports in his prologue upon S. Matthew)
entreated by the Bishops of Asia his Brethren, to write his Gospel, against
the Heriticks Ebion and Cerinthus, first required a public Fast to be
solemnized throughout the whole Church.

Such preparation in a Proportion is requisite in our lesser affairs. Rashly
to enter the lists of any business (espetially that which is sacred) is
impudently to Challenge a Blessing not to entreat one, which profane Neglect
of Duty how slightly soever men esteem of it, savours of Infidelity and
Atheism. For who can Confess a Deity and be ignorant of its concurrence to
all actions, and who can know this, and without great impiety, forbear to
implore its assistance.

To ask Help of God the Creator can be no prejudice to man, his Creature; but
his greatest advantage and highest Honor. Nether do man's ordinary means and
endeavors detract from Gods Allsufficient Providence but declare its Power.
We sceing the slenderness of our own strength, with greater admiration,
acknovvledge his Omnipotence which works all in all.

Our Good old Father Jacob here well knew the Power and Mercy of God, yet does
he not presume in a danger though he be resolved to bear it; but uses his
best means, his faithful Heart and trembling Hand are employed together: The
one in providing Presents for the Ruler of Egypt, the other in sending up
Prayers to God. If the first cannot persuade him, the last shall command him.
Faith is the ground of his diligence, He first relyes on Gods Mercy; and Fear
the Rule of his actions, He goes about to pacify the Rule.

Well then (quoth he) if it must be so, my sons, do thus, take of the best
fruits of the Land in your vessels, alittle balm, alitle Honey spices and
mirrhe, nutts and Almonds, etc. His Prayers second his outward means, And God
Allmighty, says he, give you Mercy before the Man, that he may send away
your other Brother and Benjamin, and what soever happens, I will endure it,
yea, IF I BE BEREAVED OF MY CHILDREN, I AM BEREAVED.

necessity and manner of Submitting to the Will of God. I shall now enter on
the 3 Part. of my text, and show you the Benefit redounding from such
submissions.

Common Place, and one of the most Common of Common Places even that of
Adversity or afflistion, as often preached as felt. However there will be noe
cause to pass it over, since I am naturally led thereto by the Time, as well
as my Text, a Time of Judgment, of War, and of Danger, threatening our Poor
Church and Kingdom with a heavy measure of affliction, and large portion of
this Bitter Cup, which I fear is like to be felt, or tasted (unless a speedy
Return in Duty to God and the King prevent) by our selves, and our Posterity.
While temporal crosses remain (which dye only with Man) we must preach their
Necessity and Benefit; The one as absolute, the other to the Godly certain.

To Do Good and suffer vvrong after CHRIST'S blessed Example, is an Especial
part of Christian life and Duty. Your Diligence has been required for the
first, the last requires your Humility upon the same grounds of Faith and
Fear; whereto if you do add (since Heaven frowns upon this Land,) a profound
Humiliation, you will do more than God Expects at your hands.

Not to fear Affliction becomes a Rigid Sceptick, or senseless Stoic, not an
affectionate Jacob, or tender hearted Joseph. On the other side, to be utterly
cast down in the Bed of Sorrow, fits not an Abraham, but a Cain. Both Good and
Just is God, says holy David; Good and Gracious to teach patient sinners in
the way; but Just also to punish those, which run on still in their iniquity.

Happy then are those troubled spirits (let me mind them) where this
Constellation appears, where Fear acknowledges God a Just Judge, and Faith
beleiveth him a loving Father.

Adversity indeed, is the Discipline of Gods house, under which he brings up
his Children, through fear of which he bridles their inordinate affections,
and by disenabling and mortifying them works an unwillingnesse to offend. For
Example.

The Rich man spoiled of his Riches, sees their uncertainty, and so flies back
from his eager pursuit of them to him that gave them. The Vainglorious and
ambitious man degraded from Court to Cottage, and after all his Industry and
endeavor to Rise, brought Low, and made an Object of Contempt, sees plainly
there is no Confidence in any humane Help, no not in the best and most Potent
of Princes, nor in any child of man (according to David's observation) teaching
him to trust only on the King of Kings. The Good Father here in the text
bereaved of his Children, confesses they were but a broken staff, and when he
could not longer continue a Father, contented himself fully that he was the
Child of God.

So prone is our Nature to all Voluptiousnesse and uncleanesse* and so
rebellious are our affections against any good, that nothing but this Wormwood
can weane us from sucking the dregs of worldly and sensual Pleasures, or stop
us in this Earthly pilgrimage from running headlong to destruction. He is
certainly miserable, who never felt any misery, if we believe Seneca, and it
is good Divinity in the Heathens own sense. Hos itaque quos probat Deus, quos
amat, indurar, Lib. Cur bonis viris mala accidunt. c. 4.
recognoscit, exercet, quibus indulgere, quibus parcere videtur molles venturis
malis servat. Very near that of the Apostle, Heb. 12. 6. The Lord Chasteneth
whom he loves, and scourges every son whom he receives, but reserveth
whom he seems to pass by (Quibus parcere videtur, he does but seem to
pass them over) for greater punishment.

God less regards a thousand beams in the Eyes of the wicked, than one Mote
in the eyes of his people. I will not punish (says God by his prophet) your
daughters when they Commit vvheredom nor your, sons when they commit
adultery. Hos. 4. 14. But you whom I have chosen of all the earth, will I
punish for all your Iniquity. Amos. 3. 1.

Thus Gods People in this life are as it were traveling from Egypt to Canaan.
Tho our deadly Pharaoh, the Enemy of mankind, be over whelmed in the red sea of
Christ's blood, that he cannot throw us down, yet can he east Rubs in our way
to stumble us. Some Amerites there will be still to Oppose us. The Canaanite is
yet in the Land. The Flesh and the World erect Golden Calves, suggest
Murmurings, and Lusts, whereby we provoke God to wrath, and force him by
affliction to Chastise and correct us into the right way.

Our Journey is as theirs numb. 21. 22. from Bamoth to Pisgath* from the vale
of humility and Death, to the plain hill of Happiness and Everlasting life. So
S. Jerome applies these words in his Epistle ad Fabiolam.

And this (before we proceed) may also afford a proffitable lesson for this
Worlds Darling. Has any ascended this hill of Happiness? Let him not cast his
scornful eye on his brother in the vale, but look rather toward Ieshimon the
wilderness over against him, pity them which are in it, and praise God for
his better Mansion. Let him not forget that the Hill whereon he stands is
Pisgah, which S. Jerome Interprets dolatus, Smooth as if it were plained, very
slippery, with an Easy descent, from which the least slip may cast him down
thither, whence with great labor he got up making him feel by experience
that a Relapse is a double Fall. But this by the way.

We may take one type more of the Sts. afflictions from the Israelites. There
was never any honey (observes the same Father) in their Sacrifices; neither
were the lights which burnt in their Tabernacles of wax which is sweet, but of
Oil sharp and bitter. As if they ought not enjoy the least Emblem or Shaddovv
of Pleasure. But however it was withthem, certain itis to us Christians, that
our Joy and feli city is not in the Creature here below, but in those things
vhich are above, where Cbrist sitts on the right hand of God, vvhereon we
ought to set our Affections, and which are the only object of a right
mortified and faithful Christians Search. Our Light as well as Life is in
Heaven, Where our Conversation* also ought to be, and where we shall by the
assistance of the Allmighty and a truly sanctified use of Gods Visitations
(Which are a christians best directions) in the Conclusion Arrive to our
Everlasting comfort, if we are not vvanting to our selves. CHRIST JESUS the
Sovereign of men and Angels and Captain of our Salvation, if we readily and
heartily follow him and Trust in him, will bring us (and it is only He Ps.
66. v. 12.
that can bring us) through fire and water into a vvealthy Place. He is our
MOSES to lead us (for we cannot go without him) from Bamoth to Pisgah through
many Tribulations, through all the difficulties of our lives and callings, into
the Kingdom of Heaven, and Port of our Salvation. And this is the end of Gods
visitations. The Fire of Adversity is designed to refine us, to purge away our
dross, and to fit us for those pure mansions, whereinto no unclean thing can
enter.

Who will not then cry out with David, Ps. 119. v. 71. in his sufferings, it is
good for me that I have been afflicted. It is as necessary a Duty to Praise
God after Affliction, as to pray unto him in it, though we may not pray for
it, tribulations, in themselves, being evil and the effect of Disobedience.
Had not man grown Rebellious, God had not visited, but because of the
wickedness of his doing, Gods sends upon him Cursing, vexation and Rebuke,
Deuteronomy. 28. 20. But Christ the Rock of our Salvation (blessed be his name) has
turned the edge of this sword. So that (non est malum jam Pati, sed malum
facere.) It is not evil now to suffer, but to do Evil.

The Cross of Christ (like the tree of God showed Moses Exodus 15. 25.) has
altered the nature of our troubled waters, they are no longer bitter and
unsavory, but pleasant and Wholesome.

Espetially in these Operations following*
1. They increase our knowledge, both of our Creator, and our Selves. 2. They
increase our Devotion, making us also more conformable to Christ our Head, and
so fitter subjects for his Pity and Compassion.


First they increase our knowledge, etc. While our Outward man is consumed the
inner man is renewed. For as long as the body triumphs in his strength, the
souls whole employment is to furnish the corporeal organs with vigor and
power for their more base Exercises. But those parts disabled by Adversity to
receive those Faculties, they return to the soul, and united work more
strongly in a weightier matter, even in a divine Contemplation. There is now no
fuel for Lust, no shows for Pride, every sense fails to bring in those
delightsome species, which in the time of bodily health overloaded the fainting
soul. This Prison therefore of the soul thus, once, broken, she becomes
active in her business, and runs the way of Gods Commandments. Whereas
before she only heard of God (as Job speaks) by the hearing of the Ear, The
Vail of the Temple once rent by sickness, or other adversity, now her Eyes see
him. The Eye of her understanding she more clearly apprehends his Power. The
Eye of her Faith she more confidently relyes on his mercy.

Secondly This knowledge inflames her Devotion, and renders us fitter subjects
for his pity. We most Earnestly sue for a Remedy of Danger from him whom we
best know cares most for us. While we are in our Jollity, just like the
Prodigal, in S. Lukes Gospel, we look no further than our selves. And that I
am afraid has been one of the sins of this Nation, and of this Place. A little
cross may drive us to our Neighbor, but when we are driven to eat Husks with
the swine, in our greatest Extremity, then (humiliatio in humilitate) our minds
are humbled with our Bodies; then, and not till then, Necessity becomes a
virtue; I will (because I must) go to the Father.

God deals with his Children, as a Nurse with hers, suffers them to stagger
now and then, that they may look the better to their feet. There is a Hand
behind, which the Child sees not, that holds him up. Our Heavenly Father indeed
plunges us (if I may so speak) here into the depth of Sorrow, that we may
dive into the depth of our own Heart; and to make us more sensible, punishs us
by degrees (as he did Jacob) first with the loss of Rachel, then of Joseph,
afterward with famine and fear of Benjamin. Even as Joseph dealt with his
brethren, but as Joseph also, tho he began in wrath, he ends in Peace.

Mercy follows Judgment and nothing but impenitency does make a separation. If
God at any time be long in punishing, it is to teach his people more sensibly
the guilt of their sin; that so, by the better knowledge of their guilt, they
may be driven the sooner to repentance the seat of mercy. Both which methods of
Allmighty Gods dealing with his servants have been often experienced by the
People of this land.

Rough hevvn timber and unpolishd stones, are unfit for any Princely Building,
therefore God savves us (as it were) in pieces by Adversity, smoothes our
inordinate affections, and hevvs down our Rebellious lusts, before we can
become a meet Temple of the Holy Ghost.

God well knovvs we have lost that image and superscription which he
stamped us in, and therefore melts us anew, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9. 7.,
and purifies us in the fire of Affliction, that we may be made fit
materials, in that day in the which he makes up his Jevvells, Mal. 3. 17.

In a Christian life then, as in the Almond tree, we must expect a hard
shell, tho there be a svvee kernel. Hardness, all know by Experience, thus
many times conteines svveetness, and sundry other useful quallityes, as
comfortable Health often follows after an unpleasant Potion.

Let us approve our selves therefore the servants of God, in much Patience, as
dying but behold we live, as chastned but not killed: as sorrovvfull yet
allvvay rejoicing. 2. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Our Sorrovv is but Quasi tristitia,
transitory (it seems) as there noted, by the Apostle, a dream or shaddovv of
sorrovv. But the Joy of a true Christian is other wise, there is Ce^tum
gaudium, it is not said as Joyful but allvvay rejoicing.

Has then God taken away our Worldly wealth from any of us? It is (we may
conclude) because it should not deprive us of Eternal Happiness. Has God
bereaved any of us of our Children or Friends? It is because we should put
the more Trust in him. Has he brought any of us to Dishonor here? It is
because we may be more fit for Glory hereafter.

External Benefits (none can deny) are Gods Blessings: but so is the want of
them also. All things work together for the best to those who Love God. Romans
8. 28. Christ is to his faithful servants both in life and Death advantage.
Would not any wise man willingly sovv in tears, that he might reap in ^oy?
Would not a man be content with a wet spring, so that he might be certain
of a good harvest? And thus much the Holy Prophet David assures us of, Ps. 120.
6. He that goes on his way weeping, bearing forth good seed, shall
doubtless come again with Joy, and bring his sheaves with him. The Keeper
of Israel may sometimes seem to vvink, but indeed he neither slumbers nor
sleeps. If he suffer a storm for a time, (vvherevvith we are at this instant
dreadfully threatened) hovvever the ship shall not sink. God is most powerful
oftentimes when we seem most neglected, Man's Extremities are Gods
opportunities, has always ben the observation and language of Holy men.
When ABRAHAM'S hand is up for the Stroke, then an Angel stops the svvord. When
MOSES lies spravvling in the River, then he is most safe from the Egyptian
cruelty. And our Jacob here most comforted in his sons, when he supposed he
had lost them. They are to him as the Red sea, threaten destruction but prove
safety. While he complains they will bring down his gray hairs with sorrovv
to the Grave, they revive his old age with good tidings of Corn and Joseph.

Let us then in in the name of God (without farther enlargement) take up Jacobs
Resolution in our distresses (to persuade which is the chief design of this and
my former sermon, and for which we had never more cause) and we may justly
Expect Jacobs Revvard. Let us use all means with Fear and faithfulness,
Diligence and Courage, to prevent those evils which threaten us, and leave the
Event to Gods Good pleasure, still ready, with Patient and Constant Job, in the
extremest misery, to cry out. Though thou Killest me, yet will I put my Trust
in thee. So shall we approve our selves faithful servants to God and the
King. And at last receive that Crown of Eternal Bliss which is laid up for
all those that fear him.

But I shall not proceed any further in so beaten a Road, as the Topiek of
adversity, nor yet (by your favor) conclude my discourse. There is nothing
which can be more plain, and obvious to, a Christian, than the Benefitt of
Affliction, a truth Conspicuous out of the writings of the very Heathens, and I
commend unto your Review, at this Instant, Plutarchs excellent treatise to that
purpose.

I shall therefore have regard to the Times as well as my text, and consider
some of those very afflictions hanging over our heads, which must exercise
these our Resignations, and which will prove (christianly submitted unto) thus
beneficial to us.

That it is our Duty faithfully and chearefully to submitt unto Gods will, in
all times of Adversity with Faith and Fear; and that all truly Christian
submissions will in the end be highly Advantageous, has been the subject of
my two last discourses in this Pulpit.

Applica^ion.
IF the Days of Adversity and Affliction, Brethren, be such a hopeful
seeds-time, we, in our present Circumstances, are like, if we sovv in pious
Tears, to have a plentiful crop.

Many a Heavy Judgment are already fallen upon us, for our past fins against
God; and in a more particular manner (we have too just reason to suspect) for
our secure and carnal Confidence, our Trusting in the Arm of Flesh, as well
as our unpardonable Disobedience to, and vile contempt of, Gods Vicegerent the
King. And many greater, for our stupid impenitency will fall, we have also too
Just cause to fear.

God has moved the Land and Divided it, and if his Allmighty, and most
Merciful, hand does not prevent, it must shake, nay totter into Ruin and
Destruction.

A cessation granted in order to treat*
The SWORD is drawn in the Midst of the Nation: God grant it may not be too
soon sheathed in one another bowels; nor Whet by the present Cessation.

Insomuch that what party soever gain the victory, both must certainly, some
way or other, in the Conclusion, be Considerable Loosers.

It is a sad thing that subjects to the same Prince, should in Words many times
profess, and pretend, the same thing; and yet all the while fight against one
another to Destruction.

One Party, among other matters, declares for the Protestant Religion in
general; another for the Church of England, as by Law Established.

This cannot be other, with honest meaning, than the very same cause, for the
Church of England is undoubtedly a Protestant Church, and the best Protestant
Religion (notwithstanding all aspersions) is professed in that Church; and yet,
in all probability, here is, in the Nation, a Quarrel begun (God forgive the
Authors) which is not like to be determined without the Shedding of much
Christian Blood.

Or else, again, One Party declares for the King also, (as the Lords at York)
as well as the Protestant Religion, together with the Liberties and Properties
of the Subject; Another for the King, and Ancient Laws and Government in the
Church and State. This likewise, without mental reservation, is no other than
the former, and yet both Parties, you see, enter into a dismal bloody War to
decide the Controversy.

It Is certain, that our ancient Laws and Government (so much depending on
Monarchy) cannot be preserved, by the Destruction of the Prince; and true
Liberty and Property can never be secured by the Destruct on of the Ancient
Government; no more can the right Protestant Religion.

Come, BRETHREN, let us all be well-advised before we imbrue our hands deeply
in one another Blood, such like Pretenses and Beginnings had, once, no better
consequence.

Behold, I say, two Parties of the Kings subjects making the same Protestation,
and yet all the while fight with one another, so that one of them cannot be
sincere. If two Persons declare for the King, and yet fall to Blows, one of
them (pretend what he will) must certainly be a Rebel in fighting against the
King.

I would, in Charity, think that you all conclude Rebellion a most odious
thing; and that few will (I am sure no good man would) dip themselves, in so
heinous a crime knowingly and wilfully.

The danger is that many worthy and Honest Gentlemen, as heretofore (and now in
our Present Iuncture) may be ensnared, before they are aware, into this foul
Offense, so far, that they cannot tell how to get back again: or (if they
do themselves) cannot hinder ill men from proceeding on, and effecting their
ends by virtue of the Reputation which they have given to an ill cause.

I will therefore cease to contend in this place, who is the best subject or
veriest Rebel. Whether I, that declare my self for the King, and the
Protestant Religion; or he, that declares himself for the Protestant
Religion, and the King, is the most Loyal, and the best Protestant.

I have here openly and frequently enough discoverd my Principles concerning
Subjection. I am, Brethren, of the same mind I ever was, and so resolved, by
Gods Grace, to live and dye.

Instead of such disputes, I Will endeavor to paint, and set before your Eyes,
this abominable sin that neither party will own. And (without telling you any
more who are Rebbells) I Will plainly show you, what is Rebellion, and what, it
is to be Rebellious.

In prosecution whereof, I Will keep precisely (as well as I am able) to the very
Terms, and Words, of the Church of England, in her Printed Sermons or
Homilies, Published by Royal authourity.

Rebellion then, you must know, is there esteemd by the Church of England,
wherever it is found, either among Papists or Protestants (either on the 5 of
Nov. or on the 30. of Jan.) the worst, as it was the first, of sins.

In the first of her Homilies against Rebellion, it is styled the Root of all
vices, and the Mother of all Mischeifs: and in the second part. the vvorst of
all vices, and the Greatest of all Mischeifs, at the Breaking in whereof all
sins, and Miseries, did flow in, and over-vvhelme the world: The Author of
that accursed sin of Disobedience (which brings in all other at its heels)
being no other than LUCIFER himself, who of the Brightest and most Glorious
Angel, for this very sin of Disobedience, and Rebellion against his King,
became the Blackest and foulest Fiend, and from the Height of Heaven fell into
the Bottom of Hell. As our Church expresses it in the before said Homily.

Rebellion, in another place speedily after, is styled the Foulest of all sins,
being, as it were, the Source and Original of all other, and inseparable from
the Highest Pride and Contempt of God. He that names Rebellion, says our
Church, names not a single, or one only sin, as is Theft, Murder, Robbery,
and such like, but (to speak in the old language of the Homily) the whole
Puddle and Sink of all sins against God and man; against his Prince, his
Country, his Countrymen, his Parents, his Children, his Kinsfolks, his
Friends, and against all men universally. All sins (says the very same Homily)
names he, that names Rebellion; every Commandment being violated thereby,
page 360.

Yea, that all the seven deadly sins are contained in Rebellion, you will
find asserted in the same page, all sins, by all names that sins may be
named, and by all means that sins may be committed, do wholy, and upon
heaps follovv Rebellion, page 361.

Pestilence, Famine, and War, declared in scripture, to be the greatest of
Worldly Plagues and Miseries; yea all the Miseries, which these Plagues have
in them, do alltogethor follovv Rebellion; the fore-quoted, page

Of all wars, Civil War, (we are there minded) is the vvorst; But Rebellion
far more abominable than any Civil War, page 362.

Moreover, that Rebels are Commonly punished with Remarkable shameful
Deaths, and that they do very seldom repent (the greatest of Punishments) we
are assured, by the very same Homily, page 363.

As also, that Heaven is the Place of good and obedient subjects, as Hell, the
Prison and Dungeon of Rebels against God and their Prince. Our Church, in that
very page, terming every obedient Realm the Figure of Heaven, and a Rebellious
one the similitude of Hell.

I think I need not produce any more quotations, or arguments, out of this
Repository of our Church, to convince you, that Rebellion is the most abhorred
sin; and that it can never prove a sovereign salve (whoever are the Authors
or supporters of it) for the King, Church, or Kingdom.

But that I may have a sufficient foundation, for a pathetick disswasion from
this sin; it will be requisite to inform you fully, in right
Church-of-England-Loyalty. And it can be no other, that is taken, word for
word, out of these her own authorized Sermons, which will be most effectually
done, by satisfying you, in a particular manner, what the Church of England
esteems to be Rebellion.

First, to vvithstand, or use any force or violence to, Lavvfull Sovereigns,
the they be never so wicked, and do never so much abuse their Power, is
Rebellious. If you will not give me credit; I Will tell you the very page where
you may find it. Even in the Homily of Obedience. Part. the second page the
66, the last Edit. in the year 1676. Where you are also minded (and I desire
you to take good notice thereof) that the Amal^kite who Killed King Saul, tho
it was done by Saul's own consent and command, 2 Kings. 1, was put to Death.

Secondly, we are informed that not only open Rebellion, or down right
Resistance of the Lords anointed* but any kind of Insurrection, or COMMOTION,
or Murmuring (one of our modern virtues) is condemned as an intolerable
Wickedness, in a well governed Kingdom, p. 67, of the same Hom. N^.
Where you see, by the way, how much this Ages, and that Ages, Protestants,
differ in their Sentiments of Loyalty.

Thirdly, in case of unlawful, or sinful, Commands, our Mother the Church of
England (amidst all the unjust Reproaches cast on her) is so far from approving
any Violent vvithstanding, or Rebelling against, lavvfull Rulers, that it will
not allow of any sort of sedition or Tumults, either by Force of Arms, or
Otherwise, against the King himself, or any of his officers. But lays before
the Rebels Eye Gods remarkable Judgments on Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and on
others, for provoking God in the like kind; and less provocations, than most
of us have been guilty of, tho, through the mercy of God, and a Gracious King,
we have hitherto escapd unpunished.

The fore-mentiond Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were svvallovved up alive, for
but Grudging against Gods Magistrates. Others were utterly Consumed by a
sudden Fire sent from God, for their Wicked Murmuring. Others were suddenly
stricken with a foul leprosy, for but froward behavior; not to mention some
stung to death with strange, fiery serpents; and 14700, at one time, killed
with the Plague, whereof you are minded in the Conclusion of the same Homily;
as you are, in Other places of scripture, of 24000, and 70000, also slain by
the same Judgment of God for the very same sin. That very sin of Rebellion,
that truly Diabolick sin, which many present pretenders to Loyalty nourish in
their Bosoms; who have invited the SWORD into the Land, and thereby Conjured
up a Devil, which God knows when they will be able to Conjure down again.

I shall say no more to rectify your Notions Concerning Loyalty and Rebellion,
than that our mother the Church of England (now sadly Wounded by her own
Children) who is Exceeding averse to this Hellish crime, does in these her
orthodox and Pious Composers (the standard of our Sermons and divinity)
Condemn it as disloyal and Rebellious, not only to depose, destroy, or
oppose, the King but to put him in fear, to Terrify, or disturb his sacred
Person or Mind; valuable (as the scripture tells us) above ten thousand of his
subjects.

And how any of those, who either join with his Enemies; or sit still when
their Sovereign needs their assistance, or so much as mutter against him, can
purge themselves from this last mentioned Guilt (if the Contrivers and
Mannagers of the Invasion have furnished them with distinctions to clear
themselves of the former) I shall never be able to comprehend, or Understand.

Having now, by Gods assistance, shevvn you the necessity of Christian
submission, Resolution, and Resignation to the Will of God; and the manner
how we are to Exercise those necessary, and useful Graces, and also made
some seasonable Reflections on Gods Judgments, at this time hanging over our
Heads, which do lovvdy call for the Practice of the foresaid Duties (without
which it is impossible for us to be so truly Penitent as to appease Gods wrath)
Laying also before you the Heinous Guilt, and odiousness of the sin of
Rebellion, and according to the Doctrine, and in the Words of the Church of
England, endeavored to inform you what the Church (which can better Judge
than our Private Heads) does esteem to be Rebellion and Rebellious, to
fortify you against the Odd Notions, and Hodge-Podge-Divinity of such Divines,
as are more able to write the History of the Reformation, than willing to
Practice the Reformed Religion of the Church of England (the Glory whereof is
the Bearing Faith and true Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign) Give me
leave as well as I am able to dissvvade you from that abominable sin, and all
approaches toward it, which is so dreadful in its consequences, and
destructive to Monarchy and Episcopacy, being fostered as the Darling of
Presbitery and a Common wealth* and probably by none more than our
Neighboring One, who Upholds her unnatural Invasion by tempting Subjects to
^ight against their Lavvful Sovereign.

BRETHREN I am not so old as to have forgot, nor so young but that I do Well
Remember, the spetious and holy Pretenses of 41 which were made use of to
Ruin both Church and State. Neither would I be thought so stupid, as not to
fear and suspect, but that the same Train of Designs, Intrieguts, and
Mathinations, may have the same dismall^ effects.

The Generality of People were even then, in the days of King Charles I. as
much afraid of Popery, as we are at present, tho he shevved himself to be
one of the most Pious men, and truest Protestant Princes on the Face of the
whole Earth. They then dreaded TYRANNY and ARBITRARY POWER (as they pretended)
tho they lived under a Meek and Gracious Prince, whose Clemency proved his
Ruin. They Loudly Exclaimed against EVIL COUNCILLORS, but were not
satisfied till they were fleshed with the Blood of LAUD and STRAFFORD, and
had over-throwne (under that populour color and disguise) the most
Considerable Pillars of Church and State. They complained of Greivances, (with
no less noise in those days than Malcontents in these) and also Unmannerly
pressed for Condescentions, but when they had Extorted them from that Good
Prince, (who was tender of his People even to Excess) they were not contented
till he had condescended his Royal Head to the Block; and that, by one fatal
Blow, three Kingdoms were involved in Blood and Confusion, Gods-solemne
Worship and Service turned quite of doors, the Fathers and dignified Clergy
of the Church, as well as the right-Loyall Nobility and Gentry of the Land,
Vilely trampelled on by the Meanest of the Vulgar, and at last the Crown and
Church-Revenue (the Purchase chiefly armed at) seized on, and employed to
maintain and support FANATICISME and USURPATION.

Why Rebellion, Sedition, or any rude Treatment of Majesty, should now portend
better in 88, than it did 48 years ago, I cannot discover. And that Rebels
and Traitors sted into the Lovv-Countryes, should be purified by the Air and
Conversation of Holland, I can as little Conceive. No more can I conceit how
the enticing and ensnaring away of the Kings subjects (as at present) to fight
against their Liege Lord and Sovereign, (nay to deliver him up into the hands
of his Enemies) should be a specimen, and infallible Mark of kindness to the
Church of-England-Protestant-Religion. Which will not permit upon any pretenses
whatsoever to take up Arms against a Lavvful King, nor assist, aid, or abet
those who do, no not so much as to vvish ill to the Lords Anointed in the very
Bottom of our Hearts.

For the Love of God, Brethren, let us leave those fond immaginations,
discourses, and practices, which have set the whole Land into a Combustion;
let us be ashamed of those Unreasonable Delusions, and Methods of Delivery,
which bring those very Fears, (or worse Evils,) on us, which we
endeavor to Avoid. Such Infatuation is a sad Prognostication. Quos perdere
vult Jupiter hos dementat.

We have, in this Iuncture, I confess, just ground of Fear and Ieasousy. I,
who have hitherto Opposed Fears and Iealousies, do now advise the preaching
on those Topieks, to wit. That they who dare unjustly to invade us; intend
if they can, (pretend what they please) to Conquer us, and in plain terms in
the conclusion to enslave us.

I dare not in such a Time of difficulty, but declare clearly my Mind and
Conscience. If the Trumpet now should give an uncertain Sound, it might be
of lamentable consequence.

I never did yet (I thank God) nor ever will play my Game so, as if I
intended only to save my Stake.

It is your infelicity (Dear and Beloved Brethren) at this instant, to have no
Person in Circumstances Superior to me, (in the, Country) to give you right
measures. Which when I have honestly and faithfully done; as I have
endeavored this day, (if you will not take them) the Guilt must lie at your
own doors.

I never yet was, nor ever shall be, I trust, ashamed, in the Pulpit, to own
my duty to my Sovereign. And if I should be silent now, when there is more
need than ever for Preachers faithfully to Open their Mouths, to prevent the
Seducing of VVell-Meaning People* I should conclude myself accessory to the
Rebellion.

The God of Heaven by his Holy Spirit, the most Infallible Guide, direct us all
into the faithful discharge of our respective duties to our Sovereign, from
which we can never deviate I am sure without deviating from the Church of
England.

To God the Father, etc.

FINIS.
THE CHIEFEST MATTERS CONTAINED IN SUNDRY DISCOURSES MADE TO THE CLERGY OF THE
ARCHDEACONRY of DURHAM, SINCE HIS MAJESTY'S COMING TO THE CROWN* Summed up and
seasonably brought again to their view in a Loyal
Farevvell-Visitation-Speech on the 15. of November last. 88. being ten days
after the Landing of the Prince of Orange.

By DENIS GRANVILLE D. D. Deane and Archdeacon of Durham, (now in Exile)
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Printed at Rouen by WILLIAM MACHUEL, rue S. Lo, near the Palace for JOHN
BAPTISTE BESONGNE, rue Escuyer, at the Royal sun, and are to be sold by
AUGUSTINE BESONGNE in the Great Hall of the Palace at Paris.

In the year of our Lord God M. DC. LXXXIX.

TO THE READER.
Dec. 11. 1688.
THE same necessity which drove me from my Home, at the very time which my
Sovereign was forced to withdraw from his own Palace, compells me to
send these, as well as my other, Papers, to the Press, to show the manner,
how I parted with my Friends and Flocks in the Bishopric of Durham, and that
the last Discharge of my Archidiaconall Office in a Time of trouble, was
suitable to my past life and Acttings, during more than twenty years, in a
time of Peace.

How imperfect and insufficient soever both have been, I never vvanted,
through Gods Grace, Resolution all a long to Oppose the Subjects in croaching
on the Prerogative of their King; as heartily as I have vvith-stood the Dutch
their Invading of the Land. It will be no great ground of Admiration then to
all who thoroughly know me, that, at such a Iuncture, I did dare speak
plain English, to fortify my Brethren against Temptations, and encourage them,
as I have done, in their Duty to God and the King. And I Bless Gods most holy
name, that he has been pleased to bestovv on me, for the supply of my
manifold Defects, always Christian Confidence, in the Pulpit, who have not
enjoyed much of it any where else.

By what God gave me boldness, at that time, to speak in the ears of a large
and Public Auditory of Clergy and Layity (not rashly but with the most mature
consideration that I uttered any thing in my whole life) they might perceive I
did not intend to stay at Durham, if my Sovereign should be Banished from his
Kingdom. As by committing the same discourse to the Press, after more serious
thoughts and greater deliberation, all men will be easily Convinced, that
till my Sovereign be restored (which I do heartily pray for) I have no
thoughts to return.

Tho I found it very easy, and intelligible, how to behave my self under a
Roman Catholic Prince, in the discharge of all Duties, incumbent on me, as a
Right Church-of-England-Subject, or Christian, yet must acknovvledge that I am
void of Logic and other Learning to supply me with distinctions, and
furniture, necessary to live under an Usurper.

And therefore if the Reader discover the whole course of my life, as well as
my vvritings, destitute of Craft to transform my self into any shape, and
change with the Government, let him not be astonished; or accuse me over
rigidly, for not doing that, for which I am not so well, as others,
quallified, either by nature, or education.

It has been my fate to have sucked in other Principles, and to have been
trained up under better Tutours; nay, possibly, in my whole Make, to be so
contrived, and composed, that it is not in the Power of man to nevv-mould me,
into that sort of Animal, which can blovv Hot and Cold with the same Breath,
and is able to save his stake, what ever Card turns up trump.

To these who shall condemn it in me* as a deplorable piece of Madness, or
folly to talk or write away such a Considerable Revenue, as Providence and my
Kind Patrons have bestovved on me, (which I am like to do by setting my name*
to what I print) I must declare that I am one of those Fools S. Paul speaks
of, who that I may be wise am vvilling, in the sight of the world, to
become a Fool, valuing my Innocence, and Quiet of Conscience, more than I do
the best Deanery, or Bishopric in Christendom. And as nothing yet has tempted
me, I thank God, to Compliment away my Religion, (tho I have been by some so
reproached) upon Gods raising and setting over us a Prince of a different
Communion. So no Consideration whatsoever (I rely on Gods Grace) shall be able
to prevail with me to prostitute it, by falling down to adore the
multitude, or any Image (tho it be of Gold) that shall be set up by the People.

Those therefore that attack me by arguments, or Threats, in letters, to
seduce me back, and dravv me into a Compliance with the new Government,
that I might set my hand to she raising up the Babell which they are building
in England, may save their labor and ink. For till they have confuted the
Doctrine which they have preached, as well as the sound Divinity of their
Mother, which they have forsaken, they may cease from offerring me other
arguments to convince me. And till they persuade me to set a higher value
upon my money, than I do on the Grace of God, and prize my temporal intrest
more than mine Integrity (which no magic I have yet met with all has been
able to effect, so as to fill my pockets) they may also forbear to affright
me with Deprivation.

I have long considered, and studied the point of Allegiance, which I owe to
my only Liege Lord and Sovereign King James 2, and to no other, and am firmly
without doubt, or scrupule, satisfied that my Religion will not permit me
to swear fidelity to any besides him.

That the greatest part of my Brethren notvvithstanding the faithful and
frequent endeavors I have used to establish them in Conformity and Loyalty,
should forsake Gods Vicegerent, to do Homage to the Peoples, is an
unexpressible grief to my soul.

To prevent the Incurring such guilt, and the lamentable scandal of such
Apostasy, I did in due time (as may appear from the date of the ensuing
Address) expose my self to much censure, by delivering my mind, to an
Auditory, which seemed ready to run themselves (as they have done) into that
Yoke and servitude; which I (who had greater temptations than others) was
resolved to run out of the Kingdom, and from my preferment, rather than submit
to.

And to demonstrate that I am (after great thought fullness and much prayer to
God to direct me) of the very same mind here in France on Nov. 15. 1689, that
I was in England on the same day of the month 1688, as well as desirous to
express my vvillingness, to do all that in me lies, to avvaken those out of
their sin, which I could not confirm in their Duty; I am as vvilling to
commit to the Press the discourse I then made. Tho I well know, that I
shall, in so doing, in case these Papers get into England, (and considering
men's present Genius and Actings there) be exposed to the danger of running (as
it were) the Gandelop.
Gantlet through the Nation.

D. G.
Trom my study in Rouen Nov. 15. 1689.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IF this or the former Piece have the good fortune to find the way back to
Durham, and fall into the hands of those Persons that were present when they
were spoken, (for whose sake they were first delivered and since Printed,) they
may chance to take notice, in the perusal, (if their memories do not fail
them,) that the Author is more sparing than heretofore, or ever used to be, in
his Commendation of the Constitution of the Church of England, and more
particularly in the Praise of its well compiled Liturgy, which he was wont,
upon all occasions, very highly to extol; In which case, they are desired to
understand and consider, that these Papers have been Printed in a R. Catholic
Country, where they could not be permitted to pass the press without the
perusal, and approbation of R. Catholics; and that it was a great mark of
favor, and an espetiall token of their present forwardness to concur with,
and encourage Loyalty, to suffer Sermons and A speech, spoken by a Divine of
the Church of England, to be printed here at all, notwithstanding the
castigations which have been made, by the retrenchment of sundry expressions,
and omitting all Comparisons which did carry with them any Reflections. And
therefore the aforesaid people have no just cause given them to conceit, that
the Author has, in any respect, Changed his sentiments of the Religion of the
Church of England, which he has ever professed, and where in he desires and
resolves, by gods Grace, to live and Dye.

If the above mentioned Auditors, (who discover too apparently, that there is
among them at home, what ever is in the Author abroad, a lamentable Change) or
any other sort of Readers, of our own, or of any Foreign Nation, fancy him
guilty of too much sharpness of expression, they are entreated to remember, or
to be informed, that what ever he has utterr'd, in a time of great Heat and
Hurry, has been spoken against such as did invade his own Native County with
unexpressible injustice and unnaturallness, (as well as many heightning
aggravations for want gratitude) and that it was a special Duty in every one
of his Character, and his station, at that time to expose as much as they were
able, an invasion which was beyond all precedent, and without parallel. In so
much, that if a satyricall Invective (of which the Author was never a great
lover) be at any time allowable, in the writings of a Divine, it cannot be
denied, surely, but that it may pass here, in this Instance: espetially
Considering that he did very seasonably show such his indignation, even before
the Forces that Landed had rolled to so great a number, but that they might
have been Opposed, nay suppressed, by any one County of England, which would
have showed it self, right valiant, faithful, and unanimous. And if some (...)
with (...) during the Reign of in rai^ing subjects* (...) (in the (...) of
Doctor ^.) to dethrone their lawful Sovereign* had done their parts, but with
as hearty good will (all that the (...) boast of* as he did ^ more counties
than one* might probably have been alarum*d, into so Deep a sense of their duty
and condition* that our present low Country*Cavaliers who have mounted us (and
shown themselves already so ill riders as to have sput*galled us), might have
been driven away with shame, before they had gotten into* or fixed themselves in
(...) So desirable an end, the Author conceived, may certainly authorize some
smartness of style, and Apologize for him, in any national or (...)
reflections* his honest zeal transported him into (which as he spoke he (...)
that if any perceive some vinegar in his ink, he is persuaded* they will
discover ^o g^wle.

A ^peech made by the Archdeacon to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Durham in
the Church of St. Mary le Bovv on the 15. of Nov. 1688. with a Repetition of
some chief Matters contained in former speeches since his present Majesty's
Accession to the Crown.
REVEREND and WORTHY BRETHREN.
Introduction.
It is a Custom in the University of Oxford, once in the year, in the
University-Church, to have a Repetition Sermon. This, as wellas other her
Customs, I make no doubt, is supported with Substantial Reason. An Auditory of
Scholars and Learned men, Doctors and Divines, have not, as she supposes,
always such faithful Memoryes, but that they need a monitor.

It is no affront therefore Brethren, to think that the Gravest Clergy, at the
most Solemn Visitation, may be men of the like Infirmities.

Were I not then Convinced by the language of your Actions (Whereby you Speak
as plainly as by your tongues) that you have either forgotten many things of
moment said unto you, or have done much worse, that is, in plain terms,
undervalued and rejected them; I your Unworthy Archdeacon, might have cause
enough, once in my life, to imitate this laudable University-Patterne, in
making you a Repetion-Speech, which, tho long, will go down with you the
better, at a time, when, as at present, you have no Visitation-Sermon.

And here it will not be amiss to mind you, that, Repetition-Taske there, in
the Church at Oxford, is the most difficult Employment of the whole year. So
that you will have Small reason to imagine that I do betake my self to the
like course, so much for mine own ease, as for your Edification. And as I
shall imitate my Mother the University, in one respect, so shall I in an other.
She does not exercise the Patience of her Auditory, so far, as to bring to
their view the substance of many or any Sermons of the whole year, but of the
four last imediately preceding Low-Sunday: viz. the Sermons preached on
Good Friday and Easter Day with those on the two following Feastivalls. No more
shall I disturb you with Hearing the Heads of any of my past Addresses, saving
the four last, I mean those, which I have made since the Death of our Late
Gracious Sovereign. Tho I might invite you to look farther back, being not
conscious to my self, (God be praised) that I did ever with zeal press any
thing upon you, but what was well worth your Hearing, and consonant to the
known Rules of the Church of England. So without any more ado (praying for Gods
Assistance) I enter on my proposed employment.

REPETITION OF THE SVBSTANCE OF FORMER SPEECHES.
SPEECH I.
THE former of these four Discourses I made you in the Church of S. Nicholas,
the three last in this where in we are at present assembled. I shall according
to our Oxford-Method entertain you with the Chief and Most important Points in
the same order which I spoke them.

First in that (after a considerable absence and a great Change*) I did Judge
it meet to bring to your view, The Greatness of our Affliction, and our
greater sins which provoked God at that time, and in that manner to punish us
with the loss of a Meek and merciful Father of our Country.

A Prince of so condescending a Race, that he was (like his never enough to be
admired and good natured Father) more concerned for the Ease and Property of
his subjects, than for the security of his own Person and Prerogatives; A
Prince of such Exemplary longsuffering, bearing with such innumerable and
intolerable Affronts of his Authority, that he did evince to all the world,
that it was scarce possible for a Stuart ever to be a Tyrant: A Prince, what
ever might be his own personal Infirmities, that had not one of those gross
Flavves in a Monarch, which do border upon Injustice and Cruelty to his People;
A Prince, that did so abound in Acts of Grace to a stubborn and ungrateful
Generation, that an Excessive Clemency had like to have proved his own, as it
did his Fathers Ruin: Lastly a Prince under whom (God forgive our unreasonable
complaints) we might have been (if w^e were not) one of the Happiest Nations
in the World.

The next thing which I offered to your consideration, was, The Gracious
Goodness of the present King, in not only continuing but Protecting our
Religion: Whereby he did in an unexpected, Blessed, manner, defeat the bitter
Calumnies of his Malicious Enemies, who for seven years before had most
seditiously hammered into the Spirits of the vulgar most Dismal and Dreadful
Apprehensions of a Popish successor. He thereby proving all those (God be
thanked) false Prophets, who had insinuated into the Peoples minds (to the
scaring them almost out of their senses) that as soon as the Duke of York came
to the Crown, we should have Mass said in all she Cathedralls in England.
To which Act of mercy in the King, it was but an unsuitable and unseasonable
Return (I could not omit the notice) to grudge his Majesty, and those of his
Persvvasion, the Exercise of their own Religion, with impunity from the
severity of the Laws, whilst God kept us under the Government of a Prince of
the Roman Communion: Witness the Untimely heat of some turbulent Spirits, in
the House of Commons, which assembled on the 19 of may after his Coming to the
Crown, who flung a bone among that August assembly, which was like to have
brokn all their Teeth: furiously pushing on the then present, and immediate
Revivall of the Penal Laws, without any exception of the Roman Catholics,
who had undeniable pretenses, considering their Loyalty and services in the
Great Rebellion, to some respite during the Reign of a Prince of their own
Religion. But the Major part of that Loyal Parliament vvisely foresavv,
vvhereto such a preposterous proceeding did tend, and like faithful Patriots
did readily oppose, and soon Quench the flame of that ill-timed Zeal; resolving
without any more ado (Would God none had ever changed their minds) firmly to
rely on the word of their Gracious Prince, for the security of their Religion
and Laws; dutifully expressing their just Indignation against those rash, as
well as horrid Rebels, who did at that time, insolently make a desperate
attempt to overthrow our Ancient Monarchy: The Parliament Passing a Bill of
Attainder, in the first place, against the Arch*Rebell and Head of that
Republican Crew, who were Wafted hither from the Lovv-Countryes; and then
after wards assisting their Sovereign with their Purses and Persons to the
utmost of their Power, till (by the Blessing of God) he had wholy
suppress't a Dreadful Rebellion; which, hovvever small it might be, in the
beginning, might have proved fatal to the whole Church, as well as Kingdom.

On which Wicked and Bloody Design, we may now make the more severe
Reflections (as things have fallen out) since that vile Rebellion, (after it
was hatched in Hell) had been harbored in Holland, among our Neigbours, who
make a bad complement to England, for raising them from a poor distressed
state, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, to so High and mighty a Republic, as
to give chec to the most potent Crowned Heads, even to the greatest of their
Benefactors: and from disputing in the days of Charles 2 for the Sovereignty
of the seas (an act insolent enough) to contend in the days of King James 2
for the Sovereignty of the Land, and to fight for the Imperial Crown of this
Kingdom, if not to vvear it on their heads (which it would badly become) to
trample it under their Feet; which would be the undoubted Issue of a Flemmish
zeal, mixed with Gunpovvder and Brandy, tho never so much varnished over with
Pretenses of Liberty, and Religion.

We may learn the Favor of the Hollander, in the stories of Amboina and
Bantam. From Dutch Acts of Mercy (tho some I do behold would not be convinced
a fevv days ago, that, if the Dutch should land, they intended us any harm)
the Lord deliver me, and all the Kings Obedient Subjects. And let those who
abound with so unaccountable and absurd a sort of Charity, only feel, and
experiment their Compassion. And now from this seasonable, and pertinent
digression I am led to my third particular of that Visitation-Speech which I
am Epitomizing. To wit.

The unspeakable and undeserved Mercy of Allmighty God, in the blessed
suppression of that Diabolick Rebellion where with the Enemies of our King
and Church vvel-com'd our Sovereign to the Crown.

A sad vvelcome for a poor Weather-beaten Prince newly come into the Haven
after a long and terrible Storm; lately banished from Kingdom to Kingdom, and
(which he had reason to think none of the least penances which Heaven had
imposed upon him) driven into Holland among the Ducth, who it is a Wonder did
not use Violence to him, since they did immediately, upon his Coming to the
Crown, countenance and support those Rebellious misereants* that sought his
Royal Life. And whose good will and vvell-vvishes, to those unfortunate
Rebels (who landed in the west) may now Clearly be discovered, by the
preparations which they have been making ever since the Victory, given by God
to our Sovereign, at King-Sedgemoor. Which disappointment, it is plain,
greived them, since they are, at this very instant, maintaining the same
Quarrel; publishing a no less Wicked Manifesto, or Declaration; only with
this difference, that these treacherous Enemies (which in this juncture of
Affairs have impudently invaded us) seem a little more angry, than those
traitors which landed at lime, with the God of Heaven, for postponing their
Stateholders pretenses to the Crown, by the Blessed Birth of a hopeful
Prince (whom God preserve) To whom the Barbarous Dutch (and some more
barbarous among our selves) have been more cruel than Bloody Herod in killing
the Children, by endeavoring to prove him illegitimate and disinheriting him
(which Providence and the Kings wisdom and Care seems to have put out of
dispute) thereby destroying the Hopes and felicity of three Kingdoms, in
depriving them of so unvaluable a Blessing as an heir Male, to succeed to and
support the Monarchy* But, to return, the Remarkable Justice and Vengeance of
God, in cutting of with great speed those Traitors, last spoken of which they
had fostered in their Bosom, and assisted with vessels and arms, to land
and begin a Rebellion in England and Scotland, together with the many signal
Providence of Heaven, in frustrating all their Wicked designs, bringing to
naught all their mischeivous attempts, and making that Rebellion, intended for
the Ruin of Church and state, a means (as rightly improved it might have
been) the longer to uphold both; should Convince (I say) even the most stupid
Dutch Understanding of the heavy displeasure of God against such hateful
Hypocrisy, as* the Coloring over secular, unjust, nay treasonable and bloody
Machinations with the profession of Piety: One of the Motto's which they, at
present, bear in some of their Flags (as reported) being pro liberate and
Religione for the Preservation of liberty and Religion. That our Neighbors the
Dutch, of all others, are become thus zealous and devout, and concerned for the
liberties and Religion of England (as they would have us imagine) is some
what unintelligible. Bibit Flander editque been, has been by wise men
heretofore assigned for the Flemmins Character; and I never since heard of his
Reformation. Such SAVIORS OF OUR CHURCH (God bless her) would be as bad as
the late SAVIORS OF OUR NATION. If Heaven were incensed against us in such a
degree, as to put us under a necessity of such miserable Comforters, and
friends to support us, it would be hard to know which to choose: A Savior
from Amsterdam or Sala-Manca. All I shall farther say, before I proceed to the
next particular, is, that as I do, with all my soul, thank and bless Heaven
for Saving the Nation from one of these Saviors, so I pray with most fervent
Zeal (in conjunction with all truly loyal subjects) that we may, in due
time, be saved from the Other; Trusting in God, nay resting well assured, that
we shall have a gracious Return of our Prayers, if our sins prevent not. And
so I engage in my last particular of my first discourse, namely.

Our indispensable Obligation both to God and the King, to live suitably to
such unexpected Blessings of Heaven, and unmerited kindness* of an indulgent
Prince.

The mercy of God (you were then told) had been Wonderful beyond expression to
our Gracious Sovereign, in first restoring him with his Royal Brothers, after
innumerable difficulties attending the Great and Long Rebellion, afterward
preserving him from the danger of many Bloody Battles in defense of this
nation, against those very enraged Enemies, which would (notwithstanding we
feel their Malice) make the world believe (and some I find are easy enough to
believe it) that they are our kind, nay Religious Friends: In the next place
delivering him, from that never to be forgotten danger of the Deep, when the
GLOUCESTER perished on the Lemon and Oar where God many vvayes manifested,
that he was a Prince which Heaven took into it is spetiall and Extraordinary
Protection: Then rescuing him from a greater than any of the former danger,,
even from the Madness of the People, from the fury of the Rabble, from the Rage
of the incensed Multitude, which could not refrain from the highest of
Affronts, stabbing in Effigy: Judging him unvvorthy of the respect due to a
Kings Brother, tho a Turk or Pagan* not remembering him for a while so much as
in their Prayers or Cups. Which spleen and Contempt of his sacred person,
increased to so high a Pitch (I then observed) that many, of all degrees and
Quallities (setting themselves against him) would be satisfied with nothing
less, than a barbarous Exclusion of him from the Imperial Crown, vvhereto
Allmighty God in spite of Men and Devils has brought him* with great Honor
and to our Comfort: God, in whose Governance are the Hearts of Kings, putting
it into his Royal mind to dispell the Fears and Jealousies of his people, by
the first Act he did in Council, before he had wiped the Tears from his
Eyes for his beloved Brother; And afterward making him a Blessed Instrument
of suppressing that first (Dutch) Rebellion, which I dare so to style, since
it was formed in Holland, the Common Receptacle of Christendom for Rebels and
Traitors, and so successful a Forge for Treasonable practices, that two
proscribed Ministers (fitter to be Smiths than Divines) have there hammered out
a second more Divellish Conspiracy. Such Goodness of God to our Royal Family,
not leaving it destitute of a Prince of the right line, but settling upon the
Throne so accomplished an one in all respects, that if he had been of our Own
Religion, we should have thought our selves loaded with more Happiness than
we had been able to bear. This Mercy Isay, in raising a Gracious Princs (tho
of a different Faith) to be the Defender of ours, in crushing a Rebellion like
a Cockatrice in the shell, which aimed more at the destruction of the Church
than the Crown, is so unparalleled a Blessing as deserves Everlasting Praise,
and an eternal obligation to conform our lives to the Will and Commands of
our Earthly as well as our Heavenly King. Which we cannot do (give me leave
on such occasions always to be your monitor) till nee do approve our selves
truly Genuine, obedient sons of the Church, as well as Dutiful Complying
subjects (I know no difference in those two Epithets of Obedient and
Complying, tho the last has been turned into a reproach) in all things which
are not Contrary to the Clear Word of God. But I will, for a while, stop such
inlargements, as well as set a Period to my promised repetition of the most
important Heads of the first of my four Visitation-Discourses, propounded to be
brought to your View. Which I have enlarged by unavoidable digressions,
Occasioned by the present wicked and treacherous Invasion. I shall sooner
pass through the Heads of the second remaining ones, without such additionary
Reflections, and bring all, I trust, with in the compass of less time, than
what is allowed for both Sermon and speech at a Visitation.

SPEECH. II.
THe chief points of my second discourse which I shall lay before you, are, as
follows.

First our present Kings further Expression of his Gracious Good nesse and
Condescension in the seasonable and happy Renevvall of those wholesome and
Ecexllent Directions to Preachers, which were published by his martyred
Father, and set forth, a second time, by his Royal Brother K. Charles the 2.
in the year 1662. Injoining such a Regulation of the Pulpit (out of which have
issued our former and our present Flames ready to devour us) such Exact
conformity to our Rubric, such frequent Publication (in all parochial
Churchs) of the Doctine and discipline of our Church, such respect to the Lords
day, and chiefly such a Training up of the Youth, and Catechizing them in the
Book of Common Prayer, as was the most likely means, (valuable infinitely
beyond all our Disputes and Harangues from Either Pulpit or Press) to
preserve, the Church of England. And which we Clergy had greedily embraced
(God forgive us that fatal Error of Neglecting them) had we not labored
under some kind of Infatuation.

Secondly, that bitter Invectives a against the Pope of Rome (whilst we live
under a Prince of the Roman Communion) omitting the more sure vvayes to
preserve our Religion, allowed by this, and the last Good King, as well as
biting declamations against the non-Conformists in the late Kings Reign, by
those who were themselves but semi-Conformists, were an Effect of very
blameable and dangerous Zeal, and had mightily increased our schism and
weakened our Church: It being not Satyricall Harangues, in the days of K. Chapter
the 2. (as I then told you, and still think seasonable to repeat) against the
Fanatiks, which did without a Complete Conformity to our Rules, signalize a
Right Church-of-England-Divine. No more than furious Railing, or hot Disputing
against the Pope, or Church of Rome, in the present Reign of K. James. 2. Can
give an undeniable Demonstration, that we are Good Subjects, or firm
Protestants. Neither of which can evidence us (God knows) to be the legitimate
Jssue of that Church which was never guilty of Boisterous, and unmannerly
Zeal, but always professed and taught, not only a deep veneration for
Majesty, but Christ like Meekness and Moderation: Exhorting her Children to
Honor the King, as well as Fear God, and to be just to all, even to the
vvorst and most implacable of her Enemies or Impugners.

Thirdly I shevv'd the indispensable Duty of every one of us, to betake our
selves to a more indubitable Course, than the former, of maintaining our
Religion by those lavvfull means (and much more effectual than the other)
vvbich were allowed by the King as well as our Church to save our souls,
that is, by living according to our Doctrine, rather than by Talking for it,
and most particularly by studying and practicing our Common Prayer Book; not
Spending our Powder and Ball in needless and impertinent pickarings, but
laying up a store of Ammunition, and furnishing our selves by the foresaid
prescribed Courses with Courage and Magnanimity against a Day of Battle.

The fourth and last Point recommended to your Considetation then, at that
Juncture of Affairs (and is still worthy to be thought of) was, whether
that Subtle and Malicious spirit (who often transforms himself into an
Angel of Light, effecting his vvorst Designs under the disguise of Holiness)
dot not use pretended Zeal against, as well as Fears and Iealousies of
Popery* as the most likely and success full strategem to bring it in. I was
then and am still of that Opinion. And, for Gods sake, do not despise this
honest Caution.

SPEECH III.
THUS having dispatched the things most worthy of notice, contained in my
second discourse as well as the first, I shall attempt to bring to your view
the most significant Heads of the third.

And here Waving sundry Arguments then laid before you, to submit to your
Sovereigns Will and Pleasure, even, in the most uninntelligible of all his Acts
of Mercy, J mean, that Including the Fanatics in his Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience. Excess of Favor and liberty granted to his own, as well as
our Churches enemies; as also passing over the Characters of a right Loyal,
and unalterably Obedient Subject to the King, and of a true, right bred son of
our Church, together with that Man of Indifference, that pretends to be both,
and yet is neither, which I did then very largely set before you, as well as
the motives to become the two first, that is, Good subjects, and Good
Christians; Waving, I say, these and some other matters, that time will not
permit me to reflect on, I shall only exercise your ears at present, with
hearing four Cautions, or Directions, vhich I recommended to my Auditory, in
the Conclusion of that Charge to the Clergy, to wit.

First, that, that just, reasonable, and moderate Ground of Fear, which every
Wise man ought to have, in our Circumstances, might drive u^ more close home
to the Throne of Grace, and Gods Altar and make us all acquaint our selves,
better than ever heretofore, with our Hearts and Consciences; taking such care
of the internal exercise of Grace and virtue in the soul (wherein chiefly is
the Kingdom of God) and living in such Obedience both to God and the King, as
become the best Christians and Subjects least that our Merciful God and
Gracious Prince (on whose Grace and f^avour our Felicity did then greatly
depend) should for our past, or future provocations be incensed, and deprive us
of the Liberty we enjoyed, in the Exercise of our Established Religion.

The second Direction was to take care of the young Generation* and never to
suffer any Youth to depart from the parishes, or families, or approach to the
LORDS SVPPER, with out due Instruction, and a sufficient degree of knowledge
and Devotion. (Hic labor hoc opus est*) And if you were for any works of
supererogation, I prayed you to practice them in this course, permitted to us
(Blessed be GOD and his VICEGERENT) nay required of us by his Majesty in his
pious DIRECTIONS to PREACHERS, as before mentioned; vvhereto we all ought (as
I then Cautioned you) to keep close, and the neglect whereof has much
contributed, without dispute, to our present misery.

A Third Advice was to bevvare least a Vulgar notion of Loyalty* and obedience
to your Superiors in Church and State* might debauch y ur Understanding, and
make you more suspicious of your Governors Inchroaement on the Peoples
privileges, than of the Peoples Sacrilegious Invasion on the Prerogative of
GODS VICE GERENT. When we cannot discover in England (espetially in the
family of the Stuarts) any One Instance of the f^irst; but may every day find
out lamentable Examples of the latter; And that you would remember and be
assured, that the Religion of your Sovereign did not one jot either lessen, or
so much as restrain, the Authority or Power, which he received from GOD and
not from his subjects; as also be more afraid of, and averse to Popular
Tyranny, than the Abuses of Government in a Monarch; who may be supposed to
have, as well as his subjects, knovledge, Grace and Conscience of Duty to his
Sovereign in Heaven, to restrain him from an extravagant exercise of his
Power; and to inform him, that his Account to God, will be more heavy than
that of his subjects in case of Maladministration.

My fourth and last Counsel was to be just to all men, both to the Romanist
and Dissenter. That your Aversion to the Doctrine of any Party (tho never so
Contrary to your own) should not, in any manner, exceed your Love and Concern
for the Religion you professed* and tempt you to encourage barefaced Violations
of Truth and Justice, when it is in the Concern of an Enemy, or Adversary to
your Opinions.

SPEECH IV.
THERE remains now only the last of my four Addresses to be brought to your
view (before I engage in my Conclusive Reflections) which consisted of three
heads, and wherein I spoke by way of Caution (I desire you to remember)
rather than accusation.

Three things I did advise, and beseech you in a particular manner, to take
heed and be vvare of; (And so I shall in the name of God, as long as I have the
Honor to be your Archdeacon) Things which really portend much vvotfe than
most grounds usually assigned in this suspicious Age for Fears and Jealousies.

The first was, A preposterous zeal against our Adversaries, accompained too
often with a spirit of Contradiction.

And which distills more aversion into us, and disgust against our Adversaries
Person, than Principles; Inclining us to Oppose, and confute him right, or
vvrong, Concluding all to be evil in our Antagonists (tho oftentimes very
Commendable) and fondly Over-vveening all to be Good (tho some times very
unchristian) in our selves, and others of our Persvvasion. A mallady, which
has been long the Disease of our Nation. Our Poor Church, ever since the
Puritan Faction began, laboring under the same, in such degree, that a Spirit
of Contradiction has been Commonly made the Chief standard and measure of
many men's Religion and Devotion, and the distance they kept from the vvays and
Sentiments of their Opposers, looked on as an infallible Mark of the virtue of
their own Persons, and Truth of their profession. Which Opinion and Judgment
of matters (tho never so popular) are very false Weights and Measures. By
reason, at this rate, the vvorst men must always be the greatest saints,
since in them dvvdls most Hatred and animosity, and bitter Aversion to all that
is not their own: Horrid vices, are usually the Parents of this spirit,
which I set before you, and desire you may all Loathe.

The second thing I cautioned you against, was, men's Declining in Loyalty and
Love to their Prince, on account of his Religion; Which does not in any manner
dissolve or abate the Bonds of Duty and Respect in the subject. But on the
Contrary Favors received from such a Prince (such as we have received as I
shevved then more largely) oblige subjects to some more officious respects than
are to be paid to a kind Prince of our own Persvvasion.

The third thing whereof I told you that we ought to bevvare, was,
Ingratitude to both God and the King, for those spetiall Mercies and Acts of
Grace, which we receive from one and the Other, even during our Murmurrings
and Complaints. Ingratitude to the King, I then informed you was inseparable
from Ingratitude to God, A Good and Gracious Prince being a Choice Gift of
Heaven, and one of the greatest blessings which a Nation can enjoy. And he
that will not from the Bottom of his Heart return his thanks and Praise for
so inestimable a Jevvel, is a mounster of Unthankfullness to the Common
Governor of the Universe, the Greatest of Benefactors.

Reflections on some of the points repeated, and the circumstances of the
Nation, at the time of the delivery of this speech in reference to the Invasion.
AND now, Reverend Brethren, I have, by the assistance of God finished the
Task which I proposed; (to wit,) of Refreshing your memory with the recital
of the most important matters which I recommended to your Consideration, in
all my Public Visitation-discourses since the Death of the King. And I am sure
that there is not one of them, but is very worthy of your thoughts, espetially
in such a Juncture of Affairs, as obliges every man in authotrity, to use the
most powerful Arguments, which ever were used, to raise men to a high pitch
of Loyalty, and affection to the Crown of England.

I might very properly, and profitably farther reflect and enlarge on any of
the past particulars, in these our Circumstances. But I shall confine my self
chiefly to the two last, vvhereon I did most briefly Touch, as most pertinent
for our Meditation, in this day of Rebuke and Trouble.

All men are now, I suppose, sufficiently Convinced (who do not labor under
some desperate Delusion) of the Mischeivous design of our Treacherous
neighbors; whom we shall be ashamed nay a fraid any more, surely, to style
Friends, or to cry they will do us no harm, (language wherevvith my ears
have been long grated) it being now by Proclamation Treason so to do.

If the Prince of Oranges landing with 14000 Traitors (or supporters and
Abettors of Treason) at his heels (the particulars of whose forces you have in
the last Gazette, together with some Heads of his Rebellious Declaration)
will not convince men, that there was such a thing as an Evil intended
Invasion, and that there can be no good design to our Liberty, nor Religion,
by so manifest a Violation of both, I shall give them up for lost, for men void
of common sense, and not spend any more pains or breath upon them.

As soon as his Majesty told us, in his late Proclamation, that he had
undoubted advice of a Wicked Design to invade, and Conquer his Kingdom, I did
(and thought it my duty so to do) firmly believe it, and have ever since
accordingly, in my poor sphere, not only offered my most fervent Prayers to
Heaven, for the protection of our Gracious King, Church and Kingdom, but have
done all that in me lay, both by word and example, to exhort every person
Committed to my Charge, to defend our King and Country.

And if all persons had been as forvvard, as my poor unvvorthy self, to give
credit to, and rely on the Word of our Prince (which I have not yet doubted)
the Nation had been, it is manifest, in a better state of Preparation. Tho God
be praised, his Majestyes vigilance has been such, that (if his Officers
continue faithful) the Kingdom is in no bad posture to receive, and requite
the malice of our Enemies: triumphing, at last, as gloriously over these
inveterate Foes as he did three years ago, over the last rebellious villains,
which landed in the same Country.

Thirty thousand vvel-disciplin'd and loyal subjects, under the banner of so
valiant a Prince, as ours, are able undoubtedly, by the blessing of God
(despair not) to encounter any Prince in the world, attended on, but with
14000 Rebbells. By which appellation I do no injustice, since in the Case of
Rebellion and Treason, as in that of murder, all companions are adjudged to be
accessaries, and justly are to under go their trial, as well as the principal
Actors.

The Goodness of our own Cause, and the Badness of our Enimie's, is as clear
as the sun, and put beyond all mann'er of doubt, or suspicion. Neither of which
can be brought into Question by any person, but such an one, as having sucked
in sedition with his milk, is Antimonarchicall (whiles he pretends to be
Antipapisticall) in his nature, and so much more zealous for the Name of
Protestant (the worst thing in it) than for the Religion of Protestants, as to
become a Well-willer to Turks against Christindom, wishing success to
Infidells, because Cerent Tecli, Bearing the name of a Protestant (a Rebel and
an Apost ate, or as bad) is one of their number.

We must not think so blasphemously of the Deity, that the God of Heaven (a
God of Purity and Truth) can have more favor to such a Rebellious Rout, than
to a Loyal Army fighting under the Royal standard of their lavvfull Prince in
defense of an ancient Monarchy, and most excellent Government.

No, no we must not imagine, that God (who is of purer eyes than to behold any
iniquity with approbation) can have regard to such a Gathering together of the
froward and Insurrection of Wicked Doers (as holy David heartily Prays
against in the 64. Psalm) who have whet their tongue like a svvord, and
shoot out their Arrovvs even bitter words. Where David's Character of the
Wicked (you vvil easily perceive, if you will take, the pains to peruse the
whole Psalm) exactly agrees with our Invaders. Both the wickedness and secrecy
of their Undertaking having been such as he describes. But as his Character
and Complaint in the former part of the psalm does well agree with those of
our Enemies; so, I trust in God, and heartily pray, that the latter and
prophetic part, may be verified of them likewise. v. 7. 8. 9. But God shall
suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow, that they shall be vvounded, yea
their own tongues shall make them fall; insomuch that who so sees them,
shall laugh them to scorn* And all men that see it shall say, this has God
done; for they shall perceive it is his work.

Many considerations, together with Gods Providence, in bringing this and other
pertinent psalms to the Church's use, since certain intelligence of the
Enimyes landing, do (for my particular) encourage me to put my Trust in God,
that he will not give us up, (I am sure he will not unless our sins rise to
a higher Pitch than theirs) as a Prey to these our Malicious Enemies.

If all orders of men amongst us, who have transgressed his righteous Laws,
and rendered (to use the words of our prescribed prayers) both his Mercies and
Judgments ineffectuall to our amendment, do but unfeignedly confess to God,
and Heartily repent for such their Provocations, turning away from their
wickdnesse (for which it is not yet too late) He* will be pleased to turn
away from his wrath, which now hangs over our heads, and does greivously
threaten us.

But let us all rest assured, that we of England can never be thoroughly
reconciled to Almighty God (and so much I dare in his name to assure you)
without repenting of our Ingratitude (of the late Odious unparalleled
Ingratitude) to our Sovereign, as well as himself. Which brings me home to
the Topics, that are of all other, at this time, most pertinent for our
Consideration. Which Ingratitude, I say your Ingratitude to God and the King;
which among other sins, and innumerable impieties, (many of which I fear cry
for veageance) does dare Heaven, not only to chastise us it self, but to make
us to be rebuked of our neighbors, and a By-vvord among the Heathens,
suffering us to be laughed to scorn, and had in derision of those that are
round about us: The least which the best of us, at this Cris^s, may justly
dread for our late (as well as former) vvretched requitalls, that we have
made for the Mercy and Bounty of our Father in Heaven and his Deputy on Earth.
I shall not omit the repetition there of (tho late carriages and transactions
persuade me, it will be unpleasant to some of your ears) since out of Gods
Rods we may at this very instant pluck a fescue to teach us our lesson.

We have impudently defied HEAVEN, by all imaginable Provocations, but by
nothing more (I am not afraid, nor ashamed, yet to harp upon my old string)
than by our contempt of it, in making bold with it is VICEGERENT. Tho God has
blessed us English, with a more happy Race of Kings than any Nation in the
World can boast of; yet it is notorious, that no people under the sun, have
transgressed more egregiously by murmuring and Complaints, or that has Copied
out with more exactness the unthankfullnesse, Infidelity, and Distrust of the
Impenitent and hardhearted. Jews, Both in reference to God himself in
Heaven, and their Conductors, MOSES and AARON, here on Earth.

If God in his wrath had sent us a wicked Heathnish Persecutour, a Nero, a
Caligula, or Dioclesian, to Reign over us* we must with Confusion have
confessed, that it had been much less than we deserved; And yet we (the
most incorrigible people, I think, under Heaven) are so squeamish, that we
cannot digest a Christian Monarch, Gracious and merciful even to Wonder: A
Prince, who has demonstrated himself, beyond all gainsaying, to be a true
son of K. Charles the Martyr, who was A King (I am persuaded) of the
greatest clemency that ever was upon the face of the Earth; cannot digest, I
say, a Sovereign endovved with all these Graces (and a multitude of other
Kingly Qualyties relating to War and Government) merely because he is not of
our opinion, in point of Religion; tho he gives us no other disturbance in the
exercise of ours, than to desire liberty, for himself and party to enjoy their
own.

Since we have thus Ungodlily Brovv-beaten Strugled with, and in a manner
Disclaimed, if not rejected, such a Christian Prince, God in his Justice
threatens to give us up a Prey to our Enemies, and the vvorst Masters upon the
face of the Earth.

Our abhorred Ingratitude to his Royal Brother and self (without putting in
to the scales our other innumerable sins and impieties) may give us just ground
to fear, that our incensed God may design to teach us submission and
subjection by so severe a Method, as to make us (who have been yet one of the
freest and most happy Nations of Europe) TRUCKLE to an Upstart-Commonvvealth,
to an Antimonarchicall Generation, vho by their continual sheltering,
encouraging, and assisting of Traitors, proclaim their Emnity to the very name
of King; and that they would not leave (if they could have their will) one
Crovvn'd Head in Christendom,

But let us not be discouraged, or despond over much. Our condition (Blessed be
God) is far from desperate. England cannot be destroyed, unless it destroy it
self. If we will, in this our day, but forsake our sins, and stoop first to
the God of Heaven, and afterward to his Anointed servant, our Indulgent
Sovereign, as far as he has for this last month past condescended to the
requests of his People; flinging the vvorst of Traitors, our sins out of our
Bosoms, and I do not doubt, but that we shall soon drive the Dutch
victoriously out of the Land.

TO CONCLUDE.
IT May perchance, Brethren, seem a little out of the road to employ in this my
sole Charge to the Cergy (as I have done) the whole time alloted both for
Sermon, and the other ordinary Application. But I pray consider that, I speak
to you in avery extraordinary Time, which requires every one of us (Public
Persons) to do if he can, something extraordinary in the discharge of his
Duty, And besides, it is a time of danger and war, which may be attended on, if
God in his mercy does not prevent, with Blood and Confusion. So that I cannot
assure my self (t'vvould be a sin not to fear when God threatens) that I may
live to speak to you in this Place any more (Anceps fortuna belli) tho I
declare I have not such dreadful Apprehensions, as some may have, of this
unnatural War, but support my self with a good measure of Confidence, that
God will give the King speedily the necks of his Enemies, since he has by
his late Gracious Condescensions, and assurances regained (I am vvilling to
hope) the Hearts of his Friends. Which desirable issue nothing can vvithold
Heaven from bestovving upon us, but Impenitency* and more particularly, the
want of Humility to Confess the Errors which we, the Leaders of our
flocks, have been guilty of, and to own the false steps we have made, to
the Misguiding of our People.

I do, as well as the King, next under God, rely on the brave ancient valor
of the English Nation: English men fighting with svvords, while their Enemies
put their Trust, chiefly, in Lies, and Libells.

When our Royal, and Puissant Sovereign appears in the head of his Troops* His
Example, sure, must needs animate and create Valor in the most dispirited
Covvard. And had I not indispensably devoted my self, to serve my King, by
serving our Church (and obliged my self to pray rather than fight for his
Grown) I would be the first man that should run to the Royal Standard, and
please my self to think, that in defense of my King and Country, I should have
the Honor of some of my Ancestors, to fall in the Field, or be buried in the
Deep.

Let not my Earnestness (Brethren) make you Conceit, that I suspect your
Loyalty and Allegiance, which I hope, and desire, you will all speedily
manifest by a loyal Address to his Majesty, to show your Abhorrence ofthe
Injustice and Unnaturallness of the Invasion, and that you will ever, in
remembrance of your Oaths, stand by him and serve himto the Uttermost, with
your Lives and Fortunes.

It is the indispensable Duty of a faithful Visitor to quicken his Clergy, in
such an Exigent. And with Integrity of Heart I now do it; that I may give you
true Measures, whereby you may set right your People.

I do acknovvledge my self a very feeble (tho, I hope, honest) supporter of
the Church, and Crown of England. But hovvever, I have not so bad an Opinion
of my self God be praised, as to be ashamed (here among you) either of my
Life, or Doctrine.

And to evince that I am not, I have this day repeated, the substance or Chief
Heads, of what I have l'ayd before you, during the last four years of my
Office: which, none can deny has been a time of great temptation and trial.

I COMMEND YOU TO GODS BLESSING and Direction.
I WILL say but one word more (and God knovves whether it may not be the last I
may ever say in this place) and it shall be this.

CONTEND AND FIGHT, AS WELL AS PRAY AS HEARTILY AS YOU PLEASE AGAINST OUR
INSOLENT NEIGHBORS, THE DUTCH, BUT CEASE TO DISPUTE WITH YOUR PRINCE.

FINIS.
SOLI DEO GLORIA.
THE DEANE OF DURHAMS REASONS FOR HIS WITHDRAWING INTO FRANCE, IMMEDIATELY
AFTER THE PRINCE OF ORANGES INVASION, And Driving the King, by the Svvord, out
of the Kingdom of England. IN CERTAIN LETTERS. A LETTER TO HIS BROTHER THE
EARL OF BATHE.

Printed at Rouen by WILLIAM MACHUEL, rue S. Lo, near the Palace for JOHN
BAPTISTE BESOGNE, rue Escuyer, at the Royal sun, and are to be sold by
AUGUSTINE BESOGNE in the Great Hall of the Palace at Paris.

In the year of our Lord God M. DC. LXXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE Reader is desired to understand, that when the Author first set pen to
Paper, soon after his Landing in France, in the Month of March last past, that
he did not design to print this and the ensuing Letters, or the foregoing
Discourses; His intentions, at that time, being only in a few lines to
discharge the Obligations which he did in Civility, rather than Religion, owe
to his friends and Relations (spiritual and natural* in England, after so
sudden a separation and mighty Revolution, by informing them in an ordinary way
of writing: ffirst of what passed in reference to himself and Cures
Ecclesiastical, during the disturbances occasioned by the Prince of Orange;
secondly that he did continue (by Gods Grace) to be the very same Person,
that they did discern him to be at Parting, and which he had ever professed
himself, even an Unalterable firm son of the Church of England as first
established as well as a right loyal subject to his sovereign: resolved never
to Own any new fabric built on the ruins of the Old, more than submit to a
new souveraign fet up by subjects in the room of Gods Lawful Vicegerent.

But the changeableness of Times and variety of Public occurrences, which did
render it difficult for persons in his circumstances, to fix positively in any
determination, caused him on second thoughts, to Undertake the enlargement of
the said Letters, for the satisfaction of his own conscience, rather than
their curiosity* and likewise to publish to the World the Account of himself
and Actings which he sends to his Brother, and Bishop, and together with the
wholesome Advice he gave, at parting, to the members of Durham Cathedrale, and
Clergy of his Jurisdiction. To the end that no person whatso ever under his
authority might be ignorant of his Behavior and Steadfastness, in a time of
great Apostasy, but be thoroughly informed and well assured (the better to keep
them from Falling) that he did, to the very last Upshot, practice the Doctrine
which he ever Taught; and was not ashamed, by his last services for the
Public at Withdrawing, and by his first employment of his Pen after Landing,
to proclaim himself one of those indisputably loyal Subjects, that could obey
actively in all commands not sinful, Whatever his king be, either by his
Practice-in Point of Moralls, or by his Profession in regard of his Religion;
nay*one who was more ambitious to suffer with his afflected Prince abroad, than
to keep his Preferments at home (tho in their kind some of the best in England)
with a Blemish of being accessory to the Rebellion, as his conscience assured
him he should have been, if he had (after his manner of Preaching and
Practice) but stayed at Durham, and sat still without opposing those who were
(he conceived) laboring, by dethroning his souveraigne, to Unhinge the
Ancient Government both in Church and state; or else held his tongue, and stopd
his Pen, after he was got, by a happy Providence, out of the reach of the
Kings Enemies; to gain the liberty whereof it was one chief part of his
design in leaving the Nation.

Which liberty, and opportunity he thought himself in all good conscience the
more readily and heartily obliged to embrace, since he was debarred the
Pulpit, and deprived of the ordinary Public exercise of his Ministry; being
not contented to preach by his example only, but according to the Rule of the
Apostle S. Paul, out of season, as well as in season, by Letters, Advice, and
Exhortations, at all Times, on all Places, on all fit occasions, and to all
Persons (to whom his Duty bound him to Apply himself) as far, and as well, as
he was able: His zeal by a kind of Antiperistasis (the defection reaching
his own, till this time, ever loyal family) being increased as well as his
resolution.

But how so many of such Ancient, Noble, Houses, and till this late Epidemicall
infection in a most exemplary manner faithful to the Crown, should be tainted
in the leastwise, with the horrid sin of Rebellion, he cannot devine, nor give
any reason for the same, unless the Air of England did begin to grow as
contagious as the Plague of Athens, which bred more diseases in men's Souls
than in their Bodies, corrupting (as it is Storied) their very moralls.

Yet, what ever intoxicating ^virtue may have been in the cli me, under the
Planet that reigned in 88. that all should be true* which i^ reported of some
of his own Kindred, he begs pardon if he prove a very Infidel: It being not
in the Power of all the Logi^ians in the world to Convince him, that it is
possible for one descended from his Dear Loyal Father Sr BEVIL GRANVILLE to
dye a Rebel, more than it is probable, that the lately Landed English rebels
should long prosper, or subsist, in Ireland, where no venemons Beast can live.

These Considerations, together with the difficulty of sending large Packetts,
by the Post into another Kingdom, the danger of miscarriage at a Juncture when
fevv letters Went Without Openning; the Seriously and well vveighing the vote
of the (Pretended) House of Commons to forbid all intercourse with France
after the first of August; and more Especially the frequent Reflection on his
Bodily Infirmities (fearing he might never be in the like condition of
strength and understanding to Unburthen his Conscience, if he slipped so fair
all Occasion) did cause him to make as much have as he could to commit his
thoughts thus to vvriting, and to Communicate them by this sure method of
Printing his Letters, which were not completed till the end of October last.
Wherein if nether the Reader, nor Persons to whom he writes (more than in
the discourses preceding) find any Excellency of style or matter, of Modern
Policy, or modish Learning, they may yet meet with what the Author is more
proud of, and in this present Age and Juncture very Extraordinary, as well as
more valuable; That is to say, Honesty and Courage enough to be faithful to
his King last year in spite of the mobile, and this year in spite of the
Usurpation.

TO THE EARL OF BATHE.
EVER HONORED AND DEAR Sr.
THAT I never so much as once presented my Duty to your LP. since I Left London,
nor gave you any account of my self during the Months of Oct. and Nov. last
passed, I need not, I conceive, make any Apology. All Cerimonious respects
being then svvallovved up by the Great Concerns and Transactions of the year
88, that Annu^ Mirabilis which wholy employed the Head and Hearts of all men.
And since that time, my Roling Posture, Change of measures, and Resolutions
occasioned by the uncertainty and Change of Affairs and Persons at the Helm,
together with the cross Accidents, which I have by Land and sea met with
all (through which God has of his mercy well carryd me) would not permit
me to salute you with that formality as became me, wherefore I have
hitherto continued silent; But being now more fixed and Easy, and got where I
have been aiming Ever since I left my station (on the 11. of Dec.) I cannot so
far forget my self as longer to defer the presentation of my humble Duty
and Service, and give you some Account of my behavior and motions last Winter,
together with my present State and Condition, both as to Body and Mind. I have
retained that honor and Duty for you that I have given less credit than any
other to what I have met with concerning you, either in written, or Printed
Nevves, (wherein. I have met with many things which have troubled me) and I
hope you will be pleased to have the Goodness, to afford small regard to any
Reports or discourses concerning me which may have (...) to your Ears
Contrary to the Tenor of what I write.

A bout the End of sept. last, on the first Intelligence of the Dutch Invasion,
I retired to my Cures in the Country. First to sedgefeild and then to
Easington, using my utmost zeal and discretion, in my private discourses, as
well as public Sermons, to establish my people (in so sad a Day of temptation
when some stars of the first magnitude fell from Heaven) in the Essential
Duties of subjection and Allegiance to their Sovereign, shevving that subjects
were upon noe Consideration whatsoever, nether of Religion, Liberty, nor life,
to Resist, or Desert, their Lavvfull Sovereign, tho he were no better than
such an One as S. Paul lived under, when he writ the Epistle to the Romans not
only a Heathen, but a Cruel Persecutour, A Nero, A Caligula, or A Dioclesian;
And that Subjects to a Christian Prince, and to a Prince so Merciful and
Gracious as ours, by consequence would be infinitely more Guilty, if they
should Rebel against, or Resist him, merely because he profess'ed a Different
Religion.

After I had endeavored thus to approve my self a faithful shepherd in
taking Care of my Country Flocks, I repaired to my Deanery at Durham, with the
honest Design of demonstrating my fidelity to my Sovereign, and my Mother the
Ch^ of England being persuaded that their Inttests could never be separated.
Wherefore I summoned my Brethren the Prebendaries together into Our
Chapter House; where I propounded to them, the Assisting of the King in so sad
an Exigent with their Purses, as well as their Prayers, with which motion
all present complied, giving readily their Consent with their voices, as all
absent (saving one) did by their letters: which occasioned an Act of Chapter
to the Effect follovving, tovvit, that the Deane should advance an hundred
pound and Every Prebend fifty for his Majesty's Service toward the raising of
Horse and Men, if occasion should require, and to be disposed of, to the
aforesaid Ends and Purposes, in such manner as our Bp. should appoint.

And this I did, not thinking it any very considerable Service to the King to
give him 700 (to which sum it would amount) but that this Act of ours might
be an Occasion of setting the wheel a going (and at that time t'vvas not too
late) through the Kingdom. Conceiving it no sin (in such an Extraordinary
Juncture) to lead the van in Point of Loyalty to my Prince; since the Diocese
and Archdeaconry of Durham in Particular (none can deny) had been all along
during the Time of Bishop Consins and ever since a notable Example to the
whole Nation of Conformity to the Laws, and dutyfull regard to his Majesty's
Honor and Intrest.

In the next place Remembering that I bore another Ecclesiastic Office and
Dignity in the Church of Durham about the beginning of Nov., I summond all the
Clergy of my Archdeaconry together, (who met on the 15.) laboring in the
Absence of my Superior, the Bp. (who was gone up to London) to give them
right measures in point of Church of England Loyalty and Religion; laying
before them the Indispensable Necessity of their personal Assistance of their
Sovereign, as far as any were Obliged, and Exerting their zeal to secure
their Flocks that they might not be seduced from their Allegiance, by the
Canting Sophistry, and Distinctions of the Age.

And tho the zeal I there Evidenced in my Visitaction Speech, has had since
as formely small effect (as is too visible by the Clergyes general Compliance
with their new Gevernours and Government, and renouncing their old) yet it
will serve at all times to proclaim, that their Archdeacon did on that
Occasion (as he had done before) faithfully deliver his soul.

Fourthly Beleiving it might be some Service to his Majesty, for both Clergy
and Layity to show their ABHORRENCE of that unnatural Invasion which was
then ffeared, I moved first my Brethren of the Chapter, and afterward my
Brethren of the Bench, to Join with me in an Address of that Nature to his
Majesty, but the first Refusing, and the last (all but two) vvaving the same,
I thought my self (the most public person in the Bishops Absence) obliged to
give A demonstraction of my own Loyalty which I was not afraid to do, (tho
the Prince of Orange was at that time advanced as far as Salisbury) and
accordingly on Nov. 27. sent to his Majesty by the Post an Assurance thereof
in an Address, which was intercepted by the Lord Danby, Lord Lumly and other
Lords at York. Whereof I desire your Lordships permission to annex a true Copy
to this letter to prevent the Abuses which may be occasioned by that Paper's
falling into the hands of my Enemies.

Moreover Considering my self once more in the Capacity of a Civil
Magistrate, as well as Ecclesiastical, I did a fevv days after desire my
Brethren Justices and Deputy Lieutenants, to give me a Meeting, to consult
about Serving his Majesty to the Utmost of our Powers (Hearing as yet nothing
from our Bishop) and more particularly how to defend our selves against the
Lords and Gentlemen, who had Seized on York for the Prince of Orange, and
were some of them, advancing northvvards to secure Durham and Newcastle. But
this honest Zeal of mine, was by their shunning this Opportunity of Meeting
likewise renderd fruitless, and the Lord Lumly on Wensday the fifth of Dec:
Surprised us, and enterd Durham (whiles J was preaching in the. Pulpit of the
Cathedral, in my Course, it being the first Wensday in Advent) with 50 Horse,
or thereabouts, and sundry Gentry of that, and the County of Yorkshire,
immediately afters his Arrival Sending one Capt Ireton with ten Troopers up
to my Door, to seize on my Arms, and Horses, which I refusing to deliver, or
Wait on his Lordhip, he in his Lords name confined me to my House during his
stay in that City.

On Thursday follovving the Lord Lumly without any Opposition read the Prince
of Oranges declaration at the Castle in the Presence of most of the Deputy
Lieutenants, Justices, and Gentry who flocked into his Lordship; and by their
Compliance encouraged him to send to the Magistrates of Newcastle to demand
Reception there, but being refused Admittance, the Saturday after, hastily and
with some precipitation, returned, he and his Company, to York, after having
read Publicly at the Market Cross the Prince of Oranges declaration, attended
on by a great Number of Gentry and the Country Troop; but I thank God there
were no horses nor men of mine (tho the Deane at other times sent four) to
increase the number, and honor that Cerimony; which hinderd several of the
Clergy, at that time; to send in theirs to the lessenning of the Appearance.

Hereupon I did Judge it meet the next day after being sunday, to Preach
again, tho I had done it lately in my own Proper Person, in the Cathedral
Pulpit, a seasonable Loyal Sermon (suitable to my past life and Actions in that
Country) to persuade the members of that Church, and all the Auditory to stand
firm to their Allegiance, in that day of Temptation and never to Join in the
least vvayes with that Horrid Rebellion which was at that time Set on foot
in the Nation. Which Sermons I have Printed to Justifye me to all the world
(if the publication of these do not do it) from being accessory to the
Defection, which then began, (to the Intolerable vexation of my mind) in that
Conformable County; which had till the Summer past, by it is forvvard Obedience
and Dutiful Respects stuck so close to the Crown, that his late Majesty
was wont to style it his Loyal County of Durham.

Thus was God pleased to assist a Poor vveak inconsiderable member (Exalted
beyond his merit to a high Station) of the Church of England, with fidelity
and Courage, to maintain his Post against the Abettors of that unnatural
Invasion, which it was Easy to foresee would be (as it has been) attended
on by an intolerable Usurpation of the Crown, and violation of the Laws,
and finally, if God should not of his Mercy, by some kind of miracle, Prevent,
by the utter Ruin of the Church of England; and consequently of those who had
at first invited the svvord into the Land, and betook themselves to a desperate
Remedy, a thousand times worse than the Disease Complained off.

And here before I proceed in my intended Relation of some other passages, I
desire permission to insert a fevv lines to Obviate some censures which I
Expect to meet with.

To such there fore as shall endeavor to destroy the Reputation of my
sincerity and zeal, in sticking to the Cause of a Roman Catholic Sovereign,
by the Greatness of the Example of those who have deserted it, in complying
with the Prince of Orange, (alleging that it is not likely that the single
Deane of Durham should be in the right. so many Eminent Persons of Greater
Learning, Wisdom, and Piety, in the Wrong, who have given notable Testimonies
of their Loyalty by their Sufferings and Confessions, in the Great Rebellion of
England, During the Banishment of King Chapter 2.) To such, I declare that I have
nothing to say for my self, but must return with a non nobis Domine, all the
Glory to God, who is some times pleased to make use of the vveake things of the
world to confound the Things which are Mighty; and to Revcale unto Babes
what he hid^s from the Wise and Prudent, assisting with in Times of
Persecution, poor Illiterate Men and Women, when many Great Philosophers, and
mighty Clerks, have quitted a Righteous Cause, and shamefully deserted the
Truth.

I do with all humility acknoledge it to be purely the Grace of God (the wind
of whose Spirit Blo^eth where it lists) which has supported and carried me
through all those Blasts of temptation which have Thrown down diverse strong
Pillars of the Temple, Preserving me from the Contagion of the Age, the Spirit
of Popularity and Republicanisme, Whereby Satan (transforming himself into an
Angel of Light) has tainted the Generality of the English nation of all sorts
and Degrees, and which has in the Upshot (as is too visible to all the World)
proved their Overthrow, and the Fall) never enough to be lamented) of many
Noble Personages, who had as well as their Ancestors sucked in Loyalty with
their Milk, shed their Blood to uphold the Monarchy, and seemed to be the
surest supporters of the crown.

And thus much I have been obliged to insert here, tho I could more willingly
have left it unsaid, if it had not been forced from me by the Malicious
Objections of my Enemies, and Common Justice to my self and the cause I
maintain: It being impossible for me to persevere in the Kings Quarrel which
I have espowsed, without holding fast, with great Resolution, my Integrity, and
Bearing witness to the Truth. Besides I am not ashamed, nay think it my Duty,
to own, that I am firmly and strongly persuaded, without doubt or scruple,
that my present Principles and Practices of Loyalty to my Sovereign, and Past
Obedience to the Church of Englands Rules (how singular soever by some menit
may how been termed and thought) are sound and Orthodox, being founded upon so
clear Scripture and Reason, as sets a man (in this particular) above any
Example upon Earth.

Nay I am not afraid to proclaim to all the World, that I Dare Rebuke by my
Actions (tho not other wise) the Greatest Man alive, who Dares transgress those
plain precepts of God, which I shall ever deem a great sin to separate, to
wit. FEAR GOD and HONOR the KING* Tho I have so great veneration and Respect
for hundreds of Eminent Persons, spiritual and temporal, who have to the
admiration of all men lately been imposed on (by what kind of Magic it is hard
to understand) to Court, and Complement their own Misery, that in Dubious
matters, I am not so bold, as to Resist the Power of their Examples, which in
such things I ackowledge a conductor safe enough to guide their inferiors, who
ought to suspect their own Judgments, and sentiments, when they have no clear
lightto lead them, rather than those of their Governous in Church and state,
whom they own to be Wiser and Better men.

But to stick close to the service, and Interest of my Lawful Sovereign (who
is a Sovereign never the less lawful for his Afflictions or for his
Religion) and to OBEY him too, as I am resolved, in all things, which are not
Malum in se (if he absolutely requires it) what ever may be the Consequences,
is a POINT, wherein I am so well satisfied, that I am ambitious to be
instrumental in Convincing all who depend on me, or my Jurisdictions, if I
cannot Others, of a Truth so necessary and seasonable for the consideration of
Subjects in a Rebellious Age.

Indeed* I am so far from being ashamed, that I am tempted to a little kind
of Pride to think, I brought this, and some other like Points to discussion
last summer; the General Eviction whereof (however they vere despised, and
Opposed) would have stopped Multitudes from running with full Career to put their
Necks (by the Expulsion of their own undoubted Gracious Sovereign) under the
Yoke of Afforreign Power. And it may not be Altogether unworthy of their
Thoughts, who were so angry with them, and made so much Noise about them,
whether their Anger did not proceed from the serviceablenesse of my Doctrine to
the Kings Interest, which they were about to destroy; those propositious which
I asserted, striking at the very Root of the Controversy betwixt the King and
Subjects of England, that is, whether the supremacy should be in the King or
in the People. A Galled Horse (Pardon the similitude) shows where he is sore
by his unwillingness to be handled. And the Serpent directs where a man should
strike by defending his Head.

But how greatly soever I was hereby Exposed to censure, made the Talk and
scoff of some Divines and others, over their Cups of Coffee, upon the
Interception of a letter to my Ever honored* Friend *****, and other
treacherous publication of some Queries, which were canvassed up and down about
a year ago, under the name of the Dean (and sometimes falsely under the name
of the Bishop) of Durham, I am very well pleased and greatly comforted, thad I
had then so much honesty and courage, as notwith standing great Opposition,
Powerful Examples and persuasions to the contrary, to assert the Prerogative of
my King, and to make an Attempt toward the Conviction of Others committed to
my Charge, Which were the Only persons for whom those Queries were first
designed being certain propositions (of the verity of which I made no doubt)
containing the Reasons of my forwad Compliance with his Majesty, which I drew
into Queries, for the Private Consideration of some young Divines I had under
my Roof, requiring them effectually to answer them in writing, with reasonnings
which would Bear the Eye, or to comply, as I had done, with the King.

Which Honest and loyal Queries, tho Good sense I am sure, when they were
first stole out of my study at Durham, being after passing through diverse
hands, I know not how disguised, and by some styled the nonsensical Queries of
the Deane of Durham, I shall crave leave also to publish in the postcript of
this letter, giving you no more trouble till then, about them, or my own
Justification. But craving pardon for so long a Digression, return and proceed
in my intended narration of some farther transactions relating to his Majesty's
service and mine own Escape out of England in order to repair to him.

Notwithstanding, then, all that I had done, recited in the beginning of this
letter, upon the first Allarum of the Prince of Oranges design to invade
England, and tho I had (God be thanked) honestly discharged a Good Conscience,
in Opposing by my Words and Actions, to the uttermost of my Power, the then
Growing Rebellion, as I had all along the Increase of that Temper which was, at
that time, Burst out into A Dreadful flame, whereto I discerned my self too
weak to make any farther Opposition (many of my own Brethren, Deserting, nay
opposing, me) I say, notwithstanding all this, I could not satisfy my self,
without sending away a faithful servant to his Majesty Express, with an
account of that County, together with A Duplicate of those papers, before
mentiond, which were intercepted; letting the King understand that I
despaired, as things went, (and so did those fevv loyal frainds who
Concurred with me), of doing his Majesty any further service in that Place.

Having done all that lay in my Power, in all my Capacities, by my most
vigorous Endeavors, tovvatds the Support of the Crown and the Church of
England; and seeing my self absolutely incapable to Act further for his
Majesty as I had done, and to discharge my Conscience there in so
Metamorphosed a Place, I resolved, after earnest prayer to God to direct me,
to preserve my Innocence by fflight, since I could not do it by sitting still
and staying in Durham (if I should escape the Jaole which I had little Reason
to hope) after an honest Loyal activity, which God had given me the Grace to
practice, especially during the Year past; and therefore bethought my self of
flying away secretly to the King, to Own his Cause, when I could not
otherwise serve him: Commending my Charge and fflock both in Durham and
Elsvvhere in the Bishopric to Gods Wise and Gracious Protection, signifying my
mind by letter to my Deputies both in Durham and the Country, and Hoping to
Edifye them more by such Expression of my Loyalty and Religion, in adhering to
my Sovereign, when the Defection began to be general, than I was like to
do by svch Sermons, or Example, as the new Authority would permit me to
give them.

And accordingly on the 11. of Dec. at midnight, by the help of two faithful
servants, which I did dare trust, I got my horses prepared, and was conducted
by one of them that night to He^cam, where I procured an honest Guide to
Carlisle the nearest of the Kings Garnisons, and the most Considerable Place
(as I conceived) which then held out for the King, Hull being reduced the
week before.

I had no sooner got to Carlisle (where I was very kindly received by Mr.
Howard the Governor, Coll Purcell, Capt Hern, and others Officers there) but
the very day after being Saturday, the Post brought in the Dismal Nevves, of
the defeat of some of his Majesty's Troops at Reading, and others deserting in
such sort, that he was forced to withdraw out of the Kingdom, together
with some intimations to the Governor, that it was to no purpose for him to
hold out the Place, but that he being a Roman Catholic, it would be most
prudent, and not displeasing to his Majesty for him toretire, and leave the
Government to the old Governor, tovvit Sr. Christopher Musgrave, who came
into the Town on Saturday night, and Entered on the Government, appearing in
the Governors seat on Sunday the 15. in the Cathedral.

This Direful Catastrophe, which did both astonish and afflict me, to see
our Sovereign, a Gracious Prince, treated with so much brutality, betrayed by
those he thought his best friends, deserted by his Nearest Relations,
forbidden his own Palace, and forced out of his Kingdom, did Immediately
without much consideration, incline me to leave it also, to man^fest my Just
Indignation against Rebellion and treachery, which had then spread themselves
almost over the whole Nation. And did resolve accordingly to hasten into
France to share with my Sovereign in his Misfortunes.

In order whereunto (after I had visited the Bishop of Carlisle at Rose
Castle, craved his Benediction, and deposited with his Lordship some solemn
assurances of Living and Dying in the right Church of England Religion) I
departed from Carlisle on vvensday the 19. toward Scotland with a single
servant, a scotch man, whom I had newly entertained, to Conduct me to
Edinburgh, hoping at Leith, or some other seaport on that Coast to procure
shipping for France. But resting a day or two at a Certain Place called
Allison-Banke, on the Borders, to confer with an honest Loyal Gentleman,
who had engaged there to meet me, I fell into the hands of the Rabble, who
then with ffury raged up and down, on the ffiring of the Beacons there
abouts very rashly and indiscreetly, by some credulous and temporising
Justices, who gave credit to the ffalse and malicious Reports, of the Landing
of Irish Papists, Burning of towns, and massacring of People where ever they
came.

These villains headed by one Palmer a notorious Rogue and murderer who had
but lately escaped the Gallovves, seized on me for a Popish Priest and Jesuit
on S. Thomas's day about 11. at night, and pulled me out of my Bed, Rifling my
pockets, and my Chamber, carrying away my Horses, (two Geldings vvorth 40.)
and my Portmantue, and mounting me on a little Jade not vvorth 40.

Thus disgracefully conducting me to a Poor alehouse on the English fide,
three miles off, where they searched my Portmantue, and plundered me of a Bag
of money, and some small pieces of Plate, with other things; leaving me
afterward in the hands of the Watch, and a Constable to lead me away on
foot, in a severe Cold Frosty night, with a Heavy Riding Coat, and great
Boots (ill accoutrements for vvalking) to march to Carlisle, to be examined
before one Capt. Bub, and other Officers then in the Garnison, and by whom they
did hope to have been revvarded (as they afterward declared) for their good
service to the Country in securing (as they styled me) a ^ugitiue and
Dangerous Person.

But, being well known in the City, and traveling with the Governor Sr
Christopher Musgraves Pass, they missed of their Expectation and received a
Rebuke, vvhiles I had my Horses, and the greatest part of my money restored me,
and was set at liberty, either to stay or depart the Town. And indeed can
only complain of the Mayor and some of the Magistrates; who instead of
Committing the Fellows for Felony and Burglary, they breaking open a stable
Door in the night to take away my Geldings, let them go without so much as
entering into Recognizance.

Tho I was now, a second time, at liberty, by a happy providence, to go
where I pleased, and promised A Pass if I would go home to Durham, I did
think it most prudent, to continue awhile in that city, to remove the
suspicion of my intended Flight out of England, and accordingly lived
vnconcernedly there for 14. or 15. days, constantly attending Gods Public
service, and Preaching in the Cathedral on Christinas day, whereby I convinced
People, I hope, that I was no Popish Priest, nor Jesuit.

After this the country being more Quiet, and no watches kept, nor noise of
Irish Papists, which had for a month before intoxicated (as it were) that and
other parts of England, I left the Town of Carlisle and ventured back toward
Durham, as far as Hexam, but with noe Intention to go home, designing after I
had shifted off a Guide, and some servants who where sent with letters to me,
to strike out of the Road by Berwick toward Scotland; which I did, blessed
be God, without any other considerable impediment, and on the 26 of Ian: last
arrived safe at Edinburgh; endeavoring, as soon as I could, to get admittance
into the Castle, and wait on the Duke of Gordon; to whom I communicated my
Design of going to the King, and by whom I was informed of a Vessel then in
the Road ready to depart for France. Which Opportunity I made use off, and was
after many Tempests and a tedious voyage by reason of contrary winds, at last,
safely Landed at Honfleur, over against Haver de Grace, By the mouth of the
River SEINE, on the nineteenth day of march stilo novo, and the very day after
his Majesty's departure from Breast for Ireland; which missing of the King was a
great disappointment and mortification to me.

Being somewhat indisposed after my Long and troublesome voyage (tho I was
never sick at sea) and in some danger as I thought of an ague, I rested a whole
week in that Place, where I found all Persons more than ordinarily civil to
me, upon their being satisfied that it was my Loyalty had brought me there,
and that I was fled to the King; tho I owned my self to be not only a
Protestant, and an Ecclesiastic, but an Englihman; which is now thought
imprudent and a shame to confess ones self, unless he carries with him
undeniable Testimonies of his late fidelity to his Prince. After I had paid my
Respects to the Governor the Marquis of Beuron, and returned the compliments I
had received, on the 25. I departed for Rouen where I Judged meet (since his
Majesty had left this Kingdom) to fix a while and to Recruite my self; being
also induced thereto by the great freindship and Civility of Mr. Thomas Hacket,
an honest and loyal Merchant, who wellcomed me to Town with great respect
and kindness, supplied me with moneys, tho a stranger to him without
Recommendation (whereas one to whom I was recommended failed me) and has
kindly entertained me, at his house, ever since.

And I have been the sooner prevailed on to rest here in this City from whence
I write, by reason a violent Astmatick Cough, (which has long hung about me)
increases so much, that my Physician beleives that my Lungs begin to be
ulcerated, and that without much care, I am in great danger of falling into a
Deep Consumption. And moreover this Physician, under whose Conduct I am, Deane
of the College of Physicians here, and Physician to our Late King, [being not
only a very Eminent Dr. of physic, but acquainted with my Constitution (I
having here to fore layen long sick of an Ague under his hand, and he also
having perfect Command of the English Tongue)] is likely to be much more
useful to me than another; and has been already in the beginning (Praised
be God) very successful.

I confess I have not any great Reason, during my Indisposition to make this
city the Place of my Residence, for the sake of the air, which I believe not
very good and Propet for a Consumptive Body. Tho I am persuaded that the Air of
the Country round about, at a Distance from the River, which I do Often
Breathe, is better than any air in England. But the Other satisfactions I have
mentioned, in an able Physician, privy to my infirmity of Body and a kind
Faithful Friend in adversity, not to be found in our Age every day nor in
every Place, do make amends abundantly for any defects of the clime, and are
not to be contemned by A Person in my circumstances, driven very bare out of
his native Country for his fidelity to his Prince.

As Soon as I had fixed my Resolution of staying awhile here at Rouen, I did
presume to inform his Majesty, by a Packet I sent into Ireland to my Lord
Melford, of my Arrival in France, and the manner of my escape, with an
Assurance of my unalterable Loyalty, and that I should espouse his service with
the same zeal during his Exile and adversity, as when he was on the Throne.

I did also according to the Duty of a Loyal subject pay to the Queen and
Prince, all those respects which I could at a Distance, informing her also by
the assistance of my Lord Waldegrave of my Arrival, with assurances that I
should never fail to render her Majesty and the Prince, all the duties which
were incumbent* on a subject of the King of England. And that since I had not
the felicity which I came for, of being near his Majesty, I was in the next
place desirous to be near her^, and accordingly would hasten to St. Germans
as soon as the indisposition of my Body would permit; Taking a great Delight to
be nigh the Royal Famliy, when I cannot Otherwise serve them: never thinking
my self any ways absolved from the observance I owed my Sovereign and her
Majesty and all the blood Royal by the difference of Religion.

HAving, Sr, thus given you the Trouble of so particular an account of my
self, and deportment from the time that we were first allarumm'd with the
news of the wicked intentions of the Dutch to invade us, home to this present
day, I think my self no less obliged to give you some Information Concerning
my present Temper of mind and future Intentions. And which I am the more
willing to embrace this Opportunity of doing, by Reason my infirmities of Body
do in such sort increase that I have small reason to immagine that I shall be
a long lived man; they administering to me too many Grounds of Fear (if I were
to undergo no other hazard) that I may scarce live to see my Friends in England
any more* unless the air of France and motion, be, by Gods Blessing, a means
of my Recovery and Cure of that disease which I have contracted by a sedentary
life, since my Installation into the Deanery of Durham.

And here I do in the first place, declare with all sincerity, that I am
resolved, by Gods Grace, to live and dye a true son of the Church of England,
Whereof King Charles was, King James 2. (not the Prince of Orange) is, under
God supreme Head and Governor, beleiving her to be for the Purity of her
Doctrine, the decent Regularity of her worship, and the wholesomnesse of her
Discipline (well executed) the best and most Approaching to the Primitive
Times, of any Church in Reformed Christiendome. And I do openly affirm to all
the World, that however her children (or rather those who have pretended to be
so) have behaved themselves, Either heretofore, or of late, to the scandal of
the world and Reproach of her Constitution, I am assured she will be found,
upon thorough and serious Examination, A Church which does not Countenance
Rebellion, or, indeed, any sin, or wickedness, whatsoever.

I have given no just reason, I thank God, to any to think me of another
Opinion. And if some men have been so uncharitable as to Censure me for ever
deviating from her, it has been only for such Carriage of mine, as may best
demonstrate that I am, A right Genuine, and thorough*paced (tho very feeble)
Member of Her: I mean for my Exact Conformity to, and constant Observation of,
the Excellent Rules of her Incomparable Liturgy, without any variation; and my
Constant zeal in asserting the Kings Prerogative, and her Excellent Doctrine
of non-Resistance and Subjection to Authority, in both which perohance I have
been thought sometimes a little singular. But if I have been so, I am sorry for
it, I mean, that I should want company in so laudable and Christian a Cause
and Practice; For I must still affirm that the first is the Indispensable Duty
of Every Church man, and best means to preserve her, and the last (which way
soever it fled at the Prince of Oranges Invading England) the very Flour and
Glory of our Ch: which neither loss of Estate, nor life, shall (by the
assistance of the Almighty) cause me to Renounce.

I do therefore humbly entreat your self and all my Relations, no wise to
suspect me, as if Wavering from my Obedience to my Mother (the Church) for my
immovable Adherence to the cause and interest of the Father of our Country,
and my innate Abhorrence of Disputing, Contesting, or rudely Capitulating with
my Prince, eventhen when he commanded things very contrary to my sentiments,
which I did Judge not only inexpedient, but prejudicial to the Flourishing
condition of our Church.

Had I failed as too many did in that Iuncture, or in paying the very same
duties of Allegiance and Honor, to my Present Sovereign, When he came to the
Crown, as I had performed to the late King, his Royal Brother and my Gracious
Master of Blessed memory, (because his present Majesty declared himself of
the R. Cath. Religion) I might indeed have been liable to Censure, for that was
a bad mark of a son of the Church of England. But God having enabled me to
Resist this Temptation (which has so mightily prevailed in the Nation) I would
not have you Fear that I shall be Overthrown by any other.

I am I confess, fled out of the Nation to assert the Cause of a R. Cath.
Prince, and I live at present in a R. Cath. Country. But sure I am that the
right-Church of England Religion does not only injoyne me to do the first, but
considering the circumstances of England and the neighboring Protestant
Countries, at present, to do the later. And why I and other loyal subjects
should choose France, rather than any other Nation to Reside in, may quickly
be put out of dispute, if our Censurers would be pleased to consider, how
kindly the most Christian King received his Majesty of England, and does still
entertain those who have Evidenced their Fidelity to him; as also reflect on
the innate Civilily and Hospitality of the French Nation toward strangers,
never more Visible than in this time of Distress, when all are Welcome,
espetially English men; unless they are conceived to be Spies, or Creatures
of the Prince of Orange, or other their Enemies. As for my own particular,
Common Justice does Oblige me to acknowledge, that I meet whith as much
Curtisy now in France among the R. Catholics, as I have done heretofore among
the Protestants. And am permitted to live as quietly and securely, tho I do no
ways di^o^ne my Religion, as any of their own Nation.

THis brief declaration I have made will suffice, I hope, to assure all my
Friends in England of my steadfastness in the Excellent Religion of my
Forefathers. The next duty incumbent on me, will be, to give my Family, and
you our Chief, some fresh assurance, that I am by the Grace of God Resolved to
endeavor for the future (as I have begun) to proceed in imitation of their
Loyalty, and according to their examples in all times of War and Trouble
heretofore, to stick close to the Crown; Not one of them, that I could ever
Read or hear of, having been in the least manner dipped in Rebellion, or sided
with any Usurper.

Indeed their Fidelity to their Sovereign (for which your House God be
Praised has been ever noted) none, Sir, has better copied out then your
self, whose Name is on that account already Recorded in our English Chronicle.
The Secrecy and Successefulnesse of that Negotiation of yours, in your Master
the late Kings behalf, with General Monk, will not easily be forgotten among
loyal men. And I must confess to all the world, that that notable Example and
Pattern, which you have set all your House, by your services and endeavors in
the Worst of Times, for King Charles the 2. has had great force on me, and
been mighty prevalent in inspiring me with some more than ordinary Resolution
for his Royal Brother, his lawful successor and our undoubted Sovereign, at
my first Entrance on my Deanery, which did oblige me to Appear and Act in a
more Pnblick Post than before. And does still animate me (wherefore, whatever
measures you are pleased to take at present, I hope, Sir, you will not blame
me) in my present zeal and endeavors.

Since which time I can say it without Boasting (tho if I did Boast a little,
this Conjuncture and my Circustances would Bear it) that I have never strayed
in my affection from his Majesty, nor failed in paying him all the Honor,
Duty, and Respect, which I should have renderd to my deceased Master of ever
Blessed Memory, had the Naiion been longer blessed with his Reign. But instead
thereof I do not Blush to let all the world know, that I have been somewhat
more Officious (and thought it Every ones Duty so to be) in his Service, than I
had been in his Brothers, in consideration of a Roman Catholic Kings Grace and
Goodness toward us of the Church of England, in reference to the free exercise
of our Religion* He granting us the liberty of A Religion contrary to his ovn,
and making it his Care, at his first Appearence in Council, to secure to his
Protestant Subjects of the Chapter of England so unvaluable a Blessing, neither of
which if he had done, could we have told how to help our selves, or been
absolved from our Obedience, which my little Divinity has ever told me (and I
hope ever will) is as due to a Roman Cath. Sovereign, as to a Protestant one.
The Consideration where of has, by the Blessing of God, kept me Untainted,
and Unstained throughout the whole transactions of the last 5. years, I mean
from the 6. of Feb. 84. when his Majesty mounted the Throne, to the 10. of
Dec. 88. when the same Sacred Majesty was disgracefully Driven, to the
Everlasting Reproach of the English Nation, from his own Palace of Whitehall.

No Fears, or Iealousies of Religion, Liberties, or Laws, did ever tempt me
(I Bless God) to any undue courses of Resistance, Opposition, or so much as
Unseemly Capitulation, with Gods Vicegerent, to preserve them. Tho I love them
all so well and Dearly, that I can be contented to dye for them, in any
Place, or Manner, unless it be with a sword in my hand lifted up against my
Prince. And I dare Challenge not only my Censurers, but all the World (a state
of Hostility will admit of such language) to discover any One Act of mine,
whereby I have sided with, or abetted their Enemies, in any Endeavors to
destroy, or Weaken them, that I have (I say) ever, either in the capacity of a
Private Minister, or Public Magistrate, Ecclesiastical or Civil, (in the
West, my first, or North of England, my last, station,) ceased to practice and
Exact a strict Conformity to the Rules of our Religion, or to promote an
Impartial Execution of law (as long as the laws were in Force) both against
Recusant, and Dissenter; Or that, lastly, I did ever Countenance such Omission
of Duty in Others, Clergy or layety, under my Authority.

All Places wherein I have Resided will, I make no question, testifye for me,
that I have been how (weak and unsuccessefull soever) zealous, diligent, and
faithful in these particulars; And did never in any Revolution, Put on the
Vizard of A TRIMMER; having had always from my Cradle a certain Antipathy
against such Indifferency, Hyppocrisy, and Neutrality, as do constitute that
Amphibious Creature; which by the assistance of Neighbors (which it is hard to
tell whether they live more, upon the land, or in the water) has given a kind
of Mortal Wound to the Church, and Monarehy of England.

By such Principles and Practices, I have (God be thanked) demonstrated my
self A legitimate son of my ever Honored and Dear Father Sir Bevill
Granville, whom I may (I hope in a letter to a Brother) be permitted (for my
Consolation in so melancholyck a state of Affairs) a little to Glory in, sinee
his Valor and Loyalty (sealed at Lansdown with his Blood) is set above the
spleen and censure of the most Malicious Tongues, Forasmuch as the University
of Oxford, one of the most famous Universityes in the World, has vouchsafed
to celebrate them, whith an Epicedium of their choicest Wits. A respect which
has not (as the Ingenious Reprinter of the late Edition of those Poems does in
his dedicatory Epistle well note) been usually paid to any but the Royal
Family. And in the same Temper, much heightened, and strengthend by the serious
and frequent perusal of those Iugenious Verses, which bring daily to my
consideration my loyal Fathers Example (and which I carry constantly about me
both to inspire and conduct me) I hope by Gods Grace to Breathe out my soul,
without making any difference in Matter of Obedience, betwixt a Papist, and a
Protestant Prince; A Christian, or a Heathen.

I am without any scruple assured (and so is all the World) that my Sovereign
King James the 2. is a lawful King, and has an undoubted Title, which is all
a good subject ought to enquire into. If so, I am as much assured that noe
Power upon Earth, can absolve me from my sworn Obedience to him, what ever
we are told to the contrary, in certain Enquiries into the Measures of
Submission to Supreme Authority, and the Grounds upon which it may be
lavvfull, D* B.
or necessary (as ^ the Title phraseth it) for subjects to defend their
Religion, liberties, and laws. I wish the Doctor had been pleased to speak
out plainly according to his thoughts, and I am persuaded he would have said
The Grounds vvhereon it is Lavvfull to Rebel.

But I shall give you noe more Trouble, by way of Information concerning my
self. I shall rather crave liberty to convey to my Younger Relations (since
they are numerous) by your favor and means (is you please) some wholesome
Advice for their Edification, to establish those who are not Tainted, and to
restore those who are, with the false Notions and Maxims of the Times.

My Elders I shall no wise disturb at present with my remaining discourse. But
I humbly conceive it a kind of Duty to take a little Pain sometimes with the
Others. My Father's and Mother's Dedication of one of their sons to the Church
(and it falling to the lot of me the unworthiest of them) does in some sort
constitute me A Priest to the whole Family; tho not to undertake the Charge of
all their Souls (that would be a Task not only difficult but impossible for
me to discharge and I do not desire it) yet to make to them now and then some
spiritual applications, as I do at Present, by your permision, in this letter,
and did likewise 5. years since, in some familiar ones to a Nephew in the
University of Oxford (which I printed) is a good act of Christian Religion and
Fraternall Charity.

I shall then humbly beg leave, in this paper, to desire all those, who have
any ways warped from that strict Duty and Respect which has been ever paid by
their Ancestors to the Crown, to consider their great obligations above others
to be Faithful to their Sovereign, taking more than ordinary care least they
Stain the honor of an Ancient House. And shall not, at present, insist on any
Duty paid directly to God; that was my buisnesse in part of my fore mentioned
Address; But the Duties of Subjection, and Doctrine of Non-Resistance of
Lawful Princes, whom subjects are bound to Obey, what ever be their Opinions
or Practices, are so vilely Run dnwne in England, and so universally put out of
countenance, that it is a piece of seasonable charity to Revive their
Reputation.

I think I may truly say without vanity or oftentation, that every one of us
have been, through the mercy of God, trained up in as a deep a sense of that
profound Respect and Submission which is due from subjects to their Supreme, as
any family in the Nation, having beeu in an extraordinary manner Blessed with
Loyal and Religious Parents and Progenitors; who have given the best evidence
of their sincere and hearty dutifulness to their Sovereigns in sealing it with
their Blood. And till this late never enough to be deplored General
Defection, which seemed to carry with* it an Irresistible Contagion beyond the
power of the strongest Antidote, ^here has never A Blemish of Disloyalty,
Blessed be God, been fixed on the Family of the Granvilles, or on the meanest
Branch thereof. And that there should any Person now lie under that censure, is
to me an Intolerable mortification, and the Heaviest part of my Affliction,
amidst my sufferings for my fidelity to the Crown. But since the Torrent has
Overborne some of ours as well as too many of every Ancient, Honorable and
Loyal House in the Nation, I cannot satisfy my self to sit still, and not
put to my helping Hand to save them: By desiring them, among other things, to
beware how they swallow not only new Oaths, but new Conceited Querks and
Distinctions of those Temporising Common Lawyers, who have, out of sordid
Flattery, or Fear; by an unintelligible unheard off sort of Abdication, Coined
purely for the service of an Usurper, deformed the Monarchy and Church of
England: Making a strange kind of Monster of the Fairest and Best of the
Reformed Churches; in placing two heads on one Body, such as are there the most
unlikely of any in the world to agree, A Popish and a Presbiterian one.

I never did immagine that I was, or ever should become a Pillar of the Church,
[Tho you all know, that I did in a time of Adversity and Rebellion, when there
was small Hopes of Being Deane of Durham, Devote my self thereto honestly with
Good will to Gods service and without Design.] Much less do I fancy my self
A Person of so much Might or Skill, as to be able to stem such a Tide, as has
Broken in upon us, and Beaten down the High and Rocky Cliffes of England, as if
they had been only muddy Banks or the wooden Fences of a Low Country. But on
the other side, I have not so mean thoughts of the Grace and Power of God
Almighty, who has manifested his strength in my Weakness, in upholding and
keeping me steady, [during the late Terrible Shock which like an Earth Quake
made the Foundations of the Kingdom to Tremble, and overthrew Diverse supporters
of Church and State] as to despair of all success In my Attempt to fortify
at least some, if I cannot regaine Others, or any, of my Kindred to whom I
write. Who ought not to Conceit themselves so able Divines, as to think they
are, in spiritual matters, above my Counsel and advice.

To accomplish this Good work, whereon I invoke the Assistance of that Spirit
whose Power no Creature is able to Resist, I shall lay before their Eyes some
of the Good old Church of England-Divinity, which has been infused into me,
as well as their Fathers in our Youths, by those Right Orthodox and Loyal
Doctors of the old Stamp under whose Conduct we have had the felicity to be
trained up. And remembering and well considering the words of our Savior
Christ, that a Prophet has always least honor in his own Country, and among
his own Kin, I shall keep strickly and faithfully not only to the Sense, but
often in prosecuting this Point, use the very words of A Famous Divine, of
Authority above any man's Contempt, Dr. Hen. Hamond.
being justly, had in houour and veneration, of the whole Nation, as well as our
own Family.

IN the first place, then, I here take liberty to put your and mine own
Relations in mind of some seasonable Truths, well Calculated for the meridian
of an Ancient Loyal Family* and the most effectual Preservative which I know
off, to secure their Innocence in a wavering, Corrupt, seditious Age, and
Country, tinctured all over with Schism and Rebellion. To wit.

That our Blessed savior Christ and his disciples were, of all the Doctors who
ever were in the world, the most careful to preserve the Doctrine and Practice
of Allegiance, and entire Submission and Subjection to the Supreme Powers,
which were deputed by God as his Vicegerents to Govern the world; even then,
at that very time, when they lived under Heathen Emperors, who where not only
Great Opposers of Christianity, but Cruel Merciless and Bloody Persecutors.

Furthermore it will be worthy of Observation, that Christ Jesus, tho he were
as God, the King of all Kings, and might have changed and disposed of their
Dominions, as he pleased, yet did not think fit to make any Alteration in the
Government he found on Earth when he was born; but on the Contrary, Judged it
meet to continue and settle all in that Course, where in it had been formerly
placed by God himself, living in a most Exemplary manner in subjection to the
known Laws, paying Tribuute to Caesar; Nay showing so great Concern that the
Supreme Powers should receive their Due, that he thought fit rather to work a
miracle, than appeate deficient in Paying Tribute.

Whereto if we add our Lords Refusal to accept of the Judicial Cognizance of
an Offense, when he was put upon it, as he did of A Crown when it was
offered him by the People, there will appear strong matter of Conviction, and
proof of the Inviolablenesse of the Rights of Government, which it is not
lawful for any person on earth to usurp or meddle with, without a Just Call.
So far was our Humble and Righteous Lord, the Capt: of our Salvation, from
retrenching any of the Magistrates former Rights, that he added to MOSES in
this matter, enjoining greater Awe and Reverence to be given to the Civil
Power.

Wherein we may take further notice, that Christ Jesus he was so
extraordinarily Careful and Tender: That where as MOSES among the Egiptians,
when he was but a Private man, did take upon him to exercise an Act of
Judicature on the Egyptian which wronged the Israelite Exodus 2. 12. Christ
would not do any such thing, leaving the woman taken in adultery, and all other
offenders, to the ordinary legal Course; and would not upon any Invitation, or
Importunity, Vsurp Authority, or take upon him any thing in that matter.

This without other Enlargement may Abundantly Evince, how unsuitable to the
Doctrine and Practice of Christ, and Consequently how unchristian and ungodly
are the Doctrines of those Ambitious Men who make Christianity a Ground, or
Excuse, for moving Sedition, and Raising Rebellion, thereby disquieting States,
and shaking if not dissolving Kingdoms. Tho it be carried on never so much
under the spe^ious colors of Preservation of Religion, Libertyes, or Laws.

Whereof we have now a late, and perhaps more Notable Instance than ever was
in the World: An Attempt so Abhorred and Unnatural: A I act every ways so
unjustifiable; and an Impiety so Daring, that it must necessarily, in the
Conclusion, pull down Heavy wrath, if not Speedy Vengeance, both on the
Contriver and the Accessory; Inviter and the Invited, or on their Posterity. If
an extaordinary deep Humiliation before God, and a sincere Repentance, some
what answerable to the Greatness of the Provocation, do not in due season
appease his Indignation.

Of which Heinous Guilt it concerns every one, who has been unfortunately dipped
therein (as every Complier with, as well as Promoter of, the new Government in
England certainly is) with greatest speed, and care to purge himself. And I do
hope and Pray that all those, to whom I do presume here in this paper to
Address my self, will take these things into timely and deep Consideration:
washing off those Stains of Disloyalty, that may have involved any in the
Guilt of an Unparalled Usurpation, wihch I am afraid exposes poor England to
God Almightyes Impending Judgments more than all the former sins of out selves
or Forefathers.

That I have, for my own particular, practiced the very same Loyalty and honest
zeal in reference to the Service of my Sovereign (tho A Roman Catholic,)
that I did to his Royal Brother; And have not, that I can discover upon the
most diligent search, wilfully and knowingly, made one False Step toward the
late Irregular and Injustifiable Method of Preservation of our Religion and
Laws, by the Ungodly Practices and means of INVASION and USURPATION (which
has in good truth layen both a Gasping) is a Felicity which does not only
wonderfully support, but sometimes almost transport me, amidst my present
Exercises of Patience. And will make me relish the worst Air, or Usage, that
I can meet with abroad, where there are no Fogs, nor Fumes, raised by
Rebellion, better than the best Air or Proferment in England, or any other
Country where there Are. And here I should beg pardon, for this present Trouble
and Conclude, having been I fear too tedious, but that I stand obliged, least
I preach in vain, to answer one Objection, which it is easy to foresee will
be made against my Doctrine, and may carry more Appearance of Reason therewith
than any Other.

To wit.

Christ's Example pretended for submission to the Prevailing Power; since his
acknovvledging Allegiance to be due to Tiberius Caesar; whose Predecessors
had so lately changed the Government of Rome by the Senate, did by that Act of
his give liberty to us* lavvfully to yield our Allegiance to any unjust
prevailing Power, what ever it be.

This difficulty being solved by the Forementioned learncd Doctor of our own
Church and Nation, of undeniable Authority and an Eminent Confessor in the
Great Rebellion, I Will give the Answer in his own very words without the least
variation. Which is so substantial an one, that it is seasonable at this
instant to be exposed to view. And if there were no other Design in my writing
would justify the Publication of this letter.

In short his words are these. The state of the Government of Rome, at that
time when Christ Jesus lived* must be considered distinctly what it was. It is
true indeed that Julius Caesar had (not many years before) wrested the Power
out of the Senates hands, and Changed the Government violently: but before this
time of Tiberius, whereof we speak, the buisnesse was so accorded between the
Senate and the Emperors, that the Emperor now Reigned unquestionably without
any Competition of the Senate: In him the Power was quietly seated, the money
superscribed with his Image, and Edicts sent out in his name, and he looked on
by all (with out any Rival) as inferior to God only. In which case of his
acknowledged Power, Christ being borne in his Dominious, thinks not fit to
make a Question of his Right, where there was none made by the Romans, or to
dispute Caesar's Title (However acquired by violence at first) when they from
whom it was taken did acquiesce, and disputed it not. Which Case how different
it is from other forcible Usurpations (where the legal Sovereign does still
Claim his Right to his Kingdoms, and to the Allegiance of his Subjects, no
way acquitting them from their Oaths, or laying down his Pretension, tho he
be for the present Ouerpowred) is easily discernible to any who have the
Courage and Fidelity to consider it, and is not by his own Intrests bribed, or
frighted from the performance of his Christian Duty. It being withal most
certain, that it belongs not to the conveniences or advantages of subjects to
determine, or prevail any thing in the Buisnesse of Princes Rights.

This, one of the most formidable Objections and Arguments for submission to an
unlawful prevailing Power, being thus effectually answered, I shall not think
it paine-worthy, in a letter, to multiply other of less difficulty, which by
consequence may more easily be blown away.

And indeed I suppose it needless, at this Time of Day, to fall to strong
reasonings to evince the unsincerity of the Pretensions of the Contrivers, and
Promoters, of this late unhappy Change of Government in Church and State; they
themselves having destroyed all the Plausibility of their own Professions and
Declarations.

First. The Prince of Orange disowned that he came to Conquer, or meddle with
the Crown, and yet most willingly accepted thereof at the very first offer of
the People.

Secondly. The Exercise of the Kings Prerogative in dispensing with some Laws,
on Extraordinary Emergencyes, was thought a Burden Intolerable; But it has
been no Crime since in the Subject to dispense with all; They having got (as
they think) what they have long Contended for, the Supremacy in their own
hands.

Thirdly. The Introducing of Arbitrary Power was the Dread of most men, and now
they are contented to enjoy nothing else.

Fourthly. It was Judged unpardonable Tyranny in our Sovereign* to touch the
meanest of his subjects in Point of Property; but it is a laudable virtue in
the Subject, to usurp upon, nay dispose of the Crown.

Fifthly. The English were Overwhelmed with Jealousies of introducing Popery and
promoting the Intrest of France. And all the while have gone the direct way to
bring the worst of their Fears on themselves, by Driving the King and Prince
out of the Kingdom.

Sixthly. In a word. Sundry other Things, which were deemed nnsufferable in a
lawful Prince of Gods Ordaining, are now Practiced without disgust by an
Usurper, and King of the Peoples making.

He that is not yet perfectly Convinced of the Hypocrisy of these Pretenses
and Procedings (which I hope the most Eminent of our Clergy and Nobility by
this time are) seems to have neither Eyes to see, Ears to hear, nor Heart
nor Head to consider and Understand.

I shall conclude with A Memorable Saying of our Royal Martyr King Charles the
1. on his Observation of a like spirit of Delusion which in his days possessed
the generality of the People of the same Kingdoms, in Dethroning, nay
Murdering, their Lawful King, and one of the Best of Princes, at his own
doors.

"So easy is that Legerdemain which serves to delude the Vulgar.

That the Almighty and Wise God, who in his just displeasure for our sins and
ingratitude to Himself and his Vicegerent, has for the present made the
Chutch and Monarchy of England A Notable Monument of his Wrath, would bring all
High and Low, who have contributed to so Heinous a Guilt, in his due time, to
such a sight and sense of their Crimes, that they may give to the world an
undeniable Demonstration of the Truth of their Repentance, laboring with all
their Might to redress the Scandalls they have given, by an unparalelled
Apostasy from the Principles of our Church, and an abhorred Defection, in point
of Loyalty; is the hearty and humble Prayer of

(Ever Honored and Dear Sir) Your Lordships most humble Servant and
Affectionate Brother, DENIS GRANVILLE
Rouen April 24. 1689.
POSTSCRIPT.
THat the Printing of this letter with the following Address and Queres, may
not appear to your self, as I foresee they will to all Zealous Contrivers and
Supporters of the Usutpation in England, an act of not only deplorable Folly,
but down right Frenzy, I humbly Crave your permission to insert a few lines by
way of Postscript.

I am not ignorant, but that this attempt may render me absolutely incapable of
all the favor you have showed me, since my Flight into France, in your
voluntary kind interposition to secure my Revenu; and that it must also expose
me for a subject of Common Talk and Censure thoughout the Nation. But since an
un blemis'd Loyalty is infinitely mote valuable than the Possessions of this
world, and that, I was persvaded that the Course* which I did, by Gods grace,
Steer, was the most effectual way to secure that, the very Reputation whereof I
esteem far beyond the Rents I had at Durham, Easington, and Sedgefeild; nay
moreover since that my past Life, and last Deportment in England, had not been
all of a piece, if I had not done as I did; You will not, I trust, condemn my
Carriage, however contrary to the Maxims and Temper of the Reigning Generation,
as unworthy of your House and Family.

What I have done, I have performed, thanks be to the Almighty, in the
Integrity of my Heart and Innocence of my hands, and the sense and
Consideration here of (the Issue of things exery day more and more convincing
me that I was in the Right) does afford unspeakable Comfort to my soul.

My Feeding of some Friends, in my voyage from Scotland hither, with
Expectation of an Inter-view in Kent, and talk of a Passport (the fitst of
which I did not intend, and the last, if I could get away without it, I did not
desire) is a crime I do assure my self of Gods pardon for, and of those
friends likewise whom I deluded and disapointed, when God shall be pleased to
send us a happy meeting.

As for that more unpardonable sin where with some do reproach me, and whereof
I cannot so well clear my self before the World (but is the only one, thanks
be to God, that the World can accuse me of) I me^n my Ignorance and Imbecility
to fill my Coffers and Pockets so full as some more frugall and crafty than my
self have done in less time, with a smaller Estate or Revenu, I am like to do
a sad Penance for it here abroad in a Foreign Kingdom. And the Friends and
Relations I leave at home, will not, I hope, add affliction to affliction (if
they will not help me with their Purses) by loading me with their Censures;
especially considering two last Acts of mine to demonstrate the sincerity of my
Repentance for it: First that I did voluntarily diminish my Revenu very
considerably, by Rent-Charges to satisfy my own just Debts; Secondly that I
looked on my long Neglect to practice Frugality as so great a sin, that I did
as voluntarily put my self into a kind of white sheet to atone fot the same,
by confessing it to God and the world, in a small Piece I printed in the year
85.

This is my Comfort, that no person in England is like to loose by me, unless
by his own proper Choice, and if one man does so, he must thank himself rather
than blame me. If I suffer Deprivation to his loss, he must quarrel with God
and the King, whose Commands have unavoidably obliged me to hold fast my
Religion and Loyalty. And if the Sacrificing of both, or either of them, was in
my Judgment too dear a purchase of my Revenu for my self, no one could
reasonably expect that I should undergo it for an other.

Hoping that these few Hints may give some satisfaction to all, but the
Malicious Authors of our present Misery, I shall not enlarge this Postscript
farther, than to acknowledge with all thankfullness the kindness which you have
showed me in procuring A Dispensation for me (notwithstanding I have
contradicted your Example) which I esteem thegreater Obligation, at those
friends hands who were isntrumental therein, since they did it without my
Privity or Motion.

BY the Publication of the following ADDRESS and QUERES it may appear, tha the
Author is not afraid (notwithstanding the Obloquy he did a while undergo, in
the yeat 88, for his dutiful compliance with the King) to own those notions
of Loyalty, which he did endeavor to infuse into all persons committed to his
Charge; and also that he is not ashamed, to proclaim to all the world (in
spite of the Censures he met with all) that he did, and does, hold the
following Queres in the affirmative; being of opinion that to hold them
otherwise is to place some of the King's Supremacy in the People.

An ADDRESS which the Dean of Durham sent to his Majesty, speedily after the
Prince of Orange landed [upon his Brethen their Refusal to join with him,
because the Superior Clergy had not Addtess'd before] to show his Abhorrance
of that Unnatural Invasion; which Address was intercepted by the Lord Lumley
and other Lords who had seized on York; as mentioned page 3.
To the King's most excellent Majesty.
The Hearty and Humble Address of your Majesty's ever loyal, and faithful,
Subject, and Servant, the Dean of Durham.
MAY it please your Sacred Majesty
In time of an Invasion as in a common Inundation, or Calamity by fire, When
every body is bound in duty to preserve the House, City, or Country, whereof
he is a member, without usual ceremony or compliment to Superior or Equals,
I do judge it an Indispensable Duty of every Faithful and right Loyal subject
to hasten to assist his Sovereign with his purse, as well as his prayers, to
the utmost of his power and ability; and therefore not daring to stay till all
my Betters have given me example in Addressing before me, or all my inferior
Brethren have agreed on a form to Address with me, I do heartily offer to
your Majesty all that I have to spare for your present service, thinking
nothing mine own, in such a time of danger, but what is sufficient to suffice
nature: Assuring you vvithall that I do not only from the very bottom of my
soul Abhor and Detest this Treacherous and Unnatural Invasion of the Prince
of Orange, together with all the other Wicked, Rebellious, and Bloody
Designs of his Adherents, whether Enemies at home or abroad (and more
particularly of those among us, who have lately revolted from their
Allegiance) but do with great Indignation Renounce all manner of Violence,
Force, and Contempt of Authority, offered to your Sacred Person, or Government,
either by the Rabble (the very dreg^^ of the Mobile) in the City, as well as
Rebels in the Field; Conceiving gs a great sin to use any Compulsive Arguments
to Constreine or Terrify Gods Vicegerent into a Compliance with the Will and
Desires of his subjects, be they never so much for the good of himself,
Church, or Kingdom: having learnt in the Communion of my Mother the Church of
England (wherein I am firmly resolved to live and dye) other principles than
to teach my Supreme, or any of my Superiors, what He or They ought to do,
with a svvord in my hand, or compel a Sovereign Monarch* whether he will
or no, to do his duty and gratify his people sooner than he is inclined, or
his own Necessity (whereof he is the best Judge) will permit: Satisfying
myself most thank fully with the repeated assurance, which yeur Majesty has
already given of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties^, together with all your
past and present Gracious Condescentions to remove the Fears and Jealousy of
your people, Resolving to stay your leisure for the Calling of a Parliament,
and all other means and methods, which are in your Majesty's own choice, for
the securing your own Royal Person, or Establishment of your Government in
Church or State.

Nov. 27. 88. DENIS GRAINVILLE Dean of Durham.

QVERES Put by the Dean of Durham to some Young Clergy men to answer privately
in his own Study (near about the time his Majesty sent forth an order to read
his Declaration for liberty of Conscience) which being treacherously stolen
away, or falsely transcribed, upon the interception of a letter to a Friend,
were dispersed and canvass'd up and down the Coffee-Houses of London, and
other parts of England (as mentioned page 7.) and are for that reason printed.

1. Whether a Subject is not bound to comply with his Prince in every Command,
or Reasonable Intimation of his pleasure, wherein he is not in Conscience
bound to the contrary?

2 Whether a Subject is not bound to comply with his Prince in some things,
which he conceives not only inexpedient but such as may tend to the Prejudice
of the Flourishing condition of the Church (provided the Being of the Church be
secure) if a lavvfull Prince of a Different Religion does absolutely command
them, and will not be satisfied without Compliance with such Command?

3. Whether the Church of England was not an established Church before the
enacting of the Penal Laws? If so, whether it is not better to comply with
his Majesty in consenting to take away those Penal Laws which his Majesty
desires to be abrogated, than hazard the Being of our Church, by provoking the
King on whose Favor we depend?

FINIS.
TO THE BISHOP OF DURHAM.
MY LORD.
So Sudden and violent a separation betwixt a Bishop and his Dean, as has
been occasioned betwixt your Lordship and my self, by our late stupendiou^
Revolution, is a matter of too great importance to be passed over in silence,
by one who was driven from his station by the impetuosity of that dreadful
storm, which lately fell on, and overthrew our Church and State. I conceive it
therefore my duty to inform your Lordship, not only where, but what I am, in
this age of mutability, which has produced, I think, almost all kind of
changes, among men of every Quality, Degree, and Calling, but that which
Doctor B. speaks of, in his letters concerning his travells into Italy; I mean
the change of sex.

I need not, my Lord, give You any particular account of my behavior, or
usage, in England, after your Lordship was called up to London about
Michaelmass last, or of the manner of my Escape, since your Lordship was
certified, by letters from my self, in the months of Oct: and Nov: last, of
most matters of moment relating to the Church and County of Durham (tho I had
the honor and satisfaction of receiving an answer to few of them) and may come
to the knowledge of other things, by the relation of my deportment, which I
have published in my printed letter to my Brother the Earl of Bathe; whereto I
crave leave to refert your Lordship, and all who are inquisitive after me.

I shall only embrace this occasion solemnly, and publicly, to assure your
Lordship, in general, that I did faithfully, and with as much punctuallity as
I was able, discharge those Trusts which were committed to me, in every one of
the places, and offices, which I had the honor to bear under your Lordship;
and maintained my Post in your Absence, not withstanding mighty
discouragements, till it was not possible for me any longer to strive against
that Torrent, which had hurried all matters, in that and other parts of the
Nation, into great disorder and confusion.

When I saw there was no possible means left for me, but to sink, by
endeavoring to oppose what was irresistible; or swim down the stream (which
no argument not example of the age could, I thank God, prevail with me to do.)
I was under a necessity to turn aside, and withdraw my self, beholding
matters a while at a distance; rather than in my own station and place of
acting; since I carried about which me an unalterable loyal heart, which would
not suffer me to runn (as most did) with the multitude; and on the other side
wanted both strength of mine own, and the assistance of others, effectually to
oppose that unruly and many headed monster. But did not resolve to leave the
Kingdom, and commit my Flock and Family alone to Almighty God's protection and
care, (as I afterward did) till I had a powerful example, which a dutiful
subject ought to be proud to follow, and a Precedent which may set me above the
censures of any person in the three Kingdoms.

When my Sovereign was forced from his own palace, nay driven out of the
Realm, it was time for those who were firmly resolved to adhere to, and suffer
with Him, to yield to that force and necessity, which A mighty Potentate, by
complying with, proclaimed to be invincible. Having then the honor to be one
of that number (and glorying that I am so) it would have been a preposterous
course for me (who never played my game so as to save my stake) to have stayed
at home, or in England, when I was no longer capable to serve Him, in those
offices wherein I was placed; and while I had no other prospect, but that of a
prison, without doing what was impossible for me to do, I mean bow down to
Baal, or in plain English, submit to an Usurper.

This occasioned my Flight first to Carlisle, and from thence upon it is
declaring for the P. of Orange; and change of Governor, to Edingburgh, and
from that city, upon intelligence of an Imbargo, into France, (as is set forth
more at large in the former letter to my Brother) to have the honor and
satisfaction, which is no small consolation to a loyal Subject in Banishment,
of doing homage to the Royal Family, and viewing our hopeful young Prince,
who will live, I trust in God, to constreine his Enemies to confess (what they
were, I doubt not, always persuaded of in their hearts) that he is the
legitimate son of King James the 2: and one of the greatest blessings, which
God ever bestowed on the English Nation.

As for my part (how great a parodox soever it may appear to some) I am fully
convinced of the truth thereof, as I always was of Gods wonderful Goodness
and Providence, in bringing his Father, our Gracious Sovereign, through all his
troubles, to the Crown. And I fear, that our abhorred Ingratitude toward God
for two such inestimable blessings, as the security of the succession by an
Heir Male, and those Halcyon days, which we for two years enjoyed (and might
have enjoyed longer had it not been our own faults) under a Gracious Prince of
a condescending race, have above other sins pulled down God's judgments, and
contributed toward the miserry we now groan under, and the greater misery
which hangs over our heads, and out of which we can never be delivered, but by
the extraordinary assistance of the same merciful and gracious God and King,
whom we have above measure provoked and incensed.

I have never been ashamed, I thank God, to own such sentiments, as these,
amidst all the delusions, which the generality of men of a contrary opinion
have layen under, and the greatest Obloquy and Contempt, which by them has
been cast on every one, who stuck close to his Majesty (as I thank God I have
done to the utmost of my power) in asserting his Prerogative. But I need not
affirm this to your Lordship, or any within your Diocese, having
sufficiciently proclaimed my judgment concerning these matters, in the pulpit,
both in the Cathedral and other Churches, after his Majesty's happy accession
to the Imperial Crown, and the Birth of the Prince of Wales.

Toward the Filling up the measure of that Iniquity, wherewith our just God
would no longer dispense, and whereto our Kings, our Princes, and our Prophets,
nay all the people in the land, (to speak in the Evangelical Prophets phrase,)
have contributed more or less, I know, that I my self [a wretched miserable
sinner] have sadly helped in every one of my capacities, and heartily beg
pardon of God through JESUS CHRIST for my share of the guilt. But it is to me
an unspeakable comfort, that neither my Enemies, nor my own Conscience, can
accuse me of those sins, which do seem to be the more immediate ingredients of
God's wrath, and which certainly more than others have provoked him, in such
Manner, and by such Instruments, to punish Us.

For I have heartily, from the bottom of my soul, rejoiced at our Gracious
Soverain's mounting the Throne, at Gods blessing him and us with a hopeful
Prince. I have been all along, without murmuring, contented with his
Government. I have had always more jealousy of the subject, than of my
Sovereign. I have thought our selves (as it has proved) nearer a Rebellion,
than the Introducing of Popery. And lastly I am not, no not in the thoughts of
my heart, guilty, in the leastwise, of that Perfidiousness, and Ingratitude, to
my Sovereign, or Injustice and Vnnaturalness to my Fellovv-Subjects, of
calling in Foreign assistance for our Preservation. Or if I had, it should
have been any Nation in the world rather than our Neighbors of Holland, being
not ignorant of their dealings with the English both at Amboina and Bantam.

It Is highly probable, my Lord, that these very things which I here allege for
my justification, and wherein I so much glory, will be received with derision,
and objected against me as my crimes, and that mine and other men's forwardness
to obey, and comply with, the King, has contributed to his Fall. This is a
fate, which I am sure it will not be possible for me to avoid, since that,
before I left the Nation, I had this laid to my charge, by some, who to
justify their own sawning on the Mobile, out of Fear or Intrest, began to lay
all the guilt of the King and Kingdome's overthrow to the door of the King and
his most obedient subjects; as in Oates's and Tong's plot, some brought in our
late gracious Sovereign as concerned in a design against his own Life.

But I would crave leave, here, to know who are the Objectors. If they are such
as have renounced their Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, I may save the
labor to answer them; they being not qualified to censure and accuse me, for
helping to what they were well pleased with, and desired should be brought to
pass.

If they be such as will not, at last, submit to the change of Government, and
take new oaths, tho they have been too far concerned in, and have too much
contributed to, the setting up an usurped power (by a greater Complaisance with
the Prince of Orange, than I have been guilty of toward my Sovereign) I
reply, that the Doctrine of Non-resistance which we have always, till of late,
been fond of, set forth at large in our Church-Homilies, does justify my
behavior; whereof any one may be soon convinced that will be pleased to take
the pains (which I have lately done) of seriously perusing, studying, and
analizing the Homilies published by authority, Concerning Obedience, and
against vvillfull Disobedience or Rebellion; From whence, no more than from the
Holy scripture, can I learn any Medium betwixt Resistance and Compliance. He
that does not comply with Express and Positive commands of his Sovereign, when
he beleives those commands lawful, does in some sort resist Him; that saying
of our Lord, in this case, being certainly applicable, He that is not for me is
against me.

But these, and like censures, will not, my Lord, in any great measure afflict
me. It has been my fate to be, from my Youth, inured to such, and greater,
exercises of patience. Indeed I might be induced, rather to suspect my Loyalty
and Fidelity to my Sovereign, If I should now escape Scot-free and not be
pelted at by those, who out of the same mouth can blow hot and cold, obey a
lawful Prince, and obey an Usurper; whose unjustifyable proceedings (blessed
be God) my soul does detest and abhor, being founded in that Laodicean
temper, loathsome to God and Goodmen, which I have labored ever since I have
born any public office in Church or State, as far as it was possible for me,
to oppose.

Your Lordship, I am sure, (which is my comfort) will be none of those, who
shall load me with reproaches, for my dutiful Complyances whith his Majesty,
since your example, (which did out run others) as well as your advice, did
powerfully invite me thereto. And since your Lordship has been so kind as to
attest, with your mouth to his Majesty, that I was never backward to concur
with You, in any thing which was for the King's service. Wherefore I shall
spend no more ink to disturb your Lordship with enlarging on so unnecessary a
Topic. But I shall take care to strive (by God's grace) to make good the
Character, which your Lordship was* pleased to give of me last year to the
King, you was not, my Lord, any ways deceived in your attestation, neither
shall his Majesty (I trust in God) in his expectations from me.

The remaining paper then* my Lord, will be more significantly employed in
laying, before your Lordship and the World, the Reasons, why I have not
governed my self by your Lordships example since October last, as I did
before, and cannot be prevailed on now to comply with the People's, as I did
with the Lord's Anointed my Liege and Dread Sovereign.

It was, I know, sadly bewailable for persons in such public stations, and so
nearly related, as the Bishop and Dean of Dutham, to draw two ways, as we did
(I must confess) after your Lordship was pleased to present a paper of Advice
to his Majesty, to comply with the demands of the Multitude.

And it was the more to be lamented, that such division should happen, in a
juncture of affairs, and Concussion of the Church and State, that required the
Uniting of all persons in every body Ecclesiastic and Civil (all which
strength was little enough) to uphold our Sovereign Lord's Crown and Dignity;
which we, both, were stricktly by our repeated oaths (and possibly more than
all others by particular obligations, having received our preferments by his
favor) engaged to maintain, and which were more dangerously than ever struck
at by Enemies at home and abroad.

I was astonished, my Lord at so sudden and unexpected, a change, and was,
out of respect to your Lordship, one of the last that, in the City and Church
of Durham, gave credit to the reports (wherein your honor was concerned) which
busied for a while the mouth of almost every person in the County.

That, that very method which we were afraid, nay well assured of, before
parting, was likely to destroy our present Government and Governors (things
portending as badly as in forty one) should so immediately (according to your
own expression) become the only, and most assured, means of the Preservation of
the Kings person, and establishment of his Government in Church and State, gave
me occasion beyond all measure to admire. And what should move your Lordship,
of all men in the Nation, in an unusual way, to advise his Majesty so to do,
is not yet discovered by me, tho it often imployes my thoughts.

This change of Measures in your Lordship my Diocesan, whose Counsel, Example,
and assistance, I did more than ever need and expect, at such a desperate
Crisis, did wonderfully weaken me in the discharge of all Duties incumbent on
me, either as a Churchman or Justice of the Peace, and did put me under an
unavoidable necessity of abating in my zeal to attempt sundry things, and
engage in several Designs, which could not be prosecuted, much less
accomplished, without the concurrence of my Bishop and Lord Lieutenant.

This did likewise incapacitate me to censure, or so much as curb those
insolent Young Clergymen, who before your Departure were arrived to such a
pitch of blodness, as to expose by undecent insinuations in the Congregation,
not only their Dean, but Bishop, for Obedience to the King. And which impotency
of mine was, the very Sunday after, made conspicuous, by an other indiscreet
Sermon preached in the Cathedral pulpit, which I was forced to pass by without
so much as admonition (only denying the Preacher the customary respects of an
invitation to my table) for fear of a second affront. Since instead of
assistance from those, who were sworn to give me that, and much more, I met
with reproaches, and was told in the public discharge of the Deans office,
that I was well enough Served in that my Bishop had left me in the Lurch.

I had no small difficulty to bear up against and repel those Arguments, which
were brought, the last year, out of the other Province, from the example of
great and venerable Prelates, which my entirely devoted heart to honor and
obey my King, would not permit me to immitate, tho modesty would not allow me
openly to condemn. But when those, who labored to shake me off from my
foundation of firm Loyalty, and to betray my Innocence, by persuading me to
enter into the Herd, discernd me void of my last support, and deprived of the
example of my own Bishop and Father in God, they attackt me (your Lordship my
imagine) with too great strength and rudeness, for a single Dean, without
Countenance of Superior, or Concurrence of Inferior Brethren, any longer to
withstand or oppose, with any considerable effect.

Tho God Almighty (praised be his holy Name) endowed me, in that day of Trial,
with so much courage, as to attempt to do it, in such manner, as may hereafter
prove to Edification; never changing my Note nor Measures (when all began to
dance after an outlandish Pipe) as long as I stayed on the Place. Witness my
Sermons I preached on the 5. and 9. of December* two days before I fled, and
the Sunday after the Generality of the City and Country had, with open Arms
and Mouths, received a Discontented Lord, who the week before seized on the
Town for the P. of Orange* and profaned both your Castle, and the Markett
Cross, with the reading of a Treasonnable Declaration, as is related more at
large in the foregoing letter.

I could not accord, I must confess, with such Example of your Lordship, nor
with the Example of others, in being silent, or sitting still, in a time of
imminent Danger, War* and Tumult, when good Nature, as well as good
Conscience, dictated to all faithful Clergy men and Christians, not only to
list up their voices like a Trumpett, but to employ all their hands to have
restrained the unruly multitude, which had got the Bitt in their Teeth, and
were running madly to a Change of Government, and Deposition of their King; and
in that toward their own Destruction; since the Monarchy, as well as our
Church, was like to receive (as it has done) an incureable blow, by an other
Disgrace and Banishment of a lawful Sovereign of the same Stock and Race,
which had been once before barbarously treated beyond expression, and in such
degree, that the English Nation, for a while, became an object of Contempt and
Indignation among the very Turks and Pagans.

However matters might appear to your Lordship, and other Prelates above at
London, (as I ought in duty to conclude, by their and your Actings, that they
did otherwise than to me below) I could not discover, when my eyes were most
open, and cleared by serious and fervent Devotion, that any thing or course
tended more to the preservation of the King's Crown, and security of our Church
under Him, than our unfeigned submission to our supreme Moderatour and
Governor, and our vigorous and constant opposition of seditious Incendiaries
and Malcontents, who any wise Irritated, or Inflamed the People, or did
undutifully capitulate with the King, being agitated (as was apparent) by an
humor of Popularity, and that Republican spirit which was gone forth into the
Nation, which ought to have been withstood so much the more, by how much it had
gotten strength, and numbers, to terrify some of our greatest Leaders in our
very Sion, as well as our Jerusalem; who put themselves into a most dangerous
Post [the head of the Multitude] not out of disaffection to the King, I am
persuaded, so much as out of fear of that ungovernable Beast, who will make
less scruple to pull off the B^sho'ps Lawnsleeves and the Earle's Coronets,
than either of them, in the Convention, did to deprive their Lord and
Sovereign's head of the Crown. And I must confess my self so short sighted, or
hard to be convinced, that I cannot as yet see, or own, that I then made a
wrong judgment of things, or, on that account, labored under any Error.

Would God, that all those, whom I dare not deny to be, as they think
themselves, very much wiser men (tho they did approach as much toward rudeness
in withsstanding, as I did toward Flattery in complying with the King) had not
too late discerned the pernicious fatallness of the contrary Error, in
endeavoring to bring Gods Vice gerent to Terms, whereby the Sovereignty of our
Defender of the faith, was so weakened, broken, and shattered, that he was not
able to protect either Church, or State, or so much as his own Sacred Person
from the hands of the Rabble* nay not secure his very pocketts, at last, from
the Fate of me his unworthy servant, and other his Subjects, I mean, from being
in our flight picked and rifled.

Hinc illae lachrim^. And I make no question, but that if Tears would redress
what is past, thousands of those, who murmured and complained of the King,
would shed whole rivers to restore the King, the Church and the Kingdom to the
Circumstances (as bad as they then thought them) which they were all in but
last year. But God knows it is now too late to make use of such feeble means,
for the recovery of what is lost, floods of tears being not like to prevail,
unless accompanied with a holy violence, and conjoined with sincere and hearty
prayer, issueing out from a truly penitent heart, and deeply humbled Soul.

We have, God knows, madly grasped our Religion, our Liberty, and our Laws,
out of the hands of our own lawfully descended, merciful, Prince, who
manifested all a long, and even at the last upshot, that he carried about him,
as he professed, a truly English heart, and whose Interest it was (whatever was
his Majestys Religion) to uphold them all; Grasped them away, I say and put
them into the power, and at the mercy of Foreigners, whose Humor and
Inclination it is, as well as Interest, to destroy them all; whereof a few
months are like to afford Us more lamentable Demonstrations, as we have reason
to apprehend, by the Transactions of five or six that are past.

By these few honest reflections, on the miserable Estate of my Native Country,
and more particularly on the Cathedral and Archdeaconry of Durham (which I
cannot here reflect on without often sitting down and weep) your Lordship may
perceive, that I am the very same, that You found me, when You entered on your
Diocese 17. years ago; and left me in the month of Octobet last, bearing the
Brunt of that dreadful Hurricane, which was then coming out of Holland, and
struggling with that insatiable Hydra, which did widely gape for the Crown and
Myter, and is like after devouring it is supports (like a Jugglar) to disgorge a
Commonwealth.

I am indeed, my Lord, on all accounts, and to all intents and purposes, the
very same that I have ever been; entirely devoted to the Honor, and Interest
of the ROYAL FAMILY OF THE STVARTS, and so unalterable and steady a Practiser,
as well as Professor, of the old Church-of-England-Religion (and more
especially of those distinguishing Doctrines which do signally honor our
Church, and which were, whilst practiced, so lovely in the eyes of all, as to
prevail with a Rom: Cath: Prince at his mounting the Throne to continue and
protect her) that I can by the power of no temptation, or Arguments of Dutch
Divinity, be induced to do any certain sinful act to preserve her, whether by
way of resisting my lawful Sovereign, or complying with an Usurper.

I say, my Lord, that I am, both by Nature and Instinct, a perfect Abhorrer of
that Diabolick sin of Rebellion, however varnisht over by the Father of lies,
and by what Names or Titles soever it be dignified or distinguished. And, in
the same temper of mind, I do here declare to your Lordship (which I desire may
be communicated to every Person in your Diocese under You) that I am resolved,
by the grace of the Almighty, to end my days.

Greiving that your Lordship has, by doing homage to a Superior which I
cannot own, absolved me, in a great measure, from the Canonical Obedience,
Duty, and Respect, which I did once owe You, (and whereby I am capacitated to
take greater freedom with your Lordship* than 'twas lawful for me to do in
former letters, as well as debarred of of begging your Benediction, with the
same delight I have done formely,) I rest.

MY LORD Rouen July the 1. 1689. Your Lordships, etc* DENIS GRANVILLE.

FINIS.
To the Vice-Dean and Prebendaries of the Cathedral Church of Durham.
MR. Vice-Dean and other Prebendaries of Durham.
Tho the bodily Infirmities I now feel, as well as the greater ones I have
struggled with since I left Durham, [intimated in a letter from Edingburgh]
have been, and are, sufficient to excuse my Absence, and may justify me in the
eyes of God and Man, for leaving, for some time, so cold and moist an air, as
the North of England, and repairing into a Clime more warm and benign, Yet I,
who have been, all my days, a Lover of Plain-dealing, think not fit to
conceal, any longer, the more substantial reasons, which did at first hurry me
away from You, and do still detain me abroad.

Till I was well got out of the reach of those New Governors, whom I could
neither own, nor obey, and from whom, for that very cause, had hopes of small
favor, I was, as well as my Betters, necessitated to use, the most plausible
Arguments I could with Innocence, for a Voyage into France, without declaring
the bottom of my design. And Providence, at that time, furnishing me with one
very Authentic, and reasonable enough [to wit, upon the return of a
dangerous Cough to go once more into a Country, from which I had received
formerly considerable advantage, in point of Health,] I should have been much
to blame, if I had not made use thereof, as I did, in order to my Escape.

On this account (in my letter to You, and discourse with those I met in my
journey) I insisted on little else, than what related to my then growing
Indisposition, which was come to a great height; neither did I (God be thanked)
meet, or converse with any so unreasonable, or inquisitive, as to demand
stronger motives, than the recovery and preservation of my health, (the next
valuable Blessing to the Salvation of my Soul,) to authorize my design of
hastening into this Kingdom: famous for it is Sovereign and Beneficial air for
all Consumptive Constitutions; and the virtue whereof, tho I am not got into
the most salutiferous Region, I now already, in a very great measure perceive.

But tho all I allege be very true and real, yet I dare not deny that other
and greater matters (set forth in a precedent letter) did first put it into my
thoughts, and incline me to quitt my Station, and without which, had the danger
of my life been never so great, I must confess, that, I think, I had never more
thus left my Charges, after so considerable an Absence heretofore (to recover
my health) from my Offices and Cures.

In plain English then, I declare to all the World, that the true Cause of my
sudden flight was, that I carried about me a Conscience more untractable, and
less pliable to an Usurpation, than most I left behind^, as process of time
has made too apparent. My Conscience (such as it was) did oblige me, to the
utmost of my Strength, to oppose all usurped power (as I did to the last,
wittness all the Congregation present in the Quire the Sunday before my
departure) and then, I need not tell You, it was not fit for me to stay there,
any longer. I might use the word impossible rather than unfitt, since I could
not with good Conscience stay. Id tantum possumus (says the Civillian) quod
jure possumus.

I cannot deny that every one of You, and all those Clergy in the Nation, which
were satisfied and resolved, to Submitt; that is to say renounce your
Allegiance to your Lawful Sovereign, and swear new to those, who have
ungodlily, and unjustly, deposed him, have done politickly enough to remain at
home, sit still, and hold your Tongues; at a time, when the Right
Church-of-England-Religion, (according to the best notion I have of it) nay
Christianity in general, required all faithful Preachers to lift up their
voices like a Trumpet, to oppose the madness of the People, and stop them in
their Carreer to Destruction.

But I, your unworthy Dean, who, without doubt or scruple, believed it, at that
time, as I do at present, a piece of detestable Rebellion to join with any, in
a Conspiracy against our Kings Crown, as well as Life, (and desire to be torn
with wild Horses rather than so to do,) did as politickly, (and I am sure more
honestly) in withdrawing.

But I desire You to remember, that I did not stir from my Post, till the
City of Durham was polluted by the Reading of a Declaration, which by a late
Proclamation of the King's was pronounced treasonable; and that there were not
four public Magistrates, nor one Minister in the Town, had the Courage any
ways to oppose it, or declare their dissent thereto: a v^ry feeble support for
a Dean resolved [as I then declared I was, and now declare a new that I am] to
stick close, by God's grace, to the Crown of my only lawful Sovereign King
James the 2., his Heirs, and Successors: knowing no difference betwixt the
Duty and Obedience I owe to a Prince of the Protestant, and to a Prince of the
Roman Faith.

Nay I desire you moreover to consider, that I did not runn away and forsake
my flocks, as some may be apt to object, when I saw the Wolf coming, but after
I saw him come, and with open mouth ready to devour, and had my self in some
sort tasted his Fierceness.

I beseech You therefore so take notice, that it was not till the 11. of
December, at night, that I left Durham; a day after his Sacred Majesty was
driven from Whitehall. By which time, the Wicked Contrivers of this sad
Revolution had accomplished what they had been long endeavoring, stripped the
King of all his Supports, put him under a necessity, as well as his most
faithful Subjects, to fly into an other Nation, and shown their Good Will
toward the Dissolution of the Government.

And farther, and above all this, tho I could not stay longer in Durham,
without being defiled by concurring, or confined for opposing, I did not leave
England, till the 20. of January; nor fly out of the Kings Dominions, till the
Subject, who was tender enough of his own Property, had after innumerable
Violations of the King's Prerogative, presumed to disspose of the very Crown.

For The crown offered to the Prince of Orange on Ashvvensday
Ashwensday was over, before I took shipping in Scotland. A Dismal day, a day,
which I shall mark in my Calendar, with a note of deeper Humiliation than
before; A day, which, by all truly devoted Souls to the Honor and Interest
of the Imperial Crown of England, will be remembered with more Regrett than
Ashwensday 53. A day indeed, once thought fit for the Inauguration of an
Cromvell declared Protector on Ashvvensday 16^3.
Usurper; who tho in all other respects odious and infamous, had not the
boldness to seize on the Crown, nor the People of England, at that time, (tho
plunged over head and ears in Rebellion) the Timidity nor. Stupidity, to offer
it to him, who without all dispute might then with less sin, and with more
prudence, have put it on his Head* (it having for a while before been deposited
and unimploy'd,) than some body since snatched it from the Head of his own
Uncle, nay Father.

This is, Gentlemen, the true and real cause of my withdrawing. And if You
please to be mind full of the critical time when, the manner how, and the
cause wherefore, being also so just to your Dean, as not to look barely on
his going away, but consider it as circumstantiated, and allowing me so much
Charity (who have always exercised greater toward my Dependants) as to
believe I did, at least, mean well then, and do speak true at present, I am
willing to bear all other ccnsures you can load me with, for this late
hazardous undertaking, which however it may be mis-understood, in England,
(over which, as of late, there seems still to hang some notorious cloud and
mist, which strangely obscures men's understanding) and deemed an act of Fear or
Folly; yet I am, God be praised, fully persuaded that it was the most honest,
the most courageous, and thc vvisest Act of my whose Life. And do incessantly
praise his name, that he was pleased to endow me with his grace, (passing by
many more capable to do him service,) at that very time, and in such manner as
I did, to Bear vvittness to the Truth.

1, For my Flock, had I (whose notion both of Religion and Loyalty had caused
me all a long to act at an other rate failed by a sordid and truly mean
compliance, I had certainly done them irreparable wrong, by thwarting my past
Doctrine, and destroying the example of my whole Life.

2. As for my Revenue, tho I possessed the best Deanery, and possibly the best
Archdeaconry, and one of the best Livings, in England, A Faithful Christian
ought not so highly to value them, as to put them into the scales with his
Conscience. And besides I do not forget that I both received, and held my
Deanery by the King's favor, and do resolve that without his favor I will
never keep it.

These two particulars granted, I leave all men to judge, whether it was an
unwise act of mine, all things considered, to withdraw when, and in such
manner, as I did. I do well assure my self, that it will be esteemed
otherwise, by all those that do not deny the truth of this undoubted maxim,
that Honesty is the best Policy. And I do comfort my self, that my poor
exploded Notions of Honesty and Religion, Loyalty to my King, and obedience to
the Precepts and Rules of the Church, will yet come in vogue before I leave the
World (tho I have too much reason to apprehend, that, unless the change of air
preserve me, I shall not be a long lived man (however they be run down, and
rejected in this intoxicated Age, which has, in a manner, captivated men's
Senses, as well as their Understandings.

I that am, the Lord be thanked, happily delivered, for a while, from the Foggs
of my own Country (which were sadly increased since it is late Alliance and
Communication with Holland) do no more doubt, than I cease to pray for, the
King's glorious, and blessed Restoration. That joyful Day in spite of Men
and Devils, will come, as soon, as the Church and Kingdom are, by a profound
Humiliation and sincere Repentance, prepared for so choice a blessing. And when
it does come, or is nigh approaching, it will infallibly open men's eyes, and
cause them clearly to discern their past egregious folly and facility, in
suffering themselves to be so soon overcome, by such deplorable Delusion, as
not to distinguish betwixt the felicity of living under an undisputable lawful
and gracious Prince (of the most merciful and eligible Race and
Qualifications) and bearing the Yoke of an Usurper, whose Crown must
necessarily be maintained, as it is gotten, by the Sword. And whose Reign, tho
it begins in nomine Domini, and is ushered in by a show of Religion, and
seeming love of Liberty, and Laws, soon becomes grievous, and his little
finger felt much heavier, than the Lawful Predecessour's Loins.

It will not be needful to pretend to the Spirit of Prophecy for this
Discovery, the last eight or nine Month's experience does powerfully evince the
Truth of what I affirm. There does seem already to be eyes enough open, if
their hands were at Liberty, [and good swords in them] in Scotland, and England
too, as well as Ireland, to deliver those miserable Kingdoms from real
Tyranny and Presbitery, which are not like to be found much more tolerable,
for the late injustifiable, as well as unintelligible method of Exclusion of
Popery, and pretended Arbitrary Power.

All those who were come to, and could exercise, their Understandings, from the
year 41 to the year 60, cannot forget the unsufferable Slavery which the three
Kingdoms underwent* upon the unhappy Conjunction of those forementioned
unseparable Twins. The horrid Rebellion of those days was less odious than the
present one; which is accompanied with the highest Aggravations; less odious I
say, or at least less unnatural, (than that under which the best Subjects and
Christians in England at present groan) in sundry respects, had not the former
been deeply dyed in the blood of King Charles the Martyr. And yet all the
Religion, and great ostentation of Purity of the Gospel, wherewith it was
introduced, and at last, after a flood of Loyal blood, submitted to, by an
infatuated Generation, ended at length in down right Enthusiasme; which, by
breaking of Fences, and tearing up Foundations, let in a Deluge of all kind of
Profaneness. The Privileges and Properties, as well as the Liberty of the
Subject, were got into the hands of such miserable Keepers, as kept them all to
themselves: in such sort, as scarce any Person. You do well remember, could be
Master of them, or meet with them, but at Wallingford House. In a word, after
inexpressible violence and Injustice, Cutting off sundry Pillars of Church and
State, and most those well fixed Church of England-men [Clergy or Layicks] who
had the valor to withstand the Usurpers of those days, all matters, at last,
run into Anarchy and Confusion. And the Babell, which had been twenty years in
building, after a short tottering, at the Death of their Chief Upholder, fell,
and crushed it is self with it is own weight, and covered all their
Antimonarchicall machinations with it is Ruins.

The serious and sober review of all past Transactions, from the beginning of
the long and great Rebellion home to the Dutch Invasion, to wit; of the first
stupendous wickedness of the Enemies of the King and Church of England: The
wonderful long suffering of a justly Incensed God; His unconceivable Goodness
and Compassion at length in a real delivery of the Nation, and our Church,
[from not only the most Arbitrary power, which had been before exercised, but
from the utmost malice of all it is worst Adversaries, who were watching to
devour her] The wretched Requital of God's mercy and Love, made to Heaven, by
the most Real (I fear none can excuse themselves) as well as pretended Friends
of Crown and Myter, in repaying such unexpressible Bounty with Contempt and
Ingratitude; and, at last, the most deplorable Folly and Madness of the People
of England, in being caught by, nay running into, the very same Snares,
wherein they had been once before entangled, by the Subtilty of the Devil,
almost to their utter Destruction. The recalling to mind and thorough
Consideration, I say, of such, and the like passages, should have made us,
methinks, wise enough to have avoided, in due season, the same Trap which was
again laid for us, and into which we are a second time fallen. At least, one
would guess (or else we are become perfectly stupid and insensible) should
awake every one to look to his After-Game, for fear we may be remedilessly
deprived of the remaining part of our Felicity, which is bound up in the life
of our distressed Sovereign, and his legitimate Issue, by our gracious
Queen-Consort, who has evidenced her self, in these and former innumerable
Troubles of our afflicted, and thrice banished Prince, a notable Example of
Submission and Patience, and who ought to be for being made, by God, the happy
Instrument of bringing us the Blessing of a hopeful Heir Male, for ever Dear
to the English Nation, and all faithful Subjects to the Crown of England.

If such extraordinary Dealings of the God of Heaven, varied to every man's
capacity and condition; If neither God's speaking by a still voice, nor in the
VVhirlevvind, neither by the Sunshine of mercyes, nor the Thunder of his
Judgments, [that dreadful Clap, whereinto the late black Clouds driven into
England out of Holland, broke very fatally, to the unhinging of the whole
Fabric of our Government both in Church and State,] will reclaim us, and make
us sensible of our most real Interest, and Happyness in a most desirable and
well* established Monarchy and Episcopacy, [and a gracious Prince, according to
the heart's wish of every right loyal son of the Church of England, save that
he does not ptofess our Religion;] nor reduce us to that entire obedience and
submission to the King and Church, which the wise dispensations of a loving and
long-suffering God seem, above other things, by many repeated Summonses, loudly
to call for, there remains nothing but a Fearful looking for of Judgment. I
know no Salve for our sore; nor can discover any thing which can mollify such
stony hearts, or mortify such corrupt natures; that have lamentably defeated
our heavenly Father, in all his methods to do good unto us; and save us. And I,
who have never been (all that know me must confess) a man of excessive fear and
jealousy, as to the Public, must sink down into despair: and conclude that
the people of England, the other Day, an object of envy to all the Nations
round about us, are signally marked out for God's displeasure, and will be made
a standing Monument of his Wrath to all succeding Ages*

But I shall not detain You longer with Reflections on the State of England.
It will be a Duty more incumbent on me to consider the Circumstances of Durham,
and therein those of the Cathedral Church, my special and more particular
Charge, wherein I have been by the Favor of my King, rather than my own merit,
set to Preside.

And indeed I cannot thoroughly reflect on that Church and City, wherein I
have (by God's permission and the Kings kindness) had the honor, for the last
27. years, to be dignified, without melting into Tears. To consider that the
Bishopric and Cathedral Church of Durham, which had so well approved
themselves both to his late* and present Majesty, and usually exceeded others
in expressions of Loyalty, should now lie undistinguishable, and incorporated
into the Mass of Rebellion, which the wise and just God is pleased to permit to
oppress the whole Land, peirces my very Soul.

It was one of the most painful mortifications I ever met with, the week
before my Departure, to discern my self deserted by all the Citty-Clergy in
my honest zeal for the righteous Cause of my Sovereign; In such sort, as not
to discover, then on the place, any one Ecclesiastic, neither in the
Cathedral, nor any Parochial Church, or Chapel, with in the Precincts of
that City, who had the courage, at that juncture, to own openly, either in the
Pulpit, or in his Conversation, his oppressed Prince's Interest* and Honor, by
showing just Indignation against that Treasonable Attempt, which was then
insolently made against his Crown and Dignity, in reading publicly, and with
great formality, the Prince of Orange's Declaration.
Rebellious paper mentioned in this and former letters; Tho every man, who was
not a mere Ideote, must comprehend, that that very Act countenanced was in
effect the pulling up the sluice, and letting in a Stream of Rebellion to
overflow the whole County.

This was, I declare, to me a mighty exercise of Patience, and did among other
Pressures, which possibly contributed much to my crazy condition last Winter,
heavily afflict me. But when I look farther, and at this day, regard the State
Ecclesisiastick of the whole County, and discover but three of all my Brethren
of the Clergy through the whole Bishopric of Durham (as I am made believe by
Report) who have had either the Integrity, or Courage, to stand their Ground,
against a new and unlawful Oath of Allegiance to a Prince, set up by the
abhorred treachery, and unheard of Ingratitude, of the People [Subjects] who
have no authority, in our anciently Hereditary Realm, to dispose of the Crown,
I am above measure astonished and overwhelmed with grief. Which grief is
unexpressibly augmented, when I consider that the members of that Body, or
Community whereof I have the honor to be Head, have incurred the same Guilt.
And those Eminent Persons, which, as Salt, by their Examples*, ought to have
seasoned the whole Diocese, are rendered incapable to reprove their Inferiors,
and reprehend the sins of the Times.

Alas! if Resistance of the higher powers, be, by some Modern Divines and
Distinctions, refined into a Virtue, is Perjury no sin? If the Sacred Authority
of our Earthly God (the style in Sripture allowed to a Lavvfull Sovereign) be
fallen into such deplorable contempt among Subjects, that there is little
Regard given either to their Promises, or Commands, is the Majesty of the God
of Heaven become so mean and cheap, that men, nay Divines, dare cancel the
Obligation of an Oath? And the calling God to witness the truth of what we
promise become void, and of no effect, as soon as our Interest tempt us to
break it? If so, then farewell all Religion, nay Conversation and Commerce
among men. If the Bonds of a Sacred Oath are not sufficient to hold men, surely
nothing can.

The Evils and Mischiefs, which must, unavoidably, attend a sin so universally
committed through the Kingdom, even by the Leaders and Guides of Christ's
Flock, are more and greater than it is possible for any to conceive or foresee.

Such a Notorious Contradiction of your own past Preaching and Practice, must,
I fear, render you very cheap amongst those People, which you have drawn into a
Snare by a very sinful Example, and who have too much sense not to discern the
illness thereof, tho they want Courage to resist it.

I am sorry that the necessity which I am put to of delivering my Soul,
constreins me here to declare thus much, and that you have very often, in my
Presence, preached false Doctrine, if your present Proceedings and Compliances
are justifiable.

It Is now a more seasonable time than it was a Preachers in the Cathedral
Church of Durham, as well as elsewhere, began to Caution their hearers against
implicit Obedience, whereby they did, at that time, mean all Complian^s
with K. I. James. 2.
year ago for us Ecclesiastics, who cannot swallow implicit Faith, to teach
our Hearers to beware of implicit Obedience. If it were dreadful and
dangerous while we lived under a gracious Prince of an undoubted Title, whose
excessive Goodness and Forwardness to rely on his Subjects has proved his
Ruin, is it become otherwise under the Government of a Prince, who has by
Violence wrested a Crown from the very Father of his own Princess, and his own
near Relation? who by such an act of unparaleld Injustice, and inexcusable, and
palpable, defect of Veracity, (in having at his first Entrance grossly
contradicted his own Declaration) gives more just Grounds, than both his
Uncles, or his Grandfather ever did, of Jealousy and Fear, and to conclude that
he intends to Rule as he Conquered the Kingdom, proposing to himself no other
motives, in his future Government, than he did in his first Invasion. And what
they were it will be needless to recite to any but those, who were, during the
months of Oct: and Nov: last, fast a sleep. And what will become then of our
Religion, Libertyes, and Laws, it will be easy enough to devine.

O Fortunatos nimium bona si sua norint etc.

The Review of our past Felicity, those very Blessings we enjoyed, and sadly
overlooked, during the Reign of our present Sovereign, must needs greivously
torment our Hearts; and give us occasion of pining away with just vexation and
anger at out selves. Since it is not possible now for us, in all humane
apprehension, to swim back to such our [sottishly neglected and lost]
Happiness, but through that sea of blood, which Tyrants and Usurpers commonly
shed, in prosecuting and accomplishing their Machiavellian Designs. And it is
matter of no small moment for men, especially Churchmen, to examine thoroughly,
and impartially* how much of the Guilt will lie at their own Doors. As a great
measure thereof must, it is without all Dispute, rest at the door of every one,
who has knovvingly and vvillfully contributed to the Fall and Banishment of
his Lawful Prince, whereby he is put under a Necessity, out of Justice to his
son, to recover his own by the Sword, which by Force and Violence, as well as
the abhorred Treachery of his own Subjects, were taken from him.

And I do beseech You to be assured, that in now recommending to You (whom God
has placed under my Authority) so Seasonable, and necessary a Task as this
sort of SELFE-EXAMINATION, I do manifest that I am (as I have done often in
other matters) your faithful Friend, as well as,

Rouen Aug: 15. 1689. Your affectionate Brother DENIS GRANVILLE.

FINIS.
To the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Durham.
REVEREND BRETHREN,
Among the many applications, which, upon my withdrawing, and leaving the
Nation, I have been obliged, out of common decency as well as good conscience,
(considering the publickness of my circumstances,) to make to my Relations,
Natural and Spiritual, I might, without censure, or blame, omit all Laborious
penning down of my thoughts for You, the Clergy of my Archdeaconry, having for
more than twenty years together, with the greatest industry and best zeal I was
able, from year to year, by word and letter, and sometimes in Print, not only
incited you at my Visitations, faithfully and diligently to execute your
offices; but plainly and fully delivered my soul, at my last, and more
memorable, Visitation, on the 15: of the never to be forgotten month of Nov:
1688 (ten days after our late [Dutch-Protestant] Gunpowder-Treason) Brotherly
advising, nay earnestly pressing, you, to stand the Test in that great day of
trial, that you might not have lost either the honor or reward of Confessors
for a Righteous Cause; in Asserting whereof, I am willing (and resolve by Gods
grace) to sacrifice my life, as I have done my Revenue; if the wise God should
think fit to call me to the one, as he has done to the other.

To demonstrate undeniably to your selves, and all that heard me that day,
that I was not, among all my weaknesses, afraid or ashamed to own my past life
and Doctrine, and to complete the Office of a Visitor, as honestly and heartily
as I began, I chose, you may remember, to lay before you the chief heads of
all the Good Counsel and Advice, which I had given you at the former
Conventions of the Clergy of my Jurisdiction, for four years together; even the
four last extraordinary years, that is to say, ever since his gracious
Majesty, our Liege Lord and Soverigne King James the 2:, mounted his Throne;
tho I had too much reason, then to apprehend, by your long neglect thereof, and
running counter to the principles and practice of your Archdeacon, it would
badly suite with your palates, which at that time, to my grief, appeared, and
since, without all dispute* are found, not only vitiated, but poisoned, by the
Leaven and Magic of the Age.

It was ever my hopes, that his Majesty's Loyal County of Durham (the
appellation which my gracious Master King Charles the 2: was wont, as I have
often minded You, to afford Us) would have resisted longer than any Diocese in
England, by virtue of the Good Government which was very seasonably, and more
effectually than else where, therein set on foot at his joyful Restoration.

How little prevalent, and unsuccessfull soever my poor and weak endeavors
proved toward your establishment, I could not imagine, that the Clergy of the
Bishopric of Durham, could have so soon forgotten (much less have frustrated)
the precepts, and Example, given them, by so great a Bishop Cosins.
Confessor, and stout Champion of the old orthodox Church of England, as had
happily revived good order, and conformity to the Church's Rules among them.

But since we find, by sad experience, that it is so, and that even the very
Leaders have apostatized, from their Duty to God and the King, It becomes me
(who dare not follow their Example) to do all that I can, to prevent the People
of my Archdeaconry, from being seduced thereby.

You know, I have labored faithfully, and with zeal more than ordinary, to
assert the King's cause from the year 1678 (through all the Combustions
occasioned by an Infamous Impostor,) home to the Dutch Invasion, and at that
very time, even on the 15 of Nov. 1688, brought all the wholesome advice which
I had given at several Visitations, to your view in one Address, (as before
mentioned,) which I have printed for your farther edification, and my own
justification. And in the next place, I knew of nothing better that I could do,
than to preach to you by my example, in leaving my Station, and my Revenue,
(when I could not be permitted longer to discharge a good conscience,) rather
than involve my self, in the guilt of an usurpation. Which act of mine, how
grealy soever it may have been censured, I esteem as the best sermon I ever
preached in my life, the reflection on which affords much comfort to my soul;
since thereby I cleared my self from the guilt of renouncing my Allegiance, as
the generality have done, which will prove an eternal blot to the Nation, not
excepting the Clergy of the Church of England.

It Is too late, now to give you Cautions against Perjury, or to set before your
eyes, how much more heinous it is in a Priest, than in a Lay man, because the
greatest part of you already have swallowed a new oath to an Usurper. And to
inform you in the obligation that lies on you, to repent of, rather than keep
the oath you have taken, is to conclude you (what I ought not to do) not only
bad Christians, but very weak Divines.

There is no man that understands any thing of Religion, but knows that a rash
oath only obliges to Repentance; whereof that there might be some MEET AND
WORTHY FRUITS brought forth among the Clergy of my Jurisdiction, would prove to
me great matter of Consolation; and if it were done very speedily, it would be
a great extenuation of their crime, and afford good ground to hope, they were
overborne with the Boisterousness of a Violent Sorme, rather than did wilfully
plunge themselves, in so horrid a guilt.

Let not the fear of loosing your possessions, (which I thank God has not
prevailed on me) tempt you to lie, one moment, under so insupportable a load.
The enjoyments of your Livings will be sadly purchased, by the increase of so
enormous an Impiety. And there will be a lamentable Precedent left to your
flocks, if You, the Pastors, have not sufficient sincerity to make a speedy
Confession of your sin, and courage enough publicly to own the same by giving
glory to God and taking shame unto yourselves. There can be no more effectual
way to redeem your own honor than by restoring Gods. Nothing contributed so
much to the glory of St. Augustine as his Confessions, and Retractations, and
consequently nothing can be more to yours, than to betake your selves to this
Essential part of Repentance, I mean the Confession of your Crime, whereby you
have scandalized your flocks.

You that have taken an unlawful oath to save your Benefices, have thereby put
your selves under a greater necessity of parting with them, or retaining your
guilt. For nothing lefs, than so, seems to be a sufficient evidence of^ your
sincerity. God has so ordered it, by his divine providence, that a sinner
always misses of his aim. Those that betake themselves to unlawful courses,
to save their lives or estates, must necessarily forsake them, and enter on
such as are diametrically contrary to the former, or loose their souls, which
are infinitely more valuable than both. Repentance ought to be esteemed by
every ordinary Christian a Returning from sin, yea such a Returning as requires
the treading out the very stepps, which the sinner made in order to the
commission of it. And surely, then, what soever is binding in the Disciple,
must be much more obligatory in the spiritual Guide.

But I shall not dive too far into particulars, and chalk out the exact method,
and manner how you shall make reparation, for the wrong which You have done,
by submitting to an Usurper, both to the King and Church of England. I have
reason to believe, that all of you know your duty well enough, and many I am
sure, better than I can instruct you; since the Prerogative of the King,
Passive-obedtence and Non-resistance were preached up with more zeal, by you in
the Bishopric of Durham, than they were by others in any Diocese in England.
Where Conformity to the orders of the Church, and Execution of other Laws of
the Land, were so well practiced (tho not as they ought to have been) that the
BISHOPRIC which anciently was styled the Land of Priests, was generaly reputed
the Seat of thorough-Conformists.

You on the place of acting, must see, more clearly than I can, at this
distance, (tho your eyes have been in a great measure blinded by the smoke of a
Rebellion) the fittest manner and opportunities of making satisfaction for your
egregious Apostasy.

I shall therefore, rather than prescribe the means, mind you of your
indispensable obligation to do the thing, and so redeem your honor, and
redress the scandal you have given, to the increase of your own sin, and the
unspeakable grief of my soul; who did faithfully labor to make every one
committed to my charge, such as God has given me grace to approve my self;
even an unalterable Loyal Subject to King James the second, as well as so
legitimate a son of the Church of England, as can never be persuaded, that it
can be for her Intrest to contradict her Doctrine; Which, as I have hitherto
professed, and held fast amidst all the blasts of Temptation, (from what ever
point of the Compass they have blown) I am resolved by the Divine assistance
to practice unto the end; in spite of the most prevalent examples, or
malicious censures, used now as arguments, or engines, to overthrow me.

That such a General neglect of Church Order among the Clergy, through the
Nation, (as I long, and loudly complained of, and warned you against,) should
be attended on by so fatal an Issue, as an Universal Defection, should not be
a thing perfectly new to You, to whom I address my self, since you,
yourselves, can be my witnesses, that I have often faithfully foretold, that
an Universal Semi-conformity would end in as Universal Semi-Allegiance: and
would God we had not found, by lamentable experience, that it had done much
more, by producing that degenerate offspring, who have not only imbrew'd their
hands, in so horrid a crime, as the dethroning their lavvfull Sovereign, but
like Vipers have, in a manner, eaten out their very Mother's Bovvells.

I do not doubt but that Almighty God has, by this time, brought to your
memory some of those seasonable cautions and memento's, which I have plainly
laid before You, in the public discharge of my Archidiaconall office, with
some greater force and effect on your spirits, than they had at their first
delivery. I cannot have such prejudicial thoughts of you, as to imagine
otherwise, since Divine Providence led me, often, to such suitable Topics, as
might have prevented, by God's blessing, (had they been generally insisted on
by all those who had Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and not been rejected by the
people,) much of our present misery; the ill effects of which are like to be
felt by the succeeding generation; tho we should be blessed, to morrow, with
such undeserved felicity, as all good Christians long for, I mean the speedy
Restoration of our Sovereign, Religion, Liberties and Laws.

If any of my Brethren prove not only unkind, but so unjust as to deny, what I
affirm, in reference to the seasonable advice which I did, from time to time,
recommend to them, the papers which I have by me, containing the heads of my
Visitation-Discourses, which had better luck than some of my money and plate,
in escaping the hands of the Rabble, who treated me roughly enough, in my
first-flight from Durham, can testify for me, and demonstrate to the most
malicious of my Contemners or Opposers, that I was, during my station among you
no, unfaithsull and negligent, tho vveak and unsuccessfull, Visitor.

There are many things I have said, that I am sure you cannot easily forget,
which, tho they had not their first designed effect on you, may consequently
deserve some of your consideration. It would be very grateful to me, to be
informed that I am not mistaken in this particular, but that my past
persuasions to do your duty, may opperate, as good counsel has often done, in
length of time and at a great distance.

Some desirable fruit, in the conclusion, (which I don't despair of) from
those numerous young plants, that I had, for 26 years together, with great care
and pains, vigilantly watered, will, amidst all the mortification I undergo,
revive my soul, and compensate, in some measure, for that lamentable crop
which I have hitherto reaped, from the seed I have sown, having met withal, at
leaving my station, little other return of my labors, than Almighty God did,
Esaie the 5:. where, after the Heavenly Husbandman had dig'd and dressed his
vinyard, and graciously expected, it should have brought forth grapes, it
brought forth, (as our's and other Diocesses have done,) vvilde grapes, which
must be acknowledged, after such heavenly Cultivation, a wretched Retribution.

Heartily praying that the Allmighty would strengthen those few who stand, and
raise up all who are fallen, I commend my whole jurisdiction to Gods Blessing,
and rest

Rouen Aug: 25. 1689. Your ever faithful (tho unworthy) Visitour, DENIS
GRANVILLE.

FINIS.
POSTCRIPT.
HAving in the preceding letter omitted to reply to one censure, whereto I am
least willing to answer (being more desirous to Justify my self than accuse my
Brethrrn) I cannot forbear to take notice thereof in a Postscript. I mean,
that of Singularity; to^it, that my being the only dignified Clergyman of the
Church of England, that does, at present, attend his Master in his Exile, ought
to make me Suspect my Zeal. This is the Judgment of my Enemies, that is to
say, of the COMPLIERS with the Usurpation in England. But if any of them, or
others, twitt me with Singularity at this time, I shall be the less surprised
therewith; since the Noncompliance of the Clergy, under my Authority, in that
strict Order and Conformity, which I ever thought my self obliged to practice
(and did observe, I thank God, in such a degree as to evince the
practicableness of those duties, which some men's ^loth represented impossible)
has rendered me so, for near 30 years together. And that I have been so, I
mean not discouraged to keep up, as close as I could, to the Church's Rules
(tho I have wanted the Example, and Company of any right and thorough-paced
Conformist since the decease of my ever honored Brother, Archdeacon Basire) is
at this Juncture no discomfort to me. For if God had not endowed me with
Grace, and Resolution to have performed my Duty, in a Time of PEACE and QUIET,
I should never have been enabled to do it in a Time of Trouble; and to
Withstand that Raging Torrent which has over-flowne our Church and state.

A Letter to Mr. James Hope Curate of the Parish of Easington, and Mr. Wm.
Kingford Curate of the Parish of Sedgefield, in the Bishopric of Durham,
substituted by Dr. Granville to serve the aforesaid Cures.
BRETHREN,
Amidst all the mortifications and exercises of Patience, which have been
occasioned to me, by the late Revolution of affairs in Church and State, and
more particularly by the Defection of the Clergy of my own Jurisdiction,
nothing has created so much disquiet, and so lasting a disturbance to my mind,
as that there should happen any scandalous failure in either of you, my more
peculiar Deputies, and fellow Laborers in the Gospel of Christ.

Tho the members of that Community whereof I am Head, together with the Clergy
of my Archdeaconry, began to take different measures from me, which gave me
too just grounds to fear that they would, (as they afterward did,) Bovv down
to Baal, in shaking off their Allegiance to their Liege Lord and Sovereign,
and submit to an Usurper, yet I did comfort my self with strong hopes, that
you, my immediate Supporters, would stick by me, and endeavor to the uttermost
of your powers to uphold me (against the violence of that storm which
threatened*) notwithstanding our different sentiments, and apprehensions
touching some matters in relation to the transactions of the year past. But,
after all those my Expectations, that one of my Crutches (give me leave so to
term you since I did so esteem you) should break, in a time of Danger and
Difficulty, is to me great ground of grief and trouble.

That about the beginning of the year 1688, I and you should sometimes differ in
our opinion of things, (when there began to bean unhappy Division among the
Clergy, not exceptting the very Fathers of the Church of England,) afforded no
great matter of wonder or admiration, But in the month of December following,
when all eyes were (or ought to be) opened, by a real unnatural Invasion, and
saw all the haste imaginable made violently to usurp the Crown, by the
Dethroning of a Lawful and gracious Prince, strikes me with great
astonishment; especially considering my earnest and unwearied endeavors, by
the utmost condescension and reasonings, to inform you of the ill designs
carried on (which I had the good luck you must now acknowledge to foresee
better than your selves) against the Church as well as King of England; that
one of you, I say, (God be praised it is not both) with whom I had taken so
much pains to keep steady, should after so plain a Discovery of the bottom of
ill men's intrieges, to involve the Nation in that deplorable misery under
which it does at present groan, should, I say, not only totter, but at last
fall into so abhorred a Crime as Perjury, does pierce my very soul to think
on it; since by such ill example there is an irreparable injury done to my
Flock, and to the young Clergy of my Jurisdiction, like to be influenced by the
Example of the Archdeacon's Curate, who till this late Epidemick Apostasy had
been very exemplary in keeping up good order and Discipline, according to the
good old right principles of those venerable Bp. Gunning Bp. Cosins.
Prelates, under whom, by God's Providence, I had my education.

I cannot reflect on so unpardonable a Breach of Trust, tho never so much
varnished over, with the false paint now vented in the Kingdom, without sore
indignation; nor cease to charge the guilt of so great a sin upon you, my
Representative in my Parish of Sedgefield, (to whom I now singly speak) who
have committed the same with many high Aggravations, as the following
particulars will make appear.

First you being a Person, that was happyly trained up not only in a [hitherto
ever] Cornvval.
loyal County, and more particularly in a Kilkhampton.
Parish, where there had been much seed sown, which ought to have brought forth
other grain, but under a The-Granvilles.
Family whose Loyalty till the fatal month of Nov. 1688 was never blemished
with the least stain.

In the next place after a loyal Education in the University, and the
happyness to escape, by God's blessing, those dangerous rocks, on which youth
there most commonly split, (to wit: Corruption in principles or moralls,) were
seasonably transplanted into the Curacy of a very considerable Parish in
Worstershier, where the Rector kept up exactly the Order of the Church of
England; the strickt practice whereof (however things have fallen out) was the
most likely means to have kept Clergymen steady, in such a day of trial and
temptation as our present miserable generation have lived to see.

Thirdly were, with much affection and honest intention, singl'd out, and
pitched on, by me (I having a great opinion of your Loyalty) to be my
Co-adjutour, in Sedgefield.
one of the most considerable Country Parishes of England, the burden of which
trust, as well as my great concern for the spiritual welfare of that my
flock, you ought to have learned, from the extraordinary zealous applications,
which I used at first coming to set you, and all along after to keep you,
right, in my honest Particular notions of obedience to the orders of the
Church, and of subjection to all sorts of lawful Authority. Which notions I am
not ashamed to style now particular, since the issue of things proclaims them
to be right, as well as the opposers of them notoriously in the wrong, and must
be so acknowledged by all persons, who are not unhappyly besmeared with the
present [religious] Rebellion of England, or blinded by the mist, or fumes of
an unsupportable Usurpation.

Lastly had more reason than others to have resisted those temptations, which
overthrew the generality of the Clergy of the Diocese, since you had in one
person your Rector's Dean's, and Archdeacon's continual example, in your eye,
to the very last minute* to uphold you. Nay, moreover, had a pathetick letter
written jointly to your self* and your) Brother (directed to the Curates of
Easington and Sedgefield from the Deanery, the very night of my Departure*
which carrying with it my last and best advice and sentiments, immediately
before* I lanch'd forth into a kind of sea of trouble, likely to attend that
persecuted righteous Cause, whereto I was resolved to adhere, ought to have had
as much force at Sedgefield, as it had at Easington, in inspiring one, as it
did the other to withstand the Shock, which has furiously overturned so many
of the elder and stronger Clergy, both in the Cathedral and Diocese, and
scared them out of their Allegiance unto their Lawful Prince, into submission
to a Foreign Usurper.

The last words of a Dying man are usually very powerful with all his
Relations. And surely the last exhortations of a Departing Visitor, in such a
manner, and for such a cause, should have had the like effect* If my late
example, as well as zeal, expressed in my address to the Clergy in my
conclusive Visitation [in the Church of St. Mary-le-Bow Nov. the 15 1688]*
proved unsuccessfull, and ineffectuall to persuade the Rectors of the Parishes
of my Jurisdiction, to espouse the Cause of an oppressed Prince and imitate an
honest Leader, and faithful Servant to the Crown, who was resolved to
sacrifice all rather than desert his Sovereign in misery, Yet it ought not to
be so contemptible with either of you, my own Cutates, as to be rejected; but
should have stopped you in your Carreer, had you been bent to run, with never
so much eagerness, into slavery under a Belgic yoke; nay ought to have been
esteemed so forcible to such immediate Dependants, as you, to whom I now speak,
that it should have been hardly possible for either of you to resist it. And
that either of you should, and date thus to rebuke me by your practice, and
abandon all hopes and expectations of kindness from me, by betraying me (it
deserves no milder expression) I look on as a high act of contempt, and receive
with all those resentmens of Displeasure that are allowable in a Christian.

I did not expect that both, or either of you, should have immitated me, so far
then as to have deserted your Stations (tho I am persuaded that my doing so was
the best and wisest action of my whole life) but if both of you, (rather than
renounce your sworn fidelity to King James, and swear Allegiance to an
ambitious Prince, his son in law and Nephew, who had by fraud and force deposed
his Uncle, nay Father) had been forced so to do, and desert the Nation, (as I
did,) as well a my Floks committed to your Care, it would have been a thing
very edifying, and grateful unto me, and obliged me to have taken care of
you, and allowed you, a share of whatsoever* I had to support me; not suffering
you to want bread as long as I had it, which ye had no reason to suspect that
God's Providence, and a gracious Master's kindness would deny me in the deepest
adversity abroad.

I am sure that ye two, who have not only been long resident in my house and
family, but often admitted into my closet, and sometimes into my very bosom,
ought to have conceived such an opinion; and should have taken it for granted,
by great experience of me, without any farther Declaration. Tho you had not
such particular and positive assurances thereof, as I seasonably gave a
certain Divine (I much valued) to deliver him out of those temptations,
whereinto he (being unhappily Metamorphosed in another Region*) did however
wilfully run himself, to the Injury of his Conscience, and dishonor of
himself and friends.

You therefore (my lapsed Assistant) whom I had drawn away from my native soil
(hoping, that, as you have breathed the same air, you would always profess the
same principles) to be my comfort and support, in a remote part of the Nation,
for the remainder of my life, do strangely disappoint my hopes, and are so much
the more blameworthy, since God Almighty did assist me (poor weak and unworthy
Labourer in his Vinyard) with such a happy foresight of matters, relating to
the late unfortunate change in government, that I was instrume^tall in the
bringing to the view of all those, who related to me, such a Prospect of the
things (that did at that time portend ill, as well as future (...) might render
a person stupid, who should despise, or (...).

Your (...) who has done his part faithfully to discharge his Trust in a
critical juncture, (and thereby has helped to save the honor of the young
Clergy under my Conduct,) will be willing* I know, to hear testimony* that I
did, to my utmost, diligently discharge the part of a faithful watchman*
penning down my thoughts almost daily, (using him sometimes for an Amanuensis,)
to fortify all Persons under my care, against the dangerous inveiglements of
ill men, and the plausible, rather than real, arguments of deluded goodmen;
who have, by their Reputation* contributed more to the present sad state of
things, (I must take the liberty to tell them) than the more malicious sinners,
that did originally design to trample on the Crown and Mytre.

And that I was no bad Prognosticatour, in the month of August 1688, you
your-selfe, and every body else, may without all contradiction be convinced, by
a copy of a Paper which I penned at Durham, the 27 of the aforesaid month,
according to my usual manner of dictating to one of my Clerks, in my chamber,
at my uprising. Which Paper only contains some floating thoughts of my brain,
but relating to mattets of so great importance, as did, according to its title,
portend very fatally to the Government and Church of England. And it being the
only sheet of some hundreds, (penned in such manner and much to the same
purpose,) that I did by great accident bring away with me, I shall here, to
this my letter, annex a printed Copy thereof; which will, at least,
demonstrate, to all who shall seriously consider it, that I gave a better
guess, how things would go, than any of my Censurers or Opposers, who thought
them selves greater Politicians, but have so much faild in their Politics,
that they (as well as others) are by this time, I suppose, convinced how their
zeal, which run so Counter to mine, was very preposterous: viz, That the
irregular and unaccountable method they took, to be delivered from Popery and
Arbitrary Power, has brought the whole Kingdom, absolutely under the one, and
in greater danger, than ever it was, of the other.

And that I may do all that in me lies to clear my self, both in the sight of
God and man, from being the least ways accessory to the horrid guilt, many, who
have depended on me in my parishes, or else where, have contracted, by
forsaking our Church's Doctrine, and the good Rules which I have set them, I
shall embrace this occasion to add another paper to the former, containing the
Order and Directions which I required strictly to be observed in my parishes,
respectively, which, will be sufficient to evince, that I did honestly, tho
imperfectly, endeavor to have prevented the Apostasy of any committed to my
charge; Always looking on a strict observation of the Discipline and Rubricks
of the Church, as the best means, by Gods blessing, to have strengthened them
against those temptations that have, at last, overcome them, for which I now
begin to value my self.

And a serious consideration of this Method enjoined in my Parishes, added to
the manner of my parting with my Brethren of the Cathedral, and Clergy of my
Archdeaconry, set forth in those Fare-vvell-Discourses I made to them, in the
months of Nov^ and December 1688, will sufficiently proclaim, to all unbiased
persons, that I was, at least, an Honest man, so far, in all my capacities, as
to have no fingar at all in the Invitation of a Foreign power, and the
unnatural Invasion which attended thereon, which I am desirous should remain
to Posterity upon Record.

If the publication of such papers, as were never designed for the press, seem
to savor any thing of vanity, and cause to believe, that I glory in having
been more regular* and constant, in my duty, than the generality of my
Brethren, let them give a Looser leave to speak, and desire them to remember,
and consider, that the Apostle St. Paul himself was compelled to boast, in a
less day of temptation than the fifth of November 1688, which did, in a manner,
blow up the foundations of three Kingdoms.

I confess that I do glory with the B. Apostle, but it is, as he did, in my
weakness, and the grace that Almighty God has manifested therein, carrying me
through the manifold temptations which have prevailed over my Stronger
Brethren. I do bless and praise God's holy name, and will do it, by his
assistance, for ever and ever, that he did endow me with resolution to stick
close to all the Churches Rules and Orders, (whereto I gave my assent and
consent at my first entrance into the ministerial function in the year 1661)
without governing my self by example, of any Clergy, high or low, in the city
or in the country: Living by the example of those who contradicted their
excellent Rule, being a sort of Complaisance which, I bless God's holy name* I
have never been guilty of, tho it has been, God know*s, too frequent among my
Brethren, and proved fatal to the poor church of England.

To take no comfort and satisfaction in my own innocence, (which God has in a
manner miraculously preserved, when he has suffered such a multitude of abler
Divines to fail, who were furnished with greater qualifications to have borne
vvittness to his truth,) I should look on as an act of meaness of spirit,
savouring more of spiritual ingratitude than true humility, who desire rather
to be really thankful and humble than appear either.

Let my censurers be contented with my revenue, which I have left to their
mercy, (choosing to do so rather than betray my conscience,) without depriving
me of that precious ointment, and more valuable treasure, a good name, which I
shall, in spite of all my enemies, endeavor, by the aid of Gods holy spirit,
to secure my title to, in approving my self, to the very end, as I have
hitherto as much as in me lay, a Genuine son of the Church, and Loyal subject
to the Crown of England.

If the present Generation, who favor none with their good opinion but those
who concur to the support of the present Fabric in England, will not allow me
the aforesaid satisfaction, but load me with obloquy or contempt, (and one of
these Fates I expect from the North where so few have followed my example,)
there remains, yet, one thing, that I am sure they are not able to deprive me
of; I mean the internal Peace and Quiet of my conscience, which I have enjoyed
since I was driven from my Station (to Heavens eternal praise I speak it) in a
more plentiful measure than ever I did heretofore, when I was in the actual
possession of some of the best preferments, of their kind, in England. This
supports me under my present pressures, and will be continued unto me, I trust
in God, while I continue, as I pray I may, faithful to my mother the Church,
and unalterably obedient to the father of my Country.

Of these things I require you, to assure the flocks I have committed to your
charge (whom I do not fail to commend unto God in my constant prayers, and) to
whom, besides my devotions, I have nothing to bequeathe but wholsome counsel
and a good example. And since I have no way left to convey unto them the first,
but by writing (and that with great difficulty too) not to deprive them of the
latter is become a duty of higher obligation.

Example is often more prevalent than precept. Whether the wise God will render
mine so unto my people, He alone knows, and it depends on his good pleasure.
Sure I am, that when I departed from my Cures, with a sorrowful heart, I did
conceive it the best way left me to preach unto them, by putting into actual
practice that peculiar sort of Religion and Loyalty (to use the very phrase of
some of my censurers) which I had ever taught to others, and wherein I did
incessantly labor to establish you, (as before rehearsed,) against the then
fashionable [upstart] Divinity, and Allegiance of the Age; and Whereto I should
not give this, nor the former epithet in the beginning of this letter, (my
religion and loyalty, let men call them what they please, being no other, I
bless God, than the natural Result of the pure uncorrupted Doctrine of the
right Genuine Church of England) had they not been, you know, to my reproach
often so styled, by that Generation of Semi-conformists and Loyalists, who
could then but half comply with the reasonnable demands of a Lawful Prince,
but can now wholly conform to the will of an Usurper.

I recommend you both, with all my sheep, to Almighty God's mercy and
direction, praying with all fervency to our Heavenly Father in the Church's
Littany [part of my daily devotions as I suppose it likewise is of the small
number of Othodox Clergy men in the nation] That it may please God to
strengthen such as do stand, to comfort and help the vveak-hearted, to raise
up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our feet. Applying it
more especially to the case of you my Substitutes, who are unhappyly divided,
to my unspeakable trouble, in your principles and practices, which renders this
my present way of application, very difficult to me, since it is not easy in
one joyntaddress, at the same time, to praise and dispraise (according to the
design of this paper) you to whom I write.

You then (to conclude) who have continued faithful in your Trusts, and
discharged your Conscience, I do (as the best reward you can for a^hile expect)
Praise and pray for; earnestly beseeching God to strengthen you daily, and to
carry you through the remaining difficulties, you shall meet witthall. And must
Blame (tho I pity) you that are fallen, conjuring you to reflect on what you
have done, and desiring you to be assured, that I can never have any
complacency in your services, till you bring forth undeniable fruits of
Repentance. Hoping that my censures of one, as well as praises of the other,
will have that kindly operation on your souls which I design, I do, with much
christian charity and compassion, subscribe my self*

Rouen Oct: the ^. 1691. Your very lov: Brother in CHRIST JESUS, DENIS
GRANVILLE.

FINIS.
COPY of a Paper mentioned in the foregoing page 38. and penned at Durham, by
the Author, Aug. 27* 1688, by way of reflection on the, then, Dismal
Prognostiks of the Times.

Things which portend very fatally to the Government and Church of England.
1. AN Universal Aptitude in men to receive, multiply, and magnify Fears and
Iealousies of the King.

2. The generality of the subjects of England (contrary to the Rule of Charity)
putting the vvorst Construction on the Designs and Actings of their SOVEREIGN.

3. Men's discovering by their preposterous courses (tho hey dare not speak it
with their mouths) that they think their Allegiance to the King (because of a
different Religion) not the same that it would be to a Protestant Prince

4. An industrious endeavor, for a long time, throughout the land, to alienate
the subjects Affection from their Sovereign.

5. The Spirit of Popularity, at present, so universally reigning, as to
overthrow many Honest and Good men, who seem afraid, any longer to do their
Duty to the King, and act according to their Principles, for fear of the Mobile.

6. An extraordinary forvvardness, both in Clergy as well as Gentry, to
dispute, and rudely to contend with their Prince; nay insoleutly to insult
over him upon the least success, made too apparent by the Issue of the late
Trial of the Bishops, in VVestmunster Hall.

7. The itch of disputation infinitely prevailing, in this age, above the
spirit of Divine Charity and true Devotion, men relying too much on their
Arguments and too little on their Prayers.

8. Men being now agitated more than ever by an intemperate zeal against
Popery, as heretofore against Fanaticisme, shevving much more Aversion to their
Adversary's, than love to their own Religion.

9. Most men, even Divines, manefesting an excessive fear that Popery will
come in, and yet all the while neglect to betake themselves to the most
assured means to keep it out; to wit, Amendment of life, and exact conformity
to the CHURCHES RULES, and training up the young Generation by the due exercise
of Catechism.

10. Too many flying to unjustifiable means to preserve their Keligion, and
proclaiming by their actions, that they are resolved to Rebel rather than let
it go.

11. Peaple* using their strength and number to bring their Sovereign to
Terms, and endeavoring by all means possible ta Hough band him, (if I may be
permitted to speak in the Northern phrase,) I mean not to leave it in his
Rovver to hurt them, either in their Religion, Laws, Lives, or Estates, which
is, in plain English, to Unking him.

Durham Aug. 27. 1688.
COPY of another Paper, mentioned p. 39. that the Author publishes to show how
the Singularity, for which he was, censured by some, as before related, and
despised by Others, (for he knows himself guilty of no other) was for
practicing this very following Method, himself, when present, and imposing it
on his Curates, when he was absent, to be by them also used in his Parishes: Or
for other suchlike unfashionable observation of the Church's Rules, and
performance of his Duty. Which upon strict Enquiry into the Author's Discharge
of his Offices, (since his first settlement in the North of England,) will be
found to be true; and may serve to evince, that as he has had the hard Fate
to be Deposed, for following his Sovereign into France, and sticking to the
Crown; so has he had as hard a Fate, heretofore, for cleaving to his
Mother, [and regarding, more than Others, the Precepts of the Church] even to
be oftentimes unjustly Opposed, and sometimes reproached, by his Brethren
[Citty and Country-Clergy] merely for his Over doing, as they have usually
termed it. That is, in plain English, because his Conscience would not give
him leave to omit those Duties, which they, and the generality of the Clergy in
the nation, (I will, and may, now take more liberty than ever to speak out)
have, to their everlasting shame, scandalously neglected. And by the neglect
whereof (in a word) have betrayed their Mother the Church of England, the Head
of Reformed Christendom; A very Odd kind of way to accomplish, what people
pretend, the Support of the Protestant Religion.

DIRECTIONS Which Dr. Granville Archdeacon of Durham, Rector of Sedgefeild and
Easington, enjoins to be observed by the Curates of those his Parishes, given
them in charge, at Easter visitation held at Sedgefield, in the year 1669.
THAT the Mattens and Even-Song shall be (according to the Rubric) said daily,
in the Chancells of each of his Parish-Churches, throughout the year, without
the least Variation.

That the hours for daily Prayer, on VVorking-dayes, shall be six in the
morning, and six in the evening, as the most convenient for laborers, and men
of business.

Except as folloveth.
On all Vigills and Holy-day-Eves, as also on all Saturday-afternoons (which
anciently were half-holy-dayes) three of the clock shall be the hour for
Evening-Prayers On all wensday and friday-mornings, both throughout Advent and
all Lent, and on the three Ember-Dayes in each Ember-week* the hour shall be
nine. On the Rogation-Dayes, one hour, at least, earlier by reason of the
Perambulation.


That always, as nine of the clock and three of the clockprayers aforesaid,
(when there shall be some additionary exercise of Devotion requiring a greater
number than ordinary) two bells shall chime, to intimate the same to the
People.

That at fix of the clock-prayers, one bell only shall toll beginning a quarter
of an hour before.

That there shall be always Note. That the Dearn's injoyning here, and in
some other places, things which were before expressly commanded by the
Church, was to declare that the judged them of such moment, as that he would
never dispense with the non*performance of them in his own Parishes hovvever
others did too freqnently elsvvhere.
Catechisings, after the second lesson, on sunday and Holy-day-Afternoons, with
some explanation of the Church-Catechisme [after the third collect lighten our
Darkness] unless there be some exposition of the Scripture or Rubricks, some
profitable exhortation, or discourse de tempere, drawn from the service of the
church, or else that the 39 Articles of Religion, or Canons, are to be read
according to Order.

That one quarter of an hour is sufficient for such Exposition, Exhortation, or
Discourse, and that it never shall exceed an half hour.

That on all aforesaid days, when there are prayers at nine in the morning
and two bells chime, there ought to be some additionary exposition, or
discourse to the people, (and if de tempore the better) which ought not to
exceed the time appointed, for the explanation of the Catechism.

That there shall be sermons on all Festivalls or Holy days. [Except there be
an As people grevv more fond to hear Sermons than to amend their lives Homilies
were more frequent.
Homily which shall not be oftenner than to countenance the book, or assert the
King*s supremacy, according to the Canon, which may very commodiously be done,
in some of the Homilies Concerning Obedience, or against Disobedience, being
the very words of the Church] which sermons shall never exceed an half hour.

That the sermons, even on Sundays, shall be shortened to an half hour, when
there happen's any concurrent offices which require it; but never the least
omission of one tittle of the service, or variation from the Rubricks.

That the Curate, when he bids Christmas, Easter* or Pentecost* with their
Festivalls; as also when he gives notice of Ember-vveek, Passion-vveek, or
Perambulation on Rogation-dayes, or other times extraordinary, he shall come
down to the desk [after the Niceene Creed] and do it in a more solemn manner,
than when he bids the ordinary Holy Days at the table, making a short speech
de tempore to quicken the People's Devotion.

That on Advent-sunday, and Quinquagesima-sunday, he shall do the like to
prepare the People for the Devotion of the follovving holy seasons.

That besides the several Sacraments at Christmas, Easter Day, Holy-Thursday
and Pentecost, there shall be, at least, This practice changed into a monthly
Sacrament, at the Combustions, in the year 1679.
5* other Sacraments, which Sacraments shall be administered on the several
days here nominated viz: on New year's-day, on the first sunday in Lent, on
the first Sundays in July, October, and November.

That Easter shall be the time alvvayes for admission of Youth, first at the
Communion, who are never to be admitted till they have repaired, upon summons,
to the minister to receive private instruction, on vvenssday and
Fryday-mornings, after service during Lent.

That the young people be confirmed after due instruction, before they receive,
if possible, but when that cannot be contrived by reason of the Bishop's
absence, or otherwise, that they, and their friends, be enjoined faithfully to
send them to the first confirmation, whereof they shall have notice.

That none shall be admitted to the Sacrament till 16 years of age, unless the
minister shall see extraordinary cause for the same.

That the 39 articles and Cannons be read according to Injunction.

That the Canon about Excommunication be read, and excommunicates denounced
according to the said Canon.

That his Majesty's Directions to preachers be read in the Congregation, at
least once in the year, which I, by my own authori^y, take upon me to
injoyne, as Ordinary of the PLACE.

That when Citations, Excommunications, or Absolutions are read, the Curate
shall consider whether he may, by any occasionnall reflection out of the Desk,
or from the pulpit, improve the same to the People to the deterring of them
from the like offenses* for which the persons mentioned in the said Acts of
Court are proceeded against.

That the Curate do summon the Church-vvardens, twice at least bevveen
visitation and visitation, to read and consider the visitation-articles, and to
quicken and assist them in the due discharges of their offices.

That he does, in particular, frequently mind the Church-vvardens to go out of
the Church at convenient times, for the prevention of disorders in town and
alehouses, during SERVICE.

That the Curate takes a particular notice of the Absence of Church-vvardens
from the Church on sundays and festivalls, and signify the same to the Rector
their Archdeacon.

That when the Church-vvardens are negligent, and suffer irregular behavior
during Divine service* that he admonish them of such their neglects, and cause
them to go out of their seats, sometimes, in the very time of service, to mind
people publicly of their disorder, and so shame them into a compliance, if
milder and private admonitions prove ineffectuall.

That the Curate makes enquiry, oftentimes, of the Church-vvardens, what
persons are sick, or detained from the Church by any infirmity (people being
negligent to inform the Minister voluntarily) and to repair to them
accordingly (tho they should not give notice) to assist them in reference to
their spiritual estate.

That the Curate shall on sundays and Holy Days (at least) observe a course
of personnal application (according to his promise at ordination) to the whole
as well as sick, visiting after evening-prayer, one family (if not more) on
that account, observing, as far as he shall be able, the venerable Mr* George
Herbert's method and rule to that purpose prescribed in his Country-Parson, or
Character of an holy Priest. Which book, as I recommend to all the Clergy in
my Jurisdictions, so do I more especialy to my Curates, for their rule and
direction, in order to the exemplary discharge of their Function, having
always made it mine.

That the Curate shall consider frequently, at least* once a quarter, what
Rubricks or Canons be most neglected, and contemned by the parishoners; and
that he does* (besides the ordinary explanation of the service once a year, in
obedience to his Majesty's Directions to Prearchers, read at convenient times
the said Rubricks to the people, that is to say betvveen the frist service and
Litany, or between Litany and second Service, or before, or after sermon,
(omitting if occasion require the psalm then usually sung) and that he shall
Zealously (but mildly) stir up the people to the better observation of the
same; and that when he discovers these public admonitions ineffectuall, that
he make it part of his labor, in private, with personnall applications to
reform such irregularitys. And that he shall as frequently as he can (when
presentiments are to be made) make such applications, public and private, (as
shall appear most convenient) to the offenders, in order to the prevention of
their shame and expense, which I desire alvvayes may be done, without further
prosecution, unless the thing cannot otherwise be reformed.

That such discourses as he makes, about the Rubricks and Constitutions, may be
usually out of the Desk, or if occasion require in the pulpit, after the
sermon, which I would not have burdened often with these smaller matters
relating only to good order; but reserved for more substantial and essential
truths, as the Doctrins of Faith, Repentance, Love, Obedience, Temperance, etc.

That he does not take notice of the People's breach of Rubricks, or such
disorders, in public, when he can reform the same easily in private, unless
they are notorious and scandalous, in which case he is sometimes to give
particular persons even public reproofs, in the very Congregation.

That when there is ground of suspicion that the Church-VVardens will not
faithfully do their dutys in searching the Alehouses, etc, that he go out of
the Church sometimes with them, for the more effectual prevention of disorder.

That he cause the Clarck to inquire (when notice is given of Baptism)
whether the vvitnesses have all received the Sacrament, and also to inform
the Parson (if the Church-vvardens do not) when any excommunicat'd persons
enter the Church or Churchyard, to which end and purpose there shall be a
list kept in the Vestry of all persons excommunicated.

DENIS GRANVILLE.

IN REFERENCE TO THE FOREGOING DIRECTIONS, Letters, and Discourses, the Reader
is desired to note those matters follovving.
FIRST, that here were intermingled, with the abovesaid Directions for the
Curates, sundry advices for the Churchwardens and Parish-Clarks, not judged so
necessary to be printed. These being sufficient to accomplish the
forementioned end of their printing, (p. 39.) and convince those Clergy (and
others) who would not allow the author to be worthy of his station (when he
was admitted into his Deanery) that he did notwithsstanding the great power of
their evil example (whose semiconformity first poisoned the nation) at least
endeavor to be what he all along chiefly aimed at, that is to say a Diligent
COUNTRY-PARSON, if not good Archdeacon: He taking effectual Care (and with no
ill success) that these his Rules should be, as they were, better obser'd by
his Curates, then the Church-Cannons or Rubricks were by them, and the
generality of the Clergy of the nation; and consequently in due time might have
become a tolerable Deane, by Gods blessing, if the CITTY-REBELS, Joining with
the Invaders, had not driven him with his master out of England.

SECONDLY, the Reader is desird to take further notice, that this* last*
^etter, (to wit to his Curates) was not printed when the others were, (as first
intended and mentioned in the Title Page,) in the year 1689, but was, for
certain reasons underwritten, deferred to be put into the Press, till the month
and year marked in the conclusion of the said letter, to wit Oct: 1691, some
months after the Dean's Deprivation; Which delay, among other things, hindered
the more speedy Publication of all the other papers, and was occasiond upon the
three ensuing accounts; (...) First, the Deane imagined, on second thoughts,
(...) that so plain a Rebuke as the faithful discharge of his (...)
Conscience, in the delivery of the Discourses he has printed* and the penning
of the foregoing letters he has published, in his own name, did, by
reflection, cast on many considerable [Spirituall and Temporall] Supporters of
the Usurped Authority in Church and State, was an Underaking too mighty for
him, who never delighted to expose or reproach his Superiors in any manner;
nor should have dared thus to have done it, at this time, had not too many of
them, manefestly departed from and contradicted the very Doctrine of the Church
of England, which they, as well as he, had sworn to maintain.

Secondly, He long expected that some eminent person in England, better
qualified, would have saved him the labor of such an application, as he has
here in print made to the people under his authority, by publishing, ere this,
some substantial work that should have strenuously asserted the Cause of King
James the 2, and that Church of England whereof he is supreme Governor, by
unmasking the wickedness, injustice, and ingratitude, nay unnaturallness of
Dethroning their lawful Sovereign, and under a religious pretense usurp his
Crown; The aforesaid Person not sticking, to set his name thereto, tho it
might have cost him his life, to proclaim undeniably to the World, that what
he writ he believed to be such truth of God, as he did dare seal with his
Blood. Which desirable piece of Charity to the souls of the poor people, who
were unhappily drawn into Perjury, by the powerful Example of their leaders,
the author has not yet discovered to be done by any, tho he thinks ought to
have been performed long ago (what ever had been the issue) to have given right
measures to the People of the Land, while they were staggerring, and not quite
fallen into the abominable sins of Perjury, and Renouncing their Allegiance.
Which Christian work, if it had been acted, in due season, would, among other
good effects, have edified also the Dean's Flocks, and rendered unnecessary
what he* has said to keep those steady who stand, and to restore those who
are fallen, for want of timely under-propping. The author's earnest longing,
and waiting with great impa^ience* to have seen such desirable fruit of
Primitive zeal, did detain him a while from plunging himself over head and
ears, (tho he made many offers so to do) into that Deluge which did over-spred
the land; thinking himself a bad swinmer in such Troubled waters; and moreover
(like Elihu Job. 32. 4.) being very unwilling to speak out thus boldly, and
shame the silence of his Elders, till he had given them all sufficient
opportunity to speak and write; Tho his boldness and zeal (as may be observed,
by the way, and is before noted,) was not levelled, directly, to any but those
under his own Charge and Care (or nearly related to him) to whom such a hearty
application, and such plain Reproofs, even in the very language of the letters,
became so necessary, that he could not, in good Conscience, have waved them.
And therefore he conceiv's that people have the less reason to be disturbed
thereby.

Thirdly, after the author had made a considerable progress in printing the
letters and other discourses he was forced to undertake a hazardous Journey
into England Feb. 1689 (whereby he got a small suply of money to subsist a
while abroad without defiling himself with any Oath of fidelity to the Prince
of Orange,) tho with much trouble and Danger, occasioned him by an impertinent
and malicious Postmaster, who discovered him in Canterbury. Which voyage made
it absolutely necessary to lay aside, till his return, his design of
publishing the papers he had penned at his first Coming over, unless he would
wilfully, and unavoidably, have run his neck into a halter. Which, all know,
was the Fate lately of a Mr. Ashton.
right honest and loyal man.

THIRDLY, all sorts of Readers may hereby be informed, that these papers are,
at this time, the more hastily published without polishing, because the
author, has had this summer after a long intervall, some return of those
infirmities that he brought out of England* which being seasonable memento's of
the mortality of his condition, and uncertainty of his life, have caused him,
without any more ado, or longer delay, thus plainly and honestly to deliver his
soul: the comfort of which does to him abundantly balance the uneasiness of
any obloquy, which may accrue from the provoked friends of the new government
in England, where he desires to appear no more, (unless it please God to
restore his Sovereign,) as all may be persuaded easily to believe, by his
present manner of proceeding.

Fourthly. All those who shall blame the Dean's undertaking, may, in a word,
satisfy themselves, that he had never thus exposed himself to their censure,
if he had believed that a a Dignified Divine in his circumstances (being the
only one here abroad out of the Reach of England, and whose Conscience would
not permit him to swallow any new dispensatory oaths, or distinctions) could
without the just censure of all right Church*of England-men, and loyal
subjects to King James 2., have remained silent. Since he has not now those
prudentiall considerations, that others have, to stop his mouth, or stay his
pen: His own person being secure and his Revenue lost. Whereas honest Divines
and men in England (where he hopes there be many that never bovved the knee to
Baal, tho he be ignorant who they are) cannot attempt what he does, without
the hazard of their lives, or ruin of their familyes. And therefore concludes
that a weak and bad performance, as this, of so good and spiritual a design
(the more incumbent on him) would be better than none at all, and be graciously
accepted, through JESUS CHRIST, by that ALMIGHTY GOD who can make the poorest
enterprises in his name, successful to accomplish his will.

Fifthly, and lastly, the Dean's innate indignation to many former, and late
preposterous unaccountable procedures in the Subjects of England: to wit, First
the Nonconformity, or rather Semiconformity, of the Clergy (who did with zeal
more than enough, and sometimes too bitterly, inveigh against nonconformists)
which engendered that Brood which are the authors of our Misery: Secondly their
Forvvardness to dispense throughout the Nation, with the Church Discipline, as
they pleased, where and when, there appeared no necessity; nay with the very
Rubricks of the Liturgy, whereto they had all, since the late review, given a
solemn Assent and Consent* sadly presaging that in time of distress they
would, as they have done, dispense with the very Doctrine, tho they would not
allow his Majesty in extraordinary cases, a less dispensing Power: Thirdly the
Pragmaticallness of most Common-Lavvye^s (whose duty and intrest it was, as
well as of the Ecclesiastics, to join in the support of the crown of their
Sovereign, the Fountain whence all their Law did proceed) in endeavoring
industriously by all manner of quirks, to diminish the King's Prerogative and
Authority, even coining wicked distinctions, and taking up obsolete laws to
dethrone him (when there were enough of such which they would not willingly
have revived against the People or themselves) nay flying to the Reign of an
Usurper for Acts of Pa^iament to justify and color over their fullsome
proceedings; as if a Dispensing power in the People was like to be found more
tolerable than in the King, or that such a kind of supremacy as the multitude
contended for, (and which must be either in Prince, or subject) is less liable
to Tyranny, and other abuses, when it is in the subject, than in the Sovereign.

These, and the like, perversions of Law and Religion, did cause, (the author
professes and is desirous to proclaim) so much disgust in his Soul, as
hurried him over all the difficulties and dangers that he met with, in his way
to this publication, in such a degree, that the consideration of his book's
reflecting on the new Government (which was designed to edify the people within
his own province) has pushed him on, instead of deterring him* to send it
forth into the light (committing it and his reputation to the mercy of a
Gracious God) amidst a crooked and perverse Generation, which he is willing
may learn thus much by his boldness, (or fool-hardiness as it will be possibly
termed,) to wit, that God has given him (among a multitude of infirmities,)
the Grace not to be afraid or ashamed to do his duty or discharge his offices
faithfully, who ever may be rebuked by the doing thereof; and that he is sure,
he had done neither, if he had not, as he has done, delivered his soul,
without mincing, in such plain and intelligible language, at such a juncture,
as to allot, every thing its right epithet and appellation; giving the very
names of REBELLION and USURPATION to what, he was persuaded in his conscience,
deserved such denominations; and that are so, [even REBELLION and USURPATION,]
if ever there were such things in the World. Yea such a REBELLION and
USURPATION that no good Christian can, he is also satisfied in his Conscience,
join in the first, or uphold the later, and consequently, that no body can
receive the communion, without injury to his soul, in the use of those
prayers, which pray for the maintaining of both; since he that receives the
blessed Supper of the Lord, in the office of any Church, sets his seal to all
the corruptions that are crept into that Church, and does, in a higher manner*,
profane Gods sacred name, by using that holy ordinance to so impious an end (as
to beg of God, by virtue of his saviors body and blood, the destruction of his
lawful Prince) than he that barely swears allegiance to an Usurper, Which,
yet by the way, who ever does, (let him understand) does in a manner, Abjure
his lawful Sovereign.

Which is a Case of Conscience that the Author will, in Gods name, now venture
here publicly to decide (as he has long since don to some in private) and
put his name to the decision, what ever comes of it, since no body else has
done so, for the sake of those many thousands of souls, under his authority,
in the Jurisdictons belonging to the Archdeacon and Deane of Durham; whereof
none can deny but that he has a Call from God to take care. And consequently
to undertake this difficult province, since no body else do^^ Who, if they are
not satisfied with his Judgment in this particular (which, as poor as they may
esteem it, will yet he trusts, in reference hereto, be found Orthodox) ought
to consult, as it concerns them, some abler Casuist: without being scared, (as
heretofore in some other cases,) with frightfull consequences, administered by
the Universality of the DEFECTION and such like considerations; to wit, Empty
Churches and thin Altars.

For if it be a wholesome truth which is recomended, by the Author, to their
thoughts, it cannot, he is sure, in the conclusion, produce ill effects to be
repented of. And he begs pardon, if he cannot prevail with himself to judge,
the last recited effects to be ill, as matters go, and things stand. For he
makes no doubt, but that the Churches in England must become Empty, and the
Altars thin etc. before his Sovereign is like to return to Whitehall,


