AN EXPOSITION CONTINUED UPON the fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth,
seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth Chapters of the PROPHET EZEKIEL, With
many USEFUL OBSERVATIONS THEREUPON.

Delivered at several LECTURES in London. By WILLIAM GREENHILL.

LUKE 16.29.31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead.

ROMANS 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley, 1651.

TO The Undertakers for, and Hearers of the Expository Lectures in the City of
London, and all who desire understanding in the word of God.
WHEN I was expounding the 17. and 19. Chapters of this Prophecy of Ezekiel,
and saw an end put to Kingly government in Judah, (for after Zedekiah there was
no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule) my thoughts ran much upon that ancient
Prophecy, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver
from between his feet, until Shilo come. Concerning which, though somewhat
were then said, yet I shall now endeavor to satisfy both you and my self
more fully. The words seem to imply a presence of the Scepter in the hand of
Judah when they were given forth; because a thing cannot be said to depart from
any has it not: but it was long after ere the Tribe of Judah had any Scepter.
Jacob's meaning was, that the Scepter should come in time to that Tribe, and
when it came, it should not depart; for Jacob prophesies of things to come.
They were at that time in Egypt few, poor, and low; and when they were
increased, they had no Scepter amongst them, they were under the Egyptian
Scepter, and had Egyptian Taskmasters over them. After the LORD had brought
them out of Egypt by a strong hand, there was a Scepter and Lawgiver amongst
them; but it was Moses who was of the Tribe of Levi, Exodus 21.10. And after him
Joshuah who was of the Tribe of Ephraim, Numb. 13.8.16. All that Judah had was
a little priority in pitching his Standard and Camp first, Numb. 2.3. in
sending the first Prince to offer at the Dedication of the Tabernacle, Number.
7.12. In marching first from Sinai to Paran, Number. 10.14. In having the first
lot when the Land of Canaan was divided, Josh. 15. and in going up first to
fight against the Canaanites, Judge. 1.2. And when account was taken of the
Genealogies, Judah carried the preheminencie, being first numbered, 1 Chr. 2.3.
Afterward in the days of the Judges, who bare the Scepter 339. or 362. or 370.
years as the accounts of Chronologers are, or about 450. as the Apostles
account is, Act. 13.20. There were but two of the Tribe of Judah. Othniel,
Judge. 3.9. who was of that Tribe, as appears, Josh. 15.17.20. 2 Chronicles. 4.1.13.
and Ibzan who was of Bethlehem, Judge. 12.8. The following Judges were of other
Tribes: and when it came to Kingly power, the first set up was Saul, who was a
Benjamite, 1 Samuel 9.1, 2. The next was David of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, 1 Samuel
16.1. It was now between 6. Helvicus.
and 700. years from the time of Jacob's giving out this Prophecy, all which
time it lay as dead and destitute of Regal power; which now being settled in
this Tribe, continued but to the Captivity of Zedekiah, 468. as some do
chronologize 473. years, as others. The first King the Jews had, God gave them
in his wrath, 1 Samuel 8. and the last he took away in his fury. Judah that had
been his pleasant plant, was plucked up in fury, Ezekiel. 19.12. and all the
branches of that Vine plucked off, and not one left to hold the Scepter, Jer.
22.30. Therefore some Jews and others deriving the word Shiloh from Shalach,
Galatinus, l. 4. c. 4. cited by Amama. Lyra in locum.
render the words donec veniat mittendus, and so interpret this Prophecy of
Nebuchadnezar, who was sent of God to destroy Judaea, and so the Scepter
departed from Judah. But the next words in the Prophecy confute this
interpretation, and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. Shiloh was
he that the Nations should desire, and unto whom the people should be gathered,
which never was verified in Nebuchadnezar. Vatabl. in loc. Martinij lexicon in
verbo Silo. Manasseh, Ben. Israel, q. 65. in Genesim.
The Chaldie paraphrase has it, donec veniat Christus, till Christ come: and
the Targum has it, until the time wherein Messiah the King shall come. Rabbi
Moses Gerundensis says, donec veniat filius ejus qui est Messiah, till his
son come who is the Messiah.

If we take the word Scepter for Kingly power, Julian the Apostat said, this
prophecy belonged not unto Christ, because the kingdom faild in Zedekiah.
which it certainly notes, as Psalm. 45.6. Zach. 10.11. It may be granted that
now the Scepter departed from Judah; for it is said Ezekiel. 20.27. It shall be no
more until he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him, and that was
Christ: from the putting down of Zedekiah and the death of his sons, none had
right to Kingly power till Christ came. Now the Crown was laid aside, and laid
up for his head alone, and no others. But if we take Shebet, or Shevet for a
Tribe as it is Josh. 3.12: 7.14. Psalm. 122.4. Jacob's sense in the Prophecy
is, that the Tribe of Judah should not cease, however it fared with other
Tribes, till Shiloh or Christ came. Ten of the other Tribes were carried away
Captive by Senacherib, and never returned more; but as for that of Judah,
though it were carried into Babylon, yet it was preserved there, and returned
again to it is own Land, with few of any other Tribe. It was that Tribe
chiefly which made up the Estate and Church, and continued till Christ's coming.

This sense is true, but reaches not fully the scope of Jacob in this
Prophecy; which is not simply to show the duration of the Tribes, but the
peculiar Benedictions they should have: and Judah's was the Scepter, which does
not only note royal power, but any rule, dominion, or authority, as Isa. 14.5.
Ezekiel. 19.11. And so that Tribe should have power, more or less till Shiloh
came; if not Kings, yet Lawgivers; if not supreme, yet subordinate power. Upon
the captivity of the ten Tribes, Kingly power was only and eminently in it
for 130. years and upwards: and after Zedekiah's downfall (although it lost
royal dignity, In captivate babylonica semper capita and principes suos habuit
ex semine. Davidis in Genesis q. 65.
which was for a lamentation to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 19.14.) yet it had other
Sceptricall power in it. Manasseh, Ben. Israel says, that in Babylon it had
its Heads and Rulers always of the seed of David.

When they returned from Babylon, Zorobabel was Governor of Judah, Hag. 1.1.
and ab illo usque ad Machaboeos nunquam defuerunt duces de Tribu Judae,
quanquam regio diadenrate propter persas nunquam uterentur: Suarez, Tom. 1.
Disput. 1. contra Judaeos. Pa^eus in Genesis Rivet, ibid.
From him to the days of the Machabees, or Assamonaeans, they had rulers and
Governors of that Tribe, which was 270. years, as Paraeus observes; but Rivet
makes the time shorter, affirming that the government was poenes sacerdotes
levitici generis. When Alexander the great came into Judea, which he reckons to
be but 53. years from the time of Zorobabel, Chronologers make it much more,
at that time Josephus informs us, Jaddus was High Priest, who being then the
principal Ruler, Joseph Antiq. l. 11. c. ult.
came out to meet Alexander, conducting him into the City and Temple. Now the
High Priests were not of the Tribe of Judith, Heb. 7.13, 14. but of Levi, and
so were the Assamonaeans or Maccabees, Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 8.
1 Mac. 2.1.4. 1 Chronicles. 24.7. Among whom continued the chief government till
Herod's days, diverse of them assuming Kingly power to themselves, as
Aristobulus, Alexander, Hyrcanus, and Antigonus. Mountague observes, that after
the Captivity they were under the Persians, Alexander, Acts and monuments of
the Church.
the Macedonian Princes of the Lagidan and Seleujedan lines, till the Maccabees
freed them for a time, and last of all they were under the Romans: Yet during
these troublesome times, they were governed by their own Laws and Country
customs. They had their Ethnarchs, Toparohs, High Priests, Rulers, Princes,
and sometimes Kings of their own; Jews and Israelites, though not of David,
nor of Judah. To help in this straight, it is affirmed that the Assamonaeans
were by the mothers side of Judah, and so therein the dignity of the Tribe was
preserved: But it does not appear by Scriptures, that the Females were of that
Tribe, neither were they to marry out of their Tribes, especially women
inheritrices to their Parents, Materna stirps non venit in censum sceptri.
they were tied to marry in their own Tribe, ne confunderentur haereditates.
And ordinary women might not bare rule among the Jews, though Deborah a
Prophetess once did; besides, the mothers line amongst them was not reckoned:
and the Talmud says, Rivet in Genesis
he is the end of the Family, who has no masculine issue. We cannot then make
it out this way, that the Scepter departed not from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet till Shiloh came.

Some therefore which is the better way, refer it to the Sanedrim, which was
quasi supremus senatus, as the highest judicatorie and royal council. This
Sannedrim remained in the captivity, Suarez, Tom. 1. Disp. 1. contra Judaeos,
Sect. 1. p. 6.
and continued to the days of Christ, and was either taken from them by Herod,
or at least the power of judging and sentencing to death was taken out of it by
him. Therefore said the Jews, Joh. 18.31. It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death. In former times they might, but now they were deprived of that
power. The difficulty here is to make it out, that those made up the Sanhedrim
were of the Tribe of Judah. It Is not necessary that all should be of it; if the
major part were, that suffices to pre-eminence the Tribe.

At first the men of the Sanhedrim were chosen out of all the Tribes; but when
ten Tribes fell off, it could not be, they being under Jeroboam and other
King's who were against Judah; and much less could it be, when those 10.
Tribes were carried away, and returned no more. The Babylonish captivity
therefore being ended when the Commonwealth of the Jews was restored, and
consisted most of the Tribe of Judah; It Is more then probable, that the
Sanhedrim was most of that Tribe, which in Scripture account was but one
before; for the Lord told Solomon he would give one Tribe to his son, 1 K.
11.13. and Chapter 12. 20. There was none that followed the house of David, but the
Tribe of Judah only: and 2 K. 17.18. The Lord was very angry with Israel, and
removed them out of his sight, there was none left but the Tribe of Judah only.
Benjamine did follow Rhehoboam; but there is little or no mention made of it,
Suarez ubi ante.
quia non fuit integra sicut tribus Judae. It was not entire as the Tribe of
Judah, whose dignity and excellency was such as made that inconsiderable. The
Levites also say, the Annotations upon 1 King. 11. were no distinct Tribe; when
they were cast out by Jeroboam, they left their Suburbs and possessions, and
came to Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 11. 13, 14. When therefore the return came
from captivity, it was Judah the Lord looked chiefly upon; the rest were either
reduced to that Tribe, or as inconsiderable then as before the captivity. Judah
made up the bulk and body of their Commonwealth, and the governing power if
not altogether, yet must needs be mostly in it. Manasseh Ben. Israel says,
that in the times of the Assamonaeans, Princeps Jehudae erat caput senatus
Israelitici nuncupati Sanhedrin. A Prince of Judah was chief in the great
Council called the Sanhedrin, which continued till Herod's days, and such was
the power of it, that Herod himself was called before it; for which, when he
obtained the Kingdom, he put them all to death, except one Sameas, as Josephus
reports in his 14. Book of the Antiquities of the Jews, Chapter 17. In this sense
not only were there Rulers and Governors of the Jewish nation till Christ came,
as some do carry it, but even of the Tribe of Judah. For now in Herod's days did
Shilo come, Christ was born, Mat. 2.1. The Scepter was departing when Pompey
brought Judea under the Romans, and the power of it more weakened when it was
made a Province afterward, but it fully departed not, till Titus overthrew the
City, and ruined the whole Commonwealth of the Jews, before which time
Christ was to come and enter into his Kingdom, taking the Crown to himself,
being his right (which he did, and changed it into a spiritual Kingdom, so
raising up the Tabernacle of David which was fallen) and then shortly after was
the Tribe of Judah and Jewish State utterly ruined.

In this Prophecy you see the faithfulness of the Lord making good his truths
notwithstanding all dark and contradictory appearances, his power also in
raising up Kingdoms, and pulling them down again, in changing forms of
government at his pleasure, and bringing them to nothing: You may also see how
blind the Jews are, who have many shifts to put off this prophecy from Christ;
or being conv^nced that it is a clear prophecy of the Messiah, affirm it is not
yet fulfilled, saying, there be Rulers of the Tribe of Judah to this day about
Babylon and that a Prince was seen at Bagdet, riding in a Chariot, where were a
multitude of Jews crying facite locum filio Davidis make way for the son of
David. Manasseh Ben Israel. Tom. 1. Disp. 1
It Is true, there be Jews in the world, but they have no Scepter, no Kingdom,
there is no mention or vestigium of any such thing in the world says Suarez.
Suppose it were so, that in Asia the greater, or beyond the mountains of
Cordilliere in America they had a Kingdom and Scepter, yet this was nothing to
Jacob's prophecy, which speaks of Canaan, where Judah should have rule and
power till Shiloh came. Let those therefore who have seen this Prophecy
fulfilled, felt the power, and enjoyed the blessings of the Messiah, pray that
the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil spread over all
nations may be destroyed, that so Jews and Gentiles may behold him who is the
desire of Nations, that unto him may be the gathering of the people, and that
all Saints, especially themselves, may be enabled through his grace to improve
all mercies and the ensuing truths to his glory, which is the earnest desire of
him who is

Yours in the work of the Lord, W. G.
The 11. month, the 27. day, 1650.
An EXPOSITION upon more Chapters of EZEKIEL.
CHAPTER XIV.
1. Then came certain of the Elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me.

2. And the Word of the Lord came unto me: saying;

3. Son of Man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put
the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face; should I be inquired
of at all by them?

4. Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them; Thus says the Lord God;
Every man of the house of Israel that sets up his idols in his heart, and
puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to the
Prophet, I the Lord will answer him that comes according to the multitude of
his idols.

5. Thar I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are
all estranged from me through their idols.


IN the 12th Chapter our Prophet treated of the King and his Nobles, their sins
and judgments: in the 13th of false Prophets and Prophetesses, and how the
Lord would punish them; here of the Elders and body of the people, and what
sore plagues should befall them.

There be three parts of this Chapter.

1. A conference of God with hypocritical Elders, and false Prophets, to the
12th verse.

2. A threatening of sore judgments against a sinning Land; from the 12. to the
22.

3. A respiting of some from those judgments, from v. 22. to the end.

In the first part, viz. that of it which concerns the Elders; you have

1. The occasion of it, that is, the coming of these Elders to the Prophet, v.
1.

2. Gods complaint of them, v. 3.

3. A charge to the Prophet what answer to give unto these men, from the 3. to
the end of the 8. verse.

Then came certain of the Elders of Israel.
After Ezekiel had declared the mind of God against Zedekiah, the Princes, the
false Prophets and Prophetesses, who drew many to sinful practices, and
especially to trust in vain divinations; some of the Elders of Israel thought
in themselves to go to Ezekiel and hear what he would say; he has cried down
all other Prophets, and thinks himself the only true Prophet; come let us go
to his house, and hearken what he will prophecy unto us.

Elders of Israel.
These men are called Elders, not only because they were aged, but because they
were in some place of authority, which required men grave in age and counsel.
Jer. 26.17. Then rose up certain Elders of the Land, and spoke unto all the
assembly of people. These were such Elders. Its questioned whither these Elders
were Elders of those in Babylon, or of those in Jerusalem. The most
Interpreters agree that they were of the Elders of Judah in Babylon: Chap. 8.
1. its said; The Elders of Judah sat before the Prophet: and Jer. 29.1. tells
you that there were Elders carried away captive. But judicious and learned
Junius is of another mind, who thinks these Elders were Ambassadors sent from
Zedekiah into Babylon to treat of State-affaires between him and
Nebuchadnezzar, as Jer. 51.59. Seraiah went with Zedekiah into Babylon in the
4th year of his reign: its no where extant that Zedekiah ever went into
Babylon till he was carried thither, and that was in the 11th year: the
meaning then of the words is, he went in the behalf of Zedekiah, so its in the
margent, and being a quiet Prince, endeavored to keep a peaceable
correspondencie between Zedekiah and Nebuchadnezzar: so in Jer. 29.3. Elasah
and Gemariah were sent by Zedekiah unto Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon; its
ordinary for Kings to send Ambassadors to other States, The Elders of Israel in
Jerusalem were greatly corrupted with idolatry, Chap. 8.11, 12.
and especially when a part of their people live in that State, as here, and
when they send, its some, or diverse of the Elders and Nobles that are sent;
and of these, certain came to the Prophet; its likely some of those were
formerly brought hither, might accompany them, and the judgments spoken of in
the Chapter concernd those belongd to Judea rather then those captives in
Babylon.

Sat before me.
To converse with the Prophet about the great affairs of the King and
Kingdom. They were in streights, full of doubts and fears, and came to feel
the Prophet, to inquire of him what would be the event of things; its like they
had no good tidings from Nebuchadnezzar, they would try what was to be had from
God: or thus, they had heard what the false Prophets and Prophetesses had said,
how they concurd in their Prophesies, and now they would try Ezekiel, whither
he prophesied the same, or differing things. And so came not to him animo
sincero, but fallaciously, if what he had said had liked them, then they would
have affirmed he was of the same judgment the false Prophets were, if
otherwise, that he was a lying and false Prophet, that he and Jeremie were
singular, dissenting in their Prophesies from all the other Prophets.

Observe. 1. When the true Prophets detect and disparage those are false, then
those adhere to them are offended at it, and seek advantages against them; as
here the Elders of Israel came to Ezekiel, they could not bear it that he had
said their Prophets were foolish, followed their own spirits, played the Foxes,
were liars, seducers, daubed with untempered mortar, that they and their
Prophesies should perish, for the Lord was against them. Great persons will
take part with false Prophets, and appear for them, and seek to entrap those
have discoverd them. When Micaiah discoverd the false Prophets, 1 Kings 22.22,
23. then Ahab appeared for them, and commands Micaiah to be imprisond, fed with
bread and water of affliction, 26, 27. verse.

Obs. 2. Many profess love to the true Prophets, and to Religion yet are
false-hearted to both; these Elders of Israel came to the Prophet, sat before
him, pretended to learn and obey, but their intentions looked another way. Not
all who seem religious, frequent the solemn Assemblies, and hear the Word
from the mouths of the Prophets, are truly godly: Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. says God of
the people; They sit before thee, as my people, and they hear thy words, but
they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness. And lo thou art to them as a very
lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not. This people were
as glad to hear Ezekiel Prophecy, as men to hear music, and songs, at
marriages or feasts, and yet their hearts were unsound; see Isa. 29.13.58.2, 3,
4, 5. Jer. 7.9, 10.11. where you may find their professions were pious, but
their spirits and practices impious; profession is easy in all sorts, Elders,
and Elders of Israel can do that, but the practice of what men profess is
difficult; men rest in forms of godliness, and deny the power, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Observe from the second Verse.
That much of the Scripture has been given out upon sinful occasions: when
these Elders came to the Prophet, the word of the Lord came unto him, and he
gave it out to them and us. Men's sins have opened the windows of heaven for
much divine light to shine into the world: the Prophecy of Haggai, was
occasioned by the neglect to build Gods house, as you may read in the first
Chapter, 2, 3.4, etc. Ninivehs sin drew out the Prophecy of Jonah, Chap. 1.1,
2. David's murder and adultery were occasions of some, if not of all the
Penitential Psalms: The Levite cutting his Concubine, who was forced to
death, into twelve pieces, and sending her into all the coast of Israel,
occasioned some part of the Book of Judges to be written. The Gospel of John,
its conceived by the learned, was written by the occasion of Cerinthus, Ebion,
and some others, who did deny the divine nature of Christ; therefore in the
beginning, viz. Chap. 1. he speaks much of his Godhead, Sonship, and Eternal
Generation. It was the disorders, divisions, scandalls, and corruptions, which
set Paul on work to write his two Epistles to the Corinthians, as you may
observe throughout the Epistle. The doctrine of false teachers amongst the
Galatians, gave birth to that Epistle, Chap. 1.6. and in several parts of the
Epistle it clearly appears. The danger of the Jews forsaking their
professing of Christianity, and revolting to Mosaicall Ceremonies, opened the
doors for the Epistle to the Hebrews to enter into the world. The faultiness
of the Angels in the Churches, made way for the several Epistles to be writ
and sent unto them.

VER. 3.
Son of Man, these men have set up their idols in their hearts, etc.


HEre is first Gods complaint of them: and that

1. Of their hypocrisy.

2. Of their idolatry; which is the argument he proves their hypocrisy by.
Thus, those that set up idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling blocks of
their iniquity before their faces, (...) Hominibus istis sui stercorei divi
cordi sunt. Ces hommes ci ont mis leurs idols en leurs caeurs.
and come to inquire of me, they deal hypocritically with me; but these men
do so.

2. Gods indignation against them for these sins, Should I be inquired of at
all by them?

Have set up their idols in their heart.
The Hebrew is, Have made their idols to ascend upon their heart; The
Septuagint is, They have put their thoughts upon their hearts. Castalio. Their
dunghill gods are for a delight to these men. Fr: These men have put their
idols in their heart, or as its in the margent of the French, Have subjected
their hearts to idols. The word for idols (...) is from (...) filth, Shindl:
pentaglott.
dung, which defiles, and therefore is rendered by some stercora, by the Vulgar
immunditias; so metaphorically is applied to idols, because as dung is
offensive to the eye, being an excrement, and to the smell being unsavory, so
idols are offensive unto God: this word you had before, Chap. 8.18. where it
was opened unto you. If one should now for the sense of these words tell you
they had the pictures of their idols at their hearts, it may be, you would not
altogether condemn it, for it suits with the Hebrew, they made their idols to
ascend upon their hearts. And such a practice the Scripture seems to hold
forth, Hos. 2.2. Let her put away her adulteries from between her breasts; that
is, such pictures she had of her idols hanging at her breast: so that in Jer.
17.1. may be understood, The sin of Judah is graven upon the table of their
heart, they had a table, in the form of a heart, hanging at their breast, in
which was engraven the effigies of their idol god; and that which adds some
strength to this is the 20. verse of the former Chapter, Shall a man make gods
unto himself? If this be part of the meaning, yet, I conceive, not all.

They set up their idols in their heart; that is,

1. They gave them entertainment in their hearts, and made them the Temples and
Altars for them, before, they set them in Gods house, Jer. 7.30. to pollute
that; now they set them in their own hearts, to pollute them; they minded and
affected them, they were much in their thoughts and affections, and had the
strength and supremacy of them; and so judicious Calvin interprets the place;
he says, they were so addicted to superstition, Summumgradu^ obtinere in
ipsorum cordibus.
that their idols and rites about them had made deep impressions upon their
hearts, and had the command of their thoughts and affections. Psalm. 62.10. If
riches increase, set not your heart upon them, that is, do not mind and
affect them, let not them sway, command your thoughts or affections, but here
their idols were set up in their hearts, and their hearts were set upon their
idols.

2. They purposed to honor them with Dulia and Latri^ service and worship, and
to continue in their idolatry; when the Calves were set up at Dan and Bethel,
it was for to worship them; when Amaziah set up the Edomites gods, he bowed
down to them, 2 Chronicles. 25.14. and the setting these up in their hearts, notes
their intention to persist in their way of worship.

3. They resolved not to part with them; what men set up in their hearts, they
count as their gods, Judge. 18.
they will be at any cost to maintain them, venture their credit, limbs,
lives, souls, in defense of them. You know how Micah was affected when the
Danites took away his idol gods; you must remember they were set up in his
heart as well as in his house, and therefore he gets men together, pursues the
Danites, and ventures his life to recover them. When any thing becomes an idol
in the heart, as covetousness, wantonness, ceremony, any way of false
worship, any foolish or blasphemous opinion, its no easy matter to get down
that idol.

And put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face. (...) a
(...) impingere cadere pedibus offendere offensionem praebere.

(...), detrimentosum crimen.

They were the occasion of their sins, and so causa vel unica, vel maxima
ruinae tam florentis reipublicae. Prad.



The Hebrew for stumbling block is from a word signifies to fall, to dash
against any thing, or person, so as to receive hurt, or do hurt. The
Septuagint is, They have set the torment or punishment of their iniquity before
them: Castal: their detrimentall evil. This stumbling block of their iniquity
was their idols, which while they affected, respected, reverenced, they fell
into idolatry, causd many others to do so; and therefore are called the
stumbling blocks of their iniquity, they stumbled at these, fell from God upon
these, and so wounded themselves. Zeph. 1.3. idols are called stumbling blocks.

The putting them before their faces or eyes notes.

1. Delight in them; for usually we set such things before our eyes as are
pleasing. Psalm. 26.3. Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes: So wives and
children are called the desire of men's eyes, Ezekiel. 24.16.25. because they are
pleasing and delightful; such were their idols unto these Elders of Israel,
and diverse others: hence is that phrase, Ezekiel. 6.9. Your eyes go a whoring
after your idols: that look how men are taken with a beautiful woman, so, etc.

2. Insatiablenesse in that practice, they intend to look constantly upon
them, as not being satisfied with one, two, or some few acts, but they must
have them ever in their eyes. Pro. 27.20. The eyes of man are never satisfied;
the eyes and hearts of idolaters are never satisfied. Ezekiel. 16.28. Jerusalem is
said to be insatiable: and Chap. 23.11. Aholibah, which was Jerusalem, was
corrupt and inordinate in her love, that was to idols.

Should I be inquired of at all by them?
Nunquid requirendo requiror eis? or Interrogando Interrogor.
Hebrew is, am I inquired by inquiring, or am I asked by asking? do they not
dissemble? Ezekiel do thou think they are in good earnest now they are
come, sit before thee, and make as if they would hearken to what counsel
should be given? No, no, be not deceived, they have idols in their hearts, and
before their eyes, and what ever pretenses they have, all is fancied, and
false. The words are an interrogation, discovering and reproving their
hypocrisy and impudency, that dare come to the Lord to inquire of him; Should
I be inquired, etc. do they think I will mind them, give them any
comfortable answer, far be it from me.

Obs. 1. That God takes notice of heart-idolatrie, not only what idols are in
Temples, in his worship, what innovations, corruptions, superstitions be there,
but also what idols are in men's bosoms.

Obs. 2. Where superstition and idolatry once get interest, they are not
easily removed. These Elders of Israel had turned aside from the true God, and
fell to idolatry in Jerusalem, Chap. 8. 11. and now being come into Babylon,
they brought their idols with them in their hearts; neither change of
Country, nor company, did prevail with their hearts, to let go their idols,
they saw many of their Brethren in captivity for that sin, they heard
Ezekiel Prophecy against their practices, and those upheld them in it, they
understood Nebuchadnezzar had no good will to them, yet the idols remain
firm and settled in their hearts: when idols get into Bethel, Gods house, its
a great difficulty to get them out, but when gotten into the heart, they
become immovable, you may as soon pluck out their hearts, as pluck out their
idols. The Papists hold fast their images and idolatrous practices to this
day, notwithstanding all the judgments of God have been upon them. Acts of
Authority may take down Monuments of superstition, remove out of the public
worship, ceremonies, pictures, idols; but can they remove them out of men's
hearts? its not the power of man, change of place, company, or duties will do
it, till the Lord speak to the heart with a strong hand, the idol got in,
will stand; men's affections and corruptions are very tenacious of them.

3. Idols set up in the heart, or elsewhere, prove ruin to the authors and
fautors of them; the Text calls them stumbling blocks, by them they fell into
sin, and that brought ruin upon them: Idolatry has snared and ruined many.
When Gideon made and set up an Ephod in the City, and in his heart, it became
a snare to him and to his house, Judge. 8.27. so Psalm. 106.36. They served
idols, and they were a snare unto them; it was their idolatry which brought
their captivity; and there is no idol in secret or public, but is cause of
ruin; idols in worship bring destruction upon Churches and States; idols in
heart bring destruction upon souls.

4. Men are active to their own destruction, they set up their idols in their
own hearts, and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face.
Men's destructions are from themselves: Jeroboam set the calves in Dan and
Bethel, 1 King. 12.29. He made Priests of the lowest of the people; and what
says the Text; This thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut
it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth, Chap. 13.34. Hence
God told them, Hos. 13.9. that they had destroyed themselves; they set up the
Calves at Dan and Bethel, and practiced such things as brought total
destruction upon them. Prove. 5.22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked
himself; and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins.

5. However, hypocrisy may escape the eyes of men, yet it cannot escape the
eye of God; these Elders carried it fair with the Prophet, but the Lord saw
their hypocritical and deceitful hearts, and discovered them unto the
Prophet; Gods eye is a piercing eye, and can discern hypocrisy how deeply
soever it be hid. The Scribes and Pharisees had their hypocrisy hid under long
garments, long prayers, much zeal, and yet Christ saw it, and made it known:
Mat. 23. Woe unto you Scribes, etc. What ever pretenses men make, what ever
they practice outwardly, if the heart be not clear, if they go after
covetousness, whoredom, idols, etc. its hypocrisy, seen of God, and shall
be detected. Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the
good and the evil; He knows the secret counsels and plottings of men.

6. When hypocrites sue unto God, they may rather expect wrath then mercy,
these men came for counsel and comfort; but what says the Lord; Should I be
inquired of at all by them? They have no warrant to come at me with
hypocritical hearts, with idolatrous spirits, and if they do, should I grant
their requests? No, no, I will manifest my dislike of them, answer them in
wrath, according to the multitude of their idols; for bread I will give them
stones; for fish Serpents. Would they have counsel from me, I will give them
up to their own devices, and leave them to seduction by their own thoughts and
lusts. Hos. 8.13. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offerings, but
the Lord accepts them not: Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit
their sins. They came hypocritically to God, expected acceptance when they
sacrificed, but the Lord at that time remembered their sins, and in stead of a
gracious answer, they had a grievous judgment. Hence says the Lord in Isa.
66.3. He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man, and he that sacrifices a
Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he
offered swines blood; he that burns incense, as if he blessed an idol. What
is the reason of this? why, They have chosen their own ways, and their soul
delights in their abomination; they have their idols in their hearts, they
are hypocrites, and come to me, thinking to have favor of me, and mercy
from me. They shall hear such things as they would not hear. Ahab consulted
with Michaiah about regaining Ramoth Gilead, not out of conscience to obey, but
that he might have him speak things suitable to his heart, but he heard that
displeased him.

7. God will give such answer to hypocritical heart-idolaters, as shall snare
them; I will answer them come to inquire of me according to the multitude of
their idols, that I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, in their
own thoughts and devices. Their tongues ask for mercy, but their hearts call
for judgment; there is hypocrisy and idolatry in their hearts, and suitable
thereunto shall be my answer. God answers such in justice, and sends them
strong delusions to believe lies, 2 These. 2.11. And to ripen their damnation,
they bring matter of damnation in their hearts, and God seals it up.

Quest. How are they said to be taken in their hearts when God does not answer
their desires or hopes, but gives out what is contrary there unto?

Answ. 1. When God answers not such men after their desires and expectations,
they frett and rage against God, as if he dealt not well with them, and so God
takes them in their heart, and discovers them to the world.

2. God threatening judgments, takes the hearts of sinners with fear, which
holds them in dreadful bondage night and day; famine, plague, sword, and
noisome Beasts, Captivity, were threatened: and Chap. 12.13. God calls his
judgments, nets, snares.

3. He convinces them that they do not honor him by their false worship, but
are guilty of those things do greatly offend him, they think he sees not
their idols, because shut up within in their hearts.

8. Idolatry of what kind soever is a grievous sin, it estranges from God,
they are estranged from me through their idols. Man's happiness lies in his
nearness to God, ^nion with him, and fruition of him; now idolatry, though
^nely heart-idolatry, estranges, divides, separates from God, ^^d that is the
great misery of the creature. They left the ^innite, all-sufficient, living,
only good and wise God, for dunghill gods that had nothing in them, Dijs
stercoreis.
that could do nothing for them, that brought a curse upon them and theirs.
Jer. 19.3, 4. Behold! I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever
hears, his ears shall tingle, because they have forsaken me, and have
estranged this place, and have burnt incense in it to other gods. They first
estranged themselves from God, then estranged the place of his worship. And
then God dealt strangely by them, he brought destruction upon them: People may
think themselves happy that they have communion with God in sacrifice and
worship, but if there be any idols within or without, they are strangers unto
God, and God is a stranger unto them, and strange judgments are in readiness
for them.

9. Note here the right way of coming unto God to inquire of him; if you would
have a gracious answer, you must come with hearts free from idols, with pure
hearts. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my
prayer; if we come with sin in our hearts, (sin approved, countenanced,
delighted in), God will meet us with wrath in his hand, therefore the Scripture
often tells us of this duty, how we should come to God. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw
near with a true heart. 1 Timothy 2.8. Let us lift up holy hands without wrath
and doubting; there must be no wrath nor doubting in your hearts. James 4.8.
Draw nigh to God, but how? cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your
hearts you double minded. Inwardly they must be cleansed, and outwardly
reformed, lives and spirits must be suitable unto God.

VER. 6.
Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, Repent, and
turn your selves from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your
abominations.


THis Verse is part of the charge given the Prophet, which he was to deliver to
the house of Israel, and in it i^ a command, or an exhortation to repentance,
which is ^^id down.

1. In general; Repent. 2. More specially. 1. Turn your selves from your
idols. 2. Turn away your faces from all your abominations.

Repent.
(...) from (...) reverti, to return, implying a going back from what a man
had done; the Septuagint is, (...).
turn ye too, and turn from, turn to the Lord from your idols. Castal.
Redite and avertite: Fr: returnez vous. The Greeks have two words by which
they express the nature of repentance; one is (...), which is to be careful,
anxious, sollicitous after a thing done, Ita ut in animo oriatur displicentia
qua quis rem factam infectam esse exoptat; and so (...) is that we call
poenitentia. The other word is (...) mentem and consilium in melius mutare ab
(...) dementia and (...) post, it being the correction of men's folly and
returning ad sanam mentem, and (...) is that we term resipiscentia, a growing
wise again: Some express it by postmentatio, an after mind, an amendment of
the mind. One of these, respects the change of the will, the other the change
of the mind. Some Divines refer (...) to Legal repentance, and (...) to
Evanlicall. The Hebrew word for repentance is (...) from the Word in my Text,
and notes a returning, converting from one thing to another, from sin to God. 1
King. 8.35. If they pray toward this place, and confess thy Name, and turn
from their sin when thou afflictest them, then hear thou in Heaven.

Quest. Is not repentance the work and gift of God? if so how is it that man is
commanded to repent?

Answ. Repentance is of the Lord, Acts 11.18. God granted repentance to the
Gentiles unto life. 2 Timothy 2.25. Ministers must meekly instruct those that
oppose, if God peradventure will give them ^epentance. Its also the gift of
Christ, Acts 5.31. He is exalted the a Prince and Savior, to give repentance
to Israel: yet God commands man to repent.

Because man may do something that he may repent, as ^st seriously consider
the na^^re of his sin, what circumstances its clothed with, what aggravations
it admits, how crimson and skarlet it is, against what light, mercies, means,
engagements, etc. apprehension of sin under false notions of profit or
pleasure, induces to it, and consideration of sin in its own nature, helps
to repent of it, and abhor it. Did men lay to heart what wrong the infinite
holy blessed God has by sin, what mercies it keeps from them, how greatly
it does defile them, what miseries and mischiefs it brings upon them, what a
weight of divine wrath hangs over their heads, it would have some operation
upon their hearts.

2. They may confess them before God; Josh. 7.19. Give glory to God, and make
confession unto him. Prove. 28.13. Who so confesses and forsakes, shall have
mercy. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, etc.

3. God gives what he commands; Chap. 11.19. he had promised to take the stony
heart out of their flesh, and to give them a heart of flesh, and therefore here
might command them to repent. Mark. 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel;
neither of these were in their power, they might as well create new heavens and
new earths, as do these acts, but God gives and works them both in the hearts
of whom he pleases, 2 Timothy 2.25. Phil. 1.29. Neither repentance nor faith, are
natural or any acquired habits by the industry and acts of men, but they are
the efficacious work of the Spirit in and upon the heart: God and Christ do
work repentance by the Spirit, and therefore its attributed unto them, and
denied to be in the power of man. 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves. Phil. 2.17. Its God that works
both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Commands argue not power and free
will in man to repent.

There is an Use of these.

1. In regard of God. 2. Of Man.
Gerrh. de lib. arb. sect. 72.
1. In regard of God.

1. To manifest what the Lord may justly require (...) the hands of men, if
they sin unjustly, he may justly call ^r repentance.

2. To clear himself, that it is not his fault if men cannot do what they
are called upon for. The creditor may call for his debt of that man who is fallen
into extreme poverty through his own sin.

3. To set before us the corruption and impotency of our nature, by the Law we
come to the knowledge, not of our power, but our impotency. Romans 3.20. By the
Law comes the knowledge of sin.

4. To advise us to look out for help elsewhere, therefore where you have
commands in one place of Scripture, you have promises in some other part.

2. In regard of Man.

1. That he may be more thoroughly sensible of the wretched corruption of his
nature, and bewail it more fully.

2. That he may be stirred up more effectually to beg of God that which he
commands, for God commands nothing but that which is of great weight and
advantage for man.

3. That wicked men may be inexcusable. Joh. 15.22. If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their
sin.

Obser. 1. Repentance is a turning from sin to God, sin turns men from God,
draws the soul into ways that lead unto death. James 1.14. A man is drawn
away of his own lust; drawn away from God, from his worship, truths, rules;
but when repentance comes, he turns back again, he changes his thoughts, his
mind, his will, he befooles, abhorres himself for what he has done, and so
comes to God again from whom he departed: the Prodigal was drawn away from
his fathers house through his own lust, and laid a long time in looseness and
wantonness; at last he changed his judgment, counsels, purposes, and
returning to himself, returns to his father, Luke 15.17. When he came to
himself, he said, I will arise and go to my father, and say, father, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, etc. (...), in seipsum reversus, ad cor,
ad mentem. Syrus ad animum suum, he was without himself, etc. Sinners are said
to be mad, Psalm. 102.8. They that are mad against me: and Paul when he was in
his course of sinning, says, he was exceedingly mad: Act. 26. 11. and Balaams
sin is called madness, 2 Pet. 2.16. Repentance brings a man to his right wits,
he becomes wise, and turns from his folly and madness: its called a turning of
men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18.
Sin is darkness, and when men sin they know not what they do; its the power
of Satan holds them under his government; but repentance inlightens and sets at
liberty, so that men see and walk from under Satan unto God. Verse. 20.
Repentance and turning to God are put together, they are the same, but its not
any turning, but a turning of the judgment, so that men judge otherwise of
God, of his Laws, ways, of sin, of themselves, then before, a turning of
the will and affections, so that they are carried wholly and fully unto God.
Joel 2.12. Turn you unto me, even with all your heart: if it be with a piece,
its partial, its hypocritical, its deceitful.

2. Repentance is a continued act; the word repent, implies the continuation of
it. Some have thought it one act, and that is sufficient for a man's sin, but
repentance is a grace, and must have its daily operation as well as other
graces; if faith, love, patience, humility, must continue, repentance must do
so likewise: where a spring breaks forth, its always flowing: this is the
spring of the soul, when God once smites the rockie heart, the water will
flow: sincere repentants can no moee content themselves with one act of
repentance, then with one act of faith, they often iterate and renew their
repentance. Hence is it that the Lord would not have us forget our old sins,
but to think of them and mourn for them. Deuteronomy. 9.7. Remember and forget not,
how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the Wilderness. Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. 1 Cor. 15.9. I am the
least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I
persecuted the Church of God. Ezekiel. 16.62, 63. I will establish my Covenant
with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, that thou may remember
and be consounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame,
when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done.

3. Sinners should stir up themselves, and do the utmost lies in their power
to further their turning unto God; turn your selves from your idols (...)
facite converti; use all arguments you can to cause your hearts to turn from
idols, and from other sinful ways. Consider

1. That they are separated from the Lord; Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you
that he will not hear: for a woman to be separated from her husband that is
gracious, loving, and to join her self to some rogue, is grievous; so here
are too sad effects of it, they have nothing of Gods face, nor of Gods ear.

2. That man's life is short, and the pleasures of sin but for a season; let a
man all his life enjoy them, yet they end then, and man may be cut off before
he is aware of it. Mat. 25.13. Watch, for ye know neither the hour, nor the
day, wherein the Son of man comes.

3. The daily treasuring up of wrath, and danger of final impenitency: Romans
2.4. Thou treasurest up wrath unto thy self against the day of wrath. Its a
seal of condemnation.

4. The condemnings of a man's own heart and conscience; There is no peace to
the wicked, but they are like unto the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest; as
Isa. 57.20, 21.

5. Absolute necessity of repenting and turning unto God; Luke 13.3. Except
ye repent, ye shall all perish.

6. The love of Christ, in laying down his life, shedding his blood, suffering
such hard things as he did: Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, etc.

7. That its acceptable unto the Lord, he would not else call for it, as here,
nor make such promises unto it; as 1. King. 8.48, 49, 50. If they will return
to God with all their heart and soul, he will hear their prayers, maintain
their cause, forgive their sins, and have compassion on them. Its acceptable
to the Angels; repentance makes them rejoice.

4. True repentance and turning to the Lord, does manifest it self in the
effects and fruits of it; it has meet fruit, Mat. 3.8. worthy fruit, Luke 3.8.
Now here are three effects thereof in these words.

1. When the soul is truly turned to God, it seeks to turn others, its not
content that it self is come to God, but would have many come to him
Vehashibu, facite converti, make your selves, make others to convert.

2. It dispenses with no sin, it says not, Lord be merciful to me in this,
but turns from all abominations, from every idol, the most darling sin shall
then go to it. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with
idols.

3. It avoyds the occasions of sin, and appearances of evil: Turn away your
faces from all your abominations: if you should look upon idols, they will
endanger you, stir up the old corruptions. Hence Solomon counsels men not to
look upon the wine, Prove. 23.31. when its red, and gives his color in the
Cup: Not to enter into the path of the wicked, Chap. 4.14.

VER. 7, 8.
For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth in
Israel, which seperateth himself from me, and sets up his idols in his
heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and
comes to a Prophet to inquire of him concerning me, I the Lord will answer
him by my self.

And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and a
Proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord.


IN the foregoing verse he exhorted them to repentance, and to turn from their
idols and abominations; and here in these verses he backs it with reasons:
thus if ye will not repent, but persist in your idolatry and sinful
practices, I will answer you by my self, and I will set my face against you,
etc.

Every one of the house of Israel.
The Hebrew is, ish, ish, man, man; of the house of Israel, that is, every man
of Israel that forsakes me to follow idols, I will do so and so by.

The stranger that sojourns in Israel.
Heb. (...) which the Septu: render Proselyte, (...).
of the Proselytes that sojourne. Those came from the Gentiles, and embraced
the Jewish Religion; they were Proselytes. There were two sorts of Proselytes;
one sort was called (...) the Proselyte of the Covenant; and these were to be
circumcised, and to keep the Law: another sort was called (...) the Proselyte of
the Gate, from Deuteronomy. 14.29. these were not circumcised, neither received the
Law of Moses, but the seven Precepts of Noah; one of which was, Vt non colerent
idola; if therefore they should come with idols in their hearts, God would
answer them.

And separateth himself from me.
God had taken the Jews to be his people, and some of the Gentiles came in to
join with them, yet these separated themselves from God to go to idols; like
a Woman that leaves her husband, and follows other men, Hos. 9.10. When men
leave the Law of God, and his pure worship, then they separate from God.

Of setting up idols in the heart, and putting the stumbling block of
iniquity before their face, we have spoken in the fourth verse.

And comes to a Prophet to inquire of him concerning me.
In the fourth verse, its said, and comes to the Prophet; then he adds; to
inquire of him. It was an ordinary thing for this people upon occasions to go
to the Prophets; Exodus 18.15. The people came to Moses, who was a Prophet, to
inquire of God. They went to the Seer, 1 Samuel 9.9. to inquire: so 2 King. 8.8.
Benhadad sends to Elishah the Prophet, to inquire of him. Zedekiah sent again
and again to Jeremie, to inquire of the Lord for him, Jer. 21.2.37.7. When
they came to the Prophets, or sent to them, it was to know the mind of the
Lord in their streights, undertakings, desires, and doubts.

I the Lord will answer him by my self.
The Hebrew runs thus; I the Lord, it shall be answered to him in me, I will
not let any answer him but my self. God spoke himself to Moses, Numb. 12.7,
8. which was an argument of great love, and good will; and sometimes its an
argument of wrath and displeasure, when he will not speak by others but by
himself; as here, I will not answer him by the Prophet, whom he entreats to
inquire for him, but by my self, whom he despises, by setting up idols in his
heart. I will answer him not with words but deeds, not with mercies, but with
judgments; as the next verse imports. God would not vouchsafe their questions
they propounded any answer at all, but he would go on in his judgments; not
be inquired of by them, but answer them according to the multitude of their
idols.

VER. 8.
I will set my face against that man.


Heb. is, panim faces, the plural for the singul: this phrase is frequent in
Scripture. The Targum expounds it, anger, which appears in the face, and face
is often put for the wrath and anger of God: Jer. 3.12. I will not suffer my
anger to fall upon you: Heb. is, my faces (...) Lam. 4.16. The anger of the
Lord has divided them: Heb. is, the face of the Lord. Psalm. 21.9. Thou shall
make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine anger: Heb. is, in time of thy
face; that is, when the wrath is in thy face, thou will consume them as stubble
in an Oven. So 1 Pet. 3.12. The face of the Lord is upon them that do evil;
that is, the anger, wrath, and fury of God is against such: so then to set the
face against a man, is to manifest himself to be an enemy to that man, to
persist in that enmity, and to act accordingly. You may see it in those
Scriptures where this phrase is mentioned: Levit. 17.10. I will set my face
against that soul which eats blood, and will cut him off from among his
people. Chap. 26.17. I will set my face against you, and you shall be slain
before your enemies. Jer. 21.10. I have set my face against this City for
evil, and it shall be given into the hand of the King of Babylon, and he shall
burn it with fire. You see when God sets his face against any person or thing,
he is an enemy unto them, and gives not over his enmity, till he has ruined
them, and therefore it follows here.

I will make him a sign.
His punishment shall not be easy or common, but exemplary: the Vulgar is, in
exemplum; such judgments would God bring upon them, as that others should be
astonished at them. Deuteronomy. 28.37. Thou shall become an astonishment, a Proverb,
and a byword among all Nations.

A Proverb.
God would so deal with these men, as that they should be talked on every
where: Jer. 24.9. Zedekiah, the Princes, and residue of Jerusalem, God would
remove them into all Kingdoms of the Earth for their hurt, to be a Reproach, a
Proverb, a Taunt, and a Curse in all places. Their punishment should be
Proverbiall. Calvin observes that Mashal signifies disgrace, so that they
shall not only be matter of talk to the people, but their names shall be
infamous.

And I will cut him off from the midst of my people.
God would not only make him a sign and talk to others; that were no great
matter, but destroy him, cut him off: The Scripture often speaks of cutting off
men, its not always meant by death, but thought to be some censure whereby
they were deprived of the privileges of Gods people; but sundry times its
spoken of Gods cutting men off by death: Levit. 17.10. Chap. 20.3, 4, 5, 6. And
its certain, where God is said to set his face against any, and then speaks of
cutting off from his people, that there its to be understood of cutting off by
death, as in this place, they should be cut off from his people, both by
temporal and eternal death.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord.
Hypocrites pretend they are godly, they converse with the Prophets, ask
counsel of God; but yet they contemn the true Prophets, and the power of
godliness, they will choose their own ways. Therefore says God, Ye shall
know that I am the Lord; you set up idols in your hearts, make gods of them,
but I will my self deal with you for them, and punish you severely.

Obs. 1. That when men leave God, and his ways, then they fall to idolatrous
and other sinful practices, they separated themselves from God, and set up
idols in their hearts: when once corruption has taken off the heart from the
Lord, who is an infinite good, then it cleaves to any creature, any dunghill
god, and deifies that; Hos. 9.10. They went to Baalpeor, and separated
themselves unto that shame: it was a shameful idol, yet having left God, they
could embrace it: and Hos. 4.10, 11, 12. They have left off to take heed to the
Lord; Whoredom, wine, and new wine, take away the heart; they ask counsel at
their stocks, and their staff declares unto them. Jer. 2.13. They forsook
God the fountain of living waters, and then hewed themselves Cisterns that
could hold no water. It was therefore good Counsel the Apostle gave, Heb.
3.12. Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. Through unbelief men separate from God, and
that is the principle of all disobedience, and lets the heart loose unto any
creature, to every sin.

2. Men exceeding sinful may put on a face of holiness, these men who were
idolaters, come to the Prophet, inquire of God by him, as if they were pious
men, intended to know the mind of God, and do what he would have done. This
was counterfeit holiness, they had idols in their hearts, and meant to keep
them there. Saul was sometimes among the Prophets; The Devil seems an Angel of
light, and wicked vile men appear Saints, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of
godliness. The worst of men may make a cloak of Religion; Antichrist sits in
the Temple, 2 These. 2.4. Simon Magus believing, is baptized, and wonders at the
miracles Philip wrought, Act. 8.13.

3. Look what men are in coming unto God, the like shall they find him unto
them; they came to the Prophet fallaciously, and God would not answer them by
the Prophet, but by himself; he knew how to deal with them, he knew their
hearts, and so what was fittest to be said or done unto them. Psalm. 18.25, 26.
With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful; with an upright man,
thou will show thy self upright; with the pure, thou will show thy self pure;
and with the froward, thou will show thy self froward, or wrestle with them:
so Levit. 26.23, 24. If ye will walk contrary to we, I will walk contrary
to you. If a people come humbly unto God, and sue for mercy, he will save them;
but if their hearts swell, rise within them, he will bring down their high
looks, Psalm. 18.27. As God finds men, so he will proceed with them; so he
dealt with Pharaoh.

4. God will proceed impartially with every man, be he Jew or Gentile, all is
one to God; Every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that
sojourneth in Israel, etc. God neither accepts nor respects persons, Gal. 2.6.
Act. 10.34. If a Jew be guilty, he shall have an answer suitable; so if a
Gentile be faulty, his Gentilisme shall not excuse him. Let men's conditions,
nations, qualities, degrees, be what they will, it matters not, if they come to
God with idols in their hearts, the greatest shall speed no better then the
meanest; the Jew no better then the Stranger.

5. Men set up idols in their hearts, and God sets his face against them, he
becomes an adversary unto them, looks severely upon them, speaks terribly unto
them, and works powerfully against them. They had set their faces and hearts
upon idols for evil, and God sets his face and heart against them for evil,
and is resolved to ruin them. Jer. 44.11. Behold, I will set my face against
you for evil, and to cut off all Judah. To have God set his face against a
people is very sad.

There be several sins mentioned in Scripture, for which God sets his face
against men, offering their seed to Molech, Levit. 20.2, 3. despising of his
Statutes, and breaking his Covenant, Levit. 26.15.17. idolatry and hypocrisy
here in the Text.

6. When Gods face is against a people, his judgments upon them will be
exemplary, he will make them signs and Proverbs in the world. Jer. 19.8. I
will make this City desolate, and an hissing; every one that passes thereby
shall be astonished and hiss, because of all the plagues thereof. Chap. 18.16.
Every one that passes by, shall wagge his head at it. Chap. 42.18. Ye shall
be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach. Men's names
are dear unto them, but God will blast their names, make them to be a Taunt
and Proverb, Jer. 29.22. It was a Proverb among them; The Lord make thee like
Zedekiah and Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire. And when they
wished hurt to any, they used this speech; God make them a reproach among all
Nations, Ezekiel. 5.14, 15. And when this is done, God cuts them off from the land
of the living in that condition.

7. The end of Gods setting his face against sinners, and proceeding severely
with them, is, that they may acknowledge his justice and power over them.

VERSE. 9.
And if the Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have
deceived that Prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will
destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.


FAlse Prophets were both in Judea, and in Babylon, and the people had often
recourse unto them. They spoke pleasing things, they told them were in Judea
that Nebuchadnezzar should never subdue and carry them captives, as he had done
Jechoniah, and some others with him; yea, they told them that those in Babylon
should shortly return; these were vain, false, and deceitful Prophesies, and
Divine Providence ordered it so, and therefore God says here; If the Prophet
be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet,
etc.

In the verse you have, 1. A Supposition. 2. An Assertion. 3. A Threatening.


For the Supposition, the false Prophets (for of them he speaks) were deceived
in what they spoke to the people: Zedekiah, and the rest of the Prophets which
bad Ahab to go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper, were deceived, 1 Kings 22.
Hananiah and Shelemiah made that people trust in a lie, Jer. 28.15.29.31. They
were deceived in their Prophets, and deceive others; the things they spoke came
not to pass.

If a Prophet be deceived.
Heb. Original word is (...) which being taken in the ill part, as here, notes
a turning of the heart to that; Quod est praeter rationem veritatis and
prudentiae. Septu. is; (...) si errabit: The Vulgar; Cum erraverit. (...)
pyhal, i. e. phutteh.
futur: Pisc: turns thus; Persuaderi se passus fuerit, by those idolaters and
hypocrites which came to ask counsel of him, and desired to have answer
suitable to their own wills, (as Ahab of his Prophets) or by his own corruption;
for a man may be seduced in himself by himself: James 1.14. Every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust; his lust is in him; by his
lust he is enticed, seduced, Jer. 14.14.
and this seduction is voluntary, by his own act and will. So that in himself
is the true efficient cause of his seduction.

I the Lord have deceived that Prophet.
Here Is the assertion: These words found very harsh, and no man durst have
attributed them unto the Lord, had not he himself said so: We must inquire
into the sense of these, how God is said to deceive a Prophet that speaks
falsely.

To say God declared him to be deceived, or permitted him to be deceived, comes
not up to the expression here; I have deceived that, etc. (...) its active and
notes action. This we must lay down that God neither is, nor can be the
author of sin; for then he must act against some rule; Gods will, which is
ever most holy, just, and wise, is his rule; and its unreasonable impious, to
think, that God should work or do any thing against his own will: yet God
wills sin, not as good, but so far as he intends, and is able to work good
out of it, and bring about his glory by it. Mr. Baynes, and some other hold,
there is an efficacy of God reaching to the beginning of sin, though not to
the essence of sin: and its no more then some Jesuits acknowledge, who
maintain a deadly quarrel against Calvin, for making God the author of sin,
when he says for substance no more then they. A Lapid: says, Gods permission
of sin is an action, otherwise no sin could be: Quia deus ad deceptionem, uti
ad quemlibet actum peccati, generali suo concur su physice concurrere and
cooperari debet, sine hoc enim dei concur su nil effici nil produci potest. He
says further, this permission is efficacious, and certainly ponit effectum. He
instanceth in a Greyhound which a man lets loose to pursue the hair, and sets
the dog upon the hair; so God lets Satan loose upon men, and so is active to
the beginning of sin. 1 King. 22.20. The Lord said, who shall persuade Ahab
that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? One said on this manner, another
on that manner. Verse. 21. There came forth a Spirit and said, I will persuade
him. And Verse. 22. The Lord says unto him, wherewith? I will go forth and be
a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets; and he said, thou shall
persuade him and prevail also. Go forth and do so. Here is some concurrence
of God to the deception of these Prophets: and God might have said of them as
here; I have deceived these Prophets.

The words, I have deceived, are to be taken as a judicial act of God, who
dealing with them as delinquents, punishes them with this special judgment
of seduction; they were idolatrous and hypocritical, and God punished those
sins with others, and so accidentally was the efficient cause of their
deception. God finding those men false and forward to deceive, hearkening to
their own hearts, and following their own spirits. Ezech. 13.2, 3. He gave them
up and over to vain visions and lying divinations; which was one punishment,
and to perdition, which was another punishment following thereupon. Have you a
mind to be Prophets, to prophecy lies,? ye shall be so.

Quest. Jer. 20.7. says Jeremie a true Prophet; O Lord, thou have deceived
me, and I was deceived; thou art stronger then I, and have prevailed. What
does God deceive true Prophets?

Answ. The deception here is no sinful deception, he had no vain visions, no
lying divinations, what ever he prophesied was truth, from the God of truth,
and came to pass: The meaning here is this; Jeremie was discontented, that he
saw so little fruit of his Ministry, that he found such opposition, that he
was daily in derision and mocked of every one; and therefore says; O Lord,
thou have deceived me, in making me a Prophet; I looked for other things then
I find, but I am deceived, and thou have done it: I was unwilling to be a
Prophet, objected against it, Chap. 1.6. but thou laidst thy charge upon me,
overpoweredst me, and prevailedst against me, making me great promises,
which yet I see not performed, verse. 7, 8.18, 19.

2. The words may be read thus; Thou have persuaded me, and I was persuaded;
for when its taken in the better sense, it notes to persuade.

Quest. Isa. Chap. 63.17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways?
and hardened our hearts from thy fear. Did God make the Prophet and People to
err? did he harden their hearts?

Answ. 1. The Prophet speaks in the name of the people, not of himself, he
did not err from the way of God, but reproved the people for it.

2. God did this in judgment to the people, who affected false Prophets, and
chose their own ways, Isa. 66.3. and delighted in their abominations,
therefore God denied them his Spirit, and left them to their own spirits; he in
judgment gave them up to their own ways, and to hardness of heart; and this
was not sinful in the Lord. Psalm. 81.11, 12. My people would not hearken unto
my voice, and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up unto their own hearts
lust: and they walked in their own counsels.

I will stretch out my hand upon him.
God has no hand to stretch out, he is without all parts, the words are
metaphorical, taken from the practice of men, who stretch out their hands to
do this or that. Genesis 22.10. Abraham stretched forth his hand to slay his
son. Jeroboam put forth his hand to lay hold upon the Prophet had prophesied
against his Altar, 1 King. 13.4. So God would put forth his power to punish
such a Prophet.

Quest. If God deceived him, how can he in justice punish or destroy that
Prophet?

Ans. 1. The false Prophet did what ever he did freely, he was not forced by
any power or act of God, his seduction was principally from himself; and it
was his own fault that he was deceived, that he deceived others.

2. A man may serve Providence, and yet sin against the Law of God: the secret
Providence of God had ordered it that this people should be seduced by false
Prophets, yet God in his Word had forbid false Prophets and Prophesies, Deuteronomy.
13. And because men are to look at what is written, not what is secret and
hidden, therefore if they violate the Law, God may justly punish thereupon.
Act. 4.27, 28. Herod, Pilate, Judas, and the Jews, they did to Christ
whatsoever God had determined to be done, yet were they not without sin, nor
without punishment, because they transgressed the rule given them.

Obser: 1. The Lord in his infinite wisdom and justice does make a punishment
of sin, and punish one sin with another: Besides corporal judgments he has
spiritual; if the Prophet be deceived, I the Lord have deceived him, I have
laid this judgment upon him, that he should be deceived, led into errors, and
deceive others; this he has deserved at my hands, and this punishment in just
judgment I inflict upon him. The Scriptures hold out frequently this way of
Gods proceedings with sinners; his punishing of one sin with another; 2 Chronicles.
25.17, 18, 19, 20. Amaziah provokes Joash to war, he disswades him from it;
but Amaziah would not hear; For it came of God that he might deliver them into
the hands of their enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom. Jer.
4.10. Then said I, ah Lord God, thou have greatly deceived this people and
Jerusalem, saying, ye shall have peace, whereas the sword reaches unto the
soul. They were desirous of Prophets that might speak pleasing things unto
them; they regarded not Jeremie, and Ezekiel; and God in judgment lets them
have such Prophets which cried peace, peace, and gave them over to believe
their lies; and this made Jeremie say; Thou have greatly deceived, etc. Romans
1.25, 26. They changed the truth of God into a lie; worshipped and served the
creature more then the Creator: for this cause God gave them up unto vile
affections: and verse. 28. Over to a reprobate mind. 2 These. 2.10, 11. Because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; for this
cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie.

2. God will deal severely with false Prophets; I will stretch out my hand
upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. He would
make him Exemplary to all. Hannaniah was a false Prophet, and deceived many:
therefore said God; Behold, I will cut thee from off the face of the Earth, and
that quickly, this year thou shall dye. God would not stay long from cutting
him off. Jer. 28.15, 16. Shemaiah was another false Prophet, and God would
destroy him and his seed; he should not have a man to dwell among that people,
Jer. 29.

VER. 10.
And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the punishment of the
Prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeks unto him.


THere being false Prophets among this people, they gave ear to them, resorted
unto them, took counsel of them; and here God tells Ezekiel, that not only
the false Prophets should be punished for deceiving the people, but even they
that by seeking to those Prophets were deceived by them.

The Hebrew is thus; They shall bear their iniquity; as the iniquity of him
that seeks is, so shall be the iniquity of the Prophet. Where you have
punishment, the Original is iniquity. This phrase is much in holy Writ, to
bear iniquity, and is put for bearing of punishment, which iniquity does
cause. Levit. 5.1.17. Chap. 20.17.19. They uncover the nakedness of their kin,
shall bear their iniquity; that is, their punishment for it. This phrase is
applied to Christ; Isa. 53.11. He shall bear their iniquity; which the fifth
verse calls, wounding, bruising, chastisement, stripes. Paul has the like
phrase, Gal. 5.10. He that troubles you shall bear his judgment; he shall
have his punishment what ever he be.

The punishment of the Prophet, shall be even as the punishment of him that
seeks unto him.
It may seem hence, that there is an equality in their sin, and in the
punishment; but sins and punishment do differ in Scripture. Matthew. 5.22.
Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
This refers to the Judicatorie of 23.
judgment: and whosoever shall say, Racha, shall be in danger of the The
Sanedrim which consisted of 71.
Counsel: but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of Anathema,
which was the highest punishment.
Hell fire. Here are diverse degrees of sin, and diverse degrees of punishment.
Mat. 12.45. The last estate of that man is worse then the first: worse for sin,
worse for punishment. Joh. 19.11. He that delivered me unto thee has the
greater sin: His sin that betrayed Christ, was greater then Pilates, and
answerable should be his punishment. Jer. 7.26. They did worse then their
fathers: so should have worse punishment then they God appointed punishment to
be inflicted according to the nature of the sin. Deuteronomy. 25.2. If the wicked man
be worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be
beaten before his face according to his fault. Rev. 18.7. How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give
her. By these Scriptures you see that all sins are not equal, neither all
punishment, and that God does proportion punishments to the nature of sins. We
are not here to conclude an equality of punishments upon the false Prophet,
and those that came unto him; for certainly his sin in deceiving the people,
pretending visions and divinations from heaven, that he was sent of God, etc.
was greater then the peoples: even as, notes the quality and realitie of the
punishment, not the degree.

Obs. 1. The fruit or reward of sin is burdensome, They shall bear their
iniquity; that is, the fruit and effect of it; it lights and lies heavy upon
the authors of it: guilt is a heavy burden for a soul to bear; it made a
Prophet cry out, Psalm. 51.14. Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God, thou
God of my salvation: Guilt lay like a mountain of lead upon him: so any
punishment for sin is weighty; if God send a plague, a famine, or sword, are
they not heavy? when God brought tidings to David that one of those judgments
must be upon him for numbering the people, he was in a great straight, 2 Samuel
24.14. And Psalm. 38.2, 3, 4, 5. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand
presses me soar; there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger,
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin: for mine iniquities
are gone over my head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me: my
wounds stinck, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness. He had sinned, and
found the burden of sin wonderful grievous. The Church says, Lam. 3.7. He
has made my chain heavy; sin had brought an iron heavy chain upon her. Sin
brings shame, and that is a burden. Ezekiel. 16.54. That thou may bear thine
own shame. It brings sorrows, fears, pains, loss, death, damnation, and all
these are grievous. Ezekiel. 18.20. its said, The wickedness of the wicked shall
be upon him; it shall be a burden upon him.

2. To seek unto false Prophets, is a thing punishable before God; The
punishment of the Prophet shall be as the punishment of him that seeks unto
him. Men think its nothing to consult with a wicked Prophet, but God will not
so pass it over, he counts it a great sin, and will lay upon him a
proportionable burden; if Prophets be not sent of God, if they give out
erroneous and false things, if they be wicked in their lives, its a dangerous
thing to have recourse to them, God is against those Prophets, and those depend
upon them. Jer. 23.32. I am against such Prophets, says God there, and they
shall not profit this people at all; they thought by consulting with them, that
they should gain much, and its true, they gained the displeasure of God, they
brought exemplary judgments upon themselves. God had commanded them not to
hearken to such Prophets, verse. 16. as spoke a vision out of their own heart,
and not out of the mouth of the Lord; yea, he had commanded such Prophets to be
put to death, Deuteronomy. 13.5. for them, therefore to consult with these Prophets,
to follow their counsels, and do what they appointed; leaving the true
Prophets, discountenancing and discouraging them, was a high provocation of
God, and punished answerably. Ahab sought unto the false Prophets, but God
remembered it, and visited it upon his head. If God will punish those seek to
false Prophets, surely he will not spare those seek unto Witches, Sorcerers,
Astrologers, and Star-gazers, nor those seek unto another god. Psalm. 16.4.
Their sorrows shall be multiplied.

VER. II.
That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me, neither be polluted
any more with all their transgressions: but that they may be my people, and I
may be their God, says the Lord God.


THis Verse shows the end why the Lord would punish the false Prophets, and
those consulted with him, viz. to prevent the peoples sinning against him by
idolatry and other unlawful practices. When they should see God cutting off
their Prophets, and those had hearkened to them, this would breed fear in
them, and put a stand to their sinful ways, cause them to return, and
continue in the ways of God.

House of Israel.
By these we are to understand the godly, those were elected, the spiritual
Israelites, not all after the flesh; for the false Prophets, and those clave to
them were so of the house of Israel: When God visited with great judgments, he
ever reserved some, that so his Covenant which he had made with Abraham might
not fail; and they were the spiritual Israelites, not the carnal, who went
no more astray.

May go no more astray.
(...) non errent from (...) to err, to wander; Septuag: (...); its a metaphor
borrowed from cattle which wander out of the right way, as Matthew. 18.12. If a
man have an hundred Sheep, and one of them be gone astray. Exodus 23.4. If thou
meet thine Enemies Ox or Ass going astray. And is applied unto man; 2 Pet.
2.15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way
of Balaam. Here they had left the way of God, and followed lying Prophets.

No more.
Quest. Do the godly being once redeemed go astray no more? David went astray
often, and the Apostle says, In many things we sin all, James 3.2.

Answ. Gods end in punishing the wicked, is to keep his from straying at all,
as a Parent when he corrects the child for lying, would have it lie no more,
though through that corruption is in it, it lie often.

2. That they go no more astray from him in that way, and manner they did
before, no more to false Gods, and false worshipp; they go not astray,
pernitioso errore.

From me,
The Hebr. is (...) a post me from after me: a sequendo me Jun. Pol. ab eundo
post me Pisc. Gods People are to follow him: but by harkening to false
Prophets, and the inticement of their own hearts; they are turned aside from
following God.

Neither be polluted any more.
(...) Sept. (...), ut non contaminentur, French Ne soit plus soviller, that
they may no more be soyled; the original word (...) is to pollute, defile, be
unclean; Avenarius Mercer.
and some of the learned think the word tamino and contamino are from this
word, and it is contrary to (...) which is to be clean, innocent; and purus a
sordibus.

With all their transgressions.
Or prevarications, the word (...) notes not any transgression, but such an
one, as has much of the will in it, joined with Pride and malice, and therefore
is rendered defectio, rebellio, Pal. 5.10. Cast them out in the multitude of
their transgressions, for they have rebelled against thee. They were
trangessions which had sedition and rebellion in them. Job. 34.37. He adds
Rebellion unto his sin. (...) the vulgar has it blasphemiam.

But that they may be my People, and I etc. Heb. is, and they shall be to me
for a People, and I will be to them for a God.

They were Gods people before, in Covenant, circumcised, had the Temple,
sacrifices, etc. God speaks thus, to show they had made a defection from him,
forfeited all, deserved to be rejected, and had by their sins bred a great
strangeness between him and themselves; for they had corrupted his worship,
violated his Laws, rejected his Prophets, polluted his Name and Temple,
forsaken him, and followed after strange Gods, and so done what was in them, to
be none of Gods People: but if they would awaken out of their spiritual
slumber, consider, repent, and turn to him, he would manifest his
faithfulness, and loving kindness unto them, They should be his People, etc,
The like words you had in the 11. chapter 20. They shall be my People, and I will
be their God.

Obser. 1. From the coherence with the two former Verses.

That God makes use of ill means to accomplish good ends; he lets errors, and
strange opinions, seducing Doctrines prevail with false Prophets and People,
that so they suffering proportionably for their evil, his People may be kept
from such ways and ends: he in judgment sent strong delusions to the Prophets
and People, which they venting and embracing, he punished them, that so the
house of Israel might not go any more astray from him.

There is no Creature so poisonous, but God makes use of it to some good end;
and there is no Prophet or Teacher so corrupt, no opinions so damnable or
blasphemous, but the Lord by his infinite power, orders and works it to some
good end. 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be Heresies among you, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest among you. God makes use of Heresies, Sects and
Scismes, to discover who are sound, who not: when it is a time of war, men of
valor and Counsel are made known. Deuteronomy. 13.3. When a false Prophet rose up
amongst them, the Lord tells them it was to prove them, whither they did love
the Lord, his Truths, would hold them fast and follow him; or whither they
would be led aside with erroneous doctrines, and follow seducing Teachers.

2. By judgments upon the wicked, God intends the good of his; he will destroy
the seducing Prophet, and seduced People, that the House of Israel may go no
more astray from him, that those were godly People might awake out of their
secure slumber, consider what they had done, repent of it, and never do the
like; when the Prophets of Baal were slain, then the People were freed from
their haltings between God and Baal, and clave to the Lord. Psalm. 9.16. The
Lord is known by the judgment he executes, when he lays his hand upon
sinners, Saints tremble, consider his power, Majesty, greatness, the nature of
his judgments, and so judge themselves, and remove out of the way, what ever
may provoke. Psalm. 119.119, 120. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth
like dross, therefore I love thy Testimonies, my flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. When God by his fiery judgments,
separated the dross from the gold, the wicked from the ungodly, David
trembled, considered the law of God more thoughly, and loved his testimonies,
so Isai. 26.9. When thy judgments are in the earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn righteousness, Isaiah knew that it was the mind of God, in
his judgment to advantage his by them, and therefore says, the Inhabitants of
the Earth; that is, the godly Inhabitants Will learn righteousness, they will
see the evil of sin hate it.

3. Gods own People are apt to go astray; that the house of Israel may go no
more astray; they had gone astray and were in danger to do it again. They are
like Sheep, and no creature apter to wander out of the right way, then that
Psalm. 119.176. David confesses he had gone astray like a lost Sheep, a Sheep
that has lost the Fold, and lost the way. Adam who was the Ram in the head
of the flock, he went astray in eating the forbidden fruit, and the whole flock
of mankind, have ever since followed him. Psalm. 58.3. The wicked go astray as
soon as they be borne, even from the belly, as the Hebrew is, and Isay
speaking in the name of the better sort, says, chap. 53.6. All we like Sheep
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way. One has a way of
pride; another of wantonness; a third has away of coveteousnesse, etc. Ye
were as Sheep going astray, but now are returned etc. A Sheep is,

1. A foolish Creature.

2. Subject to many diseases.

3. Obvious to much danger.

4. Aptest to leave the good paths, and good Pastures. The foolish Galathians
were ready to embrace another Gospel, and to admit cirumcision. Peter and
Barnabas stepped awry, when they dissembled with the Jews. David, its said,
Turned aside in the matter of Vriah the Hittite 1 Kings 15.5. And the People
quickly turned aside out of the way of God. Deuteronomy. 9.12.

4. When Gods People are once gone astray, they would never return of
themselves, if God should let them alone in their wrong ways; he must reduce
them by his own hand, and keep them in the right way, by his own power; a
Sheep wanders further and further, and thinks not of returning; David when he
had left the way of God, turned aside to Bathshebah, he goes further, he makes
Vriah drunk, plots his death, rejoices at it, takes the Widow to be his Wife,
and never considers all this time, that he is out of the way of God, and had
not Nathan been sent to him, to tell him how he had wandered, he had not
returned; so Peter denies his Master once, twice, thrice; and had not Christ
looked upon him, he might have denied him for ever. This appears in the
Parable of the lost Sheep, the Shepherd stays not for Sheeps returning,
Matthew. 18.12.
but goes into the mountains, and seeks that is gone astray.

5. God would have his People to keep close to him, to follow him, to walk
with him, that they may no more go astray from after me. To go after God, is
to worship him in his own way, to have him in our eye, to do things in order
to him, to follow his directions, commands, to observe his operations in the
world, to lean upon him for counsel, comfort, assistance, safety and
blessings, to submit to his will, to receive what he reveals, following on to
know God, and to get further communion with him. God would have his People to
do thus, Hosea 11.10. They shall walk after the Lord. He would go before
them, and they should follow him. They should not go after other gods, after
their own eyes, hearts, inventions, but after him. God commends David for his
following him, 1 Kings 14.8. he sets him there before Jeroboam, and condemns
him by his example. Thou have not been as my Servant David; who kept my
commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do that only which
was right in mine eyes. He went not from after God but followed him closly, and
its very pleasing to God when his People do so. Elijah knew it well, and
therefore said to the People. 1 Kings 18.21. If the Lord be God, follow him,
do not leave him to go after any other.

God shows mercy not only to little sinners, but great ones, they were
polluted with all their trangressions, with all their rebellious seditions: yet
being the House of Israel, his select ones, he would pardon their sins, though
of an high nature; God is rich and great in mercy, and no sins can exceed his
mercy, he would pass by their pollutions and transgressions, account them his
People, and be their God, their sins should not obstruct his grace. Isai. 1.18.
Though their sins be as red as Scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though
they be red like as Crimson, they shall be as wool. Scarlet and Crimson are of
a deep die; silk and woll do hold those colors firmly; you cannot wash nor
wear them out, neither nature nor art can reduce them to their pristin
condition; but let souls be dyed, and stained with sins most deeply, with the
deepest and vilest sins, yet God can take out that hellish die and tincture, he
can make them wh^te as Snow, pure as wool undyed. The wool in those Countries
was exceeding white, Psalm. 147.16. He gives snow like wool, and Daniel 7.9.
it is called Pure wool, in regard of the whiteness, Revel. 1.14. the
whiteness of wool and snow are put together, His hairs were white like
wool, as white as snow. Now let a man's sin be wilful murder, which is very
great, and his soul be dipped in blood, yet God can, and does take away such
sins, and make white again. Psalm 51.7. Wash me says David, whose soul had a
double die, one of uncleanness, another of murder, and I shall be whiter than
snow. Manasses sins were exceeding great, yet the grace of God surmounted them
all, and they were swallowed up in a Sea of Mercy. Luke 7.37. it is said, A
Woman that was a sinner came to Christ. Was this such a matter to be recorded
in holy writ? Are not all men and women sinners? Yes, but the word sinner,
notes a notorious sinner, she was such a great and known sinner, that the
Pharisees wondered at Christ, that he should suffer her to touch him, verse
35.8. Her sins were many, ver. 47. Yet mercy was reached out to her, ver. 48.
Thy sins are forgiven thee.

7. Sin is a polluting thing; Neither be polluted any more. Matthew. 15.19, 20.
Christ reckons up sins there, and says, These are they which defile a man;
(...); they make common, which in Scripture sense, is to defile, to profane,
to make unclean; so Peter expounds it, Act. 10.14. I have never eaten any
thing common nor unclean, (...), and Eras. renders the word (...) Matthew.
15.11. impurum reddere, its sin, and sin only which makes impure creatures;
therefore in Scripture it is compared to blood, Ezekiel. 16.6. to mire and dirt.
Isa. 57.20. to vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. to filth, Isa. 4.4. yea more, it is put in
the abstract, and called filthiness, Prove. 30.12. 2 Cor. 7.1. (...) that
defiles both flesh and spirit 2 Pet. 2.20. (...), Physicians say, that miasmata
are seminaria luis pestilentialis in aere corrrupto, those spreadings or
seminaries of the pestilence in a corrupt air; you know in a pestilence the
air is infected, and that infection in the air spreads, and falling upon
Subjects capable if it, infects and kills them: so pollutions in the world, are
pestilentiall, they spread, infect, and kill many. Seeing sin is such a
polluting thing, let us hasten to the fountain set open for sin and
uncleanness, let us get our souls washed in the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.14.
that blood will purge, yea, purge out any spots, all defilements, 1 John 1.7.
Revel. 7.14. they had Washed their robes and made them white, in the blood of
the Lamb, blood makes red, but the blood of the Lamb makes white, takes away
all sin, and makes innocent.

VERSE. 12. etc.
12. The Word of the Lord came again to me, saying.

13. Son of man, when the Land sins against me, by trespassing grievously,
then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it.

14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should
deliver but their own souls by their righteousness says the Lord God.

15. If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the Land, and they spoil it,
so that it be desolate that no man may pass through, because of the Beasts.

16. Though these three men were in it, as I live, says the Lord God, they
shall deliver neither Sons nor Daughters, they only shall be delivered, but the
Land shall be desolate.

17. Or if I bring a Sword upon that Land, and say, Sword go through the Land,
so that I cut off Man and Beast from it.

18. Though these three men were in it, as I live says the Lord God, they
shall deliver neither Sons nor Daughters, but they only shall be delivered
themselves.

19. Or if I send a Pestilence upon that Land, and power out my fury upon it
in blood, and cut off from it man and beast.

20. Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live, says the Lord God,
they shall deliver neither Son nor Daughter: they shall but deliver their
own souls by their righteousness.

12. For thus says the Lord God, how much more when I send my soar judgments
upon Jerusalem, the Sword and the famine, and noisome beasts, and the
pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast.


THese words are the second part of the Chapter, wherein.

1. The Lord shows what he will do with a sinning People, he will send
judgment after judgment, and here are four laid down 1. Famine, in the 13.
verse. 2. Noisome beasts in the 15. 3. A Sword, in the 17. 4. The Pestilence in
the 19.


And all these are threatened against Jerusalem, ver. 21.

2. That he will not hearken unto the intercession of any, be they never so
righteous, powerful in prayer, in the behalf of such a People.

13. ver. By trespassing grievously.
(...) prevaricando prevaricationem. Maal signifies in general, any
disloyalty of inferiors toward superiors; yet especially it notes those sins
which are against the Lord, his Covenant, and holy things; as here, they had
forsaken God, broken the Covenant, set up Idols in the Temple, worshipped the
Sun, etc. These were grievous sins, and therefore Piscator renders the word,
prevaricando perfide; by sinning treacherously: the doubling of the word notes
the affection to, delight, and continuance in sin, they were obstinate.

Of breaking the staff of bread, and famine, has been spoken in the 4. and 5.
chapter; God breaks the staff of bread, when he either takes away the virtue
of it, that it does not nourish, but men pine away and come to nothing: or when
he takes away the bread it self, so that there is not sufficient to nourish.
This the Lord does, by sending unseasonable weather, by too much drought, too
much rain, by Frosts, Hail, Mildews, Blastings, Caterpillars, locusts, etc.
And these are the hand of God stretched out, to break the staff of bread.

15. ver. Noisome Beasts to pass through the land.
Some would understand by these Beasts, the Babilonians who spoiled the Land,
and laid all desolate; and if we should do so, it were not much amiss; for
we do not find that any wild beasts were sent as a judgment upon the Jews,
before their going into captivity; yet because he speaks here of distinct
judgments, and that which is to be exemplary for all, we shall take it
literally as the rest are. It was threatened in Moses Law, that evil beasts
should be sent amongst them. Levit. 26.22. I will send wild beasts amongst you,
which shall rob you of your Children, derstoy your Cattle; make you few in
number, and your high ways shall be desolate. And it was made good; The Lord
sent fiery Serpents amongst them, which stung and destroyed many of them. Numb.
21.6. Bears which slew their Children. 2 Kings 2.24. Lions which slew the men.
Chap. 17.25, 26. and Josh. 24.12. By the Hornet God drove out the two Kings of
the Amorites. And it is probable, that when the Chaldeans came, many who fled
into woods, mountains, and by-ways, were wounded and slain by wild Beasts.

17. If I bring a Sword upon that Land.
Sword is put for war. Jer. 4.10. The sword reaches unto the soul, Chap.
25.29. I will call for a sword upon all the Inhabitants of the earth, that is a
war; and so in this place, God would bring in an enemy, armed with the
Sword, and other military instruments, and they should make grievous work
amongst them. Of the misery of war, formerly has been spoken.

19. ver. If I send a Pestilence upon that Land.
Hebrew is, (...) from (...) to speak; because in this judgment the Lord
speaks aloud. Its a soar judgment, and because it is amongst us, I shall
speak something of it. Philibertus Marchinus calls it bellum divinum; this
judgment is more immediately from God, and has less of man and second causes
in it, than others; and therefore when the murraine and plague was upon the
Cattle, Exodus 9.3. There was no hand of Moses or Aaron in bringing it in, as
in other judgments, and Ps. 91.5. It is called an Arrow, not of man's, but Gods
shooting, God shoots it into Cities, and Families, by ways undiscernable unto
us.

That there are second causes of it, we do not wholly deny, but assert they
are fewer, and hard to be found out; it puzzles the learned Physicians to
express clearly what are the causes of it, some refer it to the
indisposition of the air, by dryness and heat; some to malignant, and occult
qualities in the air, or the body, or in the diet men feed upon; some to
corruption in the blood; some to hunger; some to surfeit: Lib. 4. chap. 10.
but as Senertus, Qualis sit pestilentialis veneni natura, and quae ejus in
qualibet pestilenti constitutione differentia, nemo hactenus satis explicavit.
So Fern. Quicquid asseratur, omnis pestilentiae caeca and delitescens est
causa, De abdit: re^um cause.
and aliunde quam ex primis qualitatibus, aut ex putredine perfecta

Gods hand is seen much in this noisome disease, some pestilences kill
cattle, and not men, some kill men, and not cattle, some kill one sort of
men, and not others, some kill women and not men, and some men and not women,
some kill young, and not old people, some the strong and healthful, and not
the weak and sickly, some the rich, not the poor, some the poor and not the
rich, as the learned have observed.

This judgment, the plague, and pestilence, spreads far; it flies up and
down by night and day, it devoures multitudes suddenly; in David's time 70000.
were consumed by it in three days. Eusebius. in Chronico.
2 Samuel 24.15. In Vespasians days, at Rome, there dyed 10000. a day, for many
days together, and in the year 1345. it was so general through the Christian
world, that it destroyed half mankind; and in this City, thousands have dyed
in one week, and how suddenly men dye of it, is known unto many of you; some
within few days, yea some within few hours.

The great cause of this judgment is sin. You may observe in Scripture some
sins, which brought in the plague or pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. David's heart wat
lifted up, and he confided in the number of his People, and hereupon was the
plague sent, when Persons in place have lofty spirits and pride themselves, in
what they have, they make way for this judgment; so oppression of Gods People,
Pharaoh would not let the Israelites have liberty, but hold them under;
therefore the Murraine and plague of boyles came upon the Cattle and People,
Exodus 9. When people sin grievously, then God is ready to send in the arrows
of Pestilence. Do not many sin greatly, by pride in their Apparel, by
excess in their feastings, and pomp in the funerals of their friends, by
their bitterness against those differ from them: when the plague was much in
France, especially at Lions, about 1629. the Propapists judged Calvinisme to be
cause: those Sectaries and Heretics were tolerated; therefore Marchinus a
Florentine, in his book De bello divino, tells his Italian friends, that the
Lords end in that plague, was to root out Calvianisme.

An power out my fury upon it in blood.
To put this for blood corrupted in the body by the plague, sounds harsh, we
may take it for death, Ezekiel. 3.18. He shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thy hand, that is, his death.

14. ver. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they etc.
To speak something of each of these, Noah Genesis 6.9. Was a just man, and
perfect in his generation, there was none like unto him in the world, in his
days; and he walked with God, he had great familiarity with him; his justice,
sincerity, and piety, were eminent. His name signifies Rest or comfort, Genesis
5.29. Lamech called his name Noah, saying, this same shall comfort us
concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the
Lord has cursed. Surely he was a great comfort both to God and man, being so
holy as he was. Its conceived Lamech was a Prophet, or at least uttered these
words by a Prophetical streine, intimating thereby, that Noah should be a Type
of Christ, and so he was in building the Arc, and offering sacrifice, which
was a sweet savor in the nostrils of God, and made him say, he would curse the
eatrh no more for man's sake. Genesis 8.21.22. He was also a Preacher of
righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. And the man with whom God made a special Covenant,
and gave the Rainebow for a sign thereof, Genesis 9 9.13. yet if this man should
pray for them, God would not hear.

Daniel.
He was a holy man, and would not defile himself with the Portion of the Kings
meat and drink, Dan. 1.8. And he was a man of great wisdom, Ezekiel. 28.3.
Wiser than Daniel, men that had great insight into things, who knew secrets and
mysteries were paraleld with Daniel, or preferred before him, but Daniel was
the Standard. Daniel was alive at this time, and young, as will appear, if you
consider this time: Ezekiel spak these words, in the sixth year of Jehoiachins
captivity, if you compare the 1. Chap. 2. verse. with the 20. Chap. 1. ver.
where he speaks of the fifth, and seventh year; so that this was the time
between, and Dan. 1.1.6. Its evident that Daniel was carried into captivity,
the third year of the reign of Jehoaikim father to Jehoiachin: so that now
Daniel had been 14. years in Babylon, eight years of Jehoiakims reign, for
he reigned 11. years, 2 Chronicles. 36.5. and six of Jehoiachins captivity: So that
the learned think Daniel was not above 13. years of age, when he came into
Babylon; therefore is it that the King spoke to Aspenaz to bring of the
Children of Israel, and of the Kings seed, and of the Princes, whereof Daniel
was one; and now at this time, when Ezekiel rankt him with Noah and Job, about
27. Surely Daniel was a choice man, of singular wisdom, and holiness, whom
the spirit of God would thus join with Noah and Job, such great worthies in
their days. He was a man much given to prayer Dan. 6.10. Three times a day, he
prayed in his Chamber, with his face toward Jerusalem; and that when it lay
upon the hazard of his life. His prayer and fasting are mentioned, Chap. 9.3.
and 10.2, 3.

Job,
The Lord gives him this testimony, that he was Perfect and upright, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil; he was much in offering sacrifice, for himself
and Family, Job 1.1.5. he was a man of much faith, great patience, Job
13.15.14.14. James 5.11. he was acceptable with God, and prevaild for his
friends in prayer. chapter 42.8, 9. if these 3. men were in a Land that has
grievously sinned, they should not deliver it.

Some make great inquiry why these three men should be mentioned, rather then
others, and they give in their answer;

1. Its thought they are named, for that they could not divert Gods wrath by
their holiness and prayers, from the people of their times. Noah could not
keep off the flood, nor Job the sad things befell himself and his, nor Daniel
the captivity.

2. Others think they are named, because they freed others in eminent danger
in their times; Noah saved his Family from the flood, Job prayed for his
Friends, and they were spared. Daniel preserved the Magicians and wise men. But
rather they are named, because they were men of great holiness, exercised with
great trials, and so the more fervent in prayer: and what if these men, who
were so acceptable to me, had so much interest in me, and often prevailed with
me should pray for you, yet they should do nothing for your deliverance by
their prayers.

These were men in great afflictions, Noah in the flood; Job on the Dunghill;
Daniel in the Den.
and affliction is the whetstone of prayer, the bellows to blow up that fire.
David when he fled from Absalom, then he cried unto the Lord, and he heard him,
Psalm. 3.4. Jonas when he was in the Whales belly prayed fervently, Jon. 2.2. I
cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me. Surely Noah
when the flood came, powered out a flood of tears in prayer; and Job, when Gods
hand was so hard upon him, cried aloud unto God: and Daniel among the Lions;
yet such was the case here, that if these three men were amongst them, they
should do them no good.

16.18.20. They shall deliver neither Sons nor Daughters.
Children are very dear to Parents, they come out of their loins are part of
them, even the bowels; and holy Parents would strive hard in prayer with God
for them, are so dear unto them, they would invent arguments (for love is
inventive) to move the Lord to spare them: yet if they should bring the
strongest arguments, that nature, reason, or grace could find out, says God,
They should deliver neither Sonns nor Daughters, from any one of the judgments.

14.20. ver. They shall deliver but their own souls by their righteousness.
You must not think hence, that their holiness or righteousness merited
deliverance of themselves: Man's goodness is nothing to God; all he can do is
debt, and the best he does is imperfect, no motive of Gods will; deliverance,
salvation are acts of grace and favor Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved, and
that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any should
boast. God has out of his free grace promised to do great things for his
Elect, for the godly: and when he does ought for them, it is not because they
deserve it, or because they are godly, but because he has promised. Many
promises are made to godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8. Bodily exercise profits little,
but godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, I will deliver thee, not without calling, yet not for calling but for
his promise sake.

Quest. If these three men Noah, Daniel, and Job, who were so eminent in
holiness, so fervent in prayer, should not by their prayers and piety deliver
any, to what end should we desire the prayers of any in our days, when they
are neither so holy nor effectual in prayer as these men were, is it not
altogether in vain to crave the prayers of others, whatever our condition be?

Ans. 1. If God revealed our estate to be desperate, and that he would not
hear any praying for us here, then it were in vain for us to request any to
solicit the Lord on our behalf, 1. John 5.16. If a man have sinned a sin
unto death, any prayer made for him by whomsoever, is to no purpose; I say not
that you should pray for it, for the pardon of it, who ever should entreat you
to do it.

2. We have divine warrant for the pactise of it. 1 Samuel 12.19, All the People
said unto Samuel, pray for thy Servants unto the Lord thy God, that we dye
not, and 1. Thessal. 5.25. Brethren (says Paul) pray for us. Ephesians. 6.18, 19.
he intreates them to pray for all the Saints, and for him. James 5.14. Is any
sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
over him: and then ver. 15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the
Lord shall raise him up. Est. 4.16. She would have all the Jews gathered
together, that were in Shushan, to fast and pray for her.

Quest. 2. Had these three men met together, and agreed to pray for this
People, would God have denied them? Does not Christ say, Matthew. 18, 19. If two
of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven.

Answ. If two, three, or more agree to ask any thing, it must be in faith,
Matthew. 21.22. according to Gods will, 1 John 5.14. which could not here have
been, for God had declared his mind otherwise, and so they could neither in
faith, nor according to his Will, have prayed; they would never have agreed
together, to ask a thing contrary to his mind.

Obser. 1. That Lands may sin grievously against God, provoke him greatly: so
did the Jews, Ezekiel. 7.23. their Land was full of bloody crimes, their City full
of blackness, they had variety of abominations, chapter 8.4. Hos. 12.14. Ephraim
provoked him to anger most bitterly, Isai. 63.10. they rebelled and vexed his
holy spirit, hereupon you find Lament. 1.8. Jerusalem has grievously sinned,
and Amos 5.12. I know the mighty sins, they did mightily provok, press, and
weary God. See one place, in Jer. 2.10, 11. Pass over the Isles of Chittim,
and see, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such
a thing. Has a Nation changed their gods, which are yet no Gods? but my People
have changed their glory for that which does not profit. Be astonished O ye
Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate says the
Lord.

2. God has variety of judgments to punish a sinning People, he can stretch
out his hand, bring in a famine, the noisome beasts, the sword, and pestilence;
when men have grievous sins, God has sore judgments for them; read the 28.
of Deuteronomy. and 26. of Levit. Let Lands be never so full of People and Cattle,
let their Towns and Cities be never so well fortified, God can quickly cut off
man and beast, and lay all desolate. Cardanus in his eight book De varietate
chapter 45. reckons up 7. judgments of a grievous nature, that do befall the
sons of men, three more besides those here in our Prophet.

1. Earthquakes, which sometimes are very grievous, and shake down whole
Towns.

2. Inundations, when waters break out and drown up whole Countries.

3. Winds, which do great mischief, both at Sea and Land: and those we have
here mentioned, how grievous are they. In famines, parties have eat their own
flesh, and Mothers their own Children. Wild beasts fill all full of fears,
that none dare look out of doors, or travel the highwayes, The sword has
made sore work in Germany, Ireland, and England of late days. The Plague is
amongst us, and what it will do ere it leave us, is unknown; we that have
escaped the sword, it may be are numbered out for the plague. O let us repent of
our former and present sins, pride in apparel, excess in diet, pomp in
funerals, bitter divisions, unchristian carriages one toward another,
unthankfulness for mercies, our unworthy walking of the Gospel, and take heed
of all sin for the future.

3. Whatever the judgment be upon a sinning Land, and people, God is the
author of it, acts in, and orders it. I will stretch out my hand, and break
the staff of bread. ver. 13. If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the
Land. ver. 15. If I bring a sword upon that Land. ver. 17. If I send a
pestilence. ver. 19. These judgments come not casually, they are by divine
power and providence; if man or beast fall by them, its God cuts them off, if
the wild beasts come here and there, its God causes them to go those ways; he
gives Commission to the sword, and says, go through the Land, it could not
enter without God, much less go through a Kingdom, without warrant from him;
if the plague wander up and down in a Land, skip from street to street, from
Family to Family; if it slay thousands, and ten thousands, the Lord bids it,
orders it to do so: Therefore we should look at Gods hand in all judgments,
quietly submit to his stroke, and humble our selves under his mighty hand. I
will stretch out my hand and break, etc. Shall Gods hand be stretched out, and
we not take notice of it, its argument of a profane spirit not to do it;
Isai. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall
see and feel to their destruction.

4. The sins of a Land or People may be so great and grievous, that the Lord
will show them no mercy, but proceed irrevocably to their destruction, what
means soever be used for their help; you have sinned so against me, says the
Lord, that though Noah, Daniel, and Job were here, men of renown for their
piety and prayers, though they should singlie or jointly power out their hearts
before me, use all their interest in me for you, yet should they do no good;
they should not change my thoughts, my heart, in the least degree, they should
not obtain at my hands, to abate ought of my fury; all the judgments
intended should come, not one of them should be withheld; Jer. 15.1, 2. Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, As I live says the Lord, etc. verse 18.
yet my mind could not be toward this People. Moses was the man of God, Psalm.
90. title; the man of Gods choice, love, honoring, the man of his counsel,
that did his work, that ruled his people; the man that was so potent in
prayer, that he held Gods hands, and kept him from destroying the Progenitors
of this people here spoken of, and brought God to repent of the evil he
thought to do unto them; Exodus 32.14. and Samuel was a man, had the ear and
heart of God very much, when he cried for Israel God heard him, 1 Samuel 7.9.
yet if these two men stood before him, and mediating for these people, should
produce their strong arguments as of old, Gods mind could not be toward them,
but he would say as it there follows; Cast them out of my sight and let them
go forth, such as are for death to death such as are for the sword to the Sword
such as are for the famine, to the famine, such as are for the captivity to the
captivity; and I will appoint over them four kinds says the Lord, the sword
to slay, the Dog to tear, and the fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the
earth to devour. Their sin was so high, that the prayers of the holy, yea the
holiest men would do them no good. Jeremie was a praying and a weeping man,
much affected with the condition of this People, Jer. 9.1, 2.14.7, 8, 9. and
was much in prayer for them, but God was so far from hearing him for them,
that he forbad him to pray for them, chap. 7.16. Pray not thou for this People,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I
will not hear thee. So in chap. 14.11. Pray not for this People for their
good; as if the Lord had said, Jeremie, I know thou will be praying, weary and
wear out thy self, but pray not for their good, if thou will pray for their
destruction, that I would hasten in my judgments upon them I will hear thee
so praying, otherwise not.



When they fast, I will not hear their cry, and when they offer burnt offerings
as an oblation, I will not accept them, but I will consume them by the Sword
famine and pestilence. In James 5.16. you find the effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man avails much; (...).
if of one righteous man, surely the working prayers of many righteous men
should do more, you have six mentioned in Ezekiel and Jeremiah; Noah, Daniel,
Job, Moses, Samuel, and Jeremiah himself, yet if all these should make the
most fervent prayers that ever were made, God would not hear, but proceed in
his intended judgments against this People. Their sins had such malignity in
them, as that they out-cryed the prayers of all the righteous, yea the very
mercies of God.

5. Righteousness is advantage to men in times of common calamity, Noah, Daniel,
Job, were righteous persons, and if they had been in the Land or City, when
these soar judgments were come upon it, they should have been delivered,
verse. 14, 16, 18.20. though their righteousness could not profit others, yet it
should profit themselves; Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath,
but righteousness delivers from death: and verse. 6. The righteousness of
the upright shall deliver them. When men are holy, praying, upright men, God
has a special care of them in times of danger, Noah when the flood came, he
had an Arc to be secure in, when Sodom was destroyed, Lot was pulled out by an
Angel.

VER. 22, 23.
22. Yet behold, therein shall be left a remnant, that shall be brought forth,
both Sons and Daughters, behold they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall
see their way and their doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil
that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought
upon it.

23. And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings, and
ye shall know that I have not done without cause, all that I have done in it
says the Lord.


THese two verses are the third part of the chapter, and contain a respiting
of some from the judgments there mentioned; you have here,

1. A gracious promise of preserving a remnant; Therein shall be left a remnant.

2. A Declaration what should be done with that Remnant, They shall be
brought forth, and come to Babylon.

3. The Events following hereupon, and they are these.

1. They should see their ways and doings, what the judgments upon Jerusalem,
and their deliverance from them, wrought in them.

2. Be comforted,

1. Touching Gods dealings with Jerusalem, And ye shall be comforted
concerning the evil, etc.

2. Enlargement of their comfort from the sight of their Brethrens ways and
practices, and they shall comfort you when you see, etc.

3. Acknowledgement of the equity of Gods dealing so with Jerusalem.

There were sundry things which sadded the hearts of the Captives in Babylon
much.

1. That God should so forget his Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and his oath to David, Psalm. 89.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. as to root
out their seed from the Land of the living.

2. That they had hearkened to the voice of Jeremy and yielded themselves up
into the hands of Nebuchadnezar, who had brought them thither; whereas their
Brethren still inhabited Jerusalem, had the benefit of the Temple, and
possessed their lands and habitations in Judea, themselves being destitute of
all.

3. That the Temple, City, and pleasant Land, should be laid wast, by such
soar judgments brought upon them at once, as famine, wild beast, sword, and
pestilence.

Against these sad apprehensions the Lord here lays in comfort. And

For the first, he tells them there shall be left a remnant, that God will be
mindful of his Covenant and oath, that he will preserve a seed from the loins
of their fathers, have a Church and number to worship him.

For the second, he certifies them that those escaped should be brough forth
unto them in Babylon, and so, they should not have cause any more to complain,
that they had listened to Jeremie, and were brought into Babylon, for by this
means, they had escaped the soar judgments their brethren met withal, and
by this time were well accommodated in Babylon, and fitted in some measure, to
entertain their desolate brethren, and should see the judgments threatened by
Jeremie, accomplished fully, and what mercy it was they were brought hither
beforehand.

For the third, that all should be laid wast, he assures them, that he has had
just cause for it, that he has not in his fury done ought unadvisedly to be
repented of, but considered the cause thoroughly, viz. the grievousnesse of
their sins, which deserved to the full, all that he had done, and more;
Therefore says, ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I
have done in it. What ever I have done against the Temple, City Land, and
People, I had such cause for it, as will stop your mouths for ever; what if my
judgments have been soar upon them? yet there is this good come by them they
acknowledge me just and righteous, are ashamed of, and mourn for their ways,
and will tell you, when they come, amongst you, that in the midst of wrath they
have met with mercy; For they shall comfort you, when you see their ways and
doings.

Their ways.
Some understand hereby, their former course of life at Jerusalem, which they
should still walk in, which when the others should see, they should be
comforted in the heavy hand of God upon them. Others understand by their
ways, that sad course of life they should lead in Babylon: the primitive
captives thought them happy who were at Jerusalem, and themselves the most
miserable; but now when they should see them in captivity with themselves, and
suffering as hard, if not harder things then themselves, (...)
the Babylonish yoke would seem easier. Consorts in misery are comforts to
each other.

Junius interprets their ways and doings of the confession of their sins,
and repentance; Solamen miseria socios habuisse doloris.
the soar and heavy judgments of God, convinced them of the greatness of
their sins, caused them being now stripped of all, and in the hands of a potent
and barbarous enemy, to confess their iniquity and repent of their former
ways and doings, and that induces me, to close with this Exposition in those
words; They shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and doings. Thus though
we have met with grievous judgments, have lost City, Temple, Country, all;
are become captives like yourselves, yet God is just in all he has done, he
has made good the word of his servant Jeremiah and Ezekiel, brought us to you,
but withal, he has broken our hearts for our sins, made us to abhor and
loath our former ways and doings, so that we must say in wrath, he has
remembered mercy, and recompensed all our temporal losses, with spiritual
advantages, and this was a comfort to the hearts of the former Captives, when
they saw their ways changed. Doubtless the first captives were a great
comfort unto them, when they came into Babylon naked, and spoyld of all, and
when they had told them of the severe judgments befell them, how that some did
eat their own children, etc. certainly they were astonished at it, but when
they told them what good they had gotten, by the dealings of God with them,
they were comforted again.

Obser. 1. When Gods judgments are soarest, yet then he shows mercy to some,
when God brought his four soar judgments upon Jerusalem; viz. the sword,
famine, noisome Beast, and pestilence; yet a remnant is preserved, each
judgment devoured its number, hundreds, thousands, and ten thousands; but all
those judgments destroyed not all the People; God had some elect ones amongst
them, and the election obtaines mercy, and together with them, some others. The
Lord never powered out his wrath so fully, as that no drams of mercy were
mingled with it. In the flood of wrath which drowned the world, were drops of
mercy which saved Noah. In the Brimstone and fire, which burnt up Sodom and
Gomorah, were sparks of divine love, to deliver Lot; he ever has in wrath
remembered mercy, and will do it to the end, the world shall not have advantage
to charge him with cruelty, had none been spared, they might have said so; a
remnant is left, and the mouth of iniquity is stopped.

2. The Lord will satisfy and comfort the hearts of his against the evil and
scandal that comes by any of his judgments; when Jerusalem was destroyed, the
Jews rooted out and carried to Babylon what joy was there in the Nations? what
reproachings of the Jews? where now is their God? what now is become of their
holy City and Temple, are not all laid wast, etc? at these things the Jews
hearts in Babylon, were grieved, offended, therefore the Lord tells them, They
shall be comforted concerning all the evil he has brought upon Jerusalem,
they shall know the greatness of their sins, which moved him to do so, they
shall know the fruit of his judgments, how they have caused those brought unto
them, to confess their sins, to repent of their ways, and turn to the Lord.

3. That the Lord is righteous and just in his judgments, (...)
I have not done without cause, all that I have done in Jerusalem, he cut not
off man or beast without cause, its the Devils design to do so, therefore
says God, Job 2.3. Thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause,
but God would not do it; what ever he does, he has great cause for; he is the
only and infinitely wise God, and does all things upon the height of reason.
Their sins were such as impeach't his honor, corrupted his worship, brake the
Covenant, questioned his providence, violated justice, and conformed them to
the heathen, he had cause enough therefore to destroy them, and do what he
did, namely, to vinicate his honor, worship, covenant, providence, justice,
and to show that his People, if they will sin with the world, must suffer
grievous things for it, Jer. 22.8, 9. when the Nations should pass by the City
and say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this great City; God will have
the cause known, then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the
Covenant of the Lord their God, and worshipped other gods and served them: and
chap. 19.13. God says he would make Jerusalem as Tophet (that is, fill it with
blood, and the bodies of slain men) and why would he do so; Because of all
the Houses upon whose roofes they have burnt incense unto all the Host of
heaven, and have powered out drink offerings unto other gods.

4. Men shall know in due time the equity of Gods judgments, And ye shall know
that I have not done ought without cause. Gods judgments are a great depth,
Psalm. 36.6. men cannot sound or measure them, the nature of them, the suddennes
and severitie of them; the frequencie and continuance of them, do puzzle men,
and especially the causes of them, which are hidden from the eyes of most. Jobs
friends mistook the cause of Gods dealing so sharply with Job, but afterward
they understood it; they in Babylon, and others, were astonished at the soar
judgments of God, but God let them know the cause of it, and so they were
brought to justify God, 1 Kings 9.7, 8, 9. I will cut off Israel, out of the
Land which I have given them, and this House which I have hollowed, for my
name, will I cast out of my sight, and Israel shall be a Proverb, and a
byword, among all people, and at this House which is high, every one that
passes by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss, and they shall say, why
has the Lord done thus unto this Land, and to this House: and they shall
answer, because they for sooke the Lord their God, took hold upon other Gods,
worshipped and served them, therefore has the Lord brought upon them all this
evil. God proclaims the cause of his severe judgments, that so men may see
the equity of them, that he is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works; Psalm. 145.17. when we hear of the bloody doings have been in Germany so
long, and of those in Ireland, we are amazed, wonder what is the cause, that
God proceeds so severely with them; there is cause sufficient for it, and if we
know it not, God will in his time clear himself, and make it known to us.

CHAP. 15.
1. And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying.

2. Son of man what is the Vine tree more than any tree or than a a branch
which is among the Trees of the Forest?

3. Shall wood be taken thereof, to do any work? or will men take a pin of
it to hang any Vessel thereon?

4. Behold it is cast into the fire for fuel, the fire devoureth both the
ends of it, and the midst of it is burnt, is it meet for any w^rke

5. Behold when it was whole it was meet for no work: how much less shall it
be meet yet for any work, when the fire has devoured it and it is burned.

6. Therefore thus says the Lord; God as the Vine-Tree, among the Trees of the
Forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

7. And I will set my face against them, they shall go out from one fire, and
another fire shall devour them, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I
set my face against them.

8. And I will make the Land desolate because they have committed a trespass
says the Lord.


IN this short chapter, under the similitude of an useless and fruitless
Vine-Tree, is set forth the condition of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that is
fit for nothing but the fire, and so are they fit only for judgment.

1. The Similitude is propounded in the 2. verse, and illustrated in the 3, 4,
and 5. verses.

2. The Apodosis and Application of it, to the men of Jerusalem, is in the 6,
7, 8. verses.

3. The authority of this Prophecy in the first verse, And the word of the
Lord came unto me saying. The Prophet did not form this parable or take it up
from others, or by observation, but he had it from the Lord.

God often in Scripture calls Israel a Vine, and his Vinyard, Psalm. 80.8.14, 15.
Isai. 3.14, 27.2. Jer. 12.10. Ezekiel. 17.6. And they were a noble Vine. Jer.
2.21. A choice Vine, Isai. 5.2. A goodly Vine. Ezekiel. 17.8. but because it was
now become a degenerate plant of a strange Vine. Jer. 2.21. An empty Vine.
Hos. 10.1. or Brought forth wild grapes, therefore the Lord likens the Jews
here to the wood of a fruitless Vine.

We shall a little show you wherein the Jews, who were the Church of God,
resembled the Vine.

1. Vines are few in respect of other Trees, so were the Jews in respect of
other people, Deuteronomy. 7.7. They were the fewest of all people.

2. Vines are planted by hill sides, by houses, in gardens, orchards, etc. and
the Jews were planted in the choicest Land; Hos. 9.13. In a pleasant place; In
a very fruitful hill Isai. 5.1. The Vine was brought out of Egypt, it was a
chosen Vine, and was planted. Psalm. 80.8. but where? in a good Land. Deuteronomy. 8.7.
even A Land of brooks, fountains, springs, valleys, hills, in a Land flowing
with milk and honey, the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. therefore called A
branch of his own planting, Isa. 60.21. Planted with his right hand, Psalm.
80.15.

3. Vines are weak, must have props and supports to uphold them, God dealt so
by the Jews, Deuteronomy. 1.31. In the Wilderness the Lord thy God did bear thee, as
a man does bear his Son, in all the way that ye went. Children are weak,
and must be carried in the Arms, and so God did carry them, Deuteronomy. 33.27. The
Eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms.

4. Fruitful, no Tree so fruitful as the Vine, Psalm. 128.3. its called The
fruitful Vine, its fruitful in branches, and fruitful in clusters; the Jews
were as fruitful a Nation as any, Deuteronomy. 10.22. Thy Fathers went down into
Egypt, with 70. persons, and now the Lord thy God has made thee as the Stars
of Heaven for multitude; in a natural way they were very fruitful.

5. It spreads much, so the Jews, who were Gods Vine, Psalm. 80.9, 10, 11. the
Psalmist says there, of this Vine, that It filled the Land, covered the hills
with its shadow, sent out her boughs unto the Sea, and her branches unto the
River, and they spread far.

6. Its pleasant and delightful, such were the Jews, 1. Kings 4.25. Dwelt
safely under their Vines.
Isai. 5.7. The Vinyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel, and the
men of Judah his pleasant plant, the Hebrew is, his plant of pleasures.

7. Most pains required about Vines of any plants or trees; much digging,
dressing, pruning, supporting, fencing is needful; The Jews had much pains
or cost bestowed upon them, Isai. 5.4. What could have been done more to my
Vinyard, that I have not done in it? Other Trees are little looked after, but
the Vine must have special care, Joh. 1.5.2. the Husbandman observes every
branch, the fruitful and unfruitful, Amos 3.2. You have I known of all the
families, etc.

Verse. 2. What is the Vine Tree more then any Tree?
The Hebrew is, (...) the wood of the Vine; so the Sept. (...): so the French,
du bois de la Vigne: the word (...) signifies mostly a living Tree, as Genesis
1.11. Let the earth bring forth the fruit-Tree Psalm. 1.3. Like a Tree planted
by the Rivers of waters, yet sometimes it notes, the Trunk and body of a Tree
cut down, as in Deuteronomy. Ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
stone. Some would understand it here of the Vine-Tree, dead and cut down, but
that needs not, its more suitable to Scripture, to take it for a fruitles
Vine-Tree, neither dead nor cut down, but as if dead and cut down; and what
is such a Vine more then other Trees? its not only lower, weaker, more bunched,
wreathed, unsightly than they, but its of less use than any of the Trees of
the Forest; they serve to make Temples, palaces, houses, ships, musical and
martial instruments, and tools, for many uses, but for the Vine-Tree, it
serves not for any such use. By the interrogation, he sets out the
unusefulnesse of it; its so far from being equal to the Trees of the
Forest, as that its not comparable to a branch of one of those Trees. Take one
arm or branch of an Oak, Elm, or Ash, it would be of more use to the Joyner
or Carpenter, than the wood of a thousand Vines.

Therefore it follows,

Verse. 3. Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work?
This is a great derogation from the Vine, the wood of it is not fit for any
work; the wood of other Trees is fit for variety of services within doors and
without, this for none. The Hebrew is, ad saciendum ipsum in opus, to make it
into work, its not fit to make a pin of, which is a small thing, and for
small uses, as to hang a cloak, hatt, or band on; Will men take a pin of it
to hang a Vessel thereon? no, no, they will not, they know its unfit to hang
the least thing on it.

Verse. 4, Behold its cast into the fire for fuel.
Here he shows what its fittest for, viz, The fire, neither is it the best
fuel for that, for the branches of Vines, cut and bound up, if they be
reserved any considerable time, ne quidem igni fovendo apti sunt.

The fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burnt.
The roots and tops, namely the branches, they are only for the fire, and
quickly consumed in it, and whereas you may think the body which is the middle
part may be good for somewhat, its otherwise, the midst of it that you think
strongest, soundest, most useful, burns like the rest, and you cannot make
ought of it: other Trees when the roots and tops are burnt, their bodies are
improved, to several great and good purposes: the Vine-Tree is wholly
combustible matter, and only for the fire. Some refer the ends to the 10.
Tribes, and those carried away under Jehoiachin, the midst to those that
remained at Jerusalem.

Is it meet for any work?
Hebr. is, (...) Nunquid prosperabitur, will it prosper to work? it will
break in pieces, deceive a man's expectation, come to naught and his labor
will be in vain.

Verse. 5. When it was whole it was meet for no work, how much less shall it
be meet yet for any work when the fire has devoured it.
Sanct: thinks that their Vines at this time were much wasted, for the Caldeans
had been twice there, in Jehoiakims and Jehoiachins time, and where Armies
come, they spoil the Countries, pull down buildings, cut up Trees, tear the
Vines in pieces, and lay the Vinyards open to wast; they had almost ruined the
metaphorical Vine the Jews: as therefore the Vine neither whole nor burnt,
was meet for any domestique or State Service; so this Jewish People neither in
their prosperity or adversity neither before the Caldeans afflicted, them nor
since, have been serviceable to God or his Church.

Verse. 7. Set my face against them;
See Chapter 14. 8. Concerning these words.

They shall go out from one fire and another fire shall devour them.
By fire is meant affliction, judgments, Psalm. 66.12. We went through fire and
water, and there be sundry resemblances between them.

1. Fire is dreadful to men's thoughts, fire of Sodom, and fire of Hell how
terrible, if you see a ship on fire, etc. So judgments, afflictions are
exceeding terrible to the apprehensions of many; the Sword how sad did it make
the hearts of many before it was drawn, etc. the plague now is terrible to
your thoughts.

2. Its painful, and so are the judgments of God, they put a Land into
travail, Isai. 26. when the judgments of God were abroad, what says the
Prophet, v. 17. Like as a woman with Child that draws near the time of her
delivery, is in pain, and cries out in her pangs: so have we been in thy
sight O Lord. Gods judgments breed terrible pangs, in those are under them.

3. Fire inlightens the eyes, and judgments inlighten men's understandings,
vexatio dat intellectum, Hos. 5.15. In their affliction they will seek me
early; then they will see the nature of their sins, the danger of their
lives, the great need they have of mercy, and therefore will seek me early:
hence it is that God says so often after judgments threatened, They shall know
that I am the Lord.

4. It refines, so do the judgments of the Lord, Zach. 13.9, I will bring
them through the fire, and refine them as silver is refined. The Babylonish
Furnace, purged out their Idolatry, Isai. 1.25. I will turn my hand upon thee,
and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy Tin. When God takes
away his hand of mercy from a Nation, and turns his hand of judgment upon it,
then he purges, etc.

5. It consumes, and so do his judgments, Psalm. 21.9. Thou shall make them as
a fiery Oven, in the time of thine anger, the Lord shall swollow them up in his
wrath, and the fire shall devour them. Famine devoured its thousands, etc.

The scope of the words is, that they should have judgment after judgment, if
they escaped one, they should fall into another, until they were consumed.

Verse. 8. Because they have committed a trespass.
Hebrew is, (...) praevaricati sunt praevaricationem, he means not one
trespass only, but its a singular put for a plural, and is cleared by that,
Chap. 14.13. If a Land sin against me by trespassing grievously, (...) there
is little difference in the words, and those here might have been so rendered,
They have trespassed grievously.

Obser. 1. The Ministers of God have warrant to use Pararables, similitudes, in
their teaching of the people, God himself does it here, he brings in a parable
of the Vine-Tree, and allegorizeth upon it, and the Scripture is frequent in
parables and allegories. Christ was much in parables; they help memory, if
familiar and known, they convince more fully then plain speeches.

2. That men are apt to glory and confide in the privileges they have, What is
the Vine-Tree more then any Tree? the Jews because they were Gods Vine, Gods
people, thought themselves better then any, then all other, that they should
never be cut down and destroyed; what are not we Gods Vine, his pleasant
plant? has he not made a hedge about us, done much for us? will he pluck up
the hedge and lay us wast? No man would ever destroy his own Vine, and
Vinyard, and shall we think God will deal so by his? The Jews doted upon
their privileges, that they were Abraham's seed, they had the Temple, that they
were a plant of Gods planting; and its incident to most, to adhere to, and
confide in some privileges they have; but whence had they, or any, their
privileges? if they were the people of God, his Vine, the Lord chose them,
they chose not him, he planted them, and pleased to call them his Vine, and
Vinyard, what ever excellency or privilege they had, it was from his free
grace and good Pleasure, neither they nor we can merit, or purchase ought at
the hands of God; let us not glory in privileges, in carnal excellencies,
have any confidence in the flesh, but remember the more privileges we have,
the stronger obligation is upon us, to admire free grace, and to honor the God
of our mercies.

3. The Lord knows what all Trees are, the Vine-Tree in the Vineyard, and the
Trees of the Forest, the Cedars of Lebanon, the Oaks of Bashan, and shrubs of
the Wilderness, he knows the goodlinesse or meannesse, the tallness or
lowness, the weakness or strength, the fruitfulness or unfruitfulnesse, the
usefulness or unusefulnesse of every Tree: he knew what Trees the Jews were,
and what Trees the Gentiles were, which Tree was fit for the fire, and which
fit for other services; he knows eve y man's nature, qualities, operations,
uses and ends.

4. Trees in the Forest and Wilderness, may be of better use than Trees in
the Orchard and Vineyard, wild Trees may exceed those are planted, What is the
Vine-Tree, to a branch among the Trees of the Forest, shall wood be taken
thereof to do any work? Will it serve for a pin to hang a hat on? no, other
trees you may take the wood and Timber of, and employ many ways. The Heathens
that were Trees of the Forest, had more good in them, than the Jews who were
his Vine; they did more service to the world, they were more just, diligent,
faithful, bountiful, pitiful than the Jews, they were fitter for
Temple-worke than the other: and is it not so now? are not many Forrest-Trees
better than us Christians?

5. People degenerating from the condition they were set in, lose their esteem
and favor; this people of the Jews was a noble Vine, a choice Vine, a good
Vine; but now it was become a degenerate plant of a strange Vine, Jer. 2.21. I
had planted thee a noble Vine, Exodus 15.17. Psalm. 44.2.
wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a
strange Vine unto me? they were become like Sodom and Gomorrah, Isai. 1.10.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear unto the Law of our
God ye people of Gomorrah, now their Vine was of the Vine of Sodom and of the
fields of Gomorrah, now their grapes were of gall, and their clusters were
bitter, Deuteronomy. 32.32. and why so? Isai. 1.4. they were a sinful Nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that were
corrupters, they had forsaken the Lord, his Ordinances, Truths, worship; they
had changed their glory, and wandered after Idols, Jer. 2.11.20. they oppressed
in the Gates, the City and Land were full of violence, and bloody crimes,
Ezekiel. 7.23. and hereupon they lost their favor with God, and esteem they had
of him, so that he came to abhor them, Psalm. 78.59. He greatly abhorred
Israel, forsook them, delivered them into captivity, and into the enemies
hand; verse. 61. Because they degenerated so, God branded them with disgraceful
titles, as a Rebellious Nation, impudent children, Ezekiel. 2.3.4. Hypocritical,
Isai. 10.6. Lying, Isai. 30.9. Reprobate silver, Jer. 6.30. Sons of the
sorceresse, seed of the Adulterer, Isai. 57.3. Soothsayers, Isai. 2.6.
Supplanters, slanderers, Jer. 9.4. An assembly of treacherous men, verse. 2. A
homeborne slave, Jer. 2.14. Thorns and briars, Isai. 2.17. Naughty figs, Jer.
24.8. A Garden without water, Isai. 1.30. Scorpions, Ezekiel. 2.6. A generation of
Vipers, Matthew. 3.7. When this Vine lost its sweetness, it lost the interest it
had in the heart of God, and the more it degenerated, the more distasteful and
reproachful it became. Degeneracie from God and his ways, is a provoking
sin, God had done more for his people, than any people in the world, he had
given them such a Land, such Ordinances, Laws, privileges, as none else had;
and now for them to forsake God, was a grievous trespass, they violated many
bands of love, they brake the covenant of their God, and did secretly accuse
God, as not being so good as he had promised to be unto them, therefore Mich.
6.3. O my people what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee?
testify against me. I brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed
thee out of the house of servants, etc.

Its good for us therefore to keep close to God, not to admit of any
undervaluing or discouraging thoughts of God and his ways, let not your hearts
draw you back from God, Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him. Drawing back, is the way to perdition, Heb. 3.12. Take heed
therefore, least there be at any time, in any of you, a heart of unbelief, to
depart from the living God: if you would be honorable and fruitful, you must
cleave fully to God and keep close to him, and his ways, Joh. 15.4. The Branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye
except you abide in me.

6. That people which is fruitless, and useless is determind of God to
destruction, The Vine Tree being barren and of no use, was given and cast into
the fire, and so should the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for they were neither
fruitful nor useful.

1. Not fruitful, Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit
unto himself, this seems a contradiction, that Israel should be called an
empty Vine, and yet bring forth fruit, but it is not, the fruit was selvish
fruit, and that is as no fruit in Gods account, it brought forth branches,
leaves, and wild grapes, but God reckoned not these for fruit: their Idolatry,
superstition, oppression, violence, and injustice, were wild grapes, their
hypocrisy, formal professions, carnal confidences, their fastings and
sacrificings, were leavie things, they had no fruit unto holiness, and
righteousness, their worshipp was not pure, Laws were not executed, so that
they were unfruitful toward God and Man.

The evil of fruitlessenesse lies in this,

1. A Vine or people that are fruitless, deceive Gods expectation, Isai. 5.4.
I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes:
God had taken great pains, been at great cost with his people, waited long for
grapes, and when all came to all, there were only wild grapes, verse. 7, I
looked for judgment, but behold oppression, for righteousness, but behold a
cry.

2. It offends God to have such Trees in his Vineyard, People that bring forth
nothing but wild grapes, cursed Fruit. How grievous was it to God, that there
was no justice in the Land, Jer..5 11. Run to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, if there be any, that executes judgment, that seeks the truth,
and I will pardon it. Isai. 5.3. Judge between me and my Vineyard. it argues,
God was troubled: though they had no good fruit, yet they had evil fruit too
much, such as offended, his eyes, his ears, his taste, therefore Isa. 1.5. I
will hide mine eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers, I will not hear:
and the grapes they bare, were sour grapes, distasteful unto the Lord.

3. Fruitlessenesse is a reproach to God, who is the Husbandman of the
Vineyard, as if he were not skillful, or negligent, and did not what was
fitting, to make the Vine to bear, Matthew. 7.16.
and therefore Isai. 5.3, 4. Judge between me and my Vineyard, what could I
have done more: I have done all is fitting, for a prudent and industrious
Vine-dresser to do, and my Vine is a reproach to me; when men till their Land,
sow it with the best seed, and it brings forth nothing but Thistles, Nettles,
or weeds, its a reproach to the owner: if other people had had that pains
taken with them, those means and mercies bestowed upon them which the Jews
had, they would have brought forth fruit unto repentance.

4. Fruitless ones are a burden to God, to the godly, and to the place where
they grow.

1. To God who speaking of this People, Isai. 1.24. Says, Ah I will ease me of
mine Adversaries, they were a mighty burden unto him. Amos 2.13. Behold I am
pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that it full of sheaves.

2. To the godly; Lots righteous soul was vexed with the Sodomites, 2 Pet.
2.7. they were a Vine that brought forth nothing good. David sighed and said,
Woe is me, etc. such hinder the liberties, and sad the Spirits of those are
truly good.

3. The place where they grow, Luke 13.7. The barren fig tree must be cut
down, and why? it cumbers the ground, keeps out others which might be set up
in the place, sucks up the moisture and fatnes of the earth, overshaddows and
prejudiceth the plants are near.

5. Such are slighted, looked upon as worthless, inconsiderable; take a Vine
or Tree has no fruit, its not regarded: its not the leaves or branches, but
the fruit makes it esteemed, its not a leavie profession, but a fruitful
conversation makes people to be esteemed. Mark. 14.3. A woman bestows a box of
precious ointment upon Christ's head, some envyed at it, but Christ said she had
wrought a good work, and this begat such an high esteem of her, in the heart
of Christ, that to honor her, he said, the fact should never be forgotten, but
where ever the Gospel should be preached in the world, that she had done
should be spoken of, for a memorial of her, verse. 9. she was a Tree bare good
fruit, and was honored for it, but fruitless Trees are not minded, not
valued; take a man that does no good, we say he is an idle, an empty man.

6. Fruitlessenesse declares a man to be an evil man, a Tree is known by its
fruit, if it have good fruit its a good Tree, if ill, its an ill Tree, but what
if it have no fruit? you cannot say, its neither good nor bad, God has no such
Trees, in his garden; in that it has no fruit, its an ill Tree; a barren Tree
cannot be good; when Christ found no fruit upon the Tree, he dealt with it as
with an evil Tree.

7. That is fruitless, is near to a curse, Matthew. 21.19. when Christ saw a
fig tree without figs, what said he to it? Let no fruit grow on thee hence
forward for ever, and presently the Fig Tree withered away, Heb. 6.8. The
ground that brings forth briars and thorns, not herbs meet for the dressers,
is rejected and nigh unto cursing, Prove. 10.7. The name of the wicked shall
rot, Wicked men are fruitless, and God will curse their names, Esau, Jeroboam,
Judas.

If a Vine be fruitless, God will take away what he has bestowed, and undo
what he has done, Isai. 5.5. I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, I
will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the
wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. The hedge and wall were Gods
protection, and defense of them; now because the Vine had no good fruit, was an
empty Vine, the Lord would preserve them no longer, but expose them to spoil
and ruin, God made a Law concerning fruitful Trees, that they should be
preserved Deuteronomy. 20.19. and God himself is careful of fruitful Trees and Vines
that bring forth good grapes, Isai. 65.8. As the new wine is found in the
cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it, so will I do
for my Servants sake. If Gods Trees, Vines be fruitful, God will preserve
them, prohibit others to wrong them, Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm. Cant. 2.5. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes
that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender grapes. When the Vines do
bear good clusters and wine, the Lord is careful to preserve them, he is a
hedge and wall unto them, but when they are barren, or bring forth sour
grapes, he will protect and bless no longer, he will undo what he has done,
take away what he has bestowed, Matthew. 21.43. The Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation, bringing forth the fruits thereof; the
Jews had the Title to be Gods People, the Gospel was presented to them, both
should be taken away, and be bestowed upon the Gentiles, who would bring forth
the fruits thereof: several Kingdoms have several fruits, and the fruits of
God Kingdom, are the fruits of the Spirit.

9. Fruitles Trees must be cut down or plucked up, Luke 3.7. Cut it down.
Matthew. 3.10. Now the Axe is laid unto the root of the Tree. The Jews were a
fruitless Vine-Tree, and when Christ came, he laid the Axe to the root, and
quickly they were cut down, and sometimes he pulls them up by the roots, Jud.
12. Trees whose fruit withers without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the
roots; Fruitless Trees are twice dead, dead in the body and branches, and
dead in the root, dead by nature, and dead by their Apostacy, from that
Profession they made, and these God plucks up by the roots, there shall nothing
of them remain.

2. They were not useful: as the Vine-Tree, if fruitles, it must be cut down,
or plucked up, it is unserviceable for any work, to make a pin of, other Trees
when they are growing or cut down, serve for diverse uses at Sea and Land, this
people were come to such a pass, as that they were unfit for any use, Jeremiah
tells you they were like naughty Figgs, that could not be eaten, Chap. 24.8. and
like the girdle he hid in the bank of Euphrates, Chap. 3.7. which was marred
and profitable for nothing, you know what Christ says of salt, when it has
lost its savor its good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under
foot, Matthew. 5.13. so the Vine-Tree when it has lost its fruitfulness, its
clusters, and wine, with which it cheared God and man, its good for nothing but
to be cast into the fire, such a Vine-Tree were the Jews, Jer. 4.22. My people
is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children, and they have
none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge.

Let England, London look to it, we have been the Vine and Vineyard of the
Lord, he has made a hedge and wall about us, he has of late dug us and
pruned us, he looks for fruit, good fruit, the power of godliness, not the
form, through reformation not a half one, justice, not oppression, love, not
bitterness, taking off burdens, not laying them on, countenancing of the Saints,
not reproaching, etc. if we be found without such fruit, or having ill fruit,
the Axe is sharpening, we shall be cut down, and cast into the fire like the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem; let us now then after such warnings, such mercies and
deliverances from the wild beasts and Boares, bring forth fruit meet for
repentance, meet for the Gospel, meet for all that God has done for us.

1. We have been near cutting down like the Fig Tree, Luke 13.6, 7, 8, 9. A
man had a Fig Tree, planted in his Vineyard and came three years to see what
fruit it had, and there was none, either no figgs, or naughty figgs, and then
he said to the Dresser cut it down, but the dresser interceding, prevailed for
an other year. Lord let it alone this year also, if it bear fruit, well, if
not, then cut it down: so here, etc.

2. God has bestowed upon, and done great things for us, he has taken us out
of the Romish Egypt, and planted us in Canaan, A Land that flows with milk
and honey; he has given us the glorious and everlasting Gospel, which many
other Nations have not, in it he has given us, exceeding great and precious
promises, with it pardon of sin, the spirit, Christ himself, all; to us
Heaven is opened, we have visions of God, dewes, showrs and sunshine, to make
us fruitful; he has done for us wonderful things; has he not fenced and
walled us about with his protection; defending us from enemies without and
within, so that neither Lion nor Leopard, Boar nor Bear, Wolf nor Fox,
Jesuits, Papists, Malignants, have been able to devour us? has he not
delivered us from the greatest dangers, most devellish devices and plots, and
out of many deaths? has he not destroyed the Serpents and Scorpions? that
stung us, or driven them into holes, made their Hosts To fall, as a leaf
falls from the Vine, and as a falling Figg, from the Fig Tree. Isai. 34.4.
Has he not plucked up most of the Thorns and briars that grew in his Vinyard,
and removed the stones of stumbling out of the Ecclesiastic and civil Estate?
has he not turned curses into blessings, wise counsels into foolish results,
and by weak hands wrought glorious effects for us? has he not disappointed the
expectations of our enemies, when they have been high, puzzeling the wit of
Hell, non-plussing the powers of darkness, causing their Designs to dash out
their own brains, and to promote those they were intended to ruin.

3. God blesses and prospers a People that is fruitful in good, Genesis 49.22.
Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well, whose branches
run over the wall, of him came two Tribes Ephraim and Manasses, and how did
he prosper in Egypt? to what a height and greatness did he grow? he was the
only man in all the Land, Genesis 41.44. Its said of the man is fruitful, that he
shall prosper whatsoever he does. Psalm. 1.3. Moses exhorted the People to
obedience, upon this ground, Deuteronomy. 29.9, Keep the words of this Covenant and
do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. When men are obedient unto the
Will of God, and so fruitful, it pleases the Lord to bless them; the Jews
were the terror of Nations, whilst they worshipped God in his own ways, and
executed justice in their Gates, 2 Cron. 32.30. Hezekiah prospered in all his
works, he abounded in doing good, and prospered accordingly, if you bring
forth sweet grapes and pleasant fruit, you shall prosper in your families,
shops, journeyes, worship, etc.

4. All Creatures are fruitful one way or other, the earth is so plentiful in
fruit bearing, that as it is the Mother of all living, so its the maintainer of
them. What is there grows upon the face of the earth, which is altogether
fruitless, and does not contribute something to the good of man, and glory of
its Creator? Clouds are the bottles of heaven, and being carried over the
quarters of the earth, they empty there silver drops to enrich the earth. The
heavens yield us their light and influence, and move constantly to do us
service; that old Servant of the world the Sun, is not yet weary of sending
down her beams to warm us, and all other creatures: has God made the
heavens and earth useful and fruitful for man, and all the fish, foul,
beasts, birds, plants in them? and shall man be barren? it was a reproach for a
woman in Israel to be so, and surely for a Christian it is a great reproach to
be so.

5. Its the appointment of the Lord Christ, that those are his should be
fruitful, John 15.16. I have chosen you and ordained you, that you should go
and bring forth fruit: that they should preach, pray, convert souls, work
miracles, plant Churches, set up his Kingdom, etc. and now if Christ has
chosen you to any places, in the Family, City, Church or State, he has
ordained that you should bring forth fruit, he would not have a Parent
fruitless in the Family, nor a Magistrate in the City.

6. Its an honor to God to be fruitful; when a Vine is full of goodly
clusters, what a credit, what a chearing is it to the Vinedresser? when the
ground yields great increase, its an honor to the Husbandman; when Trees are
laden with fruit, the Gardener glories in it, come look upon this Tree; when
the Ewes bear Twins, its the Shepherds honor: and so when Christians are
fruitful, its the honor and glory of God, Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye hear much fruit. When Christians are fruitful, it provokes
others, to praise the name of the Lord, Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven.

7. Fruitfulness is delightsome to God and Man, Hos. 14.5, 6. God would be dew
to Israel, he should grow, his beauty should be as the Olive Tree, (the beauty
of the Olive Tree, is to be full of Olives) And his smell as Lebanon; Lebanon
was full of sweet Trees and fragrant flowers, and filled all the parts
thereabouts with a sweet smell: so should Israel be ftuitfull, and yield a
sweet savor to God in Heaven, and men on earth, Jud. 9.13. The Vine cheared
God and Man with its pleasant and sweet smelling wine. God in that it was
offered in the free-wil-offering, for a sweet savor unto God, Numb. 15.3, 5.
Man, Psalm. 104.15. Wine makes glad his heart: so fruitfulness in Christians
has a sweet savor, delights Heaven and Earth. The Philippians fruitfulness
was An odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable unto God, Phil. 4.18. so
prayers and praise are as incense and music unto him. Psalm. 141.2. Heb. 13.15.
The Corinthian bounty and fruitfullnesse so delighted Paul, that he boasted of
them, 2 Cor. 9.2. The savor of it extended far, and made many to glorify
God on their behalf, verse. 13. be fruitful then that you may please delight,
God and Man, and leave a good sent behind you.

8. Its the glory of any to be fruitful.

9. Christ is coming to see what fruit is upon his Vine-Trees, Heb. 10.37. Yet
a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, and
when he comes, if there be ill fruit, or no fruit upon them, he will not only
curse those Trees, but burn those Trees, for his coming will be in flames of
fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. The Inhabitants of Jerusalem were not spared because
Barren, and the Inhabitants of London will not be spared if found Barren, if
you be fruitful he will transplant you and you shall be Trees of
righteousness in the Heavenly paradise for ever.

Obs. 7. When Gods face is against a people, he will follow that people with
judgment after judgment, till they be consumed: I will set my face against
them, they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them. If
they escaped the famine, the plague should take hold of them, if that did not
the sword should, if that faild, the wild beasts should devour them, if by them
they dyed not, captivity should be their ruin; when God is wrath, he has
fiery judgments for the wicked, and if he scorch them in one fire a little,
pull them out like brands, he will throw them into another fire, if he burn
them a little more in that, and pull them out again, at last, he will throw
them into a devouring consuming fire; The wrath of a King is as a Messenger of
death. Pro. 16.14. but the wrath of God is as death it self, it pursues
sinners, till they are burnt to Ashes; wicked men are apt to think, that when
they are got out of some one fiery affliction they are safe, but another is
preparing for them; Nebuchadnezzar had twice before been in their Land, carried
away Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin at several times, and now he was ready to come
again, and after a long siege, he took the City, and carried away many to
Babylon: those were left, he set Gedaliah over them, whom Ishmael with many
other slew, this Ishmael presently after was put to flight by Johanan, who also
going into Egypt, contrary to the counsel of Jeremie, is slain there with
diverse others by the Babylonians, as Jer. 41.42.43.44. relates.

8. The sins of the Inhabitants brings desolation upon a Land, I will make the
Land desolate because they have committed a Trespass. Canaan was a pleasant
and fruitful Land, a very Paradise, but because they committed a Trespass,
corrupted Gods worship, and oppressed the People, therefore God laid wast, the
Land even his own Vineyard, he plucked away the fence, broke down the wall, and
let in those wild beasts, bears, boares, and foxes; the Babylonians who toare
the Vine in pieces, and rooted it wholly up, and laid all desolate; before they
came, the Land was as the Garden of Eden, but they left it a desolate
Wilderness. And where the Vines grew, there were briars and Thorns, Isai.
7.23. yea all the Land should become briars and thorns, verse. 24. so Chap.
32.13. Upon the Land of my people, shall come up Thorns and Briars, yea upon
all the Houses of joy, in the joyous City. Psalm. 107.4. The Lord tunes a
fruitful Land into barrenes, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

If we would therefore prevent this, let us heaken to what is said, Jer. 7.5,
6. If you thoroughly amend your ways and doings, if ye thoroughly execute
judgment between a man and his Neighbor, if ye oppress not the Strangers,
the fatherless, and the Widows, and shed not innocent blood in this place,
neither walk after other Gods to your hurt, then will I cause them to dwell in
this place.

CHAP. 16.
1. Again the word of Lord came unto me saying.

2. Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations.

3. And say, thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, thy birth, and thy
nativitie is of the Land of Canaan, thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother
an Hittite.

4. And as for thy Nativity, in the day thou wast borne, thy Navell was not
cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at
all, nor swadled at all.

5. None eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, to have
compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing
of thy person, in the day that thou wast borne.


WE are now come to the longest Chapter in the whole Prophecy, and it is
against the Jews who were at Jerusalem.

The parts of it are these,

1. The principal scope of the Chapter laid down in the second verse.

2. The natural state of the Jews represented under a parable of an infant
left and neglected of all; from the 2. verse to the 6.

3. A comemmoration of Gods dealing with them, from the 6. to the 15.

4. An exprobration of their great ingratitude in running out from God, and
sinning above other Nations, from the 15. to the 35.

5. A Commination of grievous judgments, from the 35. to the 60. wherein also
the aggravation of their sins are laid down.

6. A promise of mercy to restore and establish them, from the 60. to the end.

Verse. 1. Again the word of the Lord came unto me saying.
These words are frequent, they show whence he had what he spoke, and with what
authority he spoke, viz. divine authority, and serve for attention to provoke
the sons of men, to heed what the Prophet delivered.

Verse. 2. Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations.
By Jerusalem, he means the men of Jerusalem, and by abominations, those sins
of Idolatry, adultery, injustice, etc. which were abominable.

The Prophet being in Babylon, how could he cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations, his voice would not reach thither?

He might by Letters send to Jerusalem, to Jeremiah or some of the faithful,
to make known what a message, what a Prophecy he had received from the Lord.

Or else, he might give it out in Babylon, where were some that would quickly
carry, or send tidings thereof unto Jerusalem.

Obser. 1. That a People may be guilty of abominations, and not know nor
acknowledge them, Jerusalem was so, and did not know nor acknowledge it, Cause
Jerusalem to know her abominations. Amos 3.10. They know not to do right.

When men know not what is right, how can they know what is wrong?

They stored up violence and robbery in their palaces, they got wealth by
injustice, oppression, laid it up, and thought it well gotten.

They know not God. Jer. 9.3. They proceed from evil to evil, and know not me
says the Lord, when People know not God, they do evil after evil, and know
not that they do evil; They know not the way of the Lord, Jer. 5.4. Therefore
their own ways seem good in their eyes, Joh. 16.2. The time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think he does God Service: when men shall murder
the Saints of Christ, (a crying sin, a great abomination) they will be so
far from knowing or acknowledging it, that they will justify the fact, in
Isai. 5.20. you may read what the Jews said of evil, they called Evil good
and good, evil, they put darkness for light, and light for darkness, they
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: they set up Idols, worshipped the
Queen of Heaven, oppressed in the Gates, filled the Land with bloody crimes,
and yet justified themselves, Jer. 7.9. Will ye steal murder, commit
adultery, swear falsely, burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods,
whom ye know not, and come and stand before me in this house, and say we are
delivered? we are in no danger, whatever is threatened; they were blinded: and
as they knew not their abominations, so they acknowledged them not. Hos. 5.15.
I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offense; if they
did know their doing to be evil, yet they did not acknowledge them to be such
evils as in truth they were; they did not profess themselves to be guilty, the
Lord therefore puts them upon it, Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity,
that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God: lay it to heart and
confess it.

2. Note there is an unwillingnesse, an averseness in sinners to hear of
their sins, Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, she is against it, but
make her to know them, Jer. 44.16. We will not hearken unto thee; thou tellest
us of sinning, and judgment for sins, but say what thou will, We will not
hearken, Zech. 7.11.12. They refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder,
and stopped their ears, that they should not hear, yea they made their hearts
as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the Law, and the words which the
Lord has sent in his spirit by the former Prophets, what averseness was here
in this people, to hear of their sins or duty, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. They mocked
the Messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his Prophets, they were
not only unwilling to hear of their sins, but wilfully add to the heap of
their sins, they mock, despise, misuse the Prophets, that told them of their
mocking, despising, misusing: when Stephen told them of their practices, Acts
7.51.52. what followed upon it, They were cut to the heart, they gnashed upon
him with their teeth, they cried with a loud voice, they stopped their ears,
and ran upon him with one accord, cast him out of the City and stoned him.
54, 57, 58. verses: so when Christ told them of their sins, they derided him,
Luke 16.14. told him he had A Devil, Joh. 8.48. they Were filled with wrath,
thrust him out of the City, led him to the brow of an Hill, that they might
cast him down headlong, Luke 4.28, 29. And not only wicked men are unwilling
to hear of their sins, but even good men also; when God reproved Jonah,
Do thou well to be angry, his reply was, I do well to be angry? even to
death: he thought God did evil in reproving him, that he had more cause to be
angry than God had to chide him for his anger: when Hanani the Seer came to
Asa the King (who was a godly King, and told him he had done foolishly in
relying upon the King of Assyria, and not upon the Lord, and that therefore he
should have wars; Then Asa was wrath with the Seer, and put him in a prison
House, for he was in a rage with him because of this thing: Paul was become the
Galathians enemy, because he told them the truth, he told them of their
sins; good men do not easily endure to hear of their faults, and this is
that discourages friends from telling them what they hear, observe and know,
and so through fear they become unfaithful.

3. What God commands the Prophets and Ministers to do, it matters not how it
is taken by the People, they are to do it.

Here God commands Ezekiel to cause the People to know the abominations, it
was not for him to excuse himself from this service, to object against it, to
say they will mock me, despise me, misuse me, hate me, seek my hurt, ruin me,
God commanded, and it was his duty to do it, carefully, conscientiously, and
faithfully, he must make known their sins to the world, to themselves, let
the event be what it will, Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a Trumpet, and show my people their transgressions, and the House of Jacob
their sins: the Prophet must not whisper, but cry, and that aloud, it
matters not who hears, he must lift up his voice like a Trumpet: when men blow
Trumpets, they do it with all their strength, and the sound of it goes far;
so must the Prophets with extention of their voice, utter the sins of the
people, and show them their transgressions, they must represent them fully, and
livelilie before their eyes, and to their ears; this they must do,

1. That others may take warning, and not do as they have done, 1. Tim. 5.20.
Them that sin, rebuke before all, them that sin openly, must be rebuked
open y.

And why?

That others also may fear.

2. That they may bring the Parties to repentance, Jer. 23.22. If they had
stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they
should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their
doings.

How shall sinners come to repentance, if they hear not of their sins, if
they be not convinced of the sinfulness of them, by the Prophets and Ministers
of God? This was the fault of the false Prophets, they hid their sins from
them, but the faithful ones must tell them of them.

3. That they may deliver their own souls, Ezekiel. 33.8, 9. When I say to the
wicked, O wicked man! thou shall surely dye, if thou do not speak to warn
the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but his
blood will I require at thy hand; Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked to
turn from his way, if he turn not, he shall dye in his iniquity, but thou
have delivered thy soul.

Obser. 4. The sins of People are abominations in Gods account, he calls the
sins of Jerusalem abominations, what his soul loathed and abhord, Psalm.
14.1. They have done abominable wokrs Ps. 53.1. They have done abominable
iniquity sins are works, but works of iniquity, abominable works, and
abominable iniquity, now Ps. 5.5. it is said of God, thou hate al workers
of iniquity, if Gods hatred be against the workers of iniquity, how great is
it against iniquity it self? if a man hate a poisonous creature, he hates
poison much more, the strength of Gods hatred is against sin, and so should
we hate sin, and hate it with strength, its abomination unto God, let it be
so unto us., Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. These six things does the Lord hate, yea
seven are abomination unto him; a proud look, a lying tongue, hands that
shedd innocent blood, an heart that devises wicked imaginations, feet that be
swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaks lies, and him
that sows discord among Brethren.

Verse. 3. And say thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, thy birth and thy
nativitie is of the Land of Canaan.
The Jews stood much upon their progenitors, and gloried in it, that they were
descended from Abraham: but they were so degenerated at this time, that the
Lord sends the Prophet to upbraid them, and tell them, that their birth and
nativity was rather of the Cananites, Amorites, and Hittites, than of Abraham,
your ways and doings are such, that you seem rather to be the seed of any
impious stock than of Abraham, who was so upright, faithful and honorable,
your works are contrary to his, they are such as the Nations are, and so
testify that you are rather of them, than of him.

Thy birth,
The Hebrew is, (...), which Montanus interprets Mansiones tuae, and the
French, Ton habitation, the Sept. is, (...) thy root, so the Vulg. Radix tua,
Jun. Pisc. Pola. have it commercia tua, thy commerce, and traffiquing in in
matters of Religion is of Canaan, we have it Birth, which implies, beginning,
rise; and all these may stand, thy birth, habitation, commerce, whatever thou
think of thy self, do all declare that thou art of Canaan, of the
Amorites, and Hittites; thy worship and practices are such, that if any inquire
whence thou art, where thou dwell, whom thou resemblest, they would conclude
thou art of, dwell among, and most like unto Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites:

This is truth, but some further thing the Prophet seems to aim at here, viz.
their condition before the Lord took them to be his people, and what were they
then no better then other Nations, barbarous, idolatrous, like the Canaanites,
etc. and so the word mecorotheca may import, for some of the learned derive it
from Cor which is to dig and cut out, Isai. 51.1. Look unto the Rock, (...)
whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug.

Thy nativity,
Hebrew is, (...) Natales tui, thy nativities or birthdayes, its plural; to
signify their descent of both Parents, that they were by Father and Mother of
the Canaanites. They drew their pedigree from Abraham and Sarah, who were
Chaldeans, Genesis 11.31. but no better than the rest of other Nations, till God
pleased to cull them, and distinguish them from others. Joshua 24.2. They
served other Gods they and their Fathers.

Of the Land of Canaan.
Some understand Egypt here the Land of Canaan, because the Jews had long
lived in Egypt, which is called the Land of Ham or Cham. Psalm. 105.27. but
Egypt was not Canaan, Canaan was a Country in Asia, the less, so called from
Canaan the son of Cham, Genesis 10.6.18.19. possessed by him and his Sons.

Now Canaan was cursed by Noah, Genesis 10.25. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of
Servants shall he be, that is, extreme vile, and base: from him came the
Canaanites a cursed race, they were so wicked, that Abraham caused his Servant
to swear he would not take a wife unto his Son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, Genesis 24.3. they were given to such abominable sins, as that the
Land vomited them out, Levit. 18.25. and when the Israelites came to possess.
Canaan, they were so hateful to God, that he charged his People utterly to
destroy them, Deuteronomy. 7.2. Thou shall smite them and utterly destroy them, thou
shall make no Covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them, Verse. 16. Thine
eye shall have no pity on them, they had all abominations amongst them.

Thy Father was an Amorite.
The Amorites were of Canaan the Son of Cham, Genesis 10.15.16. and they were as
wicked as the Canaanites, Genesis 15.16. The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet
full, their iniquites were very great, only God waited for the completing
thereof, before he would destroy them, they were great Idolaters, oppressors,
made incestuous marriages, and Ahab one of the most wicked Kings that ever
were, is compared to the Amorites, 1 Kings 21.16. He did very abominably in
following Idols according to al things as did the Amorites whom the Lord cast
out before the children of Israel. They were bitter enemies unto the
Israelites, and would not let them pass through their Country, Numb. 21.23.
but fought with them; they forced the children of Dan into the mountain, Judge.
1.34. They were a people potent, and dreadful to the Jews, for Amos 2.9. Its
said of them that Their height was like the height of Cedars, and that they
were strong as Oaks; they were a Giant-like people, and as they exceeded in
height and strengh, so they exceeded in wickedness, and therefore God
destroyed his fruit from above, and his root from beneath.

Thy Mother an Hittite.
(...) Cethaea; The Cethites or Hittites were of the same stock the Amorites
were, viz. from Cham and Canaan, Genesis 10.15. Heth is said to be the Son of
Canaan, and from him sprung up the Cethites or Hittites as they are called, Genesis
5.20. what kind of people these were you may judge by profane Esau, who took
two wives from among the Hittites, which were a continual grief to Isaac and
Rebecca, Genesis 26.34, 35. yea such an affliction to Rebecca that she said, I am
weaarie of my life, because of the Daughters of Heth. Chap. 27.46. they were
contentious, stubborn, and Idolatorus, as the Greek, Chaldie, and the Targum
observe; and when the charge is given to the Israelites to destroy the Nations,
the Hittites are mentioned first, Deuteronomy. 20.17.

You see what the Canaanites Amorites and Hittites were, exceeding wicked, and
the Jews which were at Jerusalem were so degenerate that they were as if they
dwelt amidst Canaanites, and were the offspring of cursed Amorites and
Hittites 2 Kings 21.9. It is said of them that They did more evil than the
Nations whom the Lord destroyed, he means the Canaanites, Amorites and
Hittites, as appears by what follows, verse. 11. Manasses did wickedly above
all that the Amorites did which were before him.

Obser. 1. The Lord judges and pronounces otherwise of sinners, then they do of
themselves; the Jews thought themselves better than other Nations, they called
them Goijm, Nations, Gentiles by way of disgrace, they thought themselves the
holy seed, the children of Abraham, an honorable and blessed people, but God
thought and pronounced otherwise, he tells them they are Canaanites, what you
Abrahamites? no, you are Amorites; what you Israelites? you are Hittites, as
bad as the worst of Nations. They thought themselves Children of God, in high
favor with him, the true Church, whereas they were abhorred of God, and an
Apostatized Church, Rev. 2.9. They said they were Jews, when they were the
Synogogue of Satan; Ephraim said, in all my labors they shall find none
iniquity in me that were sin, but God found the Balances of deceit in his
hand. Hosea 12.7.8.

2. Men are their Children, whose ways manners and example they follow;
Jerusalem imitated the Nations in their worship, fashions, practices, Orig.
Jerome Theodor.
and she is the Child of an Amorite, of an Hittite, and her Citizens were
Amorrhaeans and Hittaeans, imitating their impiety, they contracted kindred
with them, and obtained inheritance with them, as the Fathers comment on the
words.

When men live according to the courses, natures, manners of others, they are
styled their Sons, or Chidren, and they be their Fathers, Joh. 8.44. Ye are
of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father you will do, he was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, so you abide not in
the truth, you seek to kill me; and herein you resemble the Devil, and he is
your Father; if Abraham were your Father as you pretend, You would do the
works of Abraham, Verse. 39. If God were your Father, you would love me, Verse.
42. The Father loves me, honors me, and if you were his Children you would do
so too, but you hate me and my doctrine, lie in wait to murder me, You are of
your Father the Devil: Christ eals the Scribes and Pharisees, (...), a
generation of Vipers, they were so bitter, cruel, of such a bloody and
persecuting nature.

When Elimas the Sorcerer would have hindered the conversion of Sergius Paulus,
the Apostle told him he was The Child of the Devil, Acts 13.10. his works,
ways, were such as the Devils were, and therefore the Devil was his Father:
in Isai. 57.3. God calls the Jews, Sons of the Sorceresse, the seed of the
Adulterer, and the Whore; because they did such things as Sorceresses,
Adulterers and Whores use to do; Chap. 1.10. he calls them Rulers of Sodom,
and people of Gomorrah, they so livelily represented their natures and
practices, that they seemed to be of them, and justly deserved those and titles.

Let us look to it whose ways we take up, if we imitate the world, we are
Children of the world; if Rome, Babylon, we are their Children; the Church of
Rome boasts that her birth is from the Apostle, that Peter, Paul laid her
foundation: but does she embrace their doctrine, imitate their examples? no
she is like the Nations for her Idolatry, superstition, whoredom, deceit,
pomp, pride, etc. therefore her Father is an Amorite, and her Mother an
Hittite. We say we are of Christ, but are we like unto Christ in our worship,
lives?

3. All are not godly, which spring from godly Parents, Families, and have a
name to be godly; the Jews they came out of the loins of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, the best Families that were then in the world, they of all people were
counted the holy, and godly people; but grace is not hereditary, you see here
they were so wicked that God reckons them among Canaanites, Amorites, etc. they
were as bad as any of the Nations, yea worse, Ezekiel. 5.6. Jerusalem has changed
my judgments into wickedness, more than the Nations, and my Statutes more
than the Countries that are round about her; you see it made good, what Paul
said. Romans 9.6, 7. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel; neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all Children; they were all
Israelites and seed of Abraham after the flesh, but they were not the Children
of God, they were of the Land of Canaan, etc. Judge not thou from such
external things, for Romans 2.28.29. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit,
and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

4. When the Lord takes in any to be his people, they were like others, no
better than they.

VER. 4, 5.
4. And as for thy Nativitie in the day thou wast borne, thy Navel was not cut,
neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all,
nor swadled at all.

5. None eye pittyed thee, to do any of these things unto thee, to have
compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open Field, to the loathing
of thy person in the day that thou wast borne.


THis Chapter is a continued Allegory, setting forth the state of the Jewish
Church, under the consideration of a woman in her birth, education, marriage,
adultery, rep^die and reintertainement.

Something in the last exercise was said touching the Nativitie of the Jews,
that they were of the Amorites, and Hittites.

Now to go on,

In the day thou wast borne,
When to begin the birth of the Israelitish Nation is inquirable, our Prophet
speaks of it in the person of a woman, and says, in the day thou wast borne.

Some make her birthday to be, the calling of Abraham out of Chaldaea, and
entering into Covenant with him, to bless him, to be a God to him and his seed.

The infancy and youth of this woman or Jewish estate, was from the time of
Jacobs going into Egypt, till they were led out by Moses; her grown estate
the time of the Judges and Kings; and her old age from the time of the
Babilonish captivity to Christ.

Others make the birthday of this Nation, to be their going out of Egypt,
when they were freed from their rigorous bondage there: but to this opinion I
cannot cast in my approbation, because it was the time of this woman's youth, not
her birth, and so the Scripture sets it out, Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness
of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
Wilderness, and Hosea 2.15. The days of her youth, and of her coming up out
of the Land of Aegyt, are the same; and presently after, God espoused this
people unto himself.

Some take this birthday, to be the time of Jacobs going into Egypt with 70.
souls, but this is forced, and suits not with what follows in the 5. verse.
where it is said, None eye pittyed thee, but thou wast cast out etc. Jacob and
his, were received honorably by Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and greatly
regarded for Joseph's sake.

Pradus makes the birthday to be the time after Joseph's death, when another
King rose up which knew not Joseph, but oppressed the Jews, from which time it
is said, Exodus 1.7. The Children of Israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the Land was filled
with them: but to me their birth-daay must needs be long before, take it
literally or spiritually: a people must be borne, have their being, before
they can increase, and multiply, and they were the Loads people before this
day. This birth day I know not how we can begin it at any other time, than when
the Lord called Abraham, Genesis 12.1, 2. The Lord said unto him, get thee out of
thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a Land
that I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless
thee, and make thy name great, and afterward he told him his Seed should be as
the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 15.5. As the dust upon the earth, Chap. 13.16. And as
the sand upon the Sea-shoare, Chap. 22.17. Hence is it that Abrahom is called
their Father, Josh. 24.3. I took their Father Abraham, from that other side of
the flood. We may include all the time, from Gods calling Abraham, to their
going out of Egypt, to be their birth time.

Thy Navel was not cut,
Hebrew is, (...) from (...) with a double resh, which Aben Esra says is so
called a firmitate, for (...) is firmum, and the Navel is that gives strength to
the child, from (...) principale, because its the principal thing, whereby the
Child is supported in the Womb, the Septu: mistaking for read it (...) for
(...) and render the words thus, non alligaverunt mamillas tuas: French, Con
nombril ne fut point coupe, and so we read it.

The Navell is that unites or ties the Child unto the womb of the Mother, in
which there is a Vein called Vena Vmbilicalis, and 2. Arteries: Some say that by
the Navel, life, spirit and nourishment, is let into the Child.
the Navel vein conveyes nourishment unto the Child, not to the stomach, but
to the liver, from whence it is dispersed, through the body of the Embryo, the
Arteries carry vital spirits unto it.

As a Tree by the roots is fastened to the earth, and by the fibrae the little
strings upon them draws nourishment and spirits from the earth: so is it with
a Child in the womb, the Navel fastens it to the Mother, and by the Vein and
Arteries in the Navell, it fetches in nourishment and spirits.

Some have thought Infants in the womb to be nourished by the mouth, because
when newly born, they take the breast with their mouths, but the posture of
the Infant in the womb confutes that conceit, for it lies double with the
Thumbes upon the eyes, the face upon the knees, and the Legs turned up
backwards, and how can it receive nourishment at the mouth in this posture?

Others have thought it to be nourished from that liquid humor it lies in, the
whole body taking in what is nutritive, as a sponge in the water, but that is
excrementitious and its not like that God would make that the nourishment of an
Infant in the womb, which nature abhors being out of the Womb

No, its the Navell which is the mouth of the Infant, while it is in that
prison, and it lives upon the blood and spirits of the Mother, Plutarch likens
the Navell to the roape and Anchor which stays the Infant in that Harbor of
the Mothers womb and when it is cut, the infant goes from Harbor to the Sea
and storms of the world.
but when it is borne and dsimprison'd, the Midwife or some skillful person
cuts the Navell, for if that should not be, it would be dangerous, if not
deadly both to the mother and the Infant. When it is cut there must be great
care used that it be so tied up, that neither the air get in, nor blood or
spirits flow out, either of which may hazard the life of it.

For the meaning of the words,

1. It may be this, look as a Child by the Navell draws life, Spirits, and
nourishment from the Mother, so did the Israelitish estate draw from the
Nations, that were her Parents, Amorites, Hittites Chaldeans, Egyptians, the
life, spirit, and nourishment of several impieties. Rachel had her Fathers
Idols, and in Egypt they learned the manners, fashions, and worship of the
Egyptians, they were not separate from Idols, but drew thence the grounds of
their Idolatry.

2. It points out the miserable condition of this people at first.

A Child whose Navell is not cut must needs perish, be a dead Child, so here
thy Navell was not cut, thou wast in a lost and desperate condition, Abraham
was an Idolater when the Lord took him, Psalm. 106.7. Our Fathers understood
not thy wonders in Egypt: they were an ignorant, perverse, superstitious
people.

Neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee.
When an Infant is borne,

First, the Navel is cut, The Aegytian American women wash their Children in
cold water as soon as they are borne to make them strong.
and then they use to wash it with warm water.

1. To cleanse it from that filth adheres to the body of it, from the place it
lay in, or the skin it was wrapped in. Jerome says, the bodies of Infants are
polluted with blood, and therefore are washed as soon as they are borne; but
those are experienced about the birth of Infants, say otherwise: yet somewhat
there is which calls for washing, and therefore R. Manahen renders the words
here, non es lota ad munditiem.

2. For safety, the vulgar reads it, non es lota in salutem, deriving the word
(...) from (...) to save, for if it should not be washed, the filth which
adheres to it, may cause not only unsavourinesse, but sickliness.

3. For fightlinesse, and so they fetch the word (...) from (...) aspicere, and
read the words thus, thou wast not washed, ad aspectum, to be looked upon, to
be embraced and delighted in; when its once washed, then the Midwife, Mother,
Nurse, all present, take more delight in the Child.

We have it to supple thee, (...) ad lenimen, Oecel: Cast. ineque aquae lotione
sota sis.
ut lenificareris, that thou should be lenified, the joints and parts may
have some stiffness in them, the Infant lying double or treble in the womb; or
in the birth, something may be wrentched, turned aside; its usual therefore to
mix butter, or oil with the water they wash them in, that so their limbs may
be tractable; but surely the flesh of Infants, their bodies and bones are very
tender things, and do rather stand in need of consolidating then of suppling.
I conceive therefore, it were better translated, Some advise to wash tham in
wine rather than water, as being more strengthening
Thou wast not washed in water to my sight, or when I looked upon thee: thou
had those pollutions, corruptions adhering to thee, which made thee unlovely,
unsightly, Acts 9.37. They washed the body of Dorcas, and laid it in an upper
Chamber. It was their use to wash at deaths and births.

Thou wast not salted at all.
Hebrew, et saliendo non salita fuisses, in salting thou wast not salted,
Septu: (...), Neither wast thou salted with salt.

It seems in ancient days, it was the custom after washing, to salt their
Infants, or to mingle salt with the water, in which they washed them, we read
nothing of this practice, but only in this place: Pradus cites Jerome, saying
the bodies of the Infants were salted by the Midwives, ut solidiora fiant, and
restringantur: Gallen speaks of it lib. 10. de sanitate tuenda, Chap. 7.
speaking of (...), one new born, says, it must be, (...), it must be salted
with a convenient proportion of salt round about, that so the skin of the
inward parts may be more condensate and consolidate. Avicen says, that
speedily the bodies of Infants should be washed in water, wherein salt has
been melted, that the skin and Navel may grow hard, only they do it must be
careful that the mouth and nostrils be not touched therewith.

This salting with salt was thought useful,

1. To keep the Navel being cut, from putrefying, and to speed the healing
thereof.

2. To dry up the humors with which the tender bodies do abound.

3. To cleanse away any roughness, or filth, adhering more closly to the
body. And

4. To thicken the tender skin, and confirm the inward parts of the body.

It was not in vain therefore, that Anselm: Boethius a Physician did say, sal
est quasi naturae balsamum: this custom is not amongst us, Cornel: a lapid.
but whither it may not be useful to some Infants I leave to consideration.

That which the Prophet hereby leads us unto, is, that this People had no
heavenly wisdom, no fear of God, no true grace, no salt to cure their wounds,
to keep them from putrefying, but abounded in noisome humors, were altogether
weak and feeble.

Nor swadled at all.
Hebrew is, (...) fasciando non fuisti fasciata, in swaddling thou wast not
swadled, Sept: (...) non implicata eras fasciis, French in enueloppee de
Drapeaux, Children are swadled to strengthen their bodies and to keep their
limbs straight, Luke 2.7. Christ was wrapped in swaddling clothes; and its given
as a reason why the bodies of Barbarians were streighter then the bodies of the
Romans, because they kept their Children swadled two or three years.

Hereby is set out how destitute of all help this people were.

Verse. 5. None eye pittyed thee, to do any of these things unto thee.
Here the contemptible condition of this metaphorical Infant is set out in
three things.

1. That none eye pittyed, or had compassion on her to do ought for her, its
something, in misery to be pittyed, but to have none to pity, all to be
incompassionate, is sad.

2. That she was cast out, not into some by or secret place, but into the open
Field.

3. Her person was loathed.

None eye pittyed the.
Hebrew is, (...) non pepercit super te oculus, eye has not spared upon thee,
the eye of man has not looked after thee; Vatablus, non est misertus tui
oculus, Eye has not had pity on thee, no humane eye, and the word (...)
signifies to pity as well as to spare, and this must be the sense, as these
following words do show.

To do any of these things unto thee.
What things?

To cut her Navell, to wash her, to salt her, or swaddle her; these seemed no
great things, of small moment; yet there was none found to do any of these: if
some one had cut her Navel, another washed her, a third salted her, etc. it had
been some comfort; but she was so vile, sordid, contemptible, that none eye
minded her, were moved to do ought for thee, or show her the least compassion,
or kindness.

The words for pity and compassion were opend 5. Chap. 11. Verse.

But thou wast cast into the open field
It was a custom among the Heathens, if they were poor, and could not bring
up their Children; or if the Children were deformed, Aelia: de var: hist. lib.
11.
to carry them forth and lay them in the Feilds, if they did not otherwise make
them away, and these Children were called, liberi exposititii. This was so common
a practice, that the Thebans made a severe Law against it, that whoever exposed
their Infants in the Woods or Feilds, should suffer for it. Its reported of the
Japonians, that those of them, who are not able to maintain their Children, do
usually make them away, especially if they be Females, looking upon them as
burdensome, and less useful. There is provision in some Countries to prevent
the untimely death of Children, misbegotten and exposed, they are looked after,
and taken into Houses appointed for their preservation; Clem: Roma. lib. 9.
recog.
The Jews were free from this sin above all others, for its said of them,
nunquam apud Judaeos infans natus exponitur; yet the Jewish State was as an
Infant cast out.

Now you know when a little Infant, is cast out into the woods, or fields, it
must needs perish, either by hunger, injury of weather, fowls of Heaven,
beasts of the Field, or some Vermin, if it be not taken up.

Moses was cast out, and had perished in the Arc among flaggs, if he had not
been taken up.

Some divine this to be meant of the casting out of the Hebrew Children to
their destruction; others put it upon the time of their making Brick and Clay
in the Feilds.

In the open Field.
Hebrew is, In the faces of the Field, the Hebrew call the outside or
superficies of things, their faces, as the face of the deep, face of the
waters, Genesis 1.2. so here, the face of the Field, and here rendered open.

To the loathing of thy person.
Hebrew is, (...) in abjectione animae tuae, the word (...) signifies amoliri
cum fastidio, abhominari,: Some of the Rabbis interpret Goal deimmunditie quae
adhaeret faetui; or that wherein the Infant lies, and so imports the filthy
and loathsome condition, this Israelitish Infant lay in, that there was no
regard had of he^ life or person.

The Taskmasters oppressed the Jews, their Children were cast into the
Rivers, Pharaoh and others plotted their ruin, and there was none to pity, to
help: but they were as a Child cast out, to the loathing of their Persons.

Obser. The miserable estate of man by nature both of Jew and Gentile; for what
is said here of the Israelites, is true of al mankind, and is here employed; for
if the Jew had no privilege, what must the Gentile have? man's condition by
nature is very deplorable.

I shall give you it out, as it lies couched in this similitude of an Infant
newborn.

1. Man naturally is not cut off from the old stock (as the Infants Navell was
not cut) but draws life, spirits, nutriment from it; every man's Father
naturally is an Amorite and his Mother an Hittite, and look what way they
walked in, the same does the Child: Adam was of the earth, earthy, and savoured
of the earth: so do all his Children. Thou have a Navell about thee, carnal
desire, which sucks nutriment from the womb, and paps of the creature, their
Navels are fastened to the earth, which is their mother, thence they suck their
nutriment.

Hence the Chuch Psalm. 45.10. is bid forget her own people and her Fathers
House.

2. Naturally, man is filthy, void of all beauty, and comeliness, Thou wast not
washed with water, washing supposes defilement, Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me, warm me. John 3. That which
is borne of the flesh, is flesh, Psalm. 14.3. They are altogether become filthy:
there is some natural defilement adheres to a Child newly borne, but there is
much spiritual defilement.

3. He is stiff in wickedness, he has nothing to supple him, Psalm. 78.8. A
stubborn and rebellious generation.

4. Man corrupts in his natural condition more and more, he abounds in ill
humors, his thoughts are evil only and continually, his affections are
inordinate, Col. 3.5. wicked men grow worse and worse, 2. Tim. 3.13. they
putrify in that estate: Thou w^st not salted at all; Its salt that preserves
from putrefaction: now man by nature having no salt, must needs grow more and
more unsavourie, naturally men are not salted with the fire of the spirit, or
any spark of that fire, with any grace, with any divine Truth.

5. Man is naked in his natural estate, Thou wast not swadled; an Infant not
swaled, lies naked, sprawling, and is a miserable object; man since the fall is
naked, without God, and is not ashamed of his condition Jer, 3.3. Thou had a
Whores forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. He is not clothed with
Humility, has not put the Armor of God the Roabe of righteousness, but is
impotent, weak, and cannot help himself: a Child newborn, how feeble is it?
it cannot think of ought for its own good, it cannot speak a word for it
self: it cannot go or do any thing may advantage it: such is man in his
natural condition, 2. Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think
any thing (that is good) as of our selves, Matthew. 12.34. How can you being
evil speak good things?

Nor can he do good, Romans 3.12. There is none does good, no not one, Matthew.
7.16. Grapes do not grow upon Thorns, nor figgs upon Thistles: he is flesh,
in the flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.8. here is his misery, he that was
made at the first to serve God and please him, cannot now serve or please him
at all; he is so impotent, that he is not able to receive good, when it is
presented unto him, 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God; no, he is so far from entertaining of them, that he refuses
them, Luke 14.16. When the great supper was made, many invited, and all things
ready, what did they? they all made excues, and refused to come, Verse. 18.19.20.

An Infant kicks sprawles and opposes its own good: so does man naturally,
Romans 1.30. They hate of God. John 15.24. They hated Christ and his Father, Act.
7.15. They do always resist the holy Spirit.

6. Man in his natural Estate is in a helpless condition, there is none can
do him good, None eye pittyed thee, to do any of these things unto thee, to
have compassion upon thee; none had any bowels to pity, or power to do for
this Child; and who pitties, or has power to do for men in their natural
estates? all men are in the same condition, they cannot help themselves; other
creatures are enemies to man since his fall; Angels have not power to cut the
Navell of a natural man, to wash him, salt him, swaddle him; did either Priest
or Levite pity or help the man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho, when he
fell amongst Thieves, and was left half dead? who pittyed Abraham when he was
in Vr of Chaldea?

7. Man in his natural estate is cast out, infans expositus, Thou wast cast
out in the open Field; Adam and all in him were cast out of Paradise, a type of
Heaven, into the open Field of the world; so that he has no habitation, but is
a Vagabond upon the face of the earth, an excommunicate person, Moses could
say, Psalm. 90.1. Lord thou have been our dwelling place in all generations.

8. He lies senseless in that condition, and perishes in it: the Infant cast
out is not sensible of that estate, lies obvious to a thousand dangers, and
perishes, if not taken up.

9. Man in his natural estate, is loathsome, this Infant was cast out to the
loathing of her person, when men saw her, they were so far from pitying her,
they loathed her, as a little Child in its dung: and a man in his naturalls is
so full of sin, that he is abominable, his righteousness is as a menstruous
cloth, Isai. 64.6. his prayers, sacrifice, are abomination, and what then is
himself?

Lastly, this was in the day of birth, no sooner borne but miserable, extreme
miserable, either still-borne, or devoted to death immediately. Its reported of
the Indians and Brochmanes, that after birth, about two months, some are
appointed to view their Children, and if they be not likely to prove sound,
strong, useful to the State, they make them away: so that these Children were
of all unhappie, because they were borne, not to live, but to be murdered,
according to that in Hosea 9.13. Ephraim brought forth Children to the
murderer. And it was once an Order amongst the Romans, to put Children,
supposed to become a burden rather to the common wealth, than advantage, to
death, the same day and hour they were borne; a great misery. Jerusalem in
the day of her birth was cast out, exposed to all misery.

VER. 6. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own Blood,
I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live, yea, I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood live.


WE are now at the third general part of the Chapter, the commemoration of
Gods dealing with this Israelitish metaphorical Infant, when none pittyed her,
but she was cast out, loathed, in a perishing condition, the Lord himself had
compassion, and bestowed choice mercies on her, which are expressed in the
ensuing verse to the 15.

1. Is life in the 6. verse. 2. Is increase, growth in the 7. verse. 3. Is
spiritual marriage, verse 8. 4. Spiritual washing, and cleansing and
anointing. v. 9. 5. Costly provisions of diverse sorts for ornament, clothing,
and delight for back and belly, verse 10, 11, 12.13. 6. Royal dignity, verse
13, 7. Great fame and glory, verse 14.
When I passed by thee.
Hebrew is, Transivi juxta te, God is immutable, and immovable, he goes not
from place to place, its spoken humanitus, after the manner of men, as if God
like some great man were upon a journey, and in the way should spy a poor
Infant thrown out naked under a hedge, ready to perish, and should take pity
on it: so did God toward this Israelitish Infant. Transit dominus [quando se
pate facit, simmulque admonet pate faciendo, ^uid fugiendum, quidve sequendum
sit, this passing by refers, to the time of Gods calling Abraham out of Vr of
Chaldea, Genesis 12.1. The Lord said unto Abraham, get thee out of thy Country,
and to their condition in Egypt, Exodus 12.12. I will pass thorough the Land
of Aegyt this night.

This act of Gods passing by this Israelitish infant, seems casual and
acicdentall, but it was nothing so; for known unto God are all his works and
creatures, and he does nothing but upon foreknowledge and counsel, he knew in
what case this Infant was, where and how she lay: the expression of it in that
manner is to set out the extreme misery she lay in, that there was none she
could look for in heaven or earth to show pity, and do for her.

And saw thee polluted in thy own blood.
Hebrew is, Vidi te conculcatum, in sanguinibus tuis, Septh: (...) I saw thee
mingled in thy blood; French ie T'ai veu estre soviller en ton sang: sullied in
thy blood, Cast. Conspicatus in cruore tuo volutantem; Jun. Pisc. Pol.
Videremque te prebentem te conculdandam in sanguine tuo. We may stick to our
Translation of the word, for that is trodden down is polluted, we must let you
understand what is meant by blood.

Some judge it to be the red earth, whereof they made their brick, which looked
like blood, and that God pittyed them, when they were so put to it by their
Taskmasters, and were near ruin by their hard labor, God passed by them,
and beheld them in that condition.

But others by blood do understand that inbred corruption is in man, and
estate it has put him into, he is without all spiritual good, full of all
sin, in a miserable, helples condition. A Lapid. expounds it, mystically of
original sin, which is that innate and inherent corruption, which is in man.

Blood does in Scripture set out the corrupt nature of man, as Matthew. 16.17.
Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee; corrupt nature was never able
to attain unto it: so Gal. 1.16. 1 Cor. 15.50. Sin being set out by blood in
Scripture, we must consider the resemblances.

1. Blood is natural; so sin, Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my Mother conceive me, corruption is hereditary, as Chafe with
wheat, bark with the Tree, sense is not more natural than sin

2. Blood diffuseth it self through the whole man: so does sin; its not in some
one part, but in every part: as in the Sea, all parts of it are brachish: in
wormwood, every part is bitter. So in man there is sin, in every part in the
heart, Mat. 15 19.

In the mind Ephesians. 4.17. They walked in the vanity of their mind.

In the will Matthew. 23.37. How often would I have gathered you, and you would not.

In the understanding, Ephesians. 4.18. Having their understandings darkened.

In the conscience, Heb. 9.14.

In the memory, Heb. 2.1. That is unfaithful, and let things slip.

In the eyes, 2. Pet. 2.14. They had eyes of adultery.

In the Tongue, James 3.6. It defiles the whole body, and setteh on fire the
course of nature.

In the Throat its an open Sepulcher, Romans 3.13.

In the Hands Isai. 1.15. They are full of blood,

In the Feet Romans 3.15. They are swift to shed blood.

3. Blood defiles, Ps. 106.38. the Land was polluted with blood, and sin
pollutes, yea it is pollution, 2. Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all
pollution of flesh and spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. he prays they may be sanctified
wholly: Psalm. 14.3. Man is altogether become filthy.

4. Loathsome, sin is such, Prove. 13.5. a wicked man is loathsome; his sin
makes him to be loathed. Job 42.6. I abhor my self, see verse. 5. To the
loathing of thy person.

I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live.
There is some difference about the reading of these words, the Hebrew runs
thus, I said unto thee, and there makes the stop, in thy blood live; when thou
wast, is not in the original: others read it thus, I said unto thee in thy
blood, and there make the stop, live: I saw thee in thy blood, and said unto
thee in that condition, live.

The most Interpreters do follow the Hebrew, and rend^r it, in sanguine tuo
vive, or in saguinibus tuis vive: the French is, tu viuras en ton sang: not as
if so be God would leave this Infant in her sinful or afflicted condition
still, thou art cast into a miserable condition, and that thou shall continue
in, the scope of the place prohibits credit to such a sense of the words: we
may take the words therefore, strictly according to the Hebrew, In thy blood
live; in thy blood live; that is, thou art now in thy blood, in a polluted
loathsome condition thou shall live, I will give thee life.

In the Hebrew, an imperative is put for a future sometimes, and notes power,
efficacy, Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. Get thee up into the Mount, and dye in the Mount;
there is an imperative put for a future, and it notes power, I will cause thee
to dye in the Mount: so in this place live, I will cause thee to live: and so
it has the nature of a promise, and carries thus much with it, though thou be
in great affliction, yet thou shall live, I will uphold thee in thy
afflictions, they shall not sink thee; though thou be in thy natural and
sinful condition, dead, yet thou shall live, thy sins shall not undo thee.

Live.
What life is here meant?

Some look no farther then a natural or political life, that God preserved
them, and made them prosper into a Kingdom, and the ground of this
interpretation, is their referring of the words to their being in Egypt, under
sad afflictions, in which God preserved them, out of which he brought them, and
caused them to grow into a political body. They were there in bondage (which
was a kind of death, as the Jews were said to be in their graves in Babylon)
and yet by the hand of God, preserved and freed, which is called life.

But surely we are to look further than a natural, metaphorical political life,
we must take in a spiritual life here, and that will not beforced if we refer
the words to Abraham's call, when their birthday began, God found him in his
blood, and the life he bestowed on him was spiritual, a life of faith, for he
was the Father of the faithful, a life of holiness, for he walked before God,
and was upright.

Obser. 1. God lets men lie in their blood, as long as he pleases; take blood
for affliction, or man's natural condition, in either of these, men lie the
Lords pleasure, God passed not by presently, they lay in an afflicted condition
in Egypt 200 years and more, before the Lord appeared, and led them forth.
they lay 70. years in Babylon, before deliverance came, the two witnesses
must prophecy 1260. days in sackcloth, the Jews have been now 1600. years
in an afflicted tossed condition, and the Lord has not appeared unto them:
Rev. 11.3. so for man's natural condition.

Abraham was 75. years old, when God spoke to him, called him out of his
Country, and sinful condition. Genesis 12.4. the Gentiles lay in their blood,
in their blindness, unbelief, impenitencie, idolatries, profaneness, some
thousands of years, before the Lord granted them repentance unto life, ere he
passed by them, and called them: Nichodemus was a Doctor in Israel, before the
Lord let him know the nature of regeneration.

2. The Lord takes notice of men in what condition they are, and lie in, I saw
thee polluted in thy blood, he saw Abraham in his Idolatry, Heathenisme, he
saw the Jews making brick of red earth, in the house of bondage; there is no
sinful afflicted condition, that any are in, but the Lord takes notice of it,
when Adam hid himself in the bush, the eye of the Lord was upon him, and he saw
in what a condition he was, and all mankind in him, all sinful and sinnners,
all blood and bloody. Genesis 6.5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great
in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only
evil continually: he knew what a race came out of Adams loins: Christ knew
Jerusalems condition, that she lay in her blood, when he said, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I etc. Matthew. 23 Luke 13. so for Israel in her
affliction, 2 King 14.26. the Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was
very bitter; God takes special notice of the conditions men are in, and not
only so, but visits them in those conditions, I passed by and saw thee polluted
in thine own blood, etc.

3. Jerusalem the Church of God, in its primitive and natural consideration,
was in a state of death, I said unto thee, live; neither Abraham nor any of his
seed by nature had any spiritual life in them, he and all his were dead in
sins, and trespasses, they were Idolaters, unbeleevers, under the power of
sin, Guilty before God, Romans 3.19. Concluded under sin, Gal. 3.22. they
lay in their blood without life, and this is the condition of every man by
nature, though he has a natural life, yet he is morrally dead.

Matthew. 8.22. Let their dead bury the dead, Let those were dead morrally,
bury those were dead naturally.

The whole world is dead, John 6.51. Christ says he will give his flesh For
the life of the world; it was dead before, and he brought life to it, therefore
he is said to abolish death, to bring life and immortallity to light, 2 Timothy
1.10. but the world is not quickened, it has not received life, it Lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and the members of it are dead, 1 Timothy 5.6. the
widow That lives in pleasure is dead while she lives, and Luke 15.24. This my
son was dead, But is alive; whilst he lived in sinful courses he was dead.

4. God is the author of life, he is the living God, and gives life, all life
is in him and from him, he breathed into Adam the breath of life, he caused the
spirit of life to enter into the witnesses after they were slain: he gave life
to this dying Infant; Abraham had his spiritual life from him: so has the true
Church and every Member thereof.

1. There is a life of righteousness or justification which lies in the
remission of sin, the removal of the guilt, and deliverance from the curse
of the Law due to it, and acceptance of our persons unto favor, and this life
is from God, and is called the Life of faith, Hab. 2.4. Romans 5.18. Heb. 10.38.
Justification of life, Romans 5.18. and this is Of God. Col. 2.13. You being dead
in your sins, and the uncircumcision of the flesh, has he quickened together
with him, having forgiven you all trespasses, and Ephesians. 1.6. He has made us
accepted in the beloved.

2. There is a life of holiness, 1. Joh. 3.2, 3. He that has this hope,
purifies himself, as he is pure. Romans 6.11, 13, 19. Ephesians. 4.24. which lies in
conformity to the will of God, and walking as Christ walked, and this life is
of God, for we are his workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
Ephesians. 2.10.

3. The life of glory, which consists in that happiness the Saints have in
the enjoyment of God in the heavens, and this God is Author of; therefore is
called the Father of glory, Ephesians. 1.17. and is said, To bring many sons to
glory Heb. 2.10. and to call Us unto his eternal glory, 2 Pet. 5.10.

5. There is nothing in the Creature to move God to show mercy, When thou wast
in thy blood, in thy sin, I said unto thee live. God saw nothing to incline or
move him to do ought. or bestow ought upon this Infant, he saw no dispositions,
or qualifications in Adam or Abraham, when he spoke to them, and called them;
Adam was the greatest Malefactor that ever was amongst men, he destroyed the
whole world at once; Abraham was amongst Idolaters and Idolatrous, yet God set
his heart upon them, showed them mercy, said unto them live; Adam had no
repentance, Abraham no holiness, there were no praevious dispositions, neither
could they being flesh. John 3.6. being dead Ephesians. 2.1. prepare themselves for
mercy, If men could by themselves or others be fitted for mercy, then they
should be in a middle condition, between a dead man and a living man, a natural
man and a spiritual man, an ungodly man and a godly; but the Scripture
acknowledges no such middle condition, what ever men have in them they are one
of those two, and if they be dead men, they are not nearer life by all they can
do, Romans 9.16. It is not of him that wills, and. there is nothing can have
influence into the will of God; what ever he does is free.

There be several things which move men.

1. Birth and progeny; royal and noble births have affected many, David taken
with Saul's daughter, 1 Samuel 18.17.18. this moves not God, he powers contempt
upon Princes, Job 12.21. he Choseth the poor to be rich in faith, James 2.5.
Believers are said to be borne not of bloods. Joh. 1.13. which some refer to
families of noble and royal blood, and 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many noble.

2. Beauty, Jacob was affected with the beauty of Rachel, Ahashuerus with the
beauty of Vasthi, Esth. 1.11. God is not moved with beauty, if we had it,
there is nothing in man to affect his eye, Psalm. 14.3. We are altogether
filthy, and God saw them in their blood.

3. Natural parts prevail much with men, Ahitophel his counsel took much
with David and Absalom: Joseph, Daniel, had excellent spirits, great wisdom,
and they were advanced there upon, learning is persuasive and conquers many;
but parts, and learning can do nothing with God, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise
men after the flesh, Ver. 20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? for after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom, knew, etc.
Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise, and prudent, and have revealed them unto
Babes.

4. Profitablenesse, serviceablenesse: so Paul persuades Philemon to take
Onesimus, because he would be profitable unto him, men are taken with men,
because they bring in gain unto them, its not so with the Lord, he is not
profited by the righteousness of men, Job. 35.8. he receives nothing at any
man's hands, and when we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants, we have
meat drink, wages, from him, and do all for our selves.

5. Necessity moves mightily, it caused Abiather to give the Shewbread to
David, 1 Samuel 21.6. the necessity of the Church moved the rich to sell their
Lands and Goods to distribute unto every man as they had need. Act. 2.45. this
is no motive unto divine Majesty, the greatest part of the world lie in
blindness, darkness, and they must perish without the means of grace, and
God does not vouchsafe it unto them.

6. Entreaty, that has a great prevalencie, Luke 11.5.8. When a man came to
his friend to borrow bread of him at midnight, and used entreaties,
importunity, he got what he desired: but let men pray that are in their blood,
and it moves not God, Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination
unto the Lord, Jer. 11.14. and 14.12. God tells them that when they pray, fast,
cry, offer sacrifice, he will not hear, nor accept them; the desire of the
wicked shall perish, Psalm. 112.10.

7. Hope of proving well, draws forth men to do much; Parents for Children,
and men for others, they conjecture that they may become isntrumental to
Church, state, and to Gods glory in both, the Lord that knows all, sees
nothing that will make him prove well, he knows every man will run the wrong
way, if he do not prevent, infuse, change and alter nature, Jer. 3.5. they
spoke and did evil things as they could. There is nothing in the creature to
move God to do for it; not foreseen works, faith, use of free will,
perseverance: God does bestow his favor, where is nothing to invite, When I
saw thee polluted in thy blood, I said unto thee live; not when I saw thee
washed out of thy blood, cleansed and well qualified; not when I saw thee
penitent, believing, obedient, but when I saw thee in thy blood, in the worst
condition of all: as nothing can incline God, so nothing can hinder God from
showing mercy, Romans 9.15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, etc.
God will give gifts to Christ for the rebellions, and dwell among them, Psalm.
68.18. How rebellious was Manasses, how did he sin against Heaven and earth,
yet God had a gift for him, life for him; Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, Christ said
to them live, when they were in their blood: Paul when he was a blasphemer,
persecuter, an injurious person, he showed mercy to him, and bad him live, Nec
parvum, nec modicum, nec modiculum.
these were his preparations to grace and mercy, he knew that legal acts
could not dispose him or others to receive grace, and therefore concludes, Romans
3.28. that a man is justified without the deeds of the Law.

8. Nothing in the godly moves God, all they do is debt, Luke 17.10. when they
had done all, it was but their duty, besides, the will and deed are of the
Lord, Phil. 2.13. He works in us, to will and to do of his good pleasure; and
his dispensations of grace and mercy, are not according to our wills
dispositions, qualifications, but according to the good pleasure of his own
will, 2 Timoth. 1.9. he saves and calls, Not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose.

Obs. 6. God does all freely, and nothing can hinder the work of free grace,
When I passed by thee, and saw thee in thine own blood, I said unto thee live;
when there was nothing to move in the creature, there was much in God to move
him to show compassion, the principle that sets him on work, is in himself,
and that is his (...) Ma th. 11.26. his good pleasure, (...) Romans 9.11. His
purpose, (...), Ephesians. 1.11. The counsel of his Will. The motive being within
God, all he does is free favor, mere mercy; if you will search from Gods
beginning with man, to his end, you shall find, all to be of free grace and
favor: Predestination and election are so, Romans 11.5. God has chosen the
foolish, weak, and base things of the world, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. and these are
called Vessels of mercy, Romans 9.23.

Calling is of free grace, 2 Timothy, 1.9. Gal. 1.15. who called me by his grace.

Justification is so, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely through his grace.

Adoption, Ephesians. 1.5. Its according to the good pleasure of his will.

Christ himself is free grace, Joh. 3.16.4.10.

Faith in him, Act. 18.27. They believed through grace.

Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. If God peradventure will give them repentance.

Love, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. You are taught of God to love.

Change of heart and spirit, Exek. 36.26.

Good works, Ephesians. 2.10. Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing.

Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The very God of peace sanctify, etc.

Perseverance, 1 Cor 1.8. Who shall confirm you to the end; and Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes.

Salvation, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are you saved through faith, not of your selves,
it is the gift of God, Titus. 3.5. According to his mercy he saved us.

Eternal life, Romans 6.23. It Is the gift of God.

Let the consideration hereof draw your hearts to believe; cheer you against
all doubts, fears, distempers, and cause you to give glory to God, for what
he has done.

7. The Lord shows mercy to men when they are in desperate conditions; when
this Infant was cast out, loathd, lay polluted in her blood (for her Navell was
not cut, nor healed, but she lay bleeding to death) ready to be devoured by the
beasts of the Field, the fowls of Heaven, etc. then God said, live. Take life
for preservation, freedom and prosperity, its true therein, when Moses and
other Hebrew Children were to be drowned, and so the male Jews to have been
ruined when their lives were grievous to them, under their Taskmasters, the
Lord preserved them, delivered them. When in Babylon, all their necks were upon
the block, by Hamans plot and power, the Lord showed them mercy, and said,
live: so Daniel in the Lions den, the three Children in the fiery furnace,
etc. God preserved them, freed them from their dangers, enemies; and caused
them to live. Take life for spiritual life, and you shall find that the Lord
has said live, when men have been in desperate cases, and at the brinke of
eternal destruction. The Thief upon the Cross met with life in the gates of
death, and so the Jaylour Act. 16. One having a fish-bone sticking in his
throat, and ready to be strangled, being reproved for swearing and cursing, at
that time, was so wrought upon, that the life of sin, was turned into the life
of grace. Another being in a wood, and going to hang himself, the Lord in his
providence, caused one going by the wood, to hear a noise, who came in,
counseled the man, so as that he was wrought upon at that time, and lived. You
have heard of some that have come to godly Ministers, who crossed them, in
their preaching, with resolution to murder them, but ere they parted, God said
to them live.

8. When sinners look not after God, he is pleased to to look after, and
find out them. This Infant minded not God, inquired not after him, came not
toward him: but God passed by, and seeing her in a bloody and sinful
condition, He said unto her live.

God found out, and called the Jews, when they neither sought nor called: so was
it with the Gentiles, Isai. 65.1. I am sought of them that asked not for me, I
am found of them that sought me not, these words are paradoxicall, how could
they seek, that asked not? and how could they find, that sought not? in them
therefore is held out the preventive mercy of God. God came to them, sought
them, found them, before they ask't or sought after him, Ephesians. 2.17. Christ
came and Preached peace to them that were a far off; that was, the Gentiles;
and Paul was to bear the name of the Lord before them, Act. 9.15. by him,
salvation was sent to them, Acts 28.28. and he was the Apostle of the Gentiles,
Romans 11.13. being prevented and converted by the grace of God, they sought him
whom before they knew not, nor asked for, and now they found him they had not
formerly sought, Romans 10.20. the words run thus, I was found of them that
sought me not, I was made manifest to them, that asked not after me: when they
were worshipping false Gods, blaspheming and dishonouring my name, I
unexpectedly came to them, offered them mercy and salvation, which they
neither thought of, or sought for, like men that digg in the earth for stones,
and coals, and find a great treasure.

Muscul. reads the words in the future, I will be sought of them that ask't
not for me, I will be found of them who sought me not, and so they are a
gracious promise of Gods looking after, finding out, and manifesting of
himself unto them, before they had a thought thereof: all their learning,
wisdom, morality, led them not to look after God and salvation by Christ;
by those they were carried the wrong way, and whilst they were in the way to
destruction, God met them, reveald and tendered salvation unto them: both
Gentile and Jew had preventing grace, and were sought out of God, before ever
they sought God; hence Jerusalem had that promise or title, Isai. 62.12. Thou
shall be called sought out; God had called her Children, and sought them out of
many Nations.

9. God has no need of any people; whatever he did to this people, was not
because he wanted them to do him Service, to praise his name, to promote any
of his designs, to suffer for his sake. He passed by, like some great man, that
rideing forth, finds a poor distressed Infant, and out of compassion takes it
up, and into his Family, and does much for it, not because he needs it, but
will show kindness to it of his own good pleasure: so dealt the Lord here, he
passing by, and seeing so miserable a creature, said Live, not because he had
need, but because he would show mercy, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord chose them, not
for their number, but because he loved them; and he loved them, not because he
needed them, but because he would communicate good unto them, he is al
sufficient of himself, not depending on or beholding to any creature; if he
needed people or Nations, he could create them, raise them up from the stones.
Isay says, Chap. 40.15. The Nations are as drop of the bucket, and are counted
as the small dust of the balance; and surely God who is an infinite Ocean, an
infinite being, needs not a little drop or a little dust. The Samaritan had no
need of the wounded man, Luke 10 but he needed the Samaritanes wine and oil:
God has no need of England.

10. The Lord bestows great mercies in a transient way; When I passed by and
saw thee, I said live; he took this occasion, to do good to this bloody,
helples, sinful Infant. The Samaritane, as he passed by the man wounded, took
occasion to bind up his wounds, and save his life. Christ in the 9. of John
going by saw a blind man, and thereupon anointed his eyes, and caused him to
see: so in Joel 2.14. you read of leaving a blessing behind him; God passes
through Kingdoms, Families, and uses to leave blessings where he goes, he
takes occasion from what he sees, and finds, to distribute mercies: Christ when
he was going out of the world, said, Peace I leave with you, John 14.27. he
would not leave them without a blessing.

We should labor to be like unto God and Christ, take occasions and
advantages to do good.

11. In bestowing mercies God is serious and real; this appears from the
ingemination of the words, live, live; when there is a doubling of the same
word, there the intention, realitie, and earnestness of the Author speaking is
held out; be it in matter of judgment, or matter of mercy. Ezekiel. 5.8. I, even
I, am against thee; God was seriously, and earnestly against them, Ezekiel. 37.5,
6. Ye shall live, ye shall live; God was set upon it, viz. the giving life to
dry bones, Isai. 40.1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people; the duplication of
the words imports Gods seriousnes to comfort them, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth
thee unto me, yea I will betroth thee unto me, yea a third time, I will betroth
thee unto me; the more iteration, the more affection, intention and reallitie.
Isai. 55.1. Come, Come, Come, says God thrice, and this sets out the real, and
vehement desire of the Lord to do sinners good; and how should this make
sinners hearken unto the Lord, when he speaks, and entertain any offers of
mercy from him?

12. When God has done much for a people, and they are degenerate,
ungrateful, disobedient, the Lords way of dealing with them, is to set before
them their original condition, and his kindness unto them, When thou wast in
thy blood, I said unto thee live, etc. so in Micah 6.2, 3, 4, 5. God had a
controversy with them, for their unkindnesse toward him, and says, O my
people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify
against me: for I brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out
of the House of Servants, and sent before thee, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. O my
people, rememember now what Balack King of Moab confulted, and what Balaam the
son of Beor answered him, from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the
righteousness of the Lord; that I kept Covenant, performed all promised to
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. I gave you Prophets, and Prophetesses, choice
deliverers, I turned curses into blessings, I led you by a pillar of fire in
the night, and a cloud in the day: so in Jer. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Thus says the
Lord, what iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from
me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? Neither said they,
where is the Lord that brought us out of the Land of Egypt? that led us
through the Wilderness, through a Land of Deserts and of pits, through a Land
of Drought and of the shadow of death, through a Land that no man passed
through, and where no man dwelt. And I brought you into a plentiful Country,
to eat the fruit thereof, and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye
defiled my Land, and made mine heritage an abomination. The Priests said not,
where is the Lord? and they that handle the Law, knew not me, the Pastors also
transgressed against me, and the Prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after
things that do not profit. Wherefore I will yet plead with you says the Lord,
and with your Childrens Children will I plead; God had done great things for
them, and they had greatly corrupted their ways, degenerated fearfully from
the worship of God, therefore God reduces them to consider of their pristine
condition, and what a bountiful, merciful, gracious God he was to them. He had
done such and such things for them, and they forgate him and all his kindness,
and made him say, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people,
and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made thee,
and established thee?

VERSE. 7.
I have caused thee to multiply, as the bud of the Field, and thou have
increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments: thy
breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and
bare.


THis Verse contains the second benefit which the Lord vouchsafed this Infant,
viz. growth, increase, after life granted, he caused her to multiply.

This Multiplication is set out by a double comparison, 1. Is the bud of the
Field. 2. Is of a young Maid, growing up to a marrigeable condition, Thy
breasts are fashioned, etc.


I have caused thee to multiply.
The Hebrew word for multiply, is, (...) and Montanus renders the word thus,
december millia veluti germen agri dedi te, I have given thee ten thousand as the
grass of the Field, I have increased thee exceedingly. The Hebrews use to put
thousands for great numbers, Psalm. 68.17. The Chariots of God are twenty
thousands, even thousands of Angels, that is an innumerable, or exceeding great
company. Pisc. has it, in Myriadem te auxi, I have increased thee into a
Million, I have made thee a very numerous multitude, Exodus 1.7. The Children of
Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed
exceeding mighty, and the Land was filled with them: God had made a promise to
Abraham, that he would make of him a great Nation, Genesis 12.2. that his seed
should be As the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 15.5. As the dust of the earth. Chap.
13.16. As the sand on the Sea shore. Chap. 22.17. and here you see it made
good, his posterity increased so abundantly, multiplied and waxed so mightily,
that they filled the Land.

Some observe that it was but 50. years from the death of Joseph to this time,
or thereabouts, and in those few years they came to such a numerositie as did
filthe Land, and exceed the number of the Egyptians, in their apprehensions,
Exodus 1.9. Behold the People of the Children of Israel are more and mightyer
then we; when they came into Egypt, they were not above 70. or 75. souls, but
when they went out, they were 600000. men, neither women, Children, nor aged
men were here reckoned, for in the second year after they were gone out of
Aegyt, and the second month of that year, they were reckoned again, and only
those were reckond, who were twenty years old and upwards, and able for the
war, and they were found to be 603550. Numb. 1.45, 46. here were neither
Levites, aged women, or Children numbered, which had they been, would have
doubled the Number. This made David say Psalm. 105 24. He increased his people
greatly.

As the bud of the Field.
Hebrew is, (...) Sicut germen agri, As the grass of the Field, or whatever
grows in the Field. The Septu. is, (...), as the rising or spring of the
Field: you know every thing has life in it, puts forth in the springtime,
Corn, grass flowers, weeds, Trees, bushes, every thing buds and springs
forth, and what a multitude of buds are upon some one Tree, some one hedge, in
one Field, and the Jews multiplied not as some one of them, but as the budd of
the Field in general, Here our Prophet seems to allude to Isaacks blessing of
Jacob, Genesis 27.27. The smell of my Son is as the smell of a field which the
Lord has blessed.

Thou have increased, and waxen great.
God gave out the blessing, and presently increase, and greatness followed,
both multitude and magnitude; Their multitude is set out, in Numb. 10.36.
Return O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel, the Hebrew is, ten thousands.
Their greatness you have, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. where thrice they are called A great
Nation, yea greater than others, and Joshua intimates the greatness of his
people, when he says to those came out of Joseph's loins only, Chapter 17.17. Thou
art a great people, have great power, how great were they al, and al their
power.

Thou art come to excellent ornaments.
Hebrew is, (...) ad ornamentum ornamentorum, to the ornament of ornaments:
Piscat: Vsque ad summum ornamentum to the chiefest ornament, French, Es
parvenue, a estre ornee d'ornemens. The Sept. showed themselves here like other
men subject to error, for they mistaking (...) for (...) read instead of ade,
adim, are, arim, and so make the sense this, thou art come to Cities of Cities,
to chief and excellent Cities, but the original is ornament of ornaments, what
those ornaments were, men's thoughts are diverse: some have thought them to be
the Law, Tabernacle; but that is too curious. Others refer these ornaments to
those Jewels of gold and silver which they borrowed of the Egyptians, Exodus
11. and this people both men and women, had bedeckt themselves with golden
earings, which they pulled off, and brake in pieces, to make the molten calfe
withal, Exodus 32.23. and not only these, but some take in all artificial
ornaments, that Virgins marrigeable, and near marriage, are wont to adorn
themselves withal, that they may be more amiable, and delightful, but the
words in the 11. and 12. verses, forbid us to close with this opinion, for here
the Lord speaks of such things, I decked thee also with ornaments, I put
bracelets upon thine hands, and a chain on thy neck, I put a Jewel on thy
forehead and earings in thine ears.

We are therefore to refer the words to natural ornaments, and beauty of
the body; for when Virgins are grown up and fit for marriage, then they have
natural ornaments, which do greatly become them. And that this is the genuine
sense, the words following do confirm, Thy breasts are fashioned, and thine
hair is grown, these be natural ornaments, and in these he specifies, what
Ornaments he meant.

Thy breasts are fashioned.
Hebrew, Shadai nalonu Vbera tua facta sunt firma, the Septu. is, (...) thy
breasts were made right or erected; Vulg. intumuerunt, they swelled and grew
great: so the French Tes mamelles se sont ingrossies, thy breasts are grown
bigg, they are fashioned, semiglobuli figuram referentes they resemble the
form of half globes, there is great sympathy between the womb and the
breasts, because of the Veins which go from the one unto the other.

The Breasts are placed in the Breast, says Laurentius.

1. For generation of milk, they have in them vim (...) a power to beget
milk, whereby to nourish the birth that comes from them. Through divine
providence, much blood flows from the womb to the breasts, which being
spongie, receive it, concoct it, through the heat of the heart and liver, and
turn it into milk, for sustenance of the tender Offspring.

2. They are for the defense of the heart, they defend it, Ab extrinsecus
occursantibus injuriis, from violence without.

3. For ornament and delight, they are compared in the Canticles to things that
are so, Chap. 4.5. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, like
two kids, or Fawnes which are an ornament to the Damme, or delightful to
behold, like an Ewe with two Lambs by her sides, 1 Kings 7.7. Thy breasts are
like to clusters of grapes. You know that goodly clusters, are a choice
ornament to the Vine, and very pleasing to him beholds them, and in the 8.
Chap. 10. Verse, their breasts are said to be like Towers, and its granted that
Towers are as well for ornament as defense to a City: so then the Breasts of a
Maiden or woman, are as great an ornament to her, as twins are to the Dam, as
Clusters are to the Vine, as Towers to a City.

Now by this fashioning of the breasts, is held out the fitness of this
metaphorical Maid (the Israelitish estate) for marriage. Tumor Vberum in
puellis nubilis aetatis signum. Malden:
The more prominencie or eminency of them from the body, the more is the
evidence of their fitness for marriage, Cant. 8.8. We have a little Sister,
and she has no breasts, not simply no breasts, not Vbera tumentia, not
Breasts fashioned and fitted for marriage to Christ, the time was not yet come
for them, but it was come for the Jews, and Rabbi David referrs it to their
coming out of Egypt: When a Maiden is a Servant, she is neither free nor so
fit for marriage.

Whereas thou wast naked and bare.
Hebrew is, And thou wast naked and bare, Sept. (...), and thou wast naked and
full of shame. Pisc. Nudissima fuisti and retectissima, thou wast most naked
and most uncovered. Jun. Cum tu nuda esses atque nudissima, When as thou wast
naked, even most naked. Sed eras nuda and detecta, but thou wast naked and
uncovered. Eras nuda and confusione plena, thou wast naked and full of
confusion.

This nakedness may refer to the words before, in the fourth and fifth
verses, Thou wast not swadled at all, but wast cast out in the open Feilds, to
the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast borne: and some are
persuaded to it, upon this ground, because, now was the time of her youth,
Sanct:
and its improbable that God who had taken care of her (being borne of an
Amorite and an Hittite) who had brought her up all this time, should let her be
naked and lie exposed to shame, reproach, and contempt: but the Hebrew invites
us to put it upon her present, not her past condition, thus, I have caused thee
to multiply, increase, grow great, brought thee to excellent natural
ornaments, fashioned thy breasts, made thine hair grow, and yet thou art but
naked and bare, thou art poor and have nothing.

In what this nakedness lay, is needful a little to inquire. Some place it in
her being void of the Law, Theodor. says of this person, nondum acceperat
legis tegumentum, the Law was the chief honor and ornament of the Jewish
people, and where that is not, there is a great nakedness. Some place it in
their poverty, the Rabbis say, that Israel was clad with vile garments, their
nakedness was much seen.

Its probable their poverty was great in Egypt, when they were to go out of
it, they borrowed Raiment of the Aegiptians, and Jewels of gold and silver,
Exodus 12.35. Others put it in this, that they were destitute of all help, they
were in great bondage, suffered great hardship, a pollitick plot was upon them
to drown their Male Children, and so to ruin them; and being in this case,
none pittyed them, came into their Counsel or help, and so in this sense they
were truly naked and bare.

Obser. 1. The Lord is mindful of his promises, and makes them good by
degrees, and in due time; he had promised Abraham, that he would make of him a
great Nation. Genesis 12.2. That his seed should be as the Stars, Dust, Sand, and
here you see it made out, I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the
Field. It was very unlikely that it should ever be so, God promised Ahraham a
Son, but he stayed near 20. years for him after the promise: some think it
was 40 year if not more, before Isaac married, and when married, his Wife was
barren all Abraham's days, after he had two Sons, Jacob and Esau; then Jacob
had twelve Sons, and went down into Aegyt with 70 souls, and from them
proceeded multitudes without number: so God by degrees accomplished what he
promised, and made Abraham's posterity innumerable.

2. From mean beginnings, God sometimes raises to much greatness; he brings
from a low despicable estate to great excellency; this Israelitish state was
at first, as, Infans expositus, like a Child thrown out by the friends, as not
able to maintain it, left in the Feilds to perish; this Child the Lord took
up, and brought forth a great Nation out of the loins of it.

Abraham was the man, and from him came the populous Nation of the Jews, etc.
he brought those green buds out of a dry Tree: Its Gods method often times to
raise glorious buildings out of rubbish, he made the world out of nothing from
the little drops, he makes great floods: from a little dust in livened, he has
brought forth all mankind.

What is all the world but Adam, and all the Jews but Abraham?

At the first fruit offering, they were to say, a Syrian was my Father, he went
down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a Nation,
mighty, great, and populous. Deuteronomy. 26.5.

The Roman state grew up from Romulus a Bastard.

The Turkish had low beginnings.

What was England once?

The Brittons went naked, they painted their bodies blew, were called picti and
sky colored Brittons, they wore their hair long, their Towns were their
woods, they had 10. Brit signifies painted, Taine a Nation.
or 12. wives a peeice, and those common to Brothers and Parents, they tild no
ground, did eat no flesh; but lived much upon roots, and barks of Trees, they
were exceeding superstitious, and paraleld, if not exceeded the Egyptian
Idols, and idolatry.

They were given much to Magic.

They held the soul passed from one to another.

They were hardly, known to other Nations, and had little or no commerce with
any.

The Keels and ribbs of their ships, were of light wood, covered over with
Leather.

Their Coin of brass, and Iron rings.

From these we came, and our beginning was mean.

3. The work of nature, is the work of God; multiplying, increasing, waxing
great, fashioning of breasts, growing of hair, are all natural things: but I
caused thee to, etc. opus naturae, is opus intelligentiae: it was the hand of
God to bring that green sprigg Isaac out of dry roots, and its also the
work of God to bring branches out of green roots: Children are the gift of
God, Genesis 33.5. He forms them in the womb, brings them into the world, and
bestows them upon the Parents. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Has not he made thee, and
established thee?

4. The natural beauty, excellency that any person or Kingdom has, is of
the Lords good pleasure, and mere mercy: thou art come to excellent
ornaments, but who brought her to them? was it not the Lord took her in being
cast out, that gave her breasts, that fashioned them, etc. In the 14. v. The
Lord says, he Puts comeliness upon her; what ever excellencies, ornaments of
nature Kingdoms or people have, they had them from the Lord.

5. Man in himself, or naked of himself, has no excellency, Thou wast naked
and bare: no free will, no merits.

VER. 8.
Now when I passed by thee and looked upon thee: Behold thy time was the time
of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea I
swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and
thou becamest mine.


HHere you have laid before you the third choice mercy which the Lord bestowed
upon this metaphorical Infant, grown up to woman's estate, viz. Spiritual
marriage; the Lord brought her to excellent ornaments fashioned her breasts,
made her hair to grow, and then married her unto himself.

In the verse you have,

1. The preparatories to this marriage, which are 1. Gods access to her, and
observation of her, When I passed by thee. 2. His acknowledgement of her time,
Thy time was the time of love. 3. His manifestation of his love to her, I
spread my skirt over thee,


2. The marriage itself, I swear unto thee, and entered into Covenant with
thee.

3. The effect of it, special obligation between, and mutual relation to
each other, in these words, Thou becamest mine.

The parts of the Verse being propounded, the next thing is to open the words
unto you.

Now when I passed by thee,
Of Gods passing by, I spoke in the 6. verse, it notes not local motion, bu^
is spoken humano more: God is resembled to a Travailer, going from place to
place, observing or doing several things in several places.

The former passing by referred to Abraham in his Chaldaish estate.

This is a second passing by, and referrs to their estate in Aegyt, Exodus
2.24.12.12. Chap.

And looked upon thee.
Hebrew is, I saw thee, or have seen thee, not that God was ignorant of them
and their condition, or that they were out of his sight, for he is present
every where, sees all things at all times, but it is to note, that God
intended some special mercy toward them, to do some remarkable thing for
them, Aspectu dei notatur aperta declaration auxilii. Call-
and that was the calling and sending of Moses to be a Deliverer unto them,
Exodus 3.7, 8, 10. God appeared to Moses in the burning bush, and said, I have
surely seen the affliction of my people, and am come down to deliver them,
come now therefore, I will send thee unto Pharaoh, etc. The Lords seeing, notes
his pitying, and merciful rega^ding them, French is, te regardai, I have
regarded thee, Pisc^t. Consideravi, I have considered thee, and taken thy
condition to heart, and intend to do graciously by thee.

Behold thy time was the time of love.
Thy time, what time was this?

1. The time when she was in Egypt, and suffered hard things. The Israelites,
you know, were hated of Pharaoh, Psalm. 106.10. therefore he set Taskmasters
over them, and commanded their Children to be murdered by the Midwives, to be
drowned by the people, they were made to serve with rigor in all their
Services, their bondage and oppression was such as made them cry out, and filled
them with anguish of spirit, Exodus 2.23.6. and 9. Chap.

2. The time of youth; she was now grown up to Woman's estate, and was fit
for marriage, when a Maid has her Breasts fashioned, and her hair grown,
then lovers and suitors, frequent the places where she lives, labor to gain
her affections, and to bring her into the honourble estate of marriage; and for
that purpose they employ some faithful friends to speak for them, to make way
for the accomplishment of their desires, thus dealt the Lord with the
Israelitish estate, being much multiplied in Egypt, Exodus 4.14, 15, 16. and
chap. 5.1. They went into Pharaoh and said, thus says the Lord God of Israel,
let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the Wilderness.

The time of love,
The Hebrew is, (...) The time of loves or lovers. The Septu: is, (...), which
Kirker interprets, tempus divertentium, which you may refer to the woers, or
to the woed; if to the woers, thus it was a time for the woers to leave their
own houses, and to turn into the House of their desired, to suit and solicit
her their hearts and thoughts were upon; as Sampson did the woman in Timnah: if
to the woed, thus, it was a time for the woed to divert and pass from the
state of virginity, to the state of marriage, and to be ranked in the order of
the married; but (...) signif^ies rather dissolventium, it was a time of
dissolving or dissolvers, a time for the vvoers, and vvoed, to let out their
affections, one to another, and to declare their mutual delights in each
other. Aquila in his second edition has it tempus (...) a time of espousals
and marriage, as Pradus renders the word: of commerce and exchange, as Sanct:
gives it, because they have sweet commerce together, and do buy each the
other, the man gives himself to and for the woman, and the woman herself to and
for the man, they exchange persons, liberties, estates, Cast. Cum esses ejus
aetatis, quae est amoribus idonea, others (...) the time of departing out of
their Virgi-nity. The words are expressive of Gods love, he was the lover, you
must not take them in a carnal manner, love, in such a sense, is unsuitable to
his nature, he is without all passions, and perturbations; when god does such
acts as argue love in the judgment of man, he is said in Scripture phrase to
love, when the time promised of their deliverance was come (which was to be at
the end of 400 years as you may see, Genesis 15, 13.14. Act. 7.6.7.) when God
began the work of deliverance, then he loved them, then was a time of loves.
God loved them before, Abraham was the friend of God, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. so Isaac
and Jacob were beloved of him, with the rest of their forefathers, Deuteronomy. 4.37.
He loved thy Father, says Moses; yet here its called the time of love, because
the Lord manifested singular love unto them, in redeeming them from the house
of bondage, in taking them, in a peculiar manner, to be his people, etc. and
therefore its said to be a time of love; love in pitying them, love in
remembering his promise, love in causing the Midwives to spare their Children,
love in making them grow and increase, love in sending Moses and Aron, love in
working such wonders for them, love in giving them the Egyptians Jewels and
raiment, love in bringing them out of the house of bondage, love in leading
them through the red Sea, and drowning their enemies in it,

I spread my skirt over thee.
(...) and expandi alam meam super te: so is the Septu: (...) the vulgar is
amictum meum, I spread my clothing over thee; Cast. thus, expanso in te meo
gremio, the word (...) properly signifies the wing of a bird, Genesis 7.14. that
is, there every Bird, of every sort is Col zippor, Col Canaph every bird, every
vvinged thing: metaphorically its applied to the extremity or utmost part of
things, as the outward parts of an Army are called the wings of it, Isai 8.8. The
stretching out of his wings, shall fill thy Land O Emanuel, h e wings that is,
the utmost part of Senacheribs Army when he lay before Jerusalem in Hezekiahs
days.

The ends of the earth are called so, Isai. 20.16. From the uttermost parts of
the earth, have we heard songs, miccenaph haaretz, ab alis terrae: so Isai.
11.12. He shall gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the four corners
of the earth, (...) ab alis terrae, so its put for the uttermost part of a
garment, 1. Sam. 24.4. David cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily, (...) the
wing of thy robe. The like is Jer. 2.34. In thy skirts is found the Blood of
innocents, Original, In thy Wings.

Now what this spreading of the wing or skirt means, falls into consideration.

It seems to import a marriage rite. When they were to be espoused or married
among the Jews, it was a custom to spread their garment over them; Hence it
was that Ruth said to Boas, Ruth 3.9. Spread thy skirt over thy Handmaid, for
thou art a near Kinsman, that is, betroth thee unto me, and marry me; The Law
was that when a man dyed without issue, some near Kinsman should marry the
Widow, enjoy the Inheritance, and raise up Seed to him was dead, and the
Ceremony used, was spreading the skirt over them, Deuteronomy. 22.30. a man must not
discover his Fathers skirt; that is, he must not have to do with his
Stepmother, whom his Father has spread his skirt over, and married, defiling
of her is uncovering of his Fathers skirt, Deuteronomy. 27.20. Maldonate says, it was
a rite of marriage, or certainly a promise of marriage, if a man did cover a
woman with his skirt or garment.

Besides, this rite implies protection, defense, safety; the wing of any
Foul, spread over its young, is a safety unto it, Isai. 31.5. As Birds
flying, so will the Lord of Hosts defend Jerusalem: when Birds see their young
in danger, they fly, make have unto them, spread their wings over them, and so
defend them: in like manner would the Lord do, spread his wing of protection
over Jerusalem, and preserve it; hence that phrase in Scripture, of trusting in
the shadow and covert of his wings, Psalm. 36.7:57.1:61.4:63.7:91.4. but this
protection we speak of, is not protection in general, but Maritalis
protectio, as Abraham was to Sarah, Genesis 20.16. A covering of the eyes, God was
a covering to them, Isa. 4.5. Upon all the glory a defense, (...) operimentum:
so then by this expression, is held out, God taking his people into his
Custody, his special care, provision, and defense of them.

Calvin thinks that by this spreading of their skirt, is meant all that power,
and goodness of God which he put forth in delivering of them out of Egypt;
the Lord brought them out with a strong hand, and stretched out arm, his
power, mercy, wisdom, goodness appeared marvailously in that work; he tells
them, Exodus 19.4. what he had done for them, Ye have seen what I have done
unto the Egyptians (I have sent plague after plague upon them, till I had
utterly consumed them, and in the midst of al, you were preserved) And how I
bare you upon Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self.

The Eagle, when her young ones are in danger, or ready to go from the nest,
she takes them upon her wings, and carries them away with strength, speed,
safety, and that in open view: so did the Lord by this people, he carried them
from their nest, the house of bondage, being in danger to be devoured by
Pharaoh that Dragon, upon the wings of his power and goodness, and that with
Strength, All the power of Egypt could not deteine them. Speed, Exodus 12.33.
They hasted out of the Land. Safety, Not a Dog moved his Tongue against them,
Exodus 11.7. In open view. They hired them to go with gold, silver and with
raiment, Exodus 12.33, 35.


This is more fully expressed, Deuteronomy. 32.11. As an Eagle stirs up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, and bareth
them on her wings: so the Lord alone did lead them.

Moses and Aaron were as the wings or hands of God, but God led them.

And covered thy nakedness.
The Hebrew is, (...) ignominiam tuam: so the Septu: (...) thy shame; French,
Couuri ta villenee, Castal. tuam naturam texi, I have covered thy nature, Vulg.
ignominiam tuam thy shame.

1. This nakedness may be taken literally, and so God covered it, when he gave
them the Egyptian garments, they mght leave their ragged tattered garments
behind them, and its likely they were poor, when as the Lord preserved their
garments and shoes from wearing out, or old, forty years together, Deuteronomy. 29.5.
I have led you forty years in the Wilderness, your clothes are not waxen old
upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot: had they had variety
of garments, this miracle had not been so needful.

Genesis 30.23.
2. You may take it metphorically, for that reproach, which under the Law, was
upon unmarried, fruitless, barren women, Isai. 4.1. Seven women should take
hold on one man saying, let us be called by thy name, to take away our
reproach. It was a reproach for Maidens not to be married, Ps. 78.63. Their
Maidens were not given in marriage, and Luke 1.25. When Elizabeth had
conceived, she said, The Lord has looked on me, to take away my reproach among
men: want of marriage and want of issue, were both matters of reproach in
Israel; and if Parents kept their Virgins beyond the flower of their age, it
was a reproach to them, 1 Cor. 7.36. Gods covering of her nakedness and shame,
was his entering into Covenant with this people, and taking them to be his: so
that they were not without God, without a Husband, to love, to protect, to
provide for them, which made Moses to say, Deuteronomy. 4.7. What Nation is there so
great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things?

3. For that reproach and shame the Jews were under in Egypt? they were
Servants to the Egyptians, an Idolatrous and Heathenish people, who used them
hardly, and held them under cruel bondage, Deuteronomy. 26.6. they were under a King
of another Nation, that was cruel as a Dragon, Ezekiel. 23.3. Pharaoh is called
the great Dragon, unnatural, wilful, hated them, sought their death; the
Egyptians evil entreated them, afflicted them, and laid upon them hard
bondage; when they moved to go and worship the Lord their God, they were
charged to be idle, and their task increased.

Now this was a great reproach to Abraham's posterity, that they were Servants,
and held in bondage, generation after generation; this reproach God covered,
and took away, when he brought them out of Egypt, and drowned the
Egyptians, (who had lorded it so over them) in the bottom of the Sea.

No sooner were they come out of Egypt, but the Lord told them they were come
out of the House of Bondage, Exodus 13.3. which is often mentioned in holy writ,
and they were to remember that condition, that so they might consider, how God
had covered their shame, Deuteronomy. 15.15. Thou shall remember that thou wast a
bondman in the Land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: so Chap.
16.12.24.18. God redeeming and bringing them out, thence was the covering of
their nakedness, and removing of their shame.

Obser. 1.
The Lord does wait and vvatch, to do good unto his people: before in the 6.
verse, he passed by, beheld this Israelitish Maiden in her blood, said unto
her, Live: and now again he passed by her, looked upon, and said it was a time
of love.

God observes times to be gracious, Isai. 30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait,
that he may be gracious unto you: God waits for fit opportunities and seasons
to do for his, Psalm. 81.13.14. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had minded my ways: I looked for such a season, I shoould soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. Jer. 8.6.
I had hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of
his wickedness, saying what have I done: the Lord waited, expected, and longed
for repentance, a time wherein to show them kindness: Jer. 31.28. I will watch
over them, to build them, and to plant says the Lord, he would watch a time to
do them great good, to build them up again into a civil estate, and to plant
them a noble Vine, that in Revel. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock,
if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come into him. God waits
and watches opportunities to show mercy to sinners: hence it is that David
says, Ps. 87.8. I will hear what the Lord will speak, for he will speak
peace unto his people, and unto his Saints, and Wisdom invites her Children
to hearken, Prove. 8.32. Now hearken unto me, O ye Children.

2. There be special times, wherein God makes and manifests love unto his
people, Thy time was the time of love: Solomon tells us, There is a time for
every thing, Eccles. 3.8. A time to love, and that for God as well as man, he
has his times of woing people, of making and manifesting love unto them.

I shall show you some of those times,

1. The time of affliction: this woman was in great distress in Egypt, hated,
persecuted, oppressed, held under bondage not suffered to go and worship her
God, all liberty that way was denied her, new burdens imposed, her life
imbittered and endangered, Exodus 5, 7, 21. No friend to be found in Court or
Country, no help or comfort appearing any where, and now was the time of Gods
love, he hears her cries down into the bush, converses with Moses, sends him
to this woman, to tell her that God had good thoughts toward her, intended
love to her, and would suddenly bring her out of that condition, and put her in
a new and nearer relation to himself; and when she heard this, she bowed her
head and worshipped Exodus 4.31.

When this woman was in Babylon, and her neck upon the block, through the
malice, power and policy of Haman, then was a time of love, the Lord visited,
delivered, and showed marvailous loving kindness to her, he chose her to
himself in that condition, Isai. 48.10. I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction. Elective love, is prime, strong, fundamental.

You may see also Gods love to this woman, under the name of Rachel, Jer. 31
15.16. A voice was heard in Ramah lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel
weeping for her Children, refused to be comforted, because they were not. Here
was a sad affliction, captivity has bereft her of her children, but see, now
was a time of love, for presently the Lord visited her, and said, Refrain thy
voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be
rewarded, they shall come again from the Land of the enemy, unto their own
border.

God visits his in afflictions; when the High Priests, Rulers, Elders and
Scribes, threatened Peter and John, charged them not to preach, which was a sad
thing, but they gate them to their own company and prayed, and presently God
appeared, shak'd the room where they were, and fi'ld them with his spirit,
Rev. 12. when the Dragon persecuted the woman, she had Eagles wings, etc.

Times of affliction, are times of love also, in this respect, because then as
its Job 36.8, 9, 10. he shows men the nature and greatness of their sins, he
opens their ears to disciplines and commands, that they return from their
iniquity, Chap. 33.16. He opens men's ears, and seals up their instruction.

2. The time of fulfilling promises is a time of love, God had promised that
his seed shoul serve 400. years, and in the fourth generation should return
to Canaan; this time being expired, now was the time of love, that God should
put forth his hand, lead them out with great substance of Jewels and Cattle,
and so make good his promise.

When God makes a promise, its a time of love, and when he fulfils it, its a
time of love, many receive benefit thereby.

God had promised Adam, the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head;
to Abraham, that in him all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: now
when this promise was fulfilled, Christ given out into the world, it was a
time of love, yea of loves, Luke 2.14. Glory be to God on high on earth peace,
good will toward men: when the promise of the Spirit was made good, then was a
time of loves; a time of love to the Nations that heard them speak such
excellent things in their own Tongues.

God promised that at the end of 70. years, they should return from Babylon;
when that time was out, then was the time of love, God fulfilled his promise and
brought them to Jerusalem again, which Isai. chap. 54.7. calls A gathering with
great mercies.

3. The young time of a people is the time of love, God does not only manifest,
but make love known to young ones, this Infant was apta viro, come to those
years Virgins are at, when marriageable (which by many is judged 14. years
of age) and being so, God made love to her, he gave her love tokens, Jewels of
gold and silver, and raiment, Exodus 3.21.22. Quails and Manna from Heaven,
Exodus 16. This time the Lord points at in Jer. 2.2, I remember the kindness of
thy youth, not of her kindness unto God, but his own kindness love or mercy
unto her, the Lord does suit and woe young ones to come in unto him, Eccles.
12.2. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, look upon me how
beautiful, glorious, great, rich, honorable I am, how suitable for thee, what
a contented happy life thou may lead with me, remember and mind me for thy
Husband: God sent Samuel to call David, the youngest of the Brethren before
him, and when he was come, Arise, anoint him, for this is he, 1 Samuel 16.11.12.
Prove. 1.4. Solomon's Proverbs were written to give the young man knowledge and
discretion. Zach. 2.4. Run speak to the young man.

Not only youth, but any when God offers them grace calls upon them for
repentance, believing that is a time of love.

4. Calling of people into the Church State, is a time of love, they were in
Egypt without mercy, they had not Church Order and Ordinances, but now the
Lord was bringing them, into such a condition.

3. Gods love is the foundation, and fountain of all the good his people
receive and have, it was love caused him to look upon this Infant, to say to
it Live, that caused her to multiply and grow great, that brought her to
excellent ornaments, it was his love, that made him spread his skirt over her,
and cover her nakedness, to enter into a Covenant with her, to take her to be
his, and do all those things he did for her.

When Balaak and Balaam would have cursed this woman, the Lord prevented it,
and turned the curse into a blessing, because he loved her, Deuteronomy. 23.4, 5. it
was love which caused and moved God to choose this people to be his, nothing in
them, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. it was his love to give them favor in the sight of the
Egyptians, Ex. 11.3. It was his love to bring them out of Egypt with a mighty
hand, Deuteronomy. 4.37. His love to drive out the Nations, to bring them into their
Land, and to give it them for an inheritance, verse. 38. It was from his love to
give them the Tabernacle, the Temple, his Laws, Statutes, Oracles, Ordinances,
Priests, Prophets, Sabbaths solemn Feasts, etc. all spiritual mercies are
blessings from his love. Hos. 14.4. when he heales backslidings of a people its
because he loves them freely; election, adoption, justification,
sanctification, glorification, are the issues of his love, Christ is so, John
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. if
divine love be the bottom and fountain of that gift, it is so of all others,
Romans 8.32. If God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also, freely give us all things? it was his great
love that caused him to quicken us being dead, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Gods love is the
womb which conceives and sends forth all the good things we enjoy.

4. When God takes a people to be his, he will protect them in a special
manner, and cover their nakedness and shame; he took this Israelitish woman,
spread his skirt over her, and covered her nakedness, he protected her forty
years in the Wilderness, against enemies and evils, that threatened her ruin,
he took away her reproach of barrenness and Servitude in the House of
bondage, he made her fruitful and free. When uncircumcision was a reproach
unto this people, the Lord took that away, Josh. 5.9. When Goliath defied the
Host of Israel, God took him away by David, 1 Samuel 17. and when the Lord
took in the Gentiles, did he not spread his skirt over them and cover their
nakedness? Isa. 54.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Sing O barren, thou that did not bear,
break forth into singing, and cry aloud thou that did not travel with Child,
for more are the Children of the desolate than of the married Wife, enlarge the
place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth the Curtains of thine
habitations, spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; for thou
shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left, and thy seed shall
inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited: fear not,
thou shall not be ashamed, for thou shall forget the shame of thy youth, and
shall not remember the reproach of thy Widdowhood any more; And what is the
ground of all this? Thy maker is thy Husband, therefore God would have a
special care of her, turn her barrennes into fruitfulnes, and cover her
shame, her idolatry and prophanenes.

Sin is the reproach of any people, Prove. 14.34. and makes naked, Exodus
32.25. and when God loves a people, and takes them to be his, he covers their
sins, Zach. 3.4. God had good will to Joshua the High Priest, and then said,
I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and will cloth thee with
change of raiment: God took away his sins, by the satisfaction of Christ,
and clothed him with his righteousness, that covers our spots, shame,
nakedness, Rev. 3.18. I counseled thee to buy of me white raiment, that thou
may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear.

I swear unto thee,
Hebrew is, (...) juravi tibi, Septu. (...) Castal. tibi jurans. Pisc. juravi
tibi. The meaning is, I have given thee assurance of marriage, conjugal faith.

Touching the Lords swearing, I shall speak a little.

That the Lord did swear, is upon Record, but what kind of oath it was, is not
here specified.

Some conceive that

I am the Lord,

These words do carry in them the force of an oath, and that this was the
oath made to Abraham and Jacob, to which the Lord refers, Genesis 15.7. I am the
Lord that brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees to give thee this Land to
inherit, Exodus 6.6, 7.8. Say to the Children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I
will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will take
you to be for a people, and I will be to you a God, etc.

Its thought these words I the Lord, or I am the Lord, do hold out the nature
of an oath, because Exodus 13.5. it is said, The Lord swear unto thy Fathers, to
give thee a Land flowing with mike and honey, but this will not hold, because
no more is expressed, then I the Lord, and he is said to swear, that therefore
no more was in this oath; if we consult well with the word, we may find there
was more in it, For Exodus 32.13. its plain he swear by himself, Remember
Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy Servants, to whom thou swearest by thine own
self, and saydst, I will multiply your seed as the Stars of Heaven, and all
this Land that I have spoken of, will I give unto them: the word of God tells us
that he has sworn, sometimes,

By his Holiness, Amos 4.2.

By his life, Ezekiel. 14.16.

By his great name, Jer. 44.26.

By his Soul, Jer. 51.14. henaphsho, by himself, its in the books but it is
by his soul.

By his right hand, Isai. 62.8. and The arm of his str ngth

Now the oath God swear to Abraham, was by himself, as you have heard and may
read, Genesis 22.16 therefore we may not rest in those words, I the Lord, as
being the oath, but look at Gods swearing by himself.

The manner of Gods swearing, is set down in Deuteronomy. 32 40. I will lift up my
hand to heaven and say, live for ever, the Lord imitated the practice of men in
swearing; for it was their way to lift up their hands to Heaven when they
took an oath, Genesis 14.22. Dan. 12.7. so the Angel Rev. 10.6. This was done at
the Covenant taking.

And entered into a Covenant with thee,
(...) Septu: (...) Vulg. Ingressus sum pactum tecum, Pisc. Venique tecum in
faedus Cast. Tecumfaedus feci, or, Te mihi desponsavi. French, Convins avec toi
par alliance.

A Covenant imports two Parties consenting together which a Testament does not,
a man may make his Will or Testament, and give what he please to any specified
therein, without consents; its not so in a Covenant, there mutual consent is
required, especially in a marriage Covenant. (...) some derive from (...)
comedere to eat, because at the making of Covenants, they were wont to have
sacrifices and feasts, or to eat and drink: Obadiah 7. The men that were at
peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee, they that eat
thy bread, or the men of thy bread, have laid a wound under thee: they were the
Egyptians, who drew them into a Covenant against the Chaldeans, by eating
bread, that is, by eating and drinking, which was a rite accompanied
Covenants, you find in the word mention made of a Covenant of salt. Numb.
18.19. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. which though some think to be so called, for the
firmness and everlastingnsse of the Covenant (because salt is a lasting and
preserving thing) yet somewhat else may be found in it, viz. because they did
eat and drink at the making of Covenants, and used salt which made all
savourie, therefore also it may be called a Covenant of salt; to this sense,
that in Ezra gives some light, Chap. 4.14. Now because we have maintenance
from the Kings Palace, and it was not meet for us to see the Kings dishonor,
therefore have we sent and certified the King: these words, maintenance from
the Kings Palace, are in the original thus, quod sale Pallatii saliti sumus,
now seeing we are salted with salt of the Palace; that is, we have obliged
our selves to him in a Covenant, by eating and drinking with him, therefore,
etc. so that place in Levit: 2.13. Thou shall not suffer the salt of the
Covenat of thy God, to be lacking from the meat offering.

Some derive the word Berith from (...) dissecare, because then when they made
Covenants, there was some Beast killed and cut in the midst, as Genesis 15.9,
10.18. when God made a Covenant with Abraham, there an Heifer, a she Goat, and
a Ramm were divided in the midst, and laid each piece one against another
orderly, that so the Covenanteers might pass between them, according to what
is in, Jer. 34.18. They cut the Calfe in twain, and passed between the parts
thereof, and so cut out a Covenant, and manifested thereby, that if they brake
the Covenant, they deserved to be cut in pieces.

Others derive it from (...) eligere, because it is that which two or more do
choose out and agree upon, Abimelech and his, choose to make a Covenant with
Isaac. Genesis 26.28. so the Gibeonites chose to make a League with Joshua and the
Israelites, Josh. 9.6. both persons and conditions are chosen and agreed upon,
in making of Covenants.

Again, some fetch it from (...) to create, order, dipose: for when they cut
the Beast in pieces, they did divide, order, and dispose of them equally on
both sides, and so in a Covenant, there is disposing and ordering of things, to
the content of both.

Lastly, some draw it from (...) purificare and (...) puritas, because when
Covenants are making, the parties ought to be holy, and to deal holily,
without all guile, hypocrisy, and overreaching of one another; and in this
sense, among others, the Covenant was called Holy, Dan. 11.28. Luke 1.72. The
Gibeonites dealt fraudulently, when they came with their old sacks, bottles,
shoes, garments, and moldy bread to make a Covenant with Joshua, Chap. 9.4, 5,
6.

This Covenant which the Lord entered into, was that at Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.4,
5. Moses being called up unto the Mount, the Lord said to him, If ye will obey my
voice, and keep my Covenant, then shall ye be a peculiar treasure unto me, above
all people, ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation. Moses
goes with these words unto the people to see if they would give their consent,
which they presently did verse. 8. All the people answered together and said,
all that the Lod has spoken will we do, when the Lord heard this, he said,
Lo I come verse. 9. There was mutual consent and a solemn Covenant made: so
Chap. 24.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, there the consent on both sides is
manifested, Beasts are slain and sacrificed, both the Altar and people
sprinkled with the blood of the Covenant, and the Covenant was writ and read
in the audience of all.

This Covenant which God made at Mount Sinai with this people, was a Covenant
of Grace and Mercy, take in all was delivered by God to Moses being in the
Mount, and it was so. For

1. It was a marriage Covenant, God took this people to be his Spouse,
Church, Exodus 19.4, 5, 6. he brought them to himself, made them his peculiar
treasure, a kingdom of Priests, a holy Nation; which words are appropriated
by Peter unto the Church under the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 1.6.

2. It was given in the hands of a Mediator, Gal. 3.19. if it were Moses he
typed out Christ, who was the only Mediator between God and Man, and Acts
7.38. he is said to receive lively Oracles to give us, and therefore its
thought by some, that Christ himself was the Mediator, who led them through
the Wilderness, and gave out those lively Oracles.

3. It was made with sacrifice, shedding and sprinkling of blood, Exodus 24.5,
6, 8. and the blood was called the blood of the Covenant, which represented the
sacrifice and blood of Christ, which is called Heb. 13.20. The blood of the
everlasting Covenant; the Covenant of works has no sacrifices.

4. The Ceremonial Law was all instituted worship, Types, Sacrifices,
Garments, Washings, Ointments, Figures and what that Law had led unto Christ,
Gal. 3.24. Heb. 9.10, 11. and was Evangelicall. Now all instituted worship is
contained and comprehended in the second command, they were bound to the
observation thereof by that comm and therefore this Covenant must needs have
grace and mercy.

5 If it were a Covenant of works, not of mercy, what argument were here in
the words? I entered into a Covenant with thee; God was in a Covenant of
works, with them and all the world before, and so it would be of no validity
to tell them of it, he did no more for them than for others, and if they had
broken Covenant, it was but what all the world had done; here lies a strong
convincing argument in the words, I entered into a gracious Covenant with thee,
I knew thee above all the Families of the earth, Amos 3.2. And yet you have
done thus, etc.

6. The Covenant of Grace was given out long before to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, therefore its called The Covenant and mercy, he swear unto them, Deuteronomy.
7.12. and Moses was under this Covenant, Heb. 11.24. By faith he refused to be
called, etc. when come to years, he had Christ with him, Exodus 23.20. The Angel
there, was Christ, 1. Cor. 10.9. They tempted Christ in the Wilderness, the
scope of Moses wrightings was Christ, John 5.46. Moses wrote of me, Heb. 4.2.
its said the Gospel was preached unto them, viz. that were in the Wilderness.

Now if Moses was under a Covenant of grace before, God would not reduce him
back to a Covenant of works. Its conceived, that after the breach of the first
Covenant of works, that God did never make any more such a Covenant with man,
but that after Covenants were of grace, and mercy; now it was the same
Covenant that God made with the people and Moses, Exodus 34.27. Write thou these
words, for after the Tenor of these words, I have made a Covenant with thee and
with Israel.

7. If a Covenant of works, it should be to all, seeing that Covenant at first
was made with Adam the root of mankind, but this is to some few, the seed of
Abraham only, those were brought out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.1. Hear O Israrael.
verse. 6. I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt.

And thou becamest mine.
Hebrew is, fuisti mihi or mea French, and fus faite mienne. These words note
Gods actual taking of this people to be his; Ruth 4.13. Boaz took Ruth, and
she was his Wife: facta est ei in Vxorem, Hos. 3.3. Thou shall not be for
another man, so will I be for thee. Here was a nuptial conjunction between the
Lord and this Israelitish woman, she became his Wife, his possession. This was
the joyful day, Deuteronomy. 26.18. The Lord has avouched thee this day, to be his
peculiar people, his Church, his spouse.

In marriage,

1. There is a special Union, They two shall be one flesh, two that were mere
strangers before, by marryage become one: so here God passed by this people,
cast his eye upon them, the time of love was come, he betroths and marryes them
to himself, and so makes a near and dear Union between himself and them.

2. Special communion with, and delight in each other, Cant. 2.16. My beloved
is mine, and I am his, chapter 7.10. I am my beloveds and his desire is toward
me: this woman called the Lord Ishi, Hos. 2.16. My Husband, and the Lord called
her Hepzi-bah, Isai. 62.4. My delight in her, the wife is the glory of the
Husband, 1. Cor. 11.7. And the Husband the glory of the Wife: so God looked
upon this people as his glory, Isai 4.5. Upon all the glory shall be a
defense, Isai. 62.3. They were a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and
God was their glory, Jer. 2.11. There was mutual delight in each other, God
looked upon them, as his Jewels, as his peculiar Treasure.

3. Communication of what they have each to other, especially of the Husband to
the wife, he communicates himself, his name, his estate, his secrets to his
beloved, and so did God unto this woman, and does unto his Church, Psalm. 76.1,
2. In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel: In Salem also is his
Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. They had God amongst them,

For his name he imparts it to his Church, Jer. 33.16. She shall be called
Jehova Zidkeneu, which is the Lords name, Chap. 23.6. and the Church is called
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. Jer. 14.9. We are called by thy name.

Estate, she had the Land of Canaan given her, which was the Land of Immauel,
Isai. 8.8.

God communicated to his people his vvisdome, power, secrets, truths, Spirit,
merits and righteousness of his Son.

By virtue of this Covenant they had mercies temporal and spiritual promised
them and given in.

1. Temporal and they were many.

1. Canaan was promised them, Abraham had the first promise of it, and often to
them it was renewed, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11. Chap. 11.23.24. This Land has diverse
encomiums in the Word.

1. Its called the desire and glory of all Lands, Ezekiel 20.6. 2. The Land of
Immanuel, Isai. 8.8. 3. It was a Type of Heaven, and therefore is called the
Land of the living, Psalm. 27.13. the Rest and Inheritance of the people, Deuteronomy.
12.9. and it was given them of free Grace, through the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.6.
2. Great increase in that Land, Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 67.6. The earth
shall yield her increase, and God even our God shall bless us.

3. Healthfulnesse, Deuteronomy. 7.15. Ezod. 23.25. with Exodus 15.26. God would be a
Physician amongst them, and heal them.

4. Length of days, if they kept Covenant with God Deuteronomy. 4.40. this is made an
argument, to move Children to honor their Parents, Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
and people are pressed by this argument, to love God, and obey him, Deuteronomy.
30.20. Chap. 32.46., 47.

5. Honor and esteem in the world, Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. Chap. 28.13. Psalm.
148.14. this Balaam prophesied of, Numb. 24.7.

6. Power against, and victory over their enemies, Deuteronomy. 11 25. Levit. 26.7,
8. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Josh. 10.42. Psalm. 68.35. Numb. 23.23.

7. Peace, Levit. 26.6. I will give Peace in the Land, etc. Hence they said,
Isai. 26.12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us.

8. Protection, Deuteronomy. 33.29. 2 Samuel 23.3. 1 Chronicles. 17.24. The Lord of Hosts is
the God of Israel, etc. Psalm. 68.34. and Psalm. 90.1.

9. Deliverance, Levit. 26.44, 45. Zech. 9.11. they were delivered out of
Babylon, through the blood of the Covenant, when in danger by Zerah, 2 Chronicles.
14.9.11. God by virtue of the Covenant delivered them, Psalm. 44.4.

10. By virtue thereof, God made Strangers and Heathens serviceable unto his
people, Isai. 45.3, 4. Ezra 7.11. and turned the plots and curses of enemies
into blessings, Deuteronomy. 23.5.

2. Spiritual mercies, and they were diverse.

1. They had God to be their God in a special manner. God was God of all
creatures, and of the Heathens, but not as of this people, in respect of them
they were without God, Ephesians. 2.12. but the Jews had God to be, theirs in a
most peculiar manner, 2 Samuel 7.24. 1 Chronicles. 17.22. therefore happy in the
judgment of the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. all in God was theirs: as all the man is,
and has, is the woman's, when married unto him, Isa. 54.5. Exodus 33.19. he let
Moses see what he had in God, and not only Moses, but that people also saw his
glory, Deuteronomy. 5.24. They owned one another, Exodus 15.2. Deuteronomy. 32.3. Psalm. 50.7.
Hebr. 11.16.

2. He recorded his name amongst them, and dwelt with them, Levit. 26.11, 12.
Psalm. 132.13, 14. Numb. 23.21. when God was with them, none could hurt them,
but when he was absent, then evil came upon them, Deuteronomy. 31.17. its worth much
to have God amongst a people, Psalm. 76.1, 2.

3. The Law was theirs, which was holy, just and good, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation
is there so great, that has Statutes and judgments so righteous, etc. they
made men wiser then their enemies, than all their Teachers, Psalm. 119.98, 99.
They were (...) livelie Oracles. Acts 7.38. Psalm. 147.19.20.

4. He made his mind and secrets known unto that people, 2 Samuel 7.27. Moses
had familiar converse with God, Abraham was his friend, God gave them Vrim and
Thummim, they were taught of God, whereas the Nations were deluded by the
Devil and his Oracles.

The Lord appeared to Jacob, Joshua, Solomon, and others, and made known his
will to th m

5. They had forgiveness of sins, Exodus 20.6. that is a pardoning mercy,
because visiting iniquity is contrary to it, and notes punishment, Exodus
34.6, 7. Isai, 55.7. Michah 7.18. Dan. 9.9.

6. This Covenant was the ground of their being heard in prayer, 1 Samuel 1.17.
the God of Israel grant thee thy petition, Dan. 9.17. 1 Samuel 23.10, 11. 1 Kings
8.23. 2 K. 19.15. 1 K. 17.21. Jer. 14.8.

From hence they had, 1 A ground of expostulation with God, Psalm. 22.1. My God
my God, why have thou forsaken me, etc. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Exodus 32.11. 2. Of
challenging God for help, Psalm. 3.7. Arise O Lord, save me O my God, Psalm.
35.23. Psalm. 40.17. 3. Of confidence, Micah 7.7. My God will hear me, I will
look unto the Lord, and wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear
me, Isa. 25.9.


7. They had many privileges, by virtue of this Covenant.

1. They were a holy people, Exodus 19.6. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Isai. 62.12. Dan. 12.7. God
called them his anointed, Psalm. 105.15. his Saints, Psalm. 50.5. 2. They were
dear unto God, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Exodus 19.5. a peculiar treasure, they were his
jewels, Mal. 3.17. as the Apple of his eye unto him, Deuteronomy. 32.10. a people
near unto him, Psalm. 148.14. in his arms, Deuteronomy. 33.27. his glory, Isai. 4.5.
Psalm. 78.61. 3. The Messiah was to come of them, Luke 1.72. Genesis 22.18. 4.
Amongst them did the Lord choose out materials, for the heavenly Canaan, Romans
9.4. the adoption appertained to them.
8. Eternal life and salvation, Acts 15.11. We believe that through the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they. They had sacrifices
tipyfied Christ, and the brazen Serpent.

Obser. 1.
That we are backward to believe what the Lord says and propounds unto us, he
came to this woman, pitied her in her bloody, sinful afflicted condition,
said unto her live, promised to do much for her, but she feared, doubted,
apprehended not Gods intentions by Moses, Exodus 2.11, 12. compared with Acts
7.25. she was like other women, that believe not their suitors too easily, when
they tell them of great estates, honors, advantages they shall have by them,
and so put them to it, to make things out clear and evident, wherereupon they
vow and swear to them it is so. This was the case here, the Israelitish woman
was not forward to believe, the Lord he swears by himself unto her, and you
know an oath is for confirmation, Heb. 6.16. so then that she might have her
scruples, fears, doubts jealousies removed, and be confirmed in the reallitie
of things, the Lord is pleased to swear. She had seen the great plagues upon
the Egyptians, the signs, wonders, and mighty hand of God, in bringing her
out of Egypt, yet this satisfied her not, her spirit was unbelieving, and God
swears to cure and take away that unbelief. O nos felices, etc.

Happy we, for whose sakes the Lord will vouchsafe to swear, but O most
miserable we! if we believe not the Lord swearing.

He has sworn that he has not pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel.
33.11. Isai. 45.23. I have sworn that every knee shall bow.

Obs. 2. See the infinite kindness, and condescension of God toward poor
sinners, that he will enter into Covenant with them; he is a God of infinite
glory, excellency, majesty, holiness, greatness; to him All the Nation^ of
the earth, are but as the drop of a bucket, and as the small dust of the
balance, Isa. 40.15. and what was this Nation of the Jews, The fewest of all
people, Deuteronomy. 7.7. and yet the Lord is pleased to make a Covenant with this
people, this Israelitish woman. What was there in it to move the Lord thereto,
was she of great birth? No, Thy Father was an Amorite, thy Mother an Hittite;
had she any breeding? any great portion? any beauty? no she was Infans
expositus, brought up in brick, and clay, a bond servant, not having a rag to
cover her nakedness, she lay in her blood, and was without all beauty under
great scorn and reproach, yet the Lord is pleased to enter into a Covenant of
mercy with her, but it may be the Lord foresaw that she would prove well, be
loving, obedient dutiful, no, the Lord foresaw she would be a contentious
wife, a continual dropping, that she would be murmuring, ungrateful, whorish,
rebellious, and idolatrous: yet he strikes a Covenant with her, etc. God might
have dealt with her and us in an absolute way, commanded us and immediately
destroyed us, if we had not obeyed, but he condiscends to deal with us in a
way of Covenant, a way of mercy, with us worms, bubles, drops, etc.

This should,

1. Put us into a rapture of admiration, and make us say with David, Psalm. 8.4.
O Lord! what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that
thou visitest him?

Psalm. 144.3. Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the
Son of man that thou make account of him.

Job 7.17. What is man that thou should magnify him? and that thou
should set thine heart upon him?

2. Indeare the Lord unto us abundantly, when great ones stoop to weak
unworthy ones, its a great indearing of them unto those they stoop to. When
Boaz condiscended to Ruth, it drew her heart strongly toward him.

3. Make us faithful unto God, not to let our hearts runn out a whoring after
other things, I am my beloveds, said tht Spouse, she was not for others, Job
made a Covenant with his eyes, and would not think of a Maid, he was faithful
to God, it was an imputation to Solomon, that his heart, was not perfect with
the Lord, 1 Kings 11.4.

4. Make us free and cheerful in our obedience, yiedling such as springs from
Covenant rather then command, from love rather then fear.

VER. 9.
Then washed I thee with water, yea I thoroughly washed away thy blood from
thee, and anointed thee with Oil.


THis verse lays before you, the recital of former mercies God vouchsafed
this people, and they are two, 1. Washing. 2. Anointing.


No sooner had the Lord taken this woman into Covenant with him, made her his,
but he washes and annoints her.

I washed thee with water.
Some referr this washing to their passing through the red Sea, Exodus 14.21.22.
of which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. All our Fathers were under the
cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses, in the
cloud and in the Sea. Their bringing out of Egypt was a type of redemption by
Christ, and their passage through the red Sea, a figure of baptism, or washing
in the blood of Christ.

Some here make the water to be heavenly doctrine, which the Lord gave them,
Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain: when the rain falls, it
washes away the filth of places: so did the Law, the corruptions and
pollutions of this people.

Others think here to be meant those legal washings, spoken of in several
places, begun in Exodus 19.10. The Lord said unto Moses, go unto the people and
sanctify them to day, and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, and
Numb. 19. you may read of a water made of the Ashes of a red Heifer, to
purify and cleanse those who were defiled, Heb. 9.10. they had diverse
vvashings.

One was (...) Joh. 11.55. They went up to Jerusalem, to purify themselves.

A 2d. (...) which was a more through washing, Joh. 3.25. There was a question
between some of John's Disciples, and the Jews, (...), you know they had their
water pots, which held two or three firkins a piece, in which they washed their
clothes, hands, feet, when they were defiled by touching any unclean thing.

Others put it upon Gods freeing them from their misery, sordid condition,
through their poverty and meannes, raising them up to a considerable estate.

We may step over the second and fourth, and take the first and third, I
washed thee in the red Sea, and with legal washings; now because these were
typical, and leading unto Christ, we must pass from the Ceremony to the
substance, viz. the Blood of Christ, and remission of sins, I led thee by
those washings and baptismes, to the fountain set open for uncleanness,
Zachariah 13.1. Sin defiles, and the blood of Christ cleanses from that
defilement. I find Interpreters do understand by this washing with water,
forgiveness of sins, which in the new Testament, is often expressed by the
Metaphor, of washing, sprinkling, cleansing, purging, 1 John 1.7. 2 Pet. 1.9.
Rev. 1.5. Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.2. Water cleanses, cooles, comforts, and so does
forgiveness of sins through the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 10.22.
Matthew. 9.7. Heb. 12.24.

I thoroughly washed away thy blood,
Hebrew is, Vaeshtoph damaijk, inundavi sanguines tuos a te, I have flouded thy
bloods from thee. Septu: (...) I have washed thy blood from thee, Pisc.
Inundatione aquae ablui. French, te Nettoyai de ton sang:

By bloods (so it is in the Hebrew) is meant sins, the analogy between
which I spoke of in the 6. verse, blood is natural, diffuseth it self through
the whole man, defiles, makes loathsome, and so does sin, I may add this, it
abounds in man and so does sin, but God washed away their bloods, their sins
thoroughly.

Quest. How appears it their sins were washed away?

Ans. Some Scriptures give in evidence, Psalm. 78.38. He being full of
compassion, forgave their iniquity, the word in the original, Caphar, is to
cover or cleanse, God cleansed the Elect by the blood of his Son, as Deodate
upon the place says, Psalm. 99.8. Thou wast a God that forgavest them, God did
forgive them their manifold, and great provocations of his Majesty: that place
in Numb. 14.19, 20. is very remarkable; says Moses, Pardon I beseech thee the
iniquity of this people, according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as
thou have forgiven this people from Egypt even until now: they had often and
much provoked God after their departure out of Egypt, yet God had forgiven
them, and this argument he pressed to move God to pardon them still, and ver
20. The Lord said, I have pardoned according to the word, thou have desired me
to pardon, and I have done it, hence in Nehem. 9.17. He is called a God of
pardons, ready to pardon is the translation, in the hands, but the original
is, (...) A God of propitiations of pardons.

And anointed the with Oil.
Hebrew is, (...) I anointed thee in Oil, Septu: (...) Cast: te unguento
perunxi, we must to inquire in what sense these words are to be taken.

Some put this construction upon them, that God refreshed them after their
great and long afflictions in Egypt. They had suffered long and much in the
House of bondage, and when God brought them forth, freed them from their tasks,
and Taskmasters, gave them liberty and ease, this was a kind of anointing of
them.

Others refer this to the holy Oil, with which Aaron and his Sons were
anointed, Exodus 30.30. They were anointed and consecrated, to minister unto
the Lord in the Priests Office, and so virtually in them the people were
anointed, and you know that in Exodus 19.6. they are called A Kingdom of
Priests, a'holy Nation, and in Ezra 9.2. The holy seed, Dan: 8.24. The holy
people.

You may take the words in this sense for the abundance of Oil that God gave
them, Deuteronomy. 8.8. their Land is called A Land of Oil Olive, or as the original
is, (...) A Land of Olive Tree of Oil; that is, a Land of such Olive Trees, as
yielded much Oil: this Land did not only abound with milk and honey, but also
with Oil, Joel 2.24. Their fats did overflow with wine and oil, they had it
in such abundance that they vented it to other Nations, Hos. 12.1. Oil is
carried into Egypt.

Artaxerxes appointed his Officers to allow Ezra upon his return 100 baths of
Oil, Ezra 7.22.

Now there were two sorts of Baths; one called the lesser Bath, which contained
72. quarts, another called the greater Bath, which contained 180 sextarusses or
quarts, and this distinction is founded upon 1 Kings 7 26. where the brazen Sea
is said to contain 2000. baths, which must be understood of the greater baths,
and 2 Cron. 4.5. where it is said it held 3000 baths, which you must interpret
of the lesser baths, Ezra was allowed 100 of them, which shows they had
plenty of Oil amongst them, and hence its likely the Prophet gave out the
expression of Rivers of Oil, Michah 6.7. for they had Olive-yards in
abundance, Nehem. 9.25.

For a more full understanding of these words, you must know that in the
oriental parts, they used much to wash and anoint themselves, Amos 6.6. They
anoint themselves with the chief ointments, it was ordinary at their Feasts
to do it, Matthew. 26.7. A woman came and powered a box of precious ointment upon
Christ's head as he sat at meat. Luke 7.38. A woman anointed his feet with
ointment as he sat at meat. 46. verse says Christ to Simon, Mine head with
Oil thou did not anoint, but this woman has anointed my feet, Eccles.
9.8. Let thy head lack no ointment.

They anointed not only at their feastings, but also upon their fastings,
Matthew. 6.17. When thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face.

Lavater says, that among the Eastern people the use of Oil was the same
with them, as the use of Baths amongst those where he lived. Husbands had Baths
in their Houses for themselves and wives to cleanse their bodies and strengthen
their spirits: and so upon the marriage of women, they used to wash and bath,
Ruth 3.3. when a match was intended between Ruth and Boaz, what said Naomi to
her, Wash thy self therefore and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon thee,
and get thee down to the floor: so Esther 2.12. The Wives of the Persian
Kings, had 12. months for the time of their purification, 6. months with Oil
of myrrh, and six months, with other sweet odours, that so they might be the
more pleasing, and delightful to the King, this was their custom. Now unto
this, it seems unto me, the Lord here alludes, who proceeding in the allegory
of this metaphorical woman, the Jewish estate, was now upon the marriage, and
enjoyment of her, and having washed away her blood and filth with water, he
also anoints her with oil, that so she may be the more acceptable and
delightful unto him. Now this anointing leads us to a spiritual consideration.

The stream of later interpreters runs that way. Junius is of this judgment,
Vitiositatem curat Deus sanguine Christi velut aqua, faetorem curat spiritu
velut diapasmate (...).

So Polanus, I have annonited thee with Oil, that is, I have regenerated thee,
by my holy Spirit.

Piscator, By this unction seems to be signified regeneration by the holy
Spirit.

Oecolampad: After washing comes the anointing of the Spirit, quae omniadocet
juxta charitatem dispensare danturque variae gratiae Spiritus sancti.

Pintus, I have anointed thee with Oil, that is, oleo gratiae meae.

Deodate, I have endowed thee with the graces of my Spirit, signified by the
anointing.

Of the same judgment are they set out the Annotations upon the Bible.

So Bernard, in his Thesaurus Bibli^us, in the word Oil, referring to this
place, says, its put for the grace of regeneration.

Now its clear from the holy writ that spiritual things are held forth by
Oil and anointing with it. Exodus 40.13.15. Aaron and his Sonns must be
anointed with the anointing Oil, which represented the anointing of Christ
and his Servants with the Spirit, Psalm. 45.7. Thy God has anointed thee with
the Oil of gladness above thy Fellows, its spoken of Gods anointing Christ
with his Spirit, and so likewise of his anointing the Saints with the graces
of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.21. He who has anointed us is God.

The Spirit and graces of it be here represented by Oil, we must inquire
further what is meant by this anointing, for it is certain, all of them had
not the Spirit, and graces of it.

1. By this anointing we may understand the consecration of this people unto
the Lord, he separated them from the Egyptians and rest of the world, who were
profane, and made them a holy people to himself, Exodus 40.9, 10, 11. the
Tabernacle, Altar and Vessels of both were anointed with Oil, that so they
might be holy to the Lord, they were consecated by that Oil to the Lord: so
when God by his Spirit in Moses told this people, Exodus 19.6. that they should
be a Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation, then did he annnoint them and
consecrate them unto himself, and Psalm. 105.15. They are called the Lords
anointed ones, Touch not mine anointed.

2. Gods bringing them to a gladsome condition after their soar bondage in
Egypt, and 40 years travel in the Wilderness. Oil in holy Scripture sets
out joy and cheerfulness, Psalm. 104.15. Oil to make his face to shine: Oil
when they anointed with it, and when they did eat it, much refreshed them; it
called Oil of gladness, Psalm. 45.7. and Oil of joy, Isai. 61.3. and in that
God made them a gladsome and a joyous people, he is said to anoint them, Psalm.
105.43. He brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness,
the Hebrew is, with singing: when they saw themselves through the read Sea, and
the Egyptians drowned, they sang for joy, Psalm. 106.12. They sang his praise,
and you have the Song Exodus 15. Before, they were filled with anguish of Spirit,
Exodus 6.9. but God gave them for mourning, the Oil of joy by his Spirit, he
put gladness into their hearts, they were the people that knew the joyful
sound Psalm. 89.15.

3. Gods teaching of them in the ways of his worship, never before had any
people such Laws, rules given them for divine worship, for regulation of their
lives and ways, toward God and man as they had, now teaching is set out by
Oil and Unction, 1 John 2.20.27. Ye have an unction, and the anointing
teaches you all things; that was the Spirit: God anointed Moses and the
Prophets which were amongst this people with the Spirit, and so taught them all
things needful for their condition, what says Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.5. I have taught
you Statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me: Moses and
the Prophets spoke as the holy Spirit moved them, and having the spirit of
prophecy amongst them, they may be said to be anointed.

Origin says, Vnctio est habitatio Spiritus sancti, in cognitione veritatis.

4. Gods working of grace in their hearts, and making of them truly holy: the
giving of the Spirit and graces of it unto Christ, is called an anointing of him
Acts 10.38. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Spirit, and Cant.
1.3. Because of the savor of his good ointments, the Virgins love him. Christ
communicated the graces of his Spirit, and anointed the Virgins therewith,
which were sweet and savourie as a precious ointment, and here God says he
anointed the Jews with Oil, and did give unto many of them his Spirit and
saving grace; Abraham their Father was eminent for faith, Romans 4.18, 19, 20. so
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Caleb, Joshua, Gideon, Barach, Jephtah, David,
Samuel, the Prophets, and multitudes of others, they had not only true grace,
but much grace, Heb. 11.38. These all obtain a good report through faith.

This people was the Church of God, he had no other people which he owned as
his, the Jewish Nation alone was his peculiar people, and if there was any tru^
grace in the world it was amongst them, they were called The holy People, Deuteronomy.
7.6. The holy Nation, Exodus 19.6. Holy seed. Isai. 6.13. The generation of the
righteous, Psalm. 14.15. Saints, Psalm. 50.5. not only because they were
separated from the rest of the world, came of Abraham, made a profession of the
true God and his worship, but also because they had true grace, Isai. 51.7.
God gives this testimony of them, The people in whose heart is my Law, if there
had not been many of them truly gracious, God would never have given them such
a commendation.

Thus you see what is meant by this anointing, and though all had no true
grace, yet how all may be in one respect or other said to be anointed.

Obser. 1.
Those whom it pleases the Lord to enter into Covenant with, and take to be
his people, them he pleases to wash: this arises clearly from the coherence,
I entered into a Covenant with thee and thou becamest mine, what then? Then
washed I thee with water.

There is a double washing to be considered, One external, which was in the
red Sea, and in the legal vvashings, and so they were all washed, good and bad.

There is another washing which is internal, viz. by the blood of Christ,
signified by the outward washings, and this is the principal washing, and
with this washing they were not all washed, only those who were Elect and
vessels of grace, they were vvash'd in the blood of Christ, and had the
forgiveness of sins. In the 31. of Jer. 33.35. where God speaks of entering
into Covenant with the House of Israel, he tells them he will forgive
iniquity, and Chap. ^^.8. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, (...)
that cleansing is washing them away in the blood of Christ, and pardoning them
for his sake, for it follows in the original (...) and I will pardon their
iniquities. Now in the times of the Gospel those live under the sound of it,
and do profess the same, they are washed with the water of baptism, but not
all with the blood of Christ. Simon Magus had the outward washing, Act 8.13.
but wanted the inward washing: so John baptized many with water, whom Christ
never baptized with his blood, but all the Father gave him, and were covenanted
for, those he washed with his blood, Rev. 1.5. He loved us, that is being in
Covenant with the Father, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,
which is therefore called The blood of the Covenant, Heb. 13.20. And whereas it
is said, Heb. 10.29. That some which proved Apostates were sanctified with that
blood, you must understand it of those who by profession of the faith, and
participation of the Seals, baptism and the supper, were separated from
Judaisme and Paganism, and in the judgment of charity such, not that they
were internally washed from their sins by the blood of Christ, for its
impossible, that any man sanctified and pardoned through the blood of Christ,
should tread under foot the Son of God, and count that blood an unholy,
thing; to such a soul nothing is more precious than Christ and his blood.

2. Those whose sins God forgives, he fully forgives, I thoroughly washed away
thy bloods, I suffered no sin, no guilt to stick upon thee, Ezekiel. 36.25. I
will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols I will cleanse you: sprinkling of them
with clean water imports the sprinkling of them with the blood of Christ,
whereby sins are purged and done away, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin, not some few, some little, some great, some old, some
new sins, but from all sin; when God pardons he pardons thoroughly, Jer. 33.8.
I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby they have sinned against
me, and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned against
me. Let the sins, iniquities, be what they will, when the Lord is upon the
work of forgiving, he will forgive them all: David blesses God upon this
ground, because God was a God forgiving all iniquities, Psalm. 103.3. that place
in Isa. 55.7. is to our purpose. He will abundantly pardon, not ten, twenty, a
hundred, or a thousand sins, but ten thousand sins, all wicked ways, all evil
thoughts. The Vulgar reads it, Multus est ad ignoscendum, He is much inclined
to pardon, much in pardoning, he takes delight in it, as a thing natural to
him, Mic. 7.18. He pardons iniquity and passes by transgression. And why?
Because he delights in mercy. It Is his will, his nature to be merciful,
nothing pleases him more, then to show mercy. The Hebrew is, He will multiply
to pardon, if man have multlplied sins, he will multiply means to pardon those
sins; the sins of the Creature shall not be supernumerary to the mercies of the
Creator. Man is a Father of sins, and God is a Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
Does man beget and bring forth thousands of sins in a day? God begets and
brings forth more mercies in an hour; where sin abounds, he makes grace much
more to abound. Romans 5.20.

3. Those whose sins God washes away, them he seperates from the World, makes
glad, teaches his ways, and beautifies with the graces of his spirit, I
thoroughly washed thee with blood and anointed thee with oil; all these are
comprehended in that anointing. When God washes away the sins of any, then he
anoints them with Oil; when Aaron was washed, then was he anointed, Exodus
40.12, 13. And Peter tells them that had put the Lord Christ to death, that
they were washed, and they should be anointed, they must first be Baptized for
remission of s^ns, and then they should receive the Gift of the holy Spirit,
Acts 2.38. When God pardons any, he purges them; after the remission comes the
unction: and then,

1. They are off from the World, they are the Lords, his beloved, they have
sweet peace and fellowship with him, they are Vessels anointed for the Lords
use, and dare not profane themselves with the World, Knowing, that the
friendship of the World is enmity with God, Jam. 4.4. In the first Epistle of
John, 1. he speaks of their cleansing from sin by the blood of Christ; in the
second, of their receiving the anointing: and in the 3 Chap. 13. of the Worlds
hatred of them; they were now not of the World, the unction had severed them
from the World, and they were consecrated to the Lord.

2. They are joyous and cheerful ones who are anointed; the Apostles after
they received the holy spirit, their sorrows for the departure of Christ fled
away, their troubl^s in the flesh were nothing: So Paul and Silas sang praises
at midnight, after whipping, imprisoning, and thrusting into the stocks. Acts
16.24, 25. And the Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Cha.
10.34. And why? They were made partakers of the holy Spirit. Chap. 6.4. They
were anointed, and that made them joyful.

3. They are taught the ways of God, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. I will put my Laws
into their mind, and write them in their hearts, they shall all know me from
the least to the greatest, for I will be merciful ^o their unrighteousness,
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. When God should forgive
them, and wash away their sins in the blood of Christ, then he would anoint
them, he would teach them, little and great, the knowledge of himself and his
ways.

4. They are sanctified and beautified with the graces of his spirit. When sins
are washed away in the blood of the Lamb, then God anoints with the graces of
his spirit. Tit. 3.5. Upon the washing of regeneration (that is, upon the
effectual washing of the soul by the blood of Christ in the use of Baptism)
followed the renewing of the holy spirit, which he shed on us abundantly,
Spiritum effudit, powered out like Oil, so that they were replenished,
sanctified, and beautyfied, with all the graces of his Spirit.

VERSE 10, 11, 12, 13. I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee
with badgers skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee
with silk.

I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and a
chain on thy neck.

And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earerings in thine ears, and a
beautiful Crown upon thine head.

Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine linen
and silk, and broidered work, thou did eat fine flower and honey, and Oil,
and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou did prosper into a Kingdom.


THese Verses hold out more of Gods bounty toward this Woman, like a loving
Husband newly married, he makes great provision for her.

1. Clothing, and that not common but costly Verse. 10. and part of the 13.

2. Ornaments, Verse. 11, 12. Bracelets, a Chain, a Jewel, Earerings, a Crown.

3. Diet, Fine flower, Honey, and Oil.

I clothed thee with broidered work.
(...) Vestivi te acupicto, with that is drawn, painted or imbroidered with a
needle Sept. (...) I have put on thee Garments various in the working, and
colors, Vulg. Discoloribus, with garments of diverse colors. Cast. Phrygianis
indui. Calv. Phrygionica vest variegata. Jun. Versicoloribus. Fren. Te vesti
de broiderie. The word is from (...) to imbroider with the Needle, or by
Weaving, to work in diverse colors, figures and pictures in clothes, they
made the pictures of Men, Beasts, and other living Creatures in them: sometimes
they intermixed Gold and silk of diverse colors, and so the work was very
curious and costly. Pradus conceives that the word Rickmah does properly
signify Opus acupictum, and Psalm. 45.14. where it is said, She shall be
brought unto the King in raiment of needlework, Lirkamoth it sets out what
broidery the word imports, Viz. That which is done with the Needle, and such
imbroiderie is called Opus phrigionicum, because the Phrigians first invented
it: some refer this clothing with broiderie to Aaron, Exodus 28.4. there a
broidered Coat was to be made for him, in which they affirm was imbroidered the
whole world, heaven, earth, Sea, with the fulness and furniture of them, as
Birds, Fishes, Beasts, Meadows, and those living creatures, which were dos
Vxoris, the dowry of the Wife, these were intertext, woven in, also with the
needle was imbroidered most lively the glory of their progenitors, according to
that in wisdom, 18.24. In the long garment was all the ornament, and in the
four rows of the stones, was the glory of the Fathers graven. Theodoret
refers the broiderie, and what follows in the words, to the Curtains,
coverings, and ornaments of the Tabernacle, which were costly and wrought with
needle-worke some of them, Exodus 26.26. but both these are too narrow, the
people were clothed with broidered work as well as the Priests, and
Tabernacle, Isai. 3.18. they had their braverie, and their broiderie too, Judge.
5.30. when Sisera was gone forth to fight with the Israelites, did not his
Mother and the Ladies say, Have they not divided the prey? to Sisera a prey of
diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of needle-worke on both sides meet
for the neck of them that take the spoil, the Hebrew for needle-vvorke is
Richmah and Rickmathaim, broiderie made with the needle, which the Jews had
plenty of, the repetition of the words import it, had they conquered and
spoiled the Jews, they looked for a prey of diverse colored needle-worke.

And shod thee with Badgers skin.
Hebrew is, (...) and calceavi te taxo. Septu: (...) I shod thee with skins of
a blew or hyacinth color Uulgar is, Ianthino with skins of violet color (...)
in Greek is a Violet,, and (...) a flower, from which arises (...). Jun:
Casta: read it Melinis, which agrees with our translation That this Tachash was
some living creature all agree, but what creature, is doubtful, some Rabbis
say it was a beast, quae tantum illo tempore, reperta fuerit plurimas habens
maculas, which the Chaldeans called Sasgona quasi gaudens coloribus, for some of
the Hebrews say it had six colors, we have it Badgers skins, so its rendered,
Exodus 25.5:26.14:35.7.23:36.19:39.34. Numb. 4.6.8.10.14.25. Chap. 11.12. but
whither so warrantable I leave to consideration, for the Jews held the Tachasch
to be a clean beast which the Badger is not, by Moses law, as Ainsworth
observes; how could they handle the Badger, if it were an unclean creature,
flay it, and make shoes of the skin, and not be defiled therewith? the wearing
of such shoes was a defilement and abomination: Besides, its not probable
that God would have the Tabernacle covered with the skins of unclean beasts,
that being holy. Gesner, also says that the skins of Badgers have no
pretiousnesse in them, he would have inquiry made whither it be not the Those
Lynx, some such creature, whose skin is precious and spotted: further it
appears not that Badgers skins were of use to make shoes, as here the Tachasch
is said to be. Its most likely to be some living creature peculiar to those
parts, having sundry blew spots in it, which occasioned the Septu: and Vulg:
to translate it as you heard: The Jews did wear their garments short, because
their feet were seen, they had their shoes exquisitely made and much adorned,
Isa. 3 18. ornaments of their feet. This shooing of them held out says Prado.

1. Liberty; for as to be unshod, noted captivity, Isai. 20.3, 4. so being
shod the contrary, Exodus 12.11.

2. Taking possession; for loosing the shoe was an Emblem of man's parting with
his right, Ruth 4.7. Deuteronomy. 25.9, 10.

3* Joy, Ezekiel. 24.17. in time of mourning they put off their shoes, and
therefore the Prophet being forbid to mourn, is commanded to put on his shoes.

4. Constancy and resolution, the word here for shoing is from (...) claudere,
because when a man is shod, his feet are shut up from danger of stones and
thorns, and so he goes on boldly, constantly, resolutely, Ephesians. 6.15, Having
your feet shod with the preparation of Gospel; let the Gospel be to the
affections, as shoes to the feet, have that in readiness, it will make you go
on undauntedly.

I girded thee about with fine linen.
Hebrew is thus, (...) stravite in bysso, I covered thee with fine linen.
Uulg. Cinxi te bysso. Cast. Amicui bysso. Tremel. Pisc. Xilino cotton not
bysso, and so they render it in other places, Exodus 25.4. it is, (...) there
which Trem. and Jun. render linum Xilinum not byssum, and upon this reason
because bysse or fine linen has another name amongst the Hebrews, viz. (...)
as in 1 Cron. 15.27. but this argument is not convincing, because both in the
Hebrew tongue and in others, one thing may have diverse names, and Boethius in
his sacred animadversions says that if (...) be cotton, it has also another
name in the Hebrew, namely, (...) and so he interprets that place in Josh. 2.6.
(...) to be understood of cotton and not of flax, which is Masius his opinion:
it appears to me shat Shesh was some choice material, whereof they made
precious garments and girdles such as were for Kings and great persons, Genesis
41.42. when Pharaoh would exalt Joseph, set him over all the Land next to
himself, he arrayes him in vestures of Shesh, bysse or fine linen, so in
Proverb 31.22. speaking of the virtuous wife, he says, her clothing is Shesh;
in the verse before it is said of her household, They were all clothed with
skarlet, if they were clad with that, this Shesh, must be something more
precious, otherwise her Servants should be better clad then herself, I
conceive the marginal reading were fitter, they were all clothed with double
garments: so the Hebrew word will bear it, and the former words of the verse
seem to infer it, she is not afraid of the snow, that is the greatest cold
of all, because her household is clothed with double garments, and she herself
with Shesh, fine linen and purple which were more costly then the others, Luke
16.19. the rich man is brought in clothed with purple, or fine linen, Bysso,
and its reckoned amongst precious thing, Rev. 18.12.16. as gold, silver,
precious stones, pearls, fine linen or bysse, purple, silk, scarlet, etc.
fine linen here or bysse is distinguished from silk, and so is, (...) in my
text there is another word for silk (...) they have mistaken therefore who
have rendered (...) silk, when as it is the common consent of Interpreters,
that (...) is silk; this Shesh or Byssus was a kind of flax greatly esteemed,
and desired of women, and of no less value then gold. The Rabbis say, what
place soever in the Law speaks of Shesh or Bad, it is flax, or Bysse,
Maymonie. Mercer says it is a kind of flax most fine, white and precious, and
so diverse others, only some doubt is made of the color. Pausanias and Bootius
do conceive it was of a yellowish or redish color, but the Scripture it self,
may determine that doubt, Rev. 19.14. its called (...) white linen, and the word
Shesh is put for white marble, Cant. 5.15. and if the Scripture call it white,
we need not make inquiry after any other color; for the orig. of it, De^.
tells us that Byssum non vermiculi pratum esse sed terrae ceuplantae.

I girded thee.
The Hebrew (...) signifies to bind and to cover, Isai. 1.6. Thy wounds have
not been bound up. Genesis 22.3. Abraham rose and sadled his Ass, the Hebrew is
covered in this place, the worn is to girt now whether sense of the word is
fittest, must be inquired after when as some render it, I covered I clothed
thee; others, I girded or bound thee; to me girding is most peculivr here,
because he spoke of clothing before, and speaks of covering in the next
words; its well rendered by our translators, I girded thee, etc. that is, with a
girdle made of fine linen, I girt thee and thy Children. Aarons girdle was of
fine twined linen, Exodus 39.29. girdles usually were of costly things,
Needle-worke, Exodus 28.39. of gold, Rev. 15.6. Dan. 10 5. and girdles were for
gifts, 2 Samuel 18.11. says Joab to the young man, I would have given thee ten
sheckles of silver and a girdle. Girdles amongst the attire and dressings of
women, were of some account, Jer. 2.23. Can a Maid forget her ornaments, or a
Bride her attire, their hearts and thoughts are much taken up with them, and
because they sinned so about them the Lord told them, Isa. 3.24. That instead of
a girdle, there should be a rent, and instead of a Stomacher, a girding with
sackcloth. This girding some make to note out chastity, and conjugall
fidelity. Others, fitness and preparednes for employment.

Covered thee with silk.
Hebrew is, (...) operui te serico, this covering was not any inward garment,
but some outward veil, a covevering, not a clothing. The Hebrew women did
wear their Vailes and coverings over their outward garments, Genesis 38.14. Tamar
covered herself with a Veil, so did Rebeckah, Genesis 24.65. and Cant. 5.7. the
spouse had her veil: so Isai. 3.23. the Daughters of Sion had their hoods and
vailes: whither these vailes did cover the whole bodies, like Hukes in some
Countries, or their half bodies, whither their heads or faces, is doubtful
amongst Interpreters. That they were not only for the head, but larger is clear
from Ruth 3.15. How big or little soever, it was of silk so do expositors in
general render it, only the Septu: and Jerome read it otherwise, the one has it
(...) which Suidas affirms to be a silken cloth, or precious vesture. Theod. a
net or caul made of fine hair, and put upon the heads of women Hesychius he
expouds it to be (...) a silken covering, woven, knit, or made for the hairs
of the head, and Stephanus in These. (...) is textum quoddam tenue and
bombycinum magni pretii quod crinibus obducebatur. Jerome has it subtilibus, I
covered thee with curious and fine coverings, it was of that finenesse says
he, ut capillorum tenuitatem habere credatur; that it equaliz'd small hair,
our Prophet says (...) with silk, which may be drawn out into very curious
threads, the word from whence meshi comes is (...) signifying to draw out, 2 Samuel 17.22. He drew me out of many waters, and Moses had his name hence, Ex.
2.10. because drawn out of the water, so silk is called meshi in Heb, because
its drawn out of the bowels of a worm, and afterward being put into the
water, is drawn out into the finest threads.

The use of vailes in scripture was twofold.

1. For Declaration and preservation of modesty, Genesis 24.65. When Isaac was
coming, Rebckah puts on her veil, and covers her beauty from the sight of
man, and manifests her modesty, 1 Cor. 11.5. a woman prophesying was to have
her head covered, she must not do it without her veil on, that was a shame
to her, argued boldness and impudence, and was as disgraceful as being
shorn, when therefore a woman prophesied, either in an extraordinary way as
Deborah, Huldah, Anna, the Daughters of Philip, or in an ordinary way that is
sung in public (for so prophesying is taken, 1 Chronicles. 25.1. where the
singers are said to prophecy with Harpes) they were for modesty sake to put on
their vailes, and God here gave a silken veil or covering to the Jewish Church
his Spouse, that she might carry herself modestly toward him.

2. A veil notes subjection, 1 Cor. 11.10. A woman ought to have power on her
head, that is, to cover it, that so it may appear she is under the Dominion of
her Husband, man being Gods Deputy on earth, Lord of the world, he ought not
to cover his head, lest he wrong the power put into his hand, but the woman
being of man and for man, she ought to cover and veil herself, to declare her
subjection to her Husband, and reverence the power in him; God therefore giving
a covering to this Jewish estate, would have her to know, that she was not to
live as she listed, but to be in subjection unto him, and to be ruled by his
Laws, that she was not sui juris, but at pleasure and disposure of the Lord.

Verse. 2. I decked thee also with ornaments.
In the former verse you heard of the rich clothing of this Israelitish woman,
in this and the next verse, you have her ornaments, which are for comeliness
and sight, rather than any necessity. Hebrew is, (...) ornavi te ornamento,
Septu: (...) Castal. ornamentis compsi. French Te paray d'ornemens.

I put bracelets upon thine hands.
Hebrew is, (...) armillas from (...) to couple, join unite together, and
bracelets are made of such materials, as are stringed and united together,
Septu. is, (...). This practice, was very ancient, Genesis 24.22. you have mention
of golden bracelets for the hands of Rebeckah, and these were worn sometimes
by men also, as Genesis 38.18. Tamar asked Judah for his signet, and his
bracelets, and 2 Samuel 1.10. Saul had a bracelet upon his arm, these persons of
note did use to wear, and they were a great ornament unto them, signifying
says Origin, that the hands should do no uncomlie thing.

A Chain upon thy neck.
Hebrew is, (...) its from (...) Septua. (...) which was a Chain of diverse
gems, or precious things hanging down from the neck to the breast, this
wearing of Chains about the neck we find to be first in Egypt, Genesis 41.42.
Pharaoh put a gold Chain about Joseph's neck, which was a great honoring of
him, its like the Egyptian Kings and Nobles did wear Chains for ornaments,
Dan. 5.16. Belshazar said to Daniel, If thou can read the writing and make
it known to me, thou shall be clothed with skarlet and have a chain of gold
about thy neck; it was used as for honor, so for reward, Solomon says, his
Beloveds neck was comely with Chains of gold, Cant. 1.10. so obedience to
Parents is reckoned as a chain about the neck, Prove. 1.9: here by chain says
Barnard in his Bibl. These. is meant the Laws, and Ordinances of God, which
would be a Chain to her neck.

Verse. 12. I put a Jewel on thy fore head.
The Hebrew word for Jewel is, (...) which notes a Jewel for the forehead, in
the original its on thy nose or nostrils, and Isai. 3.21 you read of nose
jewels, (...) circulos naris, the rings of the nose or jewels of the nostrils:
so in Genesis 24.47. I put the earing upon her face, its in the original hannezem
al appah, I put the Jewel on her nose or nostrils. Symmachus interprets hezem
(...) upon the nose, some think it was a ring fastend in the carlilage, or
pattition between the nostrils, which is a place fit enough for such a
purpose, and from thence hung down to the lips, Theodoret is of that
judgment, and the Lord seems to allude unto Isai. 37.29. I will put my hoock
into thy nose or nostrils, Vatablus reads it Circulum in naribus tuis, and
Historians tell us, that there be Indians and others in the world, who wear
Jewels in their noses. Others hold it was a jewel fastened on their foreheads,
and so hung down to their noses, Castal. has it frontale, as if it were a
fore-head-jewell; the Author of this opinion was Jerome, who affirms that
among their ornaments they were wont to have golden rings hang down from
their foreheads, to their mouths, and he renders, Isai. 3.21. Gemmas ex
front pendentes; I shall not contend in this point, but when the Scripture
calls them nisme haaph, I should think it safest to rest there.

Earings in thine ears.
Hebrew is, (...) circulos, its from (...) rotundum, because they are round,
Septu. is, (...) rotulas wheels, because they are round like wheels, they
were of gold usually, Exodus 32.2. Break off the golden earings, which are in
the ears of their wives, Job 42.11. Every one of Jobs friends brought him a
ring of gold, Judge. 8.24. They had golden earings, the word here signifies any
round thing, and so rings in general.

I shall speak a word or two of rings, I find in Scripture that they were
ancient, and their use to be,

1. Honorarie; so when Joseph had told Pharaoh his dream, he honored him,
with putting a ring upon his finger, Genesis 41.42. He took off the ring from his
own hand, and put it upon Joseph's. Signum ordinis equestris.

2. Signatorie; Ahashuerus bids Ester write in the Kings name for the Jews,
and seal it with the Kings ring, sealing rings were called Signets, Genesis
38.18. Tamar demands of Judah his Signet, Dan. 6.17. The King sealed it with
his own Signet, and the Signets of his Lords, and they did wear their Signets
upon their right hands, Jer. 22.24. though Coniah were the Signet, etc.

3. Decorarie or for ornament, either of the hands, Est. 8.2. or of the nose as
before, or of the ears as in this place, by this earing, Theodoret understands
the hearing of the word of God.

4. Testificatorie.

1. Of joy, Luke 15.22. said the Father of the Prodigal upon his return, Put a
ring upon his finger.

Schitzkins de Annulis.
2. Of Estate, James 2.2. If there come unto your Assembly a man with a gold
ring, etc. that shows him to be a man of Estate. Crassus that rich Roman wore
two rings, thereby intimating, the great increase of his wealth, quasi annulus
foret symbolum opulentiae.

3. Of power, Ester. 3.10. when Haman had traduced the Jews, persuaded the
King it was not for his profit to suffer them, and had offered a great sum of
money for their destruction, the King took the Ring from his hand, and gave it
unto Haman, Curt, lib. 6. de Gest. Alnx.
which testified, the King thereby gave him power to do it: so Alexander when
sick unto death, was asked who should be his successor, answered the best
amongst them, and shortly after his speech failing, he pulled off his Ring, and
gave it to Perdiccas.

Their earings entered their ears, had the name of their gods in them, Genesis
35.4. They gave to Jacob all their strange gods, and their earings, which he
buried under the Oak.

Why should he bury the earings, if they had not the names, effigies, or
memorial of their Gods in them?

Also they were tokens of reconciliation, Job 42.11. They brought to Job an
earing of gold, so God had given them his word, that it might enter into their
ears, carry the name and memorial of God to their hearts, and be a pledge of
his friendship, and good will toward them.

Obser. 1.
That whatever wealth you have, clothing, ornaments, jewels, it is the Lord
who gives you them, I clothed thee, I girded thee, I covered thee, I decked
thee, I put Bracelets upon thine hands, I put a Jewel on thy forehead, here
are six things. If we have clothes, we consider not who clothed us, therefore
says God, I clothed thee, if we be girded, etc. we are very apt to forget
Gods bounty, and to attribute, what he gives, to our own industry, prudence,
providence, or some second cause, Hos. 2.5. she thought her lovers, not God,
gave her bread, water, wool, flax, etc. Verse. 8. She did not know that I gave
her. We all live upon the Alms of God, no man has a coat, a shoe, a girdle;
no woman a veil, a hood, a jewel, but it is the gift of God, Cant. 4.1. the
Church is said to have Doves eyes, because she looks much upward. Others have
Swines, they look downward.

A beautiful Crown upon thy head.
Hebrew is, (...) Coronam gloriae, A crown of glory, that is, a Crown which
made thee glorious and beautiful, Septu. is, (...) a crown of rejoicing or
glorying, Sym. Decoris of comelines and honor, so the Vulg. and Calvin also.
Castal. Decoram coronam a comely Crown, Jun. Polon. and Pisc. Coronam ornatus,
a Crown of ornament. French is, une couronue excellent, an excellent Crown.
Oecol. Coronam pulchritudinis, a Crown of beauty.

What this Crown was, we must inquire, a Crown is somewhat compasses about,
so the word (...) whence it comes signifies, viz. circundare circumtegere, and
the learned conceive, this Crown was some ornament upon the head, made of fine
linen, silk or gold intermixed with the same, in Isa. 3.18. you read of round
tires like the moon, which Deodate says, they wore on their shoes, but
others on their heads, that were made of costly materials, and round like the
moon, and may be that which the Lord calls here the beautiful crown. Women in
our days, do tie up their hair in a round, which shows like a Crown upon
their heads.

Aaron you know was crowned, Levit. 8.9. Moses put upon his head the holy
Crown, and so in him crowned the people, who are called a royal Priesthood, a
Kingdom of Priests. Exodus 19.6. to this crowning, some think, the Lord
respects here. Others judge the Lord alludes to a custom among the Jews, and
others of putting crowns upon the heads of those who were to be married, and
receive princely power and dignity, Cant. 3.11. Solomon's Mother crowned him
with a Crown in the day of his espousals, and Isai. 61.10. As a Bridegroom
decketh himself with ornaments. The Hebrew is, That decketh himself as a
Priest, who had choice ornaments, and among the rest a Crown, and so the
Vulg. reads it, quasi sponsum decoratum corona, and so the Brides had crowns
or peculiar dressings like crowns, the Vulg. reads the words Cant. 4.8. Come
with me from Lebanon my spouse, with me from Lebanon, and Coronaberis, and thou
shall be crowned. When Ahasuerus took Ester to be his Spouse, he set the
royal Crown upon her head, Est. 2.17. so God here speaking of the marrying of
this woman to him, tells you, that he put a Crown upon her head, it was an
honorable, a princely marriage, and God would have the world know, that his
Spouse should not be inferior to any, but have her Crown and the honor of a
Kingdom, and by this Crown I conceive is meant, not the Cloud which covered
and compassed them by day, nor the Law which God gave them at Mount Sinai, but
princely dignity, dominion and power, so its used, Psalm. 132.18. His enemies
will I cloth with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish; that is,
his dignity and power shall flourish, Revel. 6.2. He sat on the white Horse,
had a Crown given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer. The
Crown given was an Emblem of dignity and dominion, and here it notes that
honor and power God gave this people, Numb. 1.16. there were Princes of the
Tribes, 12. are named in the verse before, and Chap. 16.2. you have mentioned,
250 Princes: they had store of Princes amongst them, which shows they were an
honorable and potent people, Joshua, Barack, Jephtah, etc. their dignity and
Dominion was the Crown of glory, the Lord had put upon their head.

Jer. 13.18. Say to the King and Queen humble yourselves for your
principalities shall come down, even the Crown of your glory, the word
principallities, is rendered in the margent headtires, those ornaments on their
heads which noted their principallities, as their Crowns which imported
greatness power and sovereignty, these being Crowns of their glory, should
come down, or we may take the word as it stands, the principallities, what you
count the principal things, as the royal dignity, and sovereign power,
these shall come down, these are the Crowns of glory, and they shall be laid
in the dust.

Verse. 13. Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver.
Hebrew is, and thou wast decked with noting their riches and wealth they had,
rather than their golden and silver apparel, Gold is the chiefest of metals,
and has the precedencie in Scripture, its first spoken of, Genesis 2.11.12. and
this woman had much gold, she had jewels of gold from the Egyptians, Exods
12.35. you may read in the 25. of Exodus what golden things were in the
Tabernacle, and in the 1 Kin. 6 and 7 Chapters, what gold and golden vessels
were in the Temple, and Solomon abounded with gold, he had yearly commming in
666. Talents of gold, Chap. 10.16. and the common Talent was 1875 li. and the
sacred was 3750. li. now after the rate of the common Talent, it was 1248450.
li. and after the rate of the sacred, 2496900 li. David in his time prepared,
100000 talents of gold, and 1000000. of silver for the house of the Lord.
Solomon had Targets and sheilds of gold, and al his drinking Vessels, and
silver was as plentiful as stones, and nothing accounted of in his days, 1 Ki.
10.16, 17:21.27. yea gold was so plentiful, that they made them Gods of gold,
1 Kings 12.28. and lavished out gold. Isai. 46.6.

Obser. 1.
The Lord does not only give Apparel, ornaments unto his people, but he gives
rich and costly apparel, precious ornaments, he gave them broidered work, fine
linen, and silk, bracelets, chains, jewels, and earings of gold, Jer. 20.5.
there were precious things in the City, 2 Samuel 1.24. the Daughters of Israel
were clothed in skarlet, and had ornaments of gold upon their apparel, they
had choice ornaments, Lam. 4.5. They were brought up in skarlet, they were
clothed with crimson, and decked with ornaments of gold, Jer. 4.30. Now seeing
the Lord gave them such raiment, and such ornament, there is a lawful use of
such things,. The Apostle Paul seems to be against the use of them, 1 Timothy
2.9. I will that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastnes
and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array.
Rev. 1.13. Christ was girt about with a golden girdle; it was no sin for
Rebecchah to wear the jewels and bracelets that Abraham's Servant brought and
gave her, Genesis 24.47. it was not sinful for the virtuous wife to wear silk
and purple, Prove. 31.22. God would never have given materials at all to work
them, if it were simply unlawful to wear them. Let us consider for what ends
the Lord has given Apparel and ornaments, and hereby we shall come to
discern more clearly of the lawful use, or sinful abuse of these things.

There be several ends,

1. To cover man's nakedness, God set man and woman naked in the world, at
first, that they might see they had nothing of their own, that all was the
Lords who created them, but when they sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, they
were ashamed of their nakedness, and sought to cover it, Genesis 3.7. yea God made
them coats of skins, and clothed them verse. 21. that so their nakedness and
shame might not be seen, that so modesty and chastity might be preserved,
Hos. 2.9. I will recover my wool, and my flax given to recover her nakedness.

2. To arm and defend them against the injury of the air, the violence of
wind, and weather, heat and cold, Prove. 31.21. She is not afraid of the snow,
for all her household are clothed with double garments, they keep off the
harm would come by snow and frost to the body if not clothed, therefore says
Solomon, its unseasonable to take away a man's garment in cold weather, Prove.
25.20. and Job judges it an Act of wickedness in them that cause men to want
coverings in the cold, Job. 24.7.

3. To distinguish one sex from another, God would not have men and women
dressed and adorned alike, Deuteronomy, 22.5. The woman shall not wear that which
apperteineth to a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment, God would
not have men to be effeminate, nor women to be mannish, some therefore judge it
unlawful for women to put on any arms, because armor is the furniture or
covering of man, the Hebrew word cheli signifies an instrument or ornament
that a man puts on him in time of peace or war.

4. To preserve the healthinesse of our bodies, man is borne to labor as the
sparks fly upward, Job 3.7. and man laboring, his body sweats, and sends
forth these humors would breed sicknesses, diseases, etc. which our vestures
receiving are to be changed, and so health preserved, so in time of sickness,
Job 30.18. By the great force of my disease is my garment changed, it binds
me about as the collar of my Coat.

5. To notify the conditions, ranks and places of men, Genesis 41.42. When
Joseph was exalted, he was arrayed in Vestures of fine linen, which was an
indicium, that he was a man of great place, so Est. 6.8. the man the King would
honor, must have the royal Apparel, and Herod Acts 12.21. had on royal
Apparel, Psalm. 45.13.14. The Kings daughter was in clothing of wrought gold,
and raiment of needle-worke, 2 Samuel 13.18. Tamar had a garment on of diverse
colors, for with such roabes were Kings Daughters apparrelled; Lam. 4.5. By
Scarlet they were differenced from other, Matthew. 11.8. soft-silken raiment was
for those were in Kings Houses that were Virgins, and because Christ was a
King, and a pretended King as the Jews thought, therefore they clothed him in
skarlet, Matthew. 27.28.

6. To adorn the body, Genesis 27.15, Esau had goodly, the Hebrew is desirable
raiment, that became him so, as made him lovely, desirable, Isa. 52.1. Zion
had beautiful garments, to put on such as made her beautiful, Hos. 2.13. She
decked herself with earings and jewels, Jer. 2.22. Can a Maid forget her
ornaments, Exodus 28, 40. Aarons sons must have coats, girdles bonnets, for
glory and beauty.

7. To testify grief or joy, Mordechai put on sackcloth in a time of
mourning, Joel 1.13. comely in sackcloth, there was a soar judgment upon
them: so for joy, Luke 15.22. Bring the best roabe and put upon him. Isa.
61.10. A Bridegroom decks himself with ornaments, and a Bride adornes
herself with jewels: marrriage is a time of rejoicing; garments and jewels do
testify it, when joy and mirth are in the heart of a man, then says Solomon,
let thy garments be white, Eccl. 9.8.

Wherein persons sin about Apparel and Ornaments.

1. When it is not modest, but carries with it provocation to lust and
wantonness, Prove. 7.10. There met the young man a woman in the attire of a
Harlot, with naked breasts, with curled and poudred hair, with costly
garments, which were incentiva libidinis, Rev. 17.1, 2, 3. the Whore with whom
the Kings of the earth committed fornication, was arrayed with purple and
scarlet color, decked with gold, precious stones and pearls, such things as
might entice them to folly, Hos. 2.2. he speaks of adultery between the
breasts, they either had naked breasts, or hung enticing ornaments about their
breasts; when the habit, hair, or adorning of the breasts are such as draw the
eyes, this is crimen prostitutionis, the fault of her who sets her chastity to
sale. Hierome says if a man or woman adorn themselves so as they provoke
others to look after them, though no evil follow upon it, yet the Party
shall suffer eternal damnation, because they offered poison to others, though
none would drink of it. So when women's garments are too short, they are not
suitable to modesty, 1 Timothy 2.9. Women should adorn themselves in modest
Apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety.

2. When persons exceed their degree and rank in costly Apparel and ornaments,
gold, pearls, and costly array is forbidden by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.9. and 1
Pet. 1.3. the Lord does not simply forbid all adorning, as Pelagius would have
it, but their adorning themselves beyond their degrees, it is not for the lower
rank of people to be arrayed like unto the middle sort, nor for the middle
sort ^ike unto the highest.

3. When it proclaims and maintains pride, haughtines and contempt of others,
rich Apparel, and precious Ornaments, puff up the hearts of those which wear
them, Isa. 3.16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. The Daughters of Sion are haughty, and
walk with stretched forth necks, wanton eyes, etc. and what was the occasion
and cause of this they had their braverie, tinkling ornaments, cauls and tyres
like the Moon, chains, bracelets, earings, rings, nose-jewels, changeable
suits of Apparel, fine linen, hoods and veiles, and these they were proud
of, and contemned those who wanted them; its said of the Leviathan, his scales
are his pride, Job 41.11. so many, their clothing is their pride, and being
proud they become conteptuous, Psalm. 123.4. Our soul is exceedingly filled
with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the
proud, proud ones contemn others, the Devil is a proud creature, and he
accused, contemned Joshua who was clothed with filthy garments, and when
persons are puffed up with their Apparel, they will contemn those are clad
with mean or filthy garments.

4. When its so expensive as that it hinders works of mercy, 1 Timothy 29.10.
Let women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, not with broidered hair, gold,
pearls, or costly array, but with good works, now when they wear such costly
apparel and ornaments, that they are disabled to do good to the poor,
proportionable to their rank, their cladments and ornaments become sinful,
hence it is that many of note are very miserable in their Houses, defrauding
their bellies, to lay the more upon their backs, yea become not only coveteous,
but griping Exactors upon their Tenants, racking their rents to so high a rate,
that their pride is maintained by the sweat, loss, and undoing oft-times of
others, yea oft-times so profuse this way, that they undo their own Families.

5. When strange and foreign fashions are taken up, which is one of the great
sins of England, you read in Zephan. 1.8. a terrible sentence which is this,
I will punish all such as are clothed with strange Apparel; that is, those
which did follow and imitate the strange Apparel of other Nations. Some aped
themselves into the Chaldean habits, some into the Egyptian, some into the
Tyrian, some into the Philistean, and some into other Gentilish habits, as it
is amongst us, some take up the French, some the Spanish, some Jtalian habits.
That we may conceive to be strange apparel, which is not peculiar to the
Nation where men live, nor found in the Churches of God there.

6. When too much time is laid out about curious and costly apparelling of the
body, and adorning it with ornaments; our furniture and dressings therewith
should be such, as should take up little time, for time is more precious than
all thy rich Roabes, than all thy precious jewels and ornaments. Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeem the time, because the days are evil, many men and women squander away
the time in minding new fashions, and in tricking up their vile bodies with
gorgeous apparel and ornaments, and spend so many hours therein, as that they
have scarce one hour for God, or the good of their souls; if more time be not
spent about that most noble part of man, the clothing and trimming up of it
for the Bridegroom, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, then upon the body, you sin
greatly: Its a crying and provoking sin in this Land, that many not only among
the great and gallant ones, but even of inferior rank, do spend a third part,
if not half of their day, in fitting, f^neing, and dressing up their bodies
with their broideries, fine linen, silks, accoustrements, and ornaments,
whereas a divine prohibition lies against these comparatively, 1 Pet. 3.3.
speaking of women he says, Let not their adorning be outward, of plaiting the
hair, wearing of gold, putting on of Apparel, but let it be the hidden man
of the heart, in the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit; rather this than the
other. In the Hebrew tongue, Verba negantia saepe ponuntur pro comparatis. Genesis
32.28. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob but Israel, that is, rather Israel
than Jacob. Exodus 16.8. The murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord. Prove. 8.10. Receive my instruction and not silver. Luke 12.13. When thou
make a dinner or supper, call not thy friends, kindred or rich Neighbors,
but the poor. 1 Timothy 2.14. Adam was not deceived, but the woman; that is, the
woman rather than Adam, so in this place of Peter, women should rather look at
the dressing and rich apparelling of their souls than of their bodies.

Hence those Scriptures,

Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.

Put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

Put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekness, long
suffering, charity, Col. 3.12.14.

1 Pet. 5.5. Be clothed with humility, (...) Oecumen: renders it Circumdate.
Gerrard. Innodate, do as women that deck themselves with knots of silk
ribbon: if time were spent this way, you would be more lovely in the eye of
God, you would be as Brides ready trimmed for the appearing of the great
Bridegroom.

7. When its worn unseasonably. Costly apparel and ornaments, are sometimes
as unseasonable as snow in Summer, when its a time of mourning, when God calls
either privately or publicly to it, then we sin if we put on rich attire, our
chief robes and ornaments, Exodus 33.4, 5. There were evil tidings, they
mourned, and no man put on him his ornaments; God had bid them put of their
ornaments, and told them he would not go with them, which was a soar
judgment. David when the Child lay sick, had not on his royal Apparel, for
the text says, When the Child was dead, he rose from the earth, and changed
his garments, 2 Samuel 12.20. when Haman had got power against the Jews, and
their Laws were in danger, Mordecai and many of the Jews fasted, but it was
in sackcloth and ashes; and when Esther sent other raiment for Mordecai to
put on, he would none of it, God called to mourning, and he would testify the
sorrow of his heart, by the sackcloth on his loins, and ashes on his head,
judgments and afflictions had better effects in their days, then ours, God
has a long time called upon us to put on sackcloath, to testify our sorrows,
we have had many days of mourning, God has spoken to us to put off our vain
fashions, our gorgeous apparel; our costly ornaments our sumptuosam
stoliditatem, but we have not done it. When God has looked for our coursest
and worst garments at a Fast, we have come in silk and Satin, Plush and
Crimson, bespangled with Pearls, Diamonds, with curled locks, powdered heads,
naked necks and breasts, fitter for Pageants and play houses, then the presence
of a provoked God; do you think it meet in their own consciences, that men
and women should take pleasure in adorning their bodies, and manifest it at a
Fast, when God is so far displeased that he threatens our lives and liberties.

So when they may draw away the minds of those that wear them, or those that
behold them from the worship of God, Cum a Caelestibus abducunt, therefore its
questionable whither such apparel and ornaments should be worn on the Lords
days, and at such times, when people meet in the congreation to worship the
Lord, if they take not up their own hearts, they draw away the eyes of others,
and when they come home, they can tell you more of men and women's habits and
fashions, and ornaments, then of the Preachers Sermon, etc.

Its inquireable why people should so dress up themselves when they are to
come before God, especially put on rich attire, and costly ornaments, do these
make you more acceptable to God? upon consideration you may fear its
otherwise, For.

1. You come before God in an open breach of his Will, 1 Timothy 2. 1 Pet. 3.

2. Do you not come to the Lord in a petitionarie way, that he would teach
you, pardon, sanctify, comfort you; and should Beggars come with badges of
pride upon them? should a Beggar come to you adornd with pearls and Diamonds,
with silk, satin, scarlet, you would have little heart to give unto him, 1 Timothy 2. he puts them upon praying every where, and then tells them that they
must not be adorned in costly array.

8. When the Callings of men are hindered by their apparel, that they cannot
do what is fitting in them, or with that activitie they should, sometimes
garments are too long, sometimes so little, sometimes so wide, that they cannot
walk in them, nor put forth themselves with such life, as in other garments.
David when he had Saul's armor on, he could not go in it, 1 Samuel 17.39. It
hindered the natural actions and motions of his body; that apparel which does
impede, and not promote the actions of the body, be they natural, vital or
animal, is sinful. God never set up Art to prejudice but to perfect nature,
therefore all garments and ornaments should be to make you act more livelie,
they should not retard your walking but further it: when the Sheep Fleece is
heavy and cumbersome, you take it away. Saylors will have clothes, to further
nothinder their motion.

9. When you multiply garments and ornaments, and have them to satisfy your
eye, new fangled humor, curiosity, to fill trunks and wardrobes, yea to breed
and feed moathes, rather then for any necessity or good use, Isa. 3.22. God
threatens to take away the changeable suits of apparel, they had variety of
suits, and shifted out of one into another, like many vain giddie spirits in
our days, that change their habits twice, yea thrice sometimes in a day, they
have such plenty, that though they do change often, yet they cannot keep them
from the moath, Jam. 5.1, 2. Go to you rich men,, weep and howl for the
miseries shall come upon you, your riches are corrupted, your garments are
moath-eaten: besides, they breed moathes in you, they make you sollicitous and
careful how to keep them, which of them to put on, how to turkise them into
the next fashion, etc. Matthew. 6.28. Why take ye thought for raiment? 1 Timothy 6.8.

10. When health is endangered by them, as when huffles slits and windows are
made in garments, so that they let in the cold, etc. when too short above or
beneath, when slutish. Christ's dead body, was wrapped in a clean linen
cloth, Mat. 27.59. our living bodies should not be covered with unclean
linen or woollen.

11. When it does disbecome the body, apparel is for the adorning of the
body; but there be many fashions now in the world, and dresses that do
disparage that natural beauty and comelines, which God has put upon the
body, and ought to be maintained, Paul says, women should adorn themselves
with modest apparel, (...) with becoming apparel, such as becomes nature,
such as becomes women that profess godliness; if you put honor upon those
parts are less honorable, will you dishonor those parts are more honorable?

12. When apparel is made use of to deceive, Zachar. 13.4. The false prophets
did wear rough garments to deceive, such were the garments of the true
Prophets, as you may see from Isai. 20.2. 2 Kings 1.8. and they put on such
garments, that they might be thought such Prophets, and thereby deceive the
people. Many put on rich apparel, that they may be thought wealthy men, of
good Families, that they may get rich matches, insinuate themselves into the
society of rich and great ones, to make advantage of them: many cover their
crookednesses, deformities, to deceive the World.

13. When its scandalous to others, either actively by drawing them to do the
like, or infecting the minds of others, and their own Children with sinful
thoughts and lusts, or passively when godly ones are sadded thereby.

We should not be proud of our clothing and ornaments.

1. Because they are the fruit of sin, or consequents of it. Adams sin
brought in garments, they are stigmata peccati; had there been no sin, there
had been no need of them.

2. They mind you of your great loss: you lost better garments and better
ornaments than these.

3. All from the beasts or bowels of the earth, its weakness, if not
foolishness, to affect such things.

4. Your bodies are better than your clothes, Matthew. 6.25. Is not the body
more than raiment: yet Phil 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he
is able to subdue all things unto himself. Our bodies are made of the earth,
full of sin, subject to all diseases, are often in base employments.

5. You must give account unto God of every mercy, garment, etc. James 5.9.
the Judge is at the door, 1 Pet. 4.5. Who shall give account to him that is
ready to judge the quick and the dead.

6. Because they are under condemnation, and are passing 1. John 2.15.16. Love
not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but is of the world. And the world passes away, and the lusts thereof,
but he that does the will of God abides forever.

7. Usually they have been wicked, who have affected those things, Jesabel,
Isa. those in 3. Revel. 17. The Whore. Herod Act. 12. Dives Luke 16.

8. Christ has set us an example of humility, Mat. 11.29. he woare no fine
clothes, no jewels or ornaments, he was crucified naked, for the sin of our
apparel, and it was the practice of holy women to look at the inward
adorning: The adorni^g of a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 1.5. After this
manner in old time, the holy women who trusted in God, adorned themselves.

Obser. 2.
The Lord gives variety of blessings unto his; not only aprel, costly
apparel, but variety of it, not only ornaments, and precious ones, but
variety of them, they had broidered work, fine linen, silk, bracelets,
chains, nose-jewels, earings, gold, silver in abundance, Deuteronomy. 28.12. Thou
shall lend unto many Nations, and thou shall not borrow, what ever they lent,
clothes, jewels, or money, they had variety: when the People offered so
largely, gold, silver, precious stones, and other things, 1 Chronicles. 29. it
argues that God had given them abundance of each, which made David say, ver.
14. All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, God had
first given, else there had been no giving unto him. Its said Deuteronomy. 28.47. They
had abundance of all things, yea all things at Land or Sea, Deuteronomy. 33.19. They
shall suck of the abundance of the Seas, and of treasures of gold and silver
(hid in the Sand) and apparel in great abundance.

Obser. 3.
The Lord minds and provides for his, from top to toe; clothed her with
broidered work, he covered her head with silk, he girded her with fine linen,
and shod her with skins of Tachash; her ears, nose, neck, hands, had their
ornaments, Gods eye was upon every part, and his hand gave coverings and
adornments for them; God does not only mind the honorable and highest parts,
but the lowest, the very feet of his, Isai. 3.20. they had ornaments upon their
legs, Deu. 8.4. Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot
swell these 40 years, Chap. 29.5. Thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot:
God minded the tipp of Aarons, and his Sons right ears, the thumbes of their
right hands, the great toe of their right foot, Exodus 29.20. God has put
honor and abundance of honor upon the uncomelie parts, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24.
Seeing God minds all, and provides for all, we should honor him with all,
with our heads, hands, Legs, feet, even the whole body, thou have adorned
us, we will adore thee; thou have clothed, girded, shod and decked us from the
head to the feet, we will see to it, that the whole and every part may be
Serviceable unto thee, that our inward man may be clothed with the
righteousness of Christ, and adorned from the top to the toe, with the graces of
the Spirit.

Verse. 13. Thou did eat fine flower and Honey and Oil:
You have heard before what were this woman's clothing and ornaments, now you
may hear of her diet. At marriages, as they had costly garments, precious
ornaments, so they had suitable dainties, the Lord provided for this woman, not
Acornes, or the Onions and Leekes of Egypt, but diet answerable to her
condition, for under these expressions, is held out unto us all provisions, God
gave into this Israelitish Estate, to feeed upon all things for nourishment.

Fine flower.
Hebrew is, (...) which Kirker renders flos seu deliciae; farinae triticiae,
the flower and delicacies of wheaten meal, being ground most finely, this was
offerable in sacrifices, Levit. 5. 11. but (...) was common flower or meal and
not used in sacrifice, but only in the offering of jealousy, Number. 5.15. the
French has it, la fleur de froment, the flower of wheat, it was very fine,
such as made bread or cakes for Kings, 1 Kings 4.22. such as Abraham
entertained Angels withal, Genesis 18.6. this people had Manna in the Wilderness,
and fine flower abundantly in Canaan, it is called the fat of wheat in Psalm.
81.16. Solomon spent in a day, 30. measures of fine flower in that 1 Kings
4.22. and it was cheap, A measure of flower was sold for a sheckel, 2 Kings,
7.16. which was about two shillings, and their Land was, A Land of wheat,
Deuteronomy. 8.8. and so abounded therein, that Solomon gave 20000. measures of wheat
unto Hiram, 1 Kings 5.11. the word for measure is, (...) core, now a core is
the same with the Homer, 8. or 10. bushels, so that he gave him 20000 quarters
at the least.

Honey
Hebrew is, (...) which notes all sweet things, honey, sugar, dates, figgs,
grapes, etc. 2 Chronicles. 31.5. there the people brought for offerings, the first
fruit of Corn, wine, oil, and honey, (...) Now it is not well translated
honey in this place, because honey was forbid in Offerings, Levit. 2.11. no
honey was to be in any offering made with fire: its better in the margents,
where you find it rendered Dates, Jun. and Trem. have it palmae, that is Dates,
or the fruit of the palm tree, the Law speaks not at all of the first fruits
of honey, but of other things it does, deuash may there in Chron. be translated
sweet things, or sweet fruits, and here in Ezekiel you may understand not only
honey, but all honyish, and sweet things: you have that phrase often, A Land that
flows with milk and honey, Exodus 3.8.13.5. Deuteronomy. 6.3. Josh. 5.6. Jer. 11.5.
Ezekiel. 20.6. which comprehend all other blessings, and declare what sweet and
delicate things they had to feed upon, when you read of honey in the word of
God, you must not always confine it to that we strictly call honey, but you
must extend it to any pleasant or sweet things edible, Deuteronomy. 32.13. He made him
to suck honey out of the rock: the rocks do not yield honey, but God gave them
water out of rocks, which was as sweet as honey, and God made rockie, barren
places, fruitful, which was as pleasant and delightful to them as honey, its
true, they had much honey it self in the Land as you may see from 1 Samuel
14.26. and they did eat it, Isa. 7.22. yet honey comprehended other things
also.

Oil.
Hebrew is, (...) from (...) to make fat, oil is very nourishing, it makes
plump and fat, Neh. 9.25. They took strong Cities, and a fat Land, and
possessed Houses full of all goods, wells dug, Vine-yards and Olive-yards
and Fruit Trees in abundance: so they did eat, were filled and became fat, and
delighted themselves in thy great goodness. Canaan was called a fat Land, it
abounded with oil and other choice things, which they fed upon and became fat
withal: now oil here is comprehensive, and notes also plenty of mercies
belonging to the belly, Deuteronomy. 33.24. Let Asher dipp his foot in oil; that is,
let him enjoy a Country that abounds with fatness, Job 29.6. I washed my
steps with butter, and the rock powered me out rivers of oil; these expressions
show the plenty and prosperity he had, the rock did not send out Rivers of
Oil, but rockie places became fruitful through Gods blessing; and this was as
if he had been anointed with, or eaten oil, Isai. 25.6. the word is put there
for fat things, In this mountain shall the Lord make a feast of fat things,
(...) convivium rerum pinguium, a feast of Oils. By these three, flower,
honey, and oil, are set out the delicate and abundant provision of the holy
Land.

Thou wast exceeding beautiful.
Hebrew is emphaticall, (...) decora facta es in vehementia valde, or in valde
valde: Septu: is, (...) decora facta es vehementer nimis, thou wast made very
beautiful, too beautiful. Pisc. Pulchra fuisti valde admodum very much. Jun.
Supra modum, above measure, French, As este belle tant and plus, Thou have been
beautiful and fine so much and more. The doubling of the word, sets a weight
upon the sense, and imports that she was come to exceeding great beauty, her
silken garments, and costly ornaments made her beautiful, her feeding
delicately, and feasting with the choicest dainties, made her have a fresh and
lively color, and to be very beautiful: but I conceive the beautifulness of
the Jews persons, is not the thing so much aimed at here, as the beauty of
her state, viz. that spiritual beauty this people had, which none of the
Nations had, they had the Temple, which was called The beautiful house, Isa.
64.11. and because it was upon Mount Zion, Psalm. 48.2. that is said to be
beautiful, yea the perfection of beauty, Psalm. 50.2. Strength and beauty are
in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 96.6. before that they had the Sanctuary, which was
called the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 29.2.96.9. 1 Chronicles. 16.29. They had the
Priests, who had garments glorious and beautiful, Exodus 28.2.4. When Aaron had
on his roabes, the twelve stones in his breast plate representing the twelve
Tribes, how beautiful did he and they appear in him. They had the Covenant
and Seals of it, circumcision and the passover, they had the Law, the
Prophets, Vrim and Thummim, Sabbaths, new Moons, solemn feasts and
Assemblies, they had the Sanedrim and other judicatories, all which were their
great glory and beauty.

Thou did prosper into a Kingdom.
This is the sixth choice mercy that the Lord did bestow upon her. Vulg.
profecisti in regnum. French, as prospere jusqu' a regner, in the 7. verse its
said, She had multiplied as the bud of the Field, had increased and was waxen
great, and so great as that she attaind, and came to the honor of a Kingdom;
not into the place of other Kings, that were of the Hills and Valleys in Canaan
and at Jerusalem, of which you may read, Josh. 9, 10, 11, and 12, Chapters. But
this state it self grew up to a Kingly state, at first it was governed by
Judges, it was a free estate, and they chose whom they pleased to rule over
them, afterward they mounted to royal dignity, and out of their own loins
sprang Kings, Saul, David, Solomon, and many others, and in Solomon's days did
this Kingdom most flourish, as you may see, Psalm. 72. and 1 Kings 4.24, 25,
26, etc. He reigned over all Kingdoms, from the Riv^r (that was Euphrates)
unto the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt, they brought presents, and
served Solomon all days of his life, Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man
under his Vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan to Bershebah and Solomon had
fotry thousand stals of horses for his Chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.

Or thus, if we will follow the metaphorical allusion, God entered into
Covenant with this Jewish estate, took it to be his, and married himself to
it, being a great King, and so it became or passed into a Kingdom, for the
word (...) signifies transire as well as prosperari, God therefore becoming the
King of Israel, the Israelitish estate became a Kingdom, Exodus 19.6. Ye shall
be to me a Kingdom, King and people are like Husband and Wife, Isai. 56.5. Thy
maker is thine Husband, God who was the King of this people was their Husband,
Lament. 1.1. How does the City sit solitary that was full of people, how is
she become a Widow? she that was great among the Nations, and Princess among
the Provinces, how is she become tributary? while God was in her, with her, she
was a Princess, but now having left her, she sat as a Widow, her King and
Husband was gone: this exposition suits with what you had in the 12. verse, I
put a beutifull Crown upon thine head, I married thee, and gave thee princely
dignity, dominion and power.

Obser. 1.
The Lord allows his people dainty and delicious fare; Thou did eat fine
flower, honey and Oil, under these are comprehended all the choice edibles,
and the pleasant meats, the Land of Canaan brought forth. At first green
herbs, and fruit was their meats, Genesis 1.29. but afterward, when sin had
gotten into the world, and men's desires were enlarged after the creatures, God
gave them license to eat of all creatures, Genesis 9.3. Every moving thing that
lives shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given you all
things. old Isaac must have savourie meat provided for him, Genesis 27.4. and Job
speaks of dainty meats, Chap 33.20. Hebrew is, meat of desire, and Lam. 4.5.
they fed delicately, Psalm. 78.25. Man did eat Angels food, 27. He rained flesh
upon them as dust, and feathered fowls as the sand of the Sea. God gave them
the best and choicest of meats, and so still does unto his people.

Now that we may not abuse that liberty which God gives us, to eat and drink
and that of the best, we must consider these cautions and rules.

1. We must not eat to the offense of others, Romans 14.21. It is good neither
to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth,
or is offended, or is made weak. God allows us not meat to be offensive
therewith, 1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands, least I make my Brother offend: much less does he
allow us dainties.

2. You must not be too expensive in diet, nor go beyond the place you are set
in, and abilities God has given you; some wast all they have upon their backs
and bellies, so that they have nothing for the cause of God, public occasions,
for their poor friends, or the poor in general, it will be a sad complaint, if
you shall here Christ say at last, I was hungry and you gave me no meat,
Matthew. 25.42.

3. You must not fare deliciously in times of public calamity, Isa. 22.12,
13. In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to mourning, to baldnes, and to
girding with sackcloath, and behold joy and gladness, slaying of Oxen, killing
sheep, eating flesh, drinking wine, When Gods judgments are abroad, he would
have us lay aside our dainties, and drink our own tears, to eat the bread
of mourners, and because they did not, God threatens them grievously, Amos
6.1.4, 6, 7.. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, that eat the Lambs out of
the flocks, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, that drink wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, therefore now shall they go captive,
with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched
themseves, shall be removed. Verse. 8. The Lord has sworn by himself, says
the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob. What Is that? the word
is (...) superbiam. Montan. The pomp and riches Annotat. Pomp in feasting,
pomp in apparel, etc. And hate his palaces, therefore will I deliver up the
City, with all that is therein.

4, Dainties must not be too frequent, its a brand upon the rich man, Luke
16.19. that He fared sumptuously every day, he feasted and junketed daily, so
the Kings of the earth are censured, Rev. 18.9. for that they lived deliciously
with the Whore: the choice and best of the creatures should be used sparingly.

5. In the use of them you must not forget those want necessaries, Nehem. 8.10.
Go your way, eat the fat, drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for
whom nothing is prepared, Christ bids you when you make a feast, and have
dainties, to call the poor, he counsels you to make them your guests Luke
14.13. When thou make a feast, call the poor, the lame, the maimed and
blind: there be many maimed Soldiers, poor Widows, and Orphans, did you
ever invite any of these? if you mind them not to make them your guests, and
eat your dainties, yet so far mind them, as to give them your scraps; Dives
would not give Lazarus the crumbs fell from his Table.

6. Your dishes and dainties must not be too many, excessive: some are so
pompous, that they must have mess upon mess, course upon course, exceeding in
quality and quantity, which serves, ad gulae irritamenta, Sodom had fulness
of bread, 1 Pet. 4.4. the Gentiles had excess of wine and banquettings.

7. We must so eat and drink as to maintain health and strength not impair
them, Eccles. 10.17. Solomon tells you That Land is happy, where Princes eat
in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness. Meat was appointed of God
to nourish and strengthen, Psalm. 104.15. Bread, that is, all things given to
eat, strengthens man's heart; when Princes and others eat for that end, to
strengthen them to do service to the public, then they use the creature
comfortablie; many sin in eating too much, few on the other hand; large and
delicate diet breed abundance of humors, diseases, etc. plures periere gula
quam gladio.

8. So must we partake of them, as to further us in the operations of body and
mind, to make us more active and livelie in the duties of our callings; a man
has not eat and drunk warrantably, when as Terr. says, nec pes, nec manus,
nec lingua officium suum fungi possit; you give Horses provender, that they may
more freely do their work. Tert. says of the primitive Christians, that they
were wont so to feed and feast, as to remember they were to pray, Luke 21.34,
36. Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting,
watch ye therefore and pray always; so eat and drink should a man, as that
he should ever be fit to watch and pray, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant:
because your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking
whom he may devour.

9. You must feed and feast with fear; its a charge upon some in Jude verse
12. that they did feed and feast without fear, they sinned in eating and
drinking too liberally, they did not consider the nature of the meats, nor of
their appetites, but inconsiderately ventured upon what was before them, and so
gluttoniz'd, whereas Prove. 23.1, 2. He bids a man when he is at a Rulers Table,
where danties and delicacies usually are, to consider dilligently what is
before him, and to put a knife to his throat, if he be a man given to appetite,
what is that? put thy self into a condidition, as if thou were to dye; when the
knife was at Isaac's throat, he was near death: so purting of the knife to the
throat, is serious minding of death, account, judgment, eternity, which will
keep thee from surfeiting. Paul tells you of some with a sad heart, that they
make their bellies their gods, Phil. 3.19. and they are dii stercorei, dunghill
gods, how do they make these their gods? by overminding and over pampering
them. The Rabbis say he is a glutton or a belly-god, that eats tartemar
carnis a pound of flesh, and that he is a drunkard who drinks logum vini, a
quart of wine; I know there is a difference in men's constitutions, and
inclinations, but whosoever eats too much, he is guilty of gluttonizing, which
is hebetudo mentis ad incommodum corporis (...), an inticement to lust, 2 Pet.
2.13, 14. They Riot in the day time, while they feast with you, have eyes full
of adultery, they maintain and strenghthen their lusts by the dainties they
feeed upon, James 5.5. Ye have lived in pleasure upon the earth and been
wanton, now the rule is, make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, men should rather look at, and choose that is wholesome, then what is
delicious.

10. There must be spiritual care had of the time; too much time must not be
spent about dressing or eating of meats, whole nights spent in preparing for
feasts, and making provision for lusts; and do not multitud^s in this City sit
more hours at feasting their bodies, then ever they have done at feasting
their souls, here an hour or two is enough or too much, there half days,
half nights, Isa. 5.11 they rose early, and continued till night in following
strong drink and other dainties to please their lusts, and 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. They
that be drunken, are drunken in the night, they spent that time was alloted by
God for rest, in eating and drinking, and too many spend that time is allotted
for labor, Psalm. 104.22, 23. in pampering their flesh, yea that time which
should be for prayer.

11. You must have Gods glory in your eye, when you are eating fine flower,
honey and oil, when you eat your daily dainties that must not be forgotten, 1
Cor. 10.31. Whithere you eat or drink, or what ever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.

This is done.

1. When we acknowledge God to be the Author, Hos. 2.8. She did not know, that
is, acknowledge, that I gave her corn, and wine and oil.

2. When we loooke for the sweet blessings and comfort to come from the Lord,
rather then from the creature, Matthew. 4.4. Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word proceeds out of the mouth of God,

3. When we season our Tables with heavenly and gracious discourse, many vent
corrupt, filthy and lewd speeches, they fill their bellies, and foame out
their shame, but Christ when he was at meat with his Disciples or strangers,
he took occasion to speak some gracious things, to reprove misdemeanors, Luke
22.15: 11.38. Matthew. 9.10, 12, 13.

4. When we see somewhat of God in the creature, and pass speedily through the
creature unto God, many stick in the creature.

5. When we take these as pledges of Gods love in Christ, as coming through
the covenant of grace, and are thankful for them, Ephesians. 5.20. Giving thanks
always for all things unto God, and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Obser. 2.
The Lord bestows beautifying mercies upon his people, and not only so, but
such mercies as make them very beautiful, Thou wast exceeding beautiful, thou
wast made beautiful very much, God made her so, he gave her such vestments and
ornaments as made her beauteous, he gave her Fine flower, honey and Oil, the
choicest diet, which added to her luster, and made her look lovelie. If we put
the beauty of this Israelitish woman or estate in temporals, she had the
choicest of them, her Land was, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. A good Land, a Land of
brooks, fountains, depths, springs, a Land of wheat, barley, Vines,
Fig Trees, pomgranates, a Land of oil, Olive, and honey, she had goodly
mountains, Deuteronomy. 3.25. Tabor, Hermon, Olives, Lebanon, she had great and
goodly Cities, Deuteronomy. 6.10. goodly houses, Deuteronomy. 8.12. multitudes of gardens
Amos 4.9. pleasant feilds, Isa. 32.12. goodly Cedars, Psalm. 80.10. great and
thick Oaks, 1 Kings 18.9. Ezekiel. 6.13. Her pastures were clothed with flocks,
and her valleys were covered over with corn, Psalm. 65.13. she had her Navy
of ships 1 Kings 9.26. at Sea, and 1300000 fighting men on Land at once, 2 Samuel
24.9.

But if you place her beauty in spirituals, al Nations of the earth were
black-moores to her, they were without God and his worship, Psalm. 76.1, 2. In
Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel, in Salem also is his
Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion; there he gave more special
testimonies of his presence, then in any parts of the world besides, there he
conversed with, and converted sinners, there he powered out his spirit, inspired
the Prophets, gave out divine truths, there he wrote miracles, there were all
his Ordinances, and worship, the Sanctuary, the Temple, Priests, sacrifices,
Altars, the Covenant, seals, promises, the election, adoption, the law, the
glory, salvation, Isa. 46.13. I will place salvation in Sion, for Israel my
glory, this Jewish state was the glory of the Lord, and the Lord was her
glory, he was her God, her Husband, her Counselor, her strength; spiritual
mercies are the beauty, the glory of any people, therefore Phinehas wife did
rightly call the Arc, the glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.21. Jerusalem is said to
be comely, it was the spiritual mercies, which were there, that made her
comely, and this caused David to say, Psalm. 84.1. How amiable are thy
Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts.

3. From low and mean conditions God raises up a people to greatness, thou
did prosper into a Kingdom; a little before, you may remember, this woman's
birth, and condition are set out, her Father was an Amorite, her Mother an
Hittite, she was cast out into the open field, lay in her blood, had none to
pity her, only the Lord himself did pity her, caused her to multiply as
the bud of the field, to become great and prosper into a Kingdom: from Adam
and Eve, God raised up the old world, which was very populous; from Noah and
seven more, the world is come to that populositie you now find it in. From
Abraham and Sarah, which were even dry roots, came the whole race of the
Jews, Isai. 51.1, 2. Look whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit,
whence ye are dug, look unto Abraham your Father, and unto Sarah that bare
you, for I called him alone, and blessed him and increased him, Ruth 4.11.
Rachel and Leah are said to build the House of Israel, two weak women were the
Pillars of the Israelitish estate, they bear many Children, multiplied the
posterity of Jacob, and so reared up the building of Israel, that in Deuteronomy.
26.5. is remakable Thou shall say, a Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and
he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a
Nation, great, mighty and populous. Jacob fled from Esau (who sought his
death) into Syria to his Uncle Laban, and therefore is called a Syrian, and
after went down into Egypt when Joseph sent for him, and there he grew to a
great Nation, great Cities began with single houses, great woods with single
Trees, great Armies with single men, and great floods with little drops: how
low was the state of Christianity at first in Christ and some few.

4. Its the Lord that forms people into a Kingdom, that gives them Kingly
power and dignity, verse. 12. I put a beautiful crown upon thine head, and
verse. 13. Thou did prosper into a Kingdom, I followed thee so with blessings
and increase, as that thou becamest a Kingdom, this caused David to say, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above
all. God has made Israel a Kingdom, and given it to David to reign over
under himself, and this he acknowledged, if any people in the world have
grown great, had a Crown set upon their heads, and prosper'd into a Kingdom,
the Lord did it, his hand brought it to pass, hence says, Hezekiah, 2 King
19.15. O Lord God of Israel, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the
Kingdoms of the earth. There is not a Heathen or Christian Kingdom, but the
Lord is the Author of; the prosperity and welfare of them, is of the Lord, so
long as he pleases. When Saul find, God took the Kingdom from him, 1 Samuel
15.8. yea slew him, and turned the Kingdom to David, 1 Chronicles. 10.14. He
stablisheth Kingdoms, 2 Chronicles. 17.5. he shakes Kingdoms, Isai. 23.11. he rent
the Kingdom from Rehoboam, and bestowed it upon Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.7, 8, 9,
10. Go tell Jeroboam says God to Abijah, forasmuch as I exalted thee among the
people, made thee Prince over my people Israel, and rent the Kingdom away from
the House of David, and gave it thee, and yet thou have not been as my servant
David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to
do that only which was right in mine eyes, but thou have done evil above all
that were before thee, etc. and have cast me behind thy back, therefore behold
I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will take away the remnant
of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung till it be all gone. He grew
base, and God destroyed him and his, and devolved the Kingdom upon others, so
that its frequently made good, which Daniel told Nebuchadnezzar, Chap. 2.21. He
changes times and seasons, he removes Kings, and sets up Kings, yea, he
makes Kingdoms to cease, Hos. 1.4. and its terrible what God says, Amos 9.8.
Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful Kingdom, and I will destroy
it from off the face of the earth, and he did so, when they were all carried
away captives, but after that great destruction, he brought them back again,
built them up, prospered them into a Kingdom, and set a Crown upon their head.

To speak a little of the nature and state of this Kingdom, Jacob prophesying
of it, Genesis 49.9. compares it to a Lion, which in strength and Majesty exceeds
all other beasts, and therefore is Called the King of beasts, so this Kingdom of
Israel exceeded other Kingdoms, and was above them, God was the King of this
Kingdom, Psalm. 89.18. The holy one of Israel, is our King, 1 Samuel 8.7. They
have rejected me that I should not reign over them. They were the Lords
people, and he ruled them, he gave them Laws judicial, and ceremonial which
other Nations had not.

He chose their Kings for them, Saul, David Solomon, therefore Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose: God chose the House of David, and settled upon his posterity the
Kingdom it self, which was a glorious Monarchy, And Solomon reigned over all
Kingdoms from the river unto the Land of the Philistines, and unto the border
of Egypt, 1 Kings 4.21. the Church and state were so composed, that they made
but one body: This Kingdom brought forth Messiah, King of the Jews, and the
Land was called the Land of Immanuel, Isai. 8.8. this Kingdom and the Kings of
it were representative of Christ and his Kingdom, and stands still in Christ,
Luke 1.29, 33. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his father, David and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.
This Kingdom was at height in Solomon's days, then the glory of it was very
glorious, and in Jehoshaphats days it flourished, 2 Chronicles. 18.1. Jehoshapat
had riches, and honor in abundance: so in Hezekiahs days, 2 Chronicles. 32.27, 28,
29. he had exceeding much riches and honor.

VERSE 14.
And thy renown went forth among the Heathen for thy beauty: for it was
perfect through my comelines, which I had put upon thee says the Lord God.


THis Verse holds out the last benefit which here the Lord tells this
Israelitish estate he had bestowed upon her, and that was great fame,
concerning which you have, 1. The Extent of it went forth. 2. Ground of it. 1.
Beauty. 2. Perfection of it.
3. The cause of all, the comelines God put upon her.


Thy renown.
Hebrew is, (...) thy name, its put in Scripture for renown and fame, Genesis
11.4. Let us build a City and Tower, whose top may reach unto Heaven, and let
us make us a name: let us thereby get renown and fame in the world: so in the
12. Chap. 2. I will make thy name great, that is, thou shall be renowned, in
the world.

Ezekiel. 34.27. Christ is called A plant of renown (...) a plant for a name.

Went forth
Hebrew is, (...) egressum est. Sep: (...). Cast. propagatum foret. Jun. Adeo
ut prodiret tibi fama, that is, Thy fame spread, and was known among Heathens.
There were sundry things which made this state renowned.

1. The Temple; when Solomon went about the building of it, he sent to Hiram
King of Tire, for Cedars to build it, 1 King 5. and the letters which Solomon
writ to that Heathen King, were so greatly esteemed, that they were preserved
by the Tyrians, till the time of Flavius Josephus, as himself affirms in his
first book against Apio the Grammarian.

There were 153300. men employed about the work of the Temple, 1 King 6.15.15.
the glory and statelines of i^ you may read in the sixth Chapter. In the
Sancto sanctorum the Lord did show himself in a special manner unto the high
Priest once in the year. This Temple was exceeding famous, it was called the
House of God, Eccles. 5.1.

The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4.

The Place where Gods name should be, 1 Kings 8.29.

The Holy and beautiful House, Isai. 64.11.

Gods resting place, 2 Chronicles. 6.41.

The mountain of the Lord, Isai. 2.3.

The desire of their eyes, Ezekiel. 24.21. David had told Solomon the House he
builded for the Lord, must be exceeding magnificall of fame and of glory,
through all Countries, 1 Chronicles. 22.5.

It was known far and near, Hence it was prophesied, Psalm. 68.29. Because
of thy Temple at Jerusalem, shall Kings bring presents unto thee.

2. Solomon's wisdom, house, and justice were such, as caused the name of this
state, to go out among the Heathens, 1 Kings 4.29. God gave Solomon much
wisdom and understanding, and Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all
the Children of the East Country, and all the wisdom of Egypt, for he was
wiser then all men, and his fame was in all Nations round about, and verse. 34.
There came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon from all Kings of the
earth, which had heard of his wisdom. Among others came the Queen of Shebah,
to prove him with hard Questions, which he satisfied her in, and when she had
seen his wisdom, his house and the order of it, she said to the King, It was
a true report, which I had heard in mine own Land, of thy acts and of thy
wisdom. Howbeit I believed not the words until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it: and behold the half was not told me, thy wisdom and prosperity
exceeds the fame which I heard, 1 King 10.1, 3, 4, 6, 7. His justice was
foretold, Psalm. 72.4. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the
Children of the needy, and break in pieces the Oppressors.

3. Their battles and victories; they had many choice warriors, and fighting
men among them, Joshua, Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar, Deborah, Barack, Gideon,
Jephtah, Sampson, David, etc. Asa had an Army of 580000, and he ruined Zerah's
Army of a thousand thousand, 2 Chronicles. 14.8, 9.12.13. so Jehoshaphat vanquished
the Army of the Ammonites, Moabites, and those of Mount Seir, 2 Chronicles. 20. the
Lord of Hosts was with them, and fought their Battles for them, which filled
the Nations with the fame and fear of them.

4. The Prophets and the miraculous things they did, caused the fame of this
Israelitish estate to go forth: Elijah opened and shut Heaven, James 5.17.18.
he raised the Widow of Zarephaths Son, 1 Kings 17. he sacrificed the
Prophets of Baal and of the groves, Chap. 18. so Elisha, what great things did
he? he multiplied the Widows Oil, 2 Kings 4. He gave a Son to the good
Shunamite, which went childles, and restored him to life when he was dead,
ibid, his fame spread into Syria, whereupon Naman came to him, to be cured of
his Leprosy, 2 Kings 5. He disclosed the secrets of the King of Syriah's
Counsel, Chap. 6.

5. Their being in Covenant with God, and walking according to his laws, rules
and commands, made them renowned, Hos. 11.12. Ephraim compasses me about with
lies, and the House of Israel with deceit, they went out from God, to false and
Idolatrous worship, they brake the Covenant, the law, clave to their own
inventions, but Judah yet rules with God, he goes along with God in his
ways, and is faithful with the Saints, he keeps Covenant and touch with the
Lord, and this is his wisdom, glory, renown, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep Gods Statutes
and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the
Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes and say, surely this great
Nation, is a wise and understanding people, their obedience to Gods Laws was
that made them honorable abroad, and to be counted wise and understanding: so
Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. The Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
people, and that thou should keep all his commandments, and to make thee
high above al Nations which he has made, in praise, in name, and in honor,
the way to be exalted in all these, is to walk in the ways of the Lord, its
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prove.
14.34.

For thy beauty.
I have spoken of this woman's beauty before in the 13. verse, beauty consists
in the Symmetrie or due proportion of all the parts well colored, here it was
so, there was a Symmetrie between Church and State, an idoneous proportion
between Princes, Prophets, Priests, and the people, and they were all
well-colored with temporals and spirituals.

It was perfect.
The Hebrew word (...) signifies, entire, perfect, you must not take perfect,
for that which wants nothing absolutely, but for that which is complete or
perfect in its kind, its joined to peace, Isai. 26.3. to love, 1 John 4.18. to
faith, Jam. 2.22. it notes the muchnes or intirenes of them.

My comelines.
Hebrew is, (...) in decore meo (...) notes all honorable comelines and
adorning decency, Psalm. 5.8. Thou have crowned him with glory, Vehador with
honor, comelines, Septu: (...) in comelines in beauty, Jun. majestate mea.
Castal. ob meum decus, what ever this Kingdom and People had which was
excellent, majesticall, honorable, beautiful, glorious, that is comprehended
in this word comelines.

Obser. 1.
That whatever comelines any Kingdoms, States, or persons have, it is not from
themselves but from the Lord. Through my comelines which I put upon thee, this
Jewish estate was without beauty, glory, honor, she lay in her blood, filth,
was naked and loathsome, but God spread his skirt over her, covered her
nakedness, washed away her blood, anointed her with Oil, clothed her with
broidered work, shod her with skins of Tachash, girded her with fine linen,
covered her with silk, decked her with ornaments. Whatever external or
internal comelines is in any, the Lord has put it upon them. Is a state decked
with Cities, people, trading, with mountains, woods, rivers, flocks of Cattle,
etc? has it good Laws, good Magistrates, justice duly executed, the righteous
countenanced, the wickedawed? its the Lords doing. Have any spiritual mercies?
the word, other Ordinances, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee differ? or what have
thou thou did not receive? if you receive any thing, you receive it from God.
The Spouse was comely, Cant. 1.5. her countenance was comely, Chap. 2.14. her
speech was comely, Chap. 4.3. this comlines the Lord put upon her.

2. That we have is the Lords, Through my comelines: God had bestowed many
ornaments and excellencies upon this woman, which made her comely, and here he
calls all his comeliness, 1 Kings 20.3. Benhadad said to Ahab, Thy silver and
thy gold is mine, thy wives and thy Children, even the goodliest are mine; he
challenged all injuriously, but God most justly, Hos. 2.9. My corn, my wine, my
wool, my flax; this woman was the Lords, verse. 8. Thou becamest mine, and so
all she had was his.

3. That renown and fame is a choice mercy, which God gives to his, Thy
renown went forth from among the Heathen, God made her beautiful, and caused
her renown to go abroad, and reckons it up amongst the mercies, he bestowed
upon her, Prove. 22.1. A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches: if,
man might have mountains of gold the wealth of the Indies its nothing to a good
name, Eccl. 7.1. A good name is better than precious ointment, it pleases,
refreshes, is profitable, Prove. 15.30. A good report makes the bones fat. God
gives this name, 1 Chronicles. 17.8. speaking of David, I have made thee a name like
the name of great men, that are in the earth. Verse. 21. What one Nation in the
earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to be his own people,
to make thee a name of greatness and of terriblenesse. While they clave to the
Lord, as a girdle to the loins, they were to the Lord for a name, for a
praise, for a glory, Jer. 13. but when they degenerated from God and his
ways, they became base, Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed, but
the name of the wicked shall rot, Isa. 65.15. Ye shall leave your name for a
curse unto my chosen, Isa. 62.7. Give him no rest, till he shall make Jerusalem
a praise in the earth.

VERSE. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
But thou did trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the Harlot, because
of thy renown, and powredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by;
his it was.

And thy garments thou did take, and deckedst thy high places with diverse
colors, and playedst the Harlot thereupon: the like things shall not come,
neither shall it be so.

Thou have also taken thy fair jewels of my gold, and of my silver, which I
had given thee, and made to thy self Images of men and did commit whoredom
with them.

And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them, and thou have set mine
oil and my incense before them.

My meat also which I gave thee, fine flower, and oil, and honey, wherewith I
fed thee, thou have even set it before them for a sweet savor, and thus it was
says the Lord God.


FRom the beginning of the sixth verse unto the 15. you have heard of the
choice mercies the Lord bestowed upon this Jewish estate, even such mercies as
should have engaged her heart and strength to God for ever. In these verses,
and the 15. following, you have the fourth general part of the Chapter, viz.
The Lords exprobration of this Israelitish woman, for her ingratitude, he was
exceeding kind and merciful unto her, and she was exceeding unkind and
unthankful unto him.

This ingratitude is set out,

1. By her defection from God to Idolatrous practices, laid down from the 15.
to the 35.

2. By her inhumanenes, in slaying and sacrificing her own Children, verse
20.21.

3. The cause of these, verse 22.

In the 15. verse you have,

1. Her sinful confidence, Thou did trust in thine own beauty.

2. Her whoredom, And playedst the Harlot.

3. The motive thereunto, Her renown.

4. The greatness and extent of her whoredoms, And powredst out thy
fornications on every one that passed by.

5. The manner of her whorish and Idolatrous practices, she took her garments,
jewels, oil, incense, fine flower and honey, and bestowed them al upon her
Images, in the 16, 17, 18.19. verses.

Thou did trust.
Hebrew is, (...) fidisti thou have trusted, Septu: is, (...) thou have
confided in thy beauty, so Oecol. confisa es. Vulg. habens fiduciam in
pulchritudine tua. Castal. freta tua puchritudine, having received many mercies
from God both temporal and spiritual, she grew proud, confident, and trusted
in what the Lord had given her to make her beautiful, she grew secure,
presumptuous and loose, leaving God who gave her all, and resting in his gifts.

And playedst the Harlot.
Hebrew is, (...) fornicata es, the word (...) signifies lascivire corpore aut
animo, when one leaves her Husband, and wantonizeth with others in mind or
body, when its spoken of the state of the Jews (as here, and frequently in
other places of Scripture) it notes leaving of God, cleaving to Idols,
worshipping of them, which is called fornication, whoredom, Hos. 1.2. The Land
has committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord, Judge. 2.17. They went
a whoring after other Gods, and bowed themselves unto them, Chap. 8.27. When
Gideon set up his Ephod, all Israel went thither a whoring after it. There is
spiritual whoredom as well as corporal whoredom, the setting up idols or
images, using any reverentiall gestures in honor of them, the worshipping of
them, or God by them is spiritual whoredom.

I shall show you wherefore idolatry is called fornication, and whoredom, and
that is, from the resemblances which are between them.

1. A whorish woman leaves, and goes out from her Husband to another, Prove.
2.17. She forsakes the guide of her youth, that is, her Husband, she pleades,
she had not that content, delight, satisfacton in him as she looked for: so
here, this Israelitish woman forsook her Husband, and went out to other Gods,
Jer. 2.11.13. Has a Nation changed their God, which yet are no gods? but my
people have changed their glory, they have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters. Hos. 9.1. Thou have gone a whoring from thy God, and what was that
whoring? Jer. 3.9. Committing adultery with stocks and stones, that was
idolatrous worshipping of them.

2. Whoredom is a breach of that Covenant, which was made between Husband and
Wife at marriage, and is solutio vinculi, Prove. 2.17 She forgets the
Covenant of her God, that is, the Covenant made with her Husband, in the
presence of God: so a people in Covenant with God, going out to Idolatrous
practices, they break Covenant with him, verse 8. I entered into Covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine, but this woman, falling into Idolatry brake
Covenant, therefore Jer. 3.20. As a wife treacherously departs from her
Husband, so have you dealt treacherously with me O House of Israel says the
Lord, this God foresaw, and foretold long before, Deuteronomy. 31.16. They will go a
whoring after other Gods, they will forsake me, and break my Covenant which I
have made with them.

3. Whoredom is pleasing and delightful to men and women, but its abominable
and loathsome in the account of God, Prove. 7.18. says the Harlot there, Come
let us take our fill of love until morning, Let us solace our selves with
loves, they had pleasure and delight in their sin, but it was abominable in
the sight of God, and therefore its called uncleanness in a special manner,
Romans 1.24. Ephesians. 4.19. so in idolatrizing, and superstitionizing, there is that
pleases man, but provokes God greatly: they went a whoring after Idols, they
saw beauty in them, found pleasure in letting out their hearts unto them,
Ezekiel. 18.6. They lifted up their eyes to their Idols, they took as much
pleasure in beholding them, as a man in beholding the beauty of a woman, their
Idolatry was delightful to them, Isa. 44.9. Images are called their delectable
things, or desirable as the Hebrew is, but however, they were de-lightfull to
them, they were not so to God, I^a. 65.12. They did choose that wherein I
delighted not, God was so far from delighting in them that he abhorred them,
and therefor calls them defiling abominations, Jer. 32.34. Devils, Deuteronomy.
32.17. Confusion, Isai. 41.29. Detestable things, Ezekiel. 5.11.

4. Whoredom darkens men's understandings, infatuates the Spirits of men, and
steals away their hearts, Hos. 4.11. whoredom, wine, and new wine, take away
the heart, Solomon that was exceeding wise, had his Spirit so besotted with
women, that he was not able to see the sinfullnesse of idolatry, but had his
heart turned after other gods, 1 Kings 11. such is Idolatry, it blinds men's
understanding, and clouds their judgments, Romans 1.21. They became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, and they professing
themselves wise, became fools, in making images of God, verse 22.23. see their
folly, They worshipped the works of their own hands, Jer. 1.16. They trusted
in that could neither hear, see, speak, smell, nor go, Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7, 8.
They asked counsel of stocks; Hos. 4.12. They said to a stock, thou art my
Father, and to a stone, thou have brought me forth, Jer. 2.27.

5. Whoredom is a reproaching sin, Prove. 6.33. speaking of a man committing
adultery, he tells you, A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach
shall not be wiped away: so Idolatry brings reproach upon men, 2 Pet. 4.3. they
are called Abominable Idolatries, they make the names of men abominable, as
well as their persons and actions: they are termed Haters of God, Exodus 20.5.
Blasphemers, Isa. 65.7. Adulterers, Jer. 3.9. Worshippers of Devils, Rev. 9.20.

6. Its an inflaming sin, Job 31.12. its called, A fire, and kindles such a
flame in the House, as often times consumes it, Idolatry is of the same nature,
Isai. 57.5. Inflaming themselves with Idols, there was a Spirit of whoredoms
in them, which kindled strong burning, inflaming lusts after their Idols, Jer.
50.38. They are mad upon their Idols. Where there is madness, there is a great
inflammation of the blood and spirits.

7. Uuncleanesse is a sin destructive to body and soul, Prove. 5.11. it
Consumes the body, it Destroys the soul, Chap. 6.32. and The Harlots house
is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of death, Chap. 7.27. So
idolatry is a dangerous sin, it threatens destruction of body and soul,
Baals Prophets lost their lives for their idolatry, 1 Kings 18. Gideons Ephod
was a ruin to him and to his household, Judge. 8. and in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. there
is a dreadful place against Fornicators and Idolaters. Kow ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of
God.

8. Whoredom is a costly sin, much is wasted in vestments, much in
ornaments, much in meats, drinks, junkettings and perfumes, Pov. 7.16, 17. I
have decked my bed with coverings of Tapestrie, with carved works, with fine
linen of Egypt, I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes and cynamon. The
dressings, deckings, banquettings, perfumings which attend that vice are very
costly, idolatry likewise is a chargeable thing, Isa. 46.6. They lavish gold
out of the bagg. When nothing else could fetch the gold out of it, Idolatry
could, and that in abundance, They lavish it out, to maintain and adorn an
Idol-god: see Isa. 40.19. Jer. 10.4.9. so here they decked their high places
with broidered garments, with jewels of gold and silver, they bestowed upon
them oil and incense, fine flower and honey.

9. It is an impudent sin, it makes bold and brazen faced, Pov. 7.13. The
Harlot had an impudent face, and spoke impudent things. Idolatry begets
impudency also, Ezekiel. 3.7. All the House of Israel are impudent, and how
impudently did they speak when they offered incense in the Chambers of their
imagerie, to creeping things, and abominable beasts, pourtrayed upon the
walls? They said, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth,
Chap. 8.10, 11, 12.

Because of thy renown.
Hebrew is (...) propter nomen tuum, Thou had a great name, wast become
famous abroad, and this invited the Nations to come and visit thee, and brought
in the gods of their Countries which thou receivedst, and playedst the Harlot
with, or thus you may read the words, contra nomen tuum, Thou have played the
Harlot against thy name, whereas before thou had an honorable and precious
name, now by thy sinful and base practices, thou have polluted it, and made
thy name to stink.

The Vulgar reads it, in nomine tuo, in thy name, and I find Interpreters
carry the sense to be this, That this woman having left her Husband, under
whose authority and power she formerly was, did all now in her own name, she
pretended now she was, sui juris, and would live as she lift, and converse with
whom she pleased, Hos. 4.12. They have gone a whoring from under their God,
they would not be under the authority and command of God as a chaste Spouse
should be, but left him as a whore does her Husband, and so did all in their
own name, Jer. 2.31. We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee; we are
at liberty, are Lords over our selves, and our own actions, we will have
what Gods we please.

And powredst out thy fornications.
Hebrew is, (...) effudisti, Septu. (...) Vulg. is, exposuisti, like a whore
that prostitutes her felfe to all comers, so did this Jewish state, prostitute
it self to the idolatrous practices of all Nations that came to her: its
sinful for a woman to be taken with the desire of another man, worse to commit
folly with him, though one of the same house, but its far worse to be taken
with strangers, and to prostitute her self to all comers, and to be a common
strumpet, this Israelitish woman was so: if any had any new gods, or new
devises in worship, she entertained them, the word pouring out sets forth, The
vehement and insatiable desire she had to sin, or thus, powredst out thy
fornication, Thou did communicate and impart thy Idolatrous and false ways
of worship to all that passed by, thou infectedst them therewith, thou wast not
content alone to be naught thy self, but drewest in many others to partake of
thy sins; she was full of spiritual whoredoms, and taught all Nations to be
more idolatrous.

His it was
Hebrew is, (...) to him it was; in the 8 verse, says God, Thou becamest mine,
and in the 14. Thy beauty was perfect through my comelines which I put upon
thee, but here it was another, her comelines, her beauty, her desire, her
body, her estate, were all another. Vulg. is, ut ejus fieres, that thou
should become his, thou wast weary of my love, and have sought out other
lovers, that thou might mingle with them, and satisfy thy lust, and not
only have thou left, cast off me, but thou have embraced others Vxorio affectu,
who ever passed by thee, had thy heart and affection as much as ever I had, for
him thou wast, and his was all thou had.

Obser. 1.
Where God bestows choice mercies upon a people, he looks for answerable
returns from them, he gave life to the Israelitish estate, verse 6. he
Multiplied it as the bud of the Field, verse 7. he loved this people, entered
into Covenant with them, married them unto himself, verse 8. He Washed away
their blood, and anointed them with Oil, Verse 9. He gave them Costly
apparel, precious ointments, fine flower, honey and Oil, royal dignity,
special beauty and comelines, great fame and glory, verse 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. and now expected that they should'd have lived to him, loved, feared,
obeyed, served him, and improved all for the honor of his name but thou did
trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the Harlot, etc. I looked not for
this at thy hands, of all the people in the world, I looked that thou should
have been faithful and fruitful in all good works, and been as exemplarie
for holiness and justice to other Nations, as I was exemplarie in my mercies
toward thee above other Nations, Isa. 5.2. there God fenced his Vineyard,
gathered out the stones thereof, planted it with the choicest Vine, built a
Tower in the midst of it, made a wine Press in it, dug it, caused the
clouds to rain upon it, and did all that was doeable for the good of it, and
what then? I looked that it should bring forth grapes, verse 4. I looked for
judgment and righteousness, verse. 7. where God multiplies mercies, he expects
suitable returns. See one place more, Deuteronomy. 32. from the 6. verse to the 16.
he shows there, that God was their Father, had bought them, made them a great
people from low beginnings, set them their bounds, chosen them to be his
portion and inheritance, how he had led, instructed and kept them as the Apple
of his eye, and what variety of other mercies he had bestowed upon them, But
Jesurum waxed fat and kicked, this people that should have been righteous and
upright, obeying the Laws of their God and Father, rebeld and kicked like a
fatted Ox, which made Moses say, verse. 6. Do you thus requite the Lord? do
you corrupt and spot your selves with the courses of the world? the Lord looked
for other things at their hands.

Obser. 2.
Ingratitude in Gods people, is a provoking sin, and causes God to upbraid
them for it: I gave thee life, increase, took thee to be mine, cleansed thee
from thy filth and blood, anointed thee with oil, I clothed, decked, covered
thee, fed thee, I made thee exceeding beautiful, and comlie, gave thee great
renown, set a Crown upon thy head, prosper'd thee into a Kingdom, But thou
did trust in thy beauty, and play the Harlot, from the beginning of the 6.
verse. to the end of the 14. which are but 9. verses, there is, I, 17. times,
and every mention of it is matter of upbraiding unto them, there is hardly the
like in all the book of God, when men will not mind Gods mercies to be
thankful, he will remember them to upbraid their unthankfulness for them.

When God had made Adam after his image, planted him in Paradise, given him
dominion over all the creatures, for him not to obey one little command, this
was great ingratitude provoked the Lord to come down from Heaven, to upbraid
him, and punish him for it, Genesis 3. Adam where art thou? what have thou
forgotten me, and all the mercies so lately heaped upon thee? and eaten the
forbidden fruit, Cursed is the ground for thy sake, and in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life, Verse 17. In the 37. of Isaiah, you read
of Senacheribs great Army, before Jerusalem, which filled them with fears,
and caused sadnesses in many Families, God destroyed this Army by an Angel in a
night. In the next Chapter, you find Hezekiah was sick unto death, Jerome
delivers it to be the judgment of the learned Jews, that therefore he was
stricken with sickness, because he was not thankful to God for this great
deliverance, and this was a real upbraiding of him for his ingratitude, Isai.
1.2, 3. God was so troubled at the ingratitude of this people, that he could
hold no longer, but must call forth a Prophet, and cause him to begin his
Prophecy in this manner, Hear O Heaven, and give ear O earth, for the Lord
has spoken, I have nourished, and brought up Children, and they have rebelled
against me, the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, they give
them a little hay, straw, grass, water, and the bruit creatures are thankful
for them: But Israel does not know, my people do not consider. I give them
their Oxes, and Asses, all belongs to them, and greater thing then so, yet they
know not me.

Matthew. 11. Christ upbraids Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, where his
mighty works were done, because they brought not forth fruits answerable, but
were impenitent and ungrateful, he tells Capernaum, It shall be more easy for
Sodom, then for her in the day of judgment.

Judge. 8.34.35. The Children of Israel remembered not the Lord their God, who
had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side, neither
showed they kindness to the House of Gideon, according to the goodness he had
showed unto Israel. Socrat. says the Athenians, ingratum nullum admittebant ad
Rempublicam

What ingratitude was it in the men of Keilah? when the Philistines fought
against them, robbed them, endangered their liberties and lives, and David with
his men smote the Phililstins with a great slaughter, and saved the Inhabitants
of Keilah, 1 Samuel 23.15. and quickly afterward they would have delivered David
who had saved them into the hands of Saul his enemy, verse 12.

Obser. 3.
We are very apt to trust in, and be proud of the mercies God bestows upon us,
Thou did trust in thine own beauty, those things I gave to make thee
beautiful, those thou have abused been proud of, put too much confidence in:
such is the heart of man, that it is ready to Idolize every mercy God gives.

There be several mercies we are apt to trust in.

1. In Riches, Prove. 10.15. The rich man's wealth is his strong City, he
confides as much in it as Citizens do in a walled, well fortified, and well
built City, Psalm. 52.7. This is the man that made not God his strength, but
trusted in the abundance of his riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich
in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, he
that does it shall fall, Prove. 11.28.

2. In Princes and great ones, Psalm. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor
in the son of man, in whom there is no help, no salvation, Isa. 2.22. Cease
from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of,
Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
The Jews put confidence in Egypt, and the King of it, Isa. 30.2. Therefore
shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and your trust in the shadow of
Egypt your confusion.

3. In your own natural excellencies, Jer. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory
in his wisdom, nor the mighty man in his might: it shows there is a great
propensitie in the hearts of men to do it, Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in
his own heart is a fool: the heart is the excellentest part of man, Prove.
3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy own
understanding.

4. In the Ordinances and means of grace, Jer. 9.4. Trust ye not in lying
words, saying the Temple of Lord, etc. 14. Therefore I will do unto this
house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, as I have done to Shiloh,
and I will cast out of my sight, as I have cast out all your Brethren, even the
whole seed of Ephraim

Obser. 4.
Great renown through man's corruption often proves a snare, occasions great
sins, Thou playedst the Harlot because of thy renown, thou wast grown great,
famous abroad, exceededst other Nations, who coming to see thy beauty, and
behold thy glory, which they heard of, thou dotedst upon them, and drewest
them to fornication; her renown was the bait to allure them, and to induce
them being allured to spiritual whoredoms; renown is a great mercy of the
Lord, and should be a special motive to make us honor God, and to improve it
for his glory, and others good, but usually estates and persons abuse that
renown and esteem they have in the world, making advantage thereof, only to
serve their own turns and lust. God made this people above all Nations, in
praise, in name, in honor, that they might be, An holy people unto him, Deuteronomy.
26 19. their renown should have encouraged them to holiness, and it was an
incentive unto looseness. Solomon had Great renown abroad in the Nations, 1
Kings 4.31. that drew the Princes to bestow their Daughters upon him, Chap. 11
3. he had 700. wives Princesses, his name made way for unlawful marriages, and
they made way for unlawful gods, you read of rooting up Israel, 1 Kings
14.15. of blotting out their name, from under heaven, Deu^. 9.14, of cutting it
off, Isa. 48.^9. the reason was they abused that name God had given them to
Idolatry and other sinful practices. Many of great credit take up money and
break.

Obser. 5.
Going out from God to false gods, and ways of worship, is a grievous sin,
Thou playedst the Harlot, that is, thou lefts me thy God, and Husband, and
wentest after others, thy body, thy beauty, thy heart and affections were
theirs, and with them thou did commit whoredoms, Psalm. 106.28. They joined
themselves to Baal-Peor. This was Apostacy in this people, to forsake God,
break covenant, all engagements, to go out to others, as if there were more
good, content, sweetness to be had in them, then in the Lord, Mich. 6.3. O my
people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify
against me. They made their Nations think their gods better then the God of
Israel, and their way of worship better then his, which was a great reproach to
the Lord, and made him to complain. The Hebrew call the winter (...) because
it is a reproach to the earth, and such is an Apostate people, they are (...) a
reproach to God and his Ordinances, they bring up an ill report upon Canaan,
the grapes and God thereof. When the Samaritanes worshipped strange gods, the
Jews counted and called them bastards for it, but when they practiced it
themselves, they were blind, and discerned not the evil of it, Josh. 8.41. We
be not borne of fornication, they meant they were not the Children of
Idolaters, and such as had Apostatised from God, whereas their Predecessors had
been the greatest Apostates and Idolaters of the world. This sin kindles the
jealousy of God, Exodus 20.5. Prove. 6.34. and made the Lord say, Heb. 10.38. If
any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, no, his soul should
be exceedingly against them, hence says God of the Levites that fell to
Idolatry, that they should Bear their iniqutie, and they shall not come near
unto me, to do the office of a Priest unto me, Ezekiel. 44.10.13.

Some of the Ancients have thought that a man falling away from the truth once
or twice especially, there is no mercy for him.

Obser. 6.
6. The most beautiful and renowned Church may degenerate, Apostatize and
become so corrupt, that it may be questionable, whither there be the face of a
true visible Church in all the world, this Israelitish woman was the only
spouse of God, he entered into a Covenant with her, she became his, verse 8. he
did great things for her, he put more spiritual beauty and comelines upon
her, then upon all the Nations, and made her renowned throughout the world, yet
she forsook God, played the Harlot, multiplied fornications, prostituted
herself to every Idol and Idolater, and now where was the Church of God? she
played the Harlot with many lovers, Jer. 3.1. Here was visible Apostacy,
visible idolatry, but no true visible Church, in joining communion with God in
his own way, neither was God without a true Church at this time. There were
some godly ones in secret, which kept themselves from those idolatrous
pollutions, who mourned in secret for the abominations done in the Temple,
City, and every where Ezekiel. 9.4. but these lay hid and durst not appear in
the ways of worship then amongst them: So in Elijah's days Ahab, Jezabel, the
false Prophets, and Priests of Baal, had so corrupted the worship of God, and
the people so Apostatized, that there was no visible face of a Church left in
the view of Elijah himself, for he says, The Children of Israel have forsaken
thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, slain thy Prophets, and I even I
only am left, and they seek my life to take it away, 1 Kings 19.10. but God had
then seven thousand in secret, verse 18.

The true Church may be brought to such a paucitie, such a lownes, as that
there may be no public meetings, or view thereof, whilst this Church
hearkened to her Husband, obeyed his voice, followed the rules of the word, she
was chaste, and free from errors, but when she grew proud of her fame, and
trusted in her beauty, then she fell into errors, defiled herself with Idols
and sinned shamefully.

The Papists say, their Church cannot err, especially in things necessary to
salvation, and why? because it is sponsa Christi: was not this Israelitish
Church sponsa Dei? and did it not err in the great and weighty things of
salvation? did it not leave God, and fall to Idolatry? such practices as
exclude the Kingdom of Heaven? what privilege has the Roman Church more then
this had? whatever Papists say or write; There Church has trusted in her
beauty, been proud of her renown, and played the Harlot, as notoriously as
ever Jerusalem did.

Verse 16. And deckedst thy high places with diverse colors.
The Hebrew is, And have made to thy self spotted high places, Bamoth telvoth
excelsa maculosa, Sept: is, (...)
(...) Idols sown and made up of clothes of diverse colors, Symmach: Excelsa
multicoloria. Jun. Excelsa latis maculis interstincta, Oecol. Diversicoloria.
Castal. Fecisti tibi varia sacella diverse Chapels, Call. maculis conspersa.
Telvoth says Pradus signifies, Hangings or Curtains of diverse colors. In
their High places were Altars made, for the honor of their Idols, those they
decked with Tapestrie, and clothes bespotted with diverse colors, that so
they might affect and allure more st^ongly the worshippers, and those that came
to see them worshipping.

Verse 17. Thou have also taken the fair jewels.
Hebrew is, (...) vasa gloriae tuae, The vessels or instruments of thy glory.
Septu: (...) The Vessel of thy rejoicing or glorying. Vulg. Vasa decoris tui.
Cast. Decoris instrumentum. Pisc. Vasa ornatus tui. Others, Instrumenta ornatus
tui. Some refer these instrum^nts of glory, to the golden or silver Vessels
of the Temple, which were glorious Vessels, and Vessels of their glory, Its
said that Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.24. Gathered together the Vessels of the House of
God, Cut them in pieces, and made him Altars in every corner in Jerusalem, its
like he might convert the gold and silver of the Temple to Idolatrous uses, or
you may interpret it of their plate, those Vessels of glory they had for their
domestic use, not excluding the golden and silver ornament^ they had for their
own adorning.

And made to thy self images of men.
Hebrew is, (...) Images of man. Septu: (...) Masculine images: so the Vulgar,
Others, Imagines masculi. French Des images d' hommes not images of God, who
was her Husband and beloved, but images of man. The Nations had their gods and
goddesses, he gods and she gods, Baal, Milchom, Chamos, Molech, were masculine
gods, Ashtoreth, Isis, Derceto, were feminine Gods. The Jewish estate being
here compared unto a woman, a whorish woman, who loves and affects the
presence, beauty and imbracings of men, that is, fitly said to make unto
herself images of men, with which she might adulterize and idolize, and
satiate her lusts both fleshly and spiritual: the Hebrew word for masculine or
of a man is from (...) to remember these images, were memorials and
remembrancers of their Idol gods, or pleasures they had in accompanying with,
or worshipping of them.

Verse. 19. My meat also which I gave thee.
Hebrew is, (...) my bread, though (...) ordinarily signify Bread, yet here it
must be taken comprehensively for any thing edible, the enumeration following
shows it, as Fine flower, oil and honey, and the word is so to be understood
in Luke 14.1. Christ went into one of the Pharisees houses to eat bread, by
bread is meant what ever should be set before him: so Genesis 39.6. Potiphar left
all in Joseph's hand, he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did
eat, Bread, that is, all things he did eat: so Matthew 6.11. Daily bread
comprehends all edible things, and more too.

Thou have set it before them for sweet a savor
Hebrew is, (...) in odrem quietis. Septu: (...) in odorem suavitatis: so the
Vulg. Pol. Pisc. Jun. in odorem gratum. Cast. Ad suavem odorem. Call. Lavat. In
odorem quietis. French, En odeur soeuf flairant. That is sweet and pleasing to
the smell, we rest in as delightful to us, she set these things before the
Images of men, and the false gods, to practice them if they were offended, and
to indeare them more unto herself hereby, as if she had merited their favors
and embraces; the offering of incense and sweet odors was a part of divine
worship, and when sacrifice was made to him by Noah, he smelled a sweet savor,
the Hebrew is the same with what was here, (...) odorem quietis, he was well
pleased therewith, its taken from the practice of men, who used swet smeels,
Isa. 3.24.

Obser. 1.
The making of high places, Altars, Images for religious uses, the adorning of
them, and offering unto them is idolatrous, and provoking; here God upbraids
and condemns this woman in the 16. verse in the 17. for making of Images, in
the 18. for covering of them with broidered garments, and in this verse and the
19. for offering oil, incense, flower, honey unto them, God calls these things
playing the Harlot, committing whoredom.

This practice of theirs has many aggravations in it,

1. That they made high places, the places of their idolatry which were open
to view, they would worship false gods in the sight of Heaven and earth.

That they made masculine images, which showed their filthy lust, and filthy
idolatry, and set them up in the stead of God.

3. That they covered them with diverse colors, and broidered garments; those
of one color, of worser materials might have sufficed them, but these pleased
their eyes, and inveigled others.

4. That they offered the Lords oil, incense, and meat unto them.

6. That they thougt these made them acceptable to the Idols, and the Idols
propitious unto them, and put some divinenes in them.

Obser. 2.
Idolaters, and false worshippers, think no expenses, no charges too much, to
accomplish their devices, and mainetain their way, if they want a God or an
image, to mind them of the true God, they will take their vessels of glory,
the gold and silver of the Temple, their Plate, their fair jewels and
ornaments of their body, and have gods and images made with them; if these
Gods and images seem naked, they will bestow their own clothes, their
broidered and best garments, their colored hangings, yea they will spare their
meat out of their own bellies, and set it before them. When Moses was in the
Mount, the people were set upon it to have a new visible God to go before them,
and they call upon Aaron to make them such a God; he thought they would not
have been at any great cost for an Idol-god, and therefore says, if you will
have a God, you must break the golden earings out of the ears of your wives,
sons, and daughters, if you will part with them which are your glory and
ornament, which will put you to much pain before you get them out, for you
must break them; if you will do so, you shall have a golden god, Exodus
32.1.2. did they stick at this? no, no, verse 3. All the people break off the
golden earings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron: here was
no compulsion, no delay, they break, and brought, Hos. 2.8. God multiplied her
silver and gold, and they prepared it for Baal, or therewith made Baal, they
freely bestowed it upon Idols, and idolatrous worship. Should we come to people
now and say, you would gladly have the true God to be your God, his ways and
Ordinances to walk in, and serve him by, but it must cost you your Vessels of
glory, your plate, jewels, ornaments, imbroiderie. What could they think of
it?

Obser. 3.
Its a detestable sin to abuse the mercies God gives us, for our necessities,
ornaments or delights, to the dishonor of his name, I gave thee gold and
silver, and thou made Images of them, I clothed thee with broidered work,
and thou coveredst thine Images with them, I gave thee Oil, incense, honey,
and fine flower, and thou have set them before thine Images: here was
abominable ingratitude, as if God should say here, consider and commiserate my
case, all ye my friends and faithful Servants, Men and Angels, I have showed
great kindness, and dealt bountifully with this people, honored them above
others, given them the choicest blessings the world has, and they turn all
against me, and bestow my blessings upon false gods, they take their vestments
and ornaments, cloth, adorn, and beautify their abominable Idols with them.
Suppose a Prince most amiable and virtuous, should take a poor beggarly Maid,
having nothing, sick unto death, be at great cost to cure her, cloth, adorn
her, and make her his wife, and she should bestow her imbroideries and jewels
upon whore-masters and prostitute her body unto common rogues, leaving the
Prince who had done so much for her, were it not horrible ingatitude? would not
every one heard of it commiserate the Prince and condemn her. Absalom turned
all against his Father, and it was intolerable ingratitude

If a man should set up his Child with a great stock, give him House and Land,
and he should spend it in sueing and vexing of his Father, who would not cry
out of such a Child? many men take the blessings God bestows upon them, and
spend them wholly in the service of their lusts: their bellies are their gods,
their honors, their pleasures are so, and all is wasted about them, to the
grief and dishonor of that God who gave them all.

It was never the intent or end of God, that we should pervert his blessings,
and bestow them upon Idols, or any of our base lusts; he aimd at our good, and
his own glory and we cross both, when we abuse his mercies, we wound his
honor, darken his glory, and destroy our selves.

VERSE 20, 21.
Moreover, thou have taken thy Sons, and thy Daughters whom thou have borne
unto me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured: is this of
thy whoredoms a small matter?

That thou have slain my Chilrden, and delivered them, to cause them to pass
through the fire for them.


THese words do set out the ingratitude of this woman, yet more fully, viz.
from her unnaturalness, God gave her Children, and she slew and sacrificed
them unto false gods.

Whom thou have borne unto me.
Not brought forth, that they should be the Lords, but they were his, for in
the 21 verse he calls them his Children: though this Israelitish woman had
forsaken God, and was become a notorious Idolatresse, yet the Children she
brought forth were the Lords.

1. Jure Domini, he is the God of nature, having sovereign authority over all
creatures, and so both the Parents and Children were the Lords, as well as
other creatures, he calls it his gold, his silver, his Oil, his incense, etc.

2. Jure faederis, God had made a Covenant with them, and promised to be their
God, and the God of their seed, Genesis 17.7. he speaks of his being in covenant
with his people, verse 8. of this Chapter, he took this Israelitish woman to
be his, and though she playd'd the whore, yet the Children she bare were the
Lords, because God had not given her a Bill of Divorce, but her Children had
circumcision, which was a token of the Covenant between God and them, Genesis
17.11. and it is called the Covenant of circumcision, Acts 7.8. in themselves
considered, they were worthy rather the name of Bastards, then to be honored
with the title of sons.

These have thou sacrificed.
The Hebrew word (...) is to kill, slay, as you do Beasts, either for eating
or sacrificing. Septu: is, (...). Vulg. Immolasti. Pisc. Pol. etc. mactasti,
thou have slain, so you have it in the next verse, Thou have slain my
Children (...) from (...) to kill or extend, because when the beast was killed,
they extended the parts of it: here they killed their Children, either before
they put them into the fire and sacrificed them to Idols, or by casting them
alive into the fire, Jer. 7.31. there is motion made of Topheth in the Valley
of the Son of Hinnom, and it was to burn their Sons and Daughters in the
fire: Expositors say, this Tophet was a Chapel or Altar where Molech was, and
here they offered their Chidren to that Idol. This Idol Molech, the Hebrews
tell us, was made of brass, hollow and capacious in the concave of it, they
put their Children either in it, or under it, there being a great fire, they
burnt them in honor to the Idol. Others think they were put in the arms of
the Idol, being red hot and so roasted to death, and because the lamentable
shriekes and cries of the Children in the fire should not be heard, they played
upon Tabrets, beat on drumms or pans, whence it was called Tophet for (...) is
Tympanum, A Tabret, Drum, or Pann.

This inhumane practice was frequent among the Jews, as you may observe from 2
Kings 16.3: Chap. 17.17: and 21.6. Jer. 19.5: 32.35. Ahaz walked in the way of
the Kings of Israel; and made his Sons to pass through the fire (that was
their ordinary practice) according to the abominations of the Heathen, and
Chap. 17.31. The Sepharvites burnt their Children in the fire to Adrammelech,
and Ammelech the gods of Sepharvaim.

This custom of sacrificing their Children, is judged by the learned, that the
Heathens took up from the example of Abraham, who would have offered his Son
in sacrifice to God, they thought (though this was not done) surely such
sacrifices were acceptable to God; if God took it well at Abraham's hands, who
did but attempt it, he would much more take it well at their hands, who should
do it, their Children were dear to them, and when they should thus part with
them for the honor of their God, as they conceived, how could it be but he
should take it well at their hands, they considered not that Abraham did it
upon special command. Besides its probable that the Heathens had learned the
meaning of their sacrifices, which typed out Christ, who should take man's
nature upon them, and be a sacrifice to pacify the wrath of God: they thought
hereupon, that the sacrificing of Children and men, would do the like with
their gods, and make them acceptable to them, Mich. 6.7. Shall I give my first
borne for my transgression, the fruit of my body, for the sin of my soul.
These words import, that both the Heathens and idolatrous Jews did imagine,
that the sacrificing of their Children, did make atonement for their sins,
which the Prophet confutes and condemns.

To be devoured
Hebrew is, ad comedendum to eat or to be eaten, they put their Children into
the fire, which did eat them up, and consume them, in Isai. 5.24. you have the
same word, As the fire devoureth. Orig. is, eats the stubble, and the word
fire in the Hebrew is, (...) the Tongue of the fire, the Tongue licks in the
meat and eats it: so the flame catches hold of combustible matter, and
consumes it.

To pass through the fire.
Hebrew is, in causing them to pass through: some Children they burnt wholly
in the fire, others as its usually conceived, they caused to pass through the
fire, which was a purging of them from the filth and defilements, as also a
consecrating of them to the Idol, and his Service: they placed much efficacy
in fire, for the hallowing of those passed through it.

The Tartars, says Abutensiis, think all strangers, such as are not of their
own race, unclean, and before they can see or speak with their King, they
must pass between two fires, by which being purged, they are deemed worthy
of his presence, we must pass through the fire of the Law and Gospel, before
we come to the sight of the Lord.

Whither Authors have not mistaken in this, thinking that some Children only
were drawn through the fire, and not burnt, I desire one thing may be taken
into consideration, and that is what the Scripture calls passing through the
fire, in one place it calls burning, in another 2 Kings 16.3. it is said, Ahaz
made his Sons to pass through the fire. 2 Chronicles. 28.3. its said, He burnt
his Children in the fire: so here in our Prophet that is called devouring in the
20. verse is termed Passing through the fire; in the 21. not under correction,
that they passed through the fire and so lived, but passed through it to the
honor of the Idol.

Obser. 1.
When men leave God and his word, they fall into wicked practices, and proceed
further and further daily, this Jewish estate left God and his word, fell to
Idolatry, the Idolatry of all the Nations, yea more then that, to the
sacrificing of her Children, Moreover thou have taken thy sons, etc. Jehoram
slew his Brethren, diverse Princes of Israel wrought evil in the eyes of the
Lord 2 Chronicles. 21.4. Chap. 6. Verse 11. Moreover he made high places in the
mountains of Judah, and caused the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to commit
fornication, and compelled Judah thereto; so Ahaz besides his walking in the
ways of the Kings of Israel, and making molten Images for Baalim, it is said,
Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the Son of Hinnom, see Chap.
36.14. this 16. of Ezekiel. 29. sinners have their moreovers, they add sin to
sin. Herod had done much evil, yet he added more to it, Luke. 3.19, 20. he
shut up John in prison: As sinners have their moreovers, so God has his
moreovers, Deuteronomy. 28.4. after the Lord had threatened them with judgments and
curses from 15. verse to the 45. there he says, Moreover all these curses
shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and over^ake thee, till thou be
destroyed, so Ezekiel. 5.14. Moreover, I will make thee wast, and a reproach among
the Nations that are round about thee.

Obser 2
Sinners may come to such a height of sinning, as to violate all bonds and
bounds of restraint, Thou have taken thy sons, and thy Daughters which thou
have born unto me, and these thou have sacrificed unto them to be deuovred: is
this of thy whoredoms a small matter?

There were many bonds and considerations to have kept them off from this
bloody work.

1. It was against the light of nature, which is, quaedam impressio divini
luminis in anima rationali, the light which is in the souls of men, naturally
tells them they should not murder, especially innocents, such as Children, they
should do as they would be done by, it was an unreasonable act.

2. It was against the Law of nature, which Vlpian thus defines. Jus natural
est quod natura omnia animalia docuit, It is that which nature has taught all
creatures living; you know nature has put a law or instinct into al creatures
to preserve their young, and if they be endangered by any, they will contend
and venture much for them, even timorous creatures, as birds for their young,
hens for their chicken, and all creatures more or less. The law and impulse of
nature is strong in them, but here the Law of nature had no force, Thou have
taken thy sons, etc. they came out of their loins, were parts and pieces of
themselves, and nature should have moved, wrought strongly in them, for the
preservation of their little ones, but they were unnatural, beneath the bruit
creatures in this act, they are so far from destroying their young, that they
hazard themselves to preserve them.

3. Those were Children consecrated unto the Lord, yet being circumcised, and
having the token of the Covenant, were the Lords, therefore it is said, Which
thou have borne unto me, this should have restrained them from so sacrilegious
an act, as to take them from God, and sacrifice them unto Devils, for Psalm.
106.37. They sacrificed their sons and daughters unto Devils; to take them
from an infinite, gracious, blessed, holy God, and give them unto Idols and
Devils, what an accursed and horrible thing was this? As if a Mother should
take the Child out of the Fathers arms, who is loving, tender over it, and
throw it to Lions, Bears, or any other ravenous creatures.

4. They had a full command to the contrary, Levit. 18.21. Thou shall not let
any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech, yea this was backed with no
less penalty then death, Levit. 20.2. Whosoever he be of the Children of
Israel, or of the strangers that sojourne in Israel, that gives any of his
seed to Molech, he shall surely be put to death: the people of the Land shall
stone him with stones. I will set my face against that man, and against his
family, and will cut him off. v. 3. and 5.

5. The manner of the death should have prevailed with them, not to have
yielded to it, it was the most terrible death of all deaths, to be burnt in the
fire, O the shriekes cries, and lamentations of poor innocents! but see the
hand of God upon them for it, Lamen. 4.10. They sod their own Children.

Obser. 3.
A whorish idolatrous Church may bring forth Children unto God; this Jewish
Church was fallen to as gross Idolatry and practices, as were to be found
among heathen, and yet the Children she brought forth are termed to be the
Lords, in what sense, I showed you in opening of the words, a Church may have
Ordinances which may entitle its Children to be the Lords, and yet not prove it
self to be a true Church, the Jews had circumcision, which the Chidren
partaking of, were counted the Lords, but themselves were so corrupt, whorish,
idolatrous, bloody in offering their Children to Idols, that the Lord did not
own them for a lawful Spouse, and true Church, as you may see, verse 38. I
will judge thee as women that break wedlock, and shed blood are judged: so the
Tribes brought forth Children unto God, but the Lord said of them, Loammi, Hos.
1.9. Ye are not my people. The Romish Church may bring forth some Children
unto God, because she has baptism, and other Ordinances in her, yet she is so
corrupt, idolatrous, bloody in persecuting the Saints, that she is rather the
whore of Antichrist, the Synogogue of Satan, then the true Spouse of Christ.

Obser. 4.
In matters of worship, it is not men's zeal and good intentions, will justify
their actions, they sacrifice their Children with zeal as hot as fire, they
thought to pacify and please their Idol-gods, that they did acceptable Service
in parting with their dearest comforts, their tender babes for the honor of
their God, but this was so far from acceptance, that it fearfully provoked
God, Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter? the more zealous thou art in
this, the worse; thy good intentions are abominations, who required this at
thy hands? Gideon in making an Ephod; Jeroboam in setting up the golden Calves;
the Galathians in observing of days; the Colossians in subjecting to
Ordinances, had their zeal and good intentions, but not one of them were
justifiable by the word of God, will worship has no acceptance in divine
worship, men's inventions are nothing the better for their good intentions; the
Papists pretend good intentions for all their additions to baptism, and other
parts of the worship of God, but notwithstanding their intentions, they are no
better then superstitious.

Obser. 5.
In pretended ways of worship, men grow cruel and bloody, Thou have slain
my Children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire for
them, they pretended this was a right and good way of worship, and in honor of
their false gods and ways, they become cruel and murder their own Children:
false ways of worship, have this grand evil intrinsecall unto them, they have
cruelty and bloodinesse attending them, whereas true Religion only, and the
ways of it, has this honor to be mild and merciful, bearing and forbearing,
James 3.17. The Pharisees pretended they knew the Law, were only in the right
way; but they were deceived, and how bitter, bloody, and persecuting were they
against Christ's Apostles, and those embraced the truths they delivered, John
16.2, and 3. Christ tells them what would be the practice of men in false ways,
they would kill them, and think they did God good service in it, and why? they
knew not the Father nor Christ, they were strangers unto their ways, which
were full of love, meeknes, kindness, and had ways of their own which made
them zealous, bitter, plot, and to break out into open violence, see Rev.
16.5.6. the Babylonish whore slew the Children of the Lord, and was drunk with
the blood of Saints and Martyrs, in her was found the blood of all the slain
upon the earth, all that suffered for the truth; she succeeded the former,
justified their ways, filled up what was wanting in them.

VERSE. 22.
And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms, thou have not remembered the
days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare and wast polluted in thy
blood.


THis verse contains the ground and cause of this woman's sinful departure
from God, of her idolatry and cruelty, viz. the forgate in what a poor
forlorn and miserable condition she had been in, and what God had done for
her, she neither remembered her own misery, nor Gods mercies, she was naked,
bare, and he clothed her, she was polluted in her blood, and he washed her,
she was very deformed, and he put beauty upon her, she was base, contemptible,
and he made her renowned in the world, but these things were not thought on,
had she kept in her heart, what a low estate she once was in, and how the Lord
dealt by her in that estate, she would never have left him broken out into and
proceeded on in such wicked ways as she did.

Obser. 1.
When Gods people are raised, they are apt to forget God and themselves, and to
break out into sinful courses, this Israelitish woman being exalted by God,
thought not upon her former low estate, nor what God had been unto her, in that
estate, Psalm. 106.21. They forgate God their Savior, he saved them from the
plagues in Egypt, from the Aegytians, from the red Sea, the fiery Serpents,
and other evils, and what, did they forget him? Yea they soon forgate him,
verse 13. they Soon forgate his works, the Hebrew is, They made have, they
forgate; man at first was called Adam, earth or red earth, but after the fall
Enosh, which some render obliviosus, forgetful, because through sin he was
so cracked, that he could not hold or remember any thing. God had done great
and many wonderful things for this people, Deuteronomy. 4.32, 33, 34. and charged
them they should not forget them or him, Deuteronomy. 4.9.23.12.8 Chap. 11.14. yet
look into the 32. Chapter 18. Verse, where it is said, Of the rock that begat
thee, thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God that formed thee: God begat
them, and formed them into a people, Kingdom, did all for them, yet they
forgate him; and is it not so among us, whom he has begotten into families,
and formed into Cities, Counties, and a Kingdom? May not we say with David,
Psalm. 8. Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him? What is Enosh? he is a
sorry, miserable, wretched, forgetful creature, do what thou will for him,
be what thou will to him, he will soon forget thee, and all thou have done.

Obser. 2.
Consideration of men's misery, and Gods mercy to them in that misery, it is
a special help to prevent sin, In all thy whoredoms, thou have not
remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and polluted in thy
blood, their forgetfulness of them opened the door unto sin, the remembance
of them, would have shut it against, and kept them from sin. When the heart
is seriously excercis'd about a low, miserable, lost, perishing condition, and
what undeserved kindness God showed in it, ingatitude, pride, carnal
confidence, bud not out, grow not up, bring not forth: and as it is a curb to
keep us from sin, so it is a strong trace to draw us out of sin, In all
thine abominations and whoredoms thou have not remembered, etc. intimating
that if this woman had laid to heart her former condition, and the great
kindnesses of God to her, she would have repented her of her ways, and turned
to the Lord, thoughts thereof would have begot such thoughts, workings of
Spirit as these, What did God pity me, when none would pity? Did he take me
in when I was cast out? Did he bestow life upon me, make me grow and increase?
has he washed, anointed me, covered, adorned, beautified me? and have I gone
out from him, left him, sinned against him, requited him ill for all his
kindness, I am ashamed of it, I will turn to him and ask him forgiveness.
When David had sinned, and lay in it, the Prophet minds him of his former
condition, and what God had done for him, 2 Samuel 12.7. I anointed thee King
over Israel, thee who wast at the Sheepefold, low, mean, despised, I delivered
thee out of the hand of Saul, he sought thy life, I gave thee thy Masters
house, wives, the houses of Judah and Israel: these he sets before him, that
upon the due minding of them he might be affected, and led to repentance for
his sinful practices. If you would think what low estates you were lately in,
what God did for you then, it would be a special means to keep you from
sin.

VERSE. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. And it came to pass after all thy
wickedness (woe, woe, unto thee says the Lord God)

That thou have also built unto thee an eminent place, and have made thee an
high place in every street.

Thou have built thy high places, at every head of the way, and have made thy
beauty to be abhorred, and have opened thy feet to every one that passed by,
and multiplied thy whoredoms.

Thou have committed fornication with the Egyptians, thy Neighbors, great of
flesh, and have increased thy whoredoms to provoke me to anger.

Behold therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have diminished
thine ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee,
the daughters of the Philistines which were ashamed of thy lewd ways.

Thou have played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast
insatiable, yea thou have played the Harlot with them, and yet could not be
satisfied.

Thou have moreover multiplied thy fornications in the Land of Canaan, unto
Chaldea, and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith.


IN these verses the Lord does further accuse and charge this woman, that she
made no stop nor stand in her wickedness, but proceeded further and further,
After all thy wickedness thou have also built unto thee an eminent place, and
have made thee an high place in every street.

This is set out unto us,

1. By the eminency of the place, she built not some little low place,
obscure, unnoted, but one eminent, great, gloroious, high.

2. From the multitude of high places and Altars, she made not here and there
one, but in every street, at every heads of the way, where was the most
concourse of people, ibid.

4. From her impudency, Thou have opened thy feet to every one that passed by,
thou did not through frailty of nature, violence of temptation, transgres
with one two or a few, but like an arrant whore past shame, Thou have opened
thy feet to every one.

5. From the several Nations she committed folly with, she was not content to
be idolatrous her self, but made Covenants and Leagues with others, and drew
them in; as,

1. The Egyptians, who are described to be, 1. Her Neighbors. 2. Great of
flesh, verse 26.


2. The Assyrians, verse 28.

6. From the extent of her whoredoms, which was from Canaan to Chaldea, verse
29. not only in Canaan but in Chaldea she was Idolatrous.

7. From her insatiablnesse, verse 28, 29.

8. From the effects which are,

1. Threatening from God, verse 23. Woe, woe unto thee.

2. Abhorrencie of her beauty, verse 25. And have made thy beauty to be
abhorred.

3. Punishment, verse 27.

1. Set down in general, under this expression, I have stretched out my hand
over thee.

2. In particular, and that in two things.

1. In diminution of their comforts, I have diminished thine ordinary food.

2. In puttting them into the power of their enemies, I delivered thee unto the
will of them that hate thee.

4. Shame, so lewd, and vile were her ways, that even her enemies were
ashamed of her, verse 27.

In the 23. verse, there is nothing to open.

You may observe,

1. That when Gods own people go on in sinful ways, its grievous unto him,
it affects, yea afflicts his heart, here God taking notice, and speaking of
this Israelitish woman's sinful practices, and proceeding on in them, breaks
out in the midst of a sentence saying, Woe, woe unto thee, he was so full
with thoughts of her ingratitude, unkindnesse, rebellion, idolatry, etc. that
he opens, empties, and eases himself in these expressions, Genesis 6.5.6. When
God saw the wickedness of man to be great, it repented him that he had made
man on the earth, and grieved him at the heart, Psalm. 78.40. They did often
grieve him in the Desert, Psalm. 95.10. God says, Forty years long was I
grieved with this generation, Isa. 63.10. They vexed his holy Spirit, therefore
Isa. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine
enemies. Christ wept over Jerusalem.

2. The end of wickedness is woe, she had been notoriously wicked, and what
followed upon it? woe, woe, its double, and notes intensenesse, she had been
intense in sinning, and God was intense in threatening; woe to thee thou have
left me, woe to thee thou have embraced other gods, woe to thy estate and
body, Assryrians shall come and destroy them, and woe to thy soul, I will
destroy that: God was greatly exasperated, and therefore powers out a double
woe against her, one temporal, another eternal, let who will be wicked, be it
Judah and Jerusalem, woe and woe must be their portion, let it be the Lords
own people, he will not spare, if they repent not, if they turn not from
their evil ways, he will denounce woes against them, and bring woes upon
them, The wages of sin is death, a temporal death, there is one woe, an
eternal death there is another woe.

Verse 25. Thou have made thy beauty to be abhorred.
This woman was very lovelie, through her state and Church beauty, she was
renowned among the Nations for it, but when she became Idolatrous, she spotted
her beauty, so as it became abominable. Take the fairest woman that is most
desirable, and prized, if once she come to be common, and open her feet to all
comers, as the phrase here is, she grows loathsome, abominable, such was the
jewish state of our Prophets metaphorical woman, who multiplied Altars,
Idolatries, and committed fornication with the Nations far and near, the Lord
had said long before, when they fell to Idolatry, that their spot was not the
spot of his children, Deuteronomy. 32.5. when they were free from this sin they were
beautiful and glorious, Numb. 24.5. How goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy
Tabernacles O Israel, Chap. 23.21. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. The Vulg. reads it thus, Non est
idolum in Jacob, neque videtur simulachrum in Israele, idolatry makes the most
glorious Nation abominable, Prove. 14.34. sin is a reproach to any people,
and especially this sin, 1. Pet. 4.3. they are called, Abominable Idolatries;
they are so in themselves, and they make so. What ever a woman's beauty is, if
she be mad and phrantick, you despise her and her beauty, you will not have to
do with her. Idolatry is a madness; Jere. 50.38. They are madd upon their
idols; and such madness makes the beauty of a State or Church loathsome.

Verse 27. And have diminished thine ordinary food.
The Hebr. for ordinary food is (...) statutum tuum: Septu: is, (...) legitima
tua, I will take away thy lawful things. Vulg. is, justificationem tuam; Which
Mariana says, was Gods Covenant whereby she was justified: Sanct: Some outward
sign of inward holiness: Oecol: Succidi constitutum tuum, I have cut down
thy constitution: Calv: demensum tuum: so Pisc: and Jun: Cast: institutum tuum:
Lav: statutum cibum tibi: Fr: ton estat; (...) says Prad: is a Statute,
Constitution, an Ordinance, a Law, form of living, Worship, Caeremonie, atque
id omne quod manat a legislatore. Jerome interprets it of their Ceremonies,
Sabbaths, and Solemnities: Theod: of the Law it self: others of their holy
things. But God dealing here with this Jewish estate as a husband with an
expensive and adulterous wife, says; I have cut thee short of thy allowance, I
have diminished thy portion. Proverb. 31.15. She arises while it is yet night,
and gives meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens: its (...) and
its taken for a portion of meat and drink, and its not amiss to take it so
here; thou have abused thy fine flower, honey and oil, but I will lessen them,
thou shall have little of these hereafter, thy portion shall be smaller. The
confining it to things edible I like not; let us extend it to other things
also, and the sense will be more full, viz. to her garments, ornaments, silver,
gold, incense, etc. Hos. 2.9. I will take away my corn, my wine, recover my
wool and my flax; and so it suits with the Chaldie interpretation, auferam
bonum tuum; Its our sin that causes God to diminish our comforts.

Deliver thee to the will of them that hate thee.
The Hebrew for will is (...) in animam, Septu. (...) in animas; so the Vulgar,
in animas. Call. desiderio ceu libidini; so others; Fr. en la volonte, its an
Hebraisme, the soul put for the will, lust or desire in it, and so its
frequently used; Exodus 5.19. My lust shall be satisfied upon them. Psalm. 78.18.
They asked meat for their lust; the Heb. is, soul, Psalm. 105.22. To bind his
Princes at his pleasure, benaphsho, according to the lust and pleasure of his
soul. Psalm. 41.3. Give him not to the will of his enemies; Heb. soul of his
enemies. Luke 23.25. He delivered Jesus to their will.

The daughters of the Philistims.
In Scripture sense, Villages and Towns are counted daughters, as chief
Cities were called Mothers; 2 Samuel 20.19. Thou seek to destroy a City and a
Mother in Israel, that was Abel where they asked counsel; and because Cities
had Towns and Villages belonging to them, as you may read 1 Chronicles. 7.28.
Bethel and the Towns thereof, Gezer with the Towns thereof, Shechem Gaza and
the Towns thereof; so ver. 29. Bethsheon and her Towns, Taanach and her
Towns, etc. These Towns were accounted the daughters of those Cities, because
they were either made, governed by, or some ways belonging to those Cities,
and the Citizens thereof. And so diverse Expositors do take the daughters of
the Philistims here to be the Towns and Villages of Palestina. And so the
daughters of Jerusalem often mentioned in the Canticles, to be the Villages
adjacent. But its better to interpret the words of the persons, then of the
places; and to understand by daughters of Philistims the Philistims themselves.
2 Samuel 1.20. Tell it not in Gath, least the daughters of the Philistims
rejoice; that is, not the villages but the Philistims themselves: so Psalm.
48.11. Let the daughters of Judah be glad, that is, the people of Judah: in
ver. 26. that which is Egyptians, in the original is sons of Egypt; and
ver. 28. with the Assyrians, in the Heb. is the sons of Ashur: and here by
daughters of Philistims is meant the Philistims; and daughters are mentioned
rather then sons, because the Lord had spoken of the Jewish estate as a
woman, and so continues the allegory in the same sex. The Philistims hated
the Jews much, often war'd against them, and brought them under, as you may
observe in the book of Judges, Chap. 10. and 13. they were glad when mischief
befell them, therefore when Saul and Jonathan were slain, David would not have
it told in Gath or Askelon, least the Philistims should triumph, 2 Samuel 1.20.

Obser.
To be delivered up to the wills of men that hate us is a sad judgment, to be
given up to the wills and lusts of men is sad, but especially to the wills and
lusts of those that hate us; David when God propounded the three sad things to
him, 2 Samuel 24. one whereof was to flee before his enemies, he chose rather
famine or plague, then to fall into the hands of man, ver. 14. He knew that the
hands and hearts of men were merciless. Psalm. 27.12. Deliver me not over unto
the will of mine enemies; why, they bear false witness, they breath out
cruelty. Levit. 26.17. They that hate you shall reign over you: the
Philistims and Babylonians hated them, and they were Lords over them, and very
sad was their bondage under them, 2 Chronicles. 28.18. the Philistims invaded the
Cities of the low Country, and of the South of Judah, and had taken
Bethshemesh, Ajalon, Gederoth, Shocho, Timnah, Gimzo, with the Villages
thereof; for the Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz King of Israel who
made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord.

2. Those are counted Gods people may so exceed in sin as that Gods enemies may
be ashamed of them; the Philistims which hated God and the Jews, were ashamed
of their lewd ways, they blushed at the sins the Jews gloried in; they
gloried in their idolatry, they made high places every where; they committed
spiritual whoredom with greediness; other Nations kept their Gods, but they
changed their God and glory for that did not profit, Jer. 2.11. This levitie
and idolatry of theirs made the heavens astonished, and the Philistims ashamed:
they saw more filth and loathsomenesse in this sin, then the Jews; such
abominable idolatry affected their hearts. The word in Hebrew for lewd is (...)
scelus wickedness, yea some notable and emphaticall wickedness. The abusing
and forcing the Levites Concubine unto death, Judge. 19. is called Judge. 20.6.
(...) lewdness, wickedness, abomination; and Hierom upon the 24 of Ezekiel.
interprets it immunditia execrabilis and scelesta, an execrable and villainous
filthiness. The impudency of this Jewish woman was such in her accursed
idolatry, that the daughters of the Philistims were ashamed at it, durst not
do the like, and were chaste in comparison of Jerusalem and her daughters, who
lusted after the Gods, and worship of the Nations on every side. The Egyptians
deified Onyons, Leekes, Catts, Beetles or Dors, Oxen, Sheep, Dogs, Apes,
Hawks, Crocodiles, Serpents, Battes, Moules, and quaedam pudenda dictu, and
with Egyptian idolatry did the Jews entangle themselves, as also with the
Assyrian and Chaldean; if they had any new gods, the Jewish hearts were on fire
for them, and unquiet till they enjoyed them, the Nations were content with
their own gods, but Jerusalem must have all.

3. Wicked and wanton lusts are unsatiable, this metaphorical woman had vile
lusts in her, she lusted after the Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, committed
fornication with them, opened her feet to all passengers, yet was she not
satisfied therewith, ver. 29. And in the 28. its said, She was unsatiable, and
could not be satisfied. Eccles. 1.8. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, ^or
the ear filled with hearing, the one would see more, the other hear more; and
so it is with the lusts of men and women, they would see, hear, and have more.
There be four things that are never satisfied, that say not it is enough, the
grave, the barren womb, the earth, the fire, Prove. 30.15, 16. And I may add
there be four evils or lusts that will never be satisfied.

First is the covetous lust, it would have more when it has most. Eccles. 4.8.
The covetous man's eye is not satisfied with riches. Chap. 5.10. He that loves
silver shall not be satisfied with silver.

2. Is revenge, he is haunted with this lust, be he great or small, will not be
satisfied, Prove. 6.34, 35. He will not spare in the day of vengeance, he will
not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou give many
gifts.

3. Frowardness of spirit: Prove. 17.20. A froward heart finds no good; do
what you will to him or for him has it, he finds no satisfying good in it.

4. Is the lust of the flesh, which is the most insatiable, Ephesians. 4.19. They
gave themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. Romans 1.26, 27. They burned in their lust one toward another, not
in a natural way, but in that which was against nature, men with men and women
with women. History tells of that notorious Strumpet Messalina, who gloried she
had exceeded another Harlot, and said, Se inter diem and noctem viginti quinque
passam concubitus, that in 24. hours she had entertaind 25. men. To this lust
idolatry is compared, and called fornication, whoredom, because idolaters are as
insatiable in their way, as men and women in the lusts of the flesh. Hos. 2.5.
I will go after my lovers, I will have more idols and more idolatrous
practices, Ephraim was not satisfied with what she had: so Jerusalem had the
Egyptian, Assyrian, and Chaldean Gods, and they did not quench but increase
her thirst after more still. Thus it is with any lust whatsoever if you give
way to it, it grows strong, insatiable, like water breaking over the banks,
and will not be stopped, like fire getting strength, and cannot be quenched;
its wisdom therefore to deal with our lusts betimes, to keep them in, under,
yea to crucify and mortify them.

Some Interpreters understand the fornication and whoredom committed with the
Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldeans in the 26. 28, 29. ver. to be meant of
those sinful Leagues the Jews made with them, Isa. 20.5, 6. Isa. 30.1, 2, 3.
2 King. 18.21.24. Isa. 31.1. 2 King. 16.7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 28.16. They had little
cause to confederate with any of the Nations, especially the Egyptians, who
had kept them under hard bondage many years, drowned their children, were the
grossest idolaters under heaven, and pursued them to the red Sea, to bring them
back to their taskes of brick, clay, and straw, or to destroy them; and God had
forbid them to seek help from the Nations, and therefore Jer. 2.18. What have
thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the water of Sihor, or what have
thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river? What have
thou to do to treat and Covenant with, or to fetch help from them, to drink
of Nilus and Euphrates, those muddie rivers and forsake the fountain of living
waters, the Lord God of Israel? Ver. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct
thee, etc. thou shall fall by them, and suffer, it was a wicked thing and
evil, and bitter thing, a forsaking of God, and casting him off, who had taken
the protection of that land and people to himself in a peculiar manner.

Its questioned whether a Nation or Prince may Covenant and confederate with
them that are of a false Religion; it should seem to be negative, because here
the Jews confederating with the Egyptians and Assyrians is called fornication,
whoredom; and God was twice wroth with Jehoshaphat for entering into League
with the Kings of Israel, who had set up false worship, once for joining with
Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and after for joining with Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 20.36, 37.
But notwithstanding these instances, its not unlawful for those of the true
Religion to make Leagues and Covenants with forrainers that are of another
Religion. Abraham was in confederacy with Aeshcol and Aner, who were Amorites,
Genesis 14.13. with Abimelech, Chap. 21.27. Jacob with Laban, Genesis 31.44, 45.
Solomon with Hiram, 1 King. 5.12. Joshua with the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.15. If
they were unlawful, these men must all lie under censure. These Leagues are
for defense against violence of wicked men, for preservation of peace, without
prejudice to the true Religion, tending to the propagation of it, they are
warrantable. But when distrust of divine assistance, covetousness, compliance
with idolaters, unjust war with, and oppression of others, and hazard of
corrupting the worship of God, are the grounds and ends of making Leagues with
them, they are unlawful. The Jews distrusted God, and sought to Egypt and
Assyria for help, complied with idolaters, corrupted the pure worship of God
thereby; therefore their Leagues were unlawful. As for that of Jehoshaphat
with Ahab and Ahaziah, besides his compliance and covetousness, there was a
special consideration in it, viz. that they being revolters from God (for the
ten Tribes fell from the true God, and set up the Calves) he should join in
Covenant with them; he helped Ahab in his war against Ramoth Gilead, which
the Prophet Micaiah had told them they should not prosper in. There being a law
against revolters, Deuteronomy. 13.13, 14, 15.

Howbeit Leagues be lawful with others, yet they are d^ngerous, and should
cautiously be made.

Verse. 30. How weak is thine heart, says the Lord God, seeing thou do all
these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman.
THis ver. is another effect of this Woman's wickedness, and that is weakness
of heart; set out

1. By way of admiration; How weak, etc.

2. By way of Comparison, viz. of an imperious whorish Woman, she does those
things which enfeeble her heart, enervate her spirits, and thou do the like,
thy heart must therefore be weak.

Weak.
Hebrew (...) The word amal signifies a thing has no virtue, power, efficacy
in it. Jer. 15.9. She that has borne seven languisheth, she has given up the
ghost; its the same word she was so without strength that her soul was ready
to leave her; it notes not any weakness, but extreme weakness, and therefore
sometime its put for a thing witherd or dried up, Isa. 24.7. The vine
languisheth, it was witherd and dried up; so Joel 1.1^.12. Na^. 1.4. Lam. 2.8.
Pr^dus says, the word signifies, excisum, dissipatum, perditum, corruptum,
perversum, and makes the sense thus; How perverse, depraved, and corrupt is thy
heart, when thou do such things as declare that thou have not only banished
the fear of God from thy heart, but also all modesty from thy face. Jerome,
what shall I do to thy heart?

Vulg: In quo mundabo cor tuum, they derive the word from (...) to circumcise,
and so to cleanse, intimating her heart was so foul, that it was
uncleanseable, it was cor putridum. Calv. Quam molle and dissolutum. Castal: O
te perditae mentis. French Comment. Ton caeur est' il ainsi lasche. Others
render it, Languidum. Vatabl: O impotens cor tuum. She was instable, desired
society with the gods of other Nations; she could not contein, but use all
means to accomplish her wicked desires.

Imperious.
Hebrew (...) dominatrix, a woman that has a domineering spirit; from (...) to
dominere and exercise Lordlinesse over others, to usurp authority.

Septu: (...), of one that is at liberty, that has no husband, but runs up
and down according to her own lust and will; Dominium sui habentis, says Lav:
Dominantis, Call: Procax idem quod petax.
French, d'vne paillarde robuste. Vulg: is Procax, saucie, wanton, impudent,
which in the Greek is (...), when the mask of modesty and bridle of
continency are laid aside, and a bold forwardness to filthiness is
manifested, when a woman does not only expect and wait for her lovers, but
desires, invites, and constraines them to satisfy her lusts, and will have no
nay; such a shameless, saucie imperious whore was she in the 7. of the Prove.
who ver. 21. caused the young man to yield; so here Jerusalem was like a Queen
of whores, daring and doing any thing.

The work.
What is that work; 1. To slight and leave her husband, or parents, friends,
if she have no husband; so did this woman. Jer. 2.13. Ezekiel. 6.9.

2. To seek out, invite, follow, fetch in others, and to communicate her self
to them; so did this woman, Ezekiel. 23.16, 17. she sent to the Chaldeans and
Babylonians, and they came to her into the bed of love.

3. To wast her husbands estate; so here, thou have taken my gold and silver,
made images, set mine oil, etc.

4. To neglect, deal harshly with the children of her husband; so here, Thou
have taken the sons and daughters thou did bare unto me, and have
sacrificed them unto idols.

5. To excuse, clear, and justify her self; Prove. 30.20. The adulterous
woman eats, wipeth her mouth and says, I have done no evil; so this Jewish
woman, Jer. 2.33. How can thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after
Baalim? Ver. 29. Wherefore will you plead with me? ye all have transgressed
against me.

6. To be excessive in feasting and filthiness, Prove. 7.18. Come let us take
our fill of love. 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. They feast and have eyes full of adultery;
so here, ver. 15. thou powredst out thy fornications on every one that passed
by. Ver. 29. She multiplied her fornications in Canaan and Chaldea.

Obser. 1.
That sin, especially whoredom and idolatry do effeminate and enfeeble the
hearts of people; Hos. 4.11. Whoredom is one of the things takes away the
heart, that is, the reason, understanding, judgment, so that a man becomes
instable, weak and foolish. Corporal whoredom subjects men to the wild and
insatiable lusts of the flesh, spiritual to an idol, which is the work of
man's hands; and what folly is this? Such sins weaken men's credit, consciences,
hearts, and spirits; adultery is the destruction of the soul, it wounds, Prove.
7.26. She has cast down many wounded; and the more wounds the more weakness.
Dalilah weakened Sampsons hands and heart, and wounded him deeply. Genesis 49.4.
Reuben unstable as water, he went up to his fathers bed. Prove. 10.29. The way
of the Lord is strength.

Obser. 2.
Adulterers and idolaters are imperious; the Jewish State was guilty of those
sins, and is compared here to an imperious whorish woman. All lusts are
masterly and domineering, James 4.1. Whence come wars and fightings among
you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? The
word for Iusts is (...) pleasures, they are pleasing things, and must be
pleased, they must have the heads, hearts and hands of men to do them service,
else they will make war in you, if they cannot win consent, they will force
it, they are imperious things; Ver. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy, who art thou that judge another? Here he shows the
imperiousness of men's lusts when they are rigid and censorious; they fit in
judgment upon others, they thrust themselves into the throne of God, they take
his prerogative upon them, and will be Judges of the Law, save and destroy at
their pleasure. Psalm. 12.4. With our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our
own, who is Lord over us? Their lusts were so imperious, they lorded it in
their hearts and tongues. Exodus 15.9. What said Pharaoh? I will pursue, I will
overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I
will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy them. Pharaoh was a great King, yet
his lusts were above him. 2 Pet. 2.14. Having eyes full of adultery, and that
cannot cease from sin; their fleshly lusts commanded their hearts and eyes, and
carried them with greediness to uncleanness. So for idolaters, Jer. 44.16,
17. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we
will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
out of our own mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power
out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings
and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem.

Obser. 3.
Imperiousness argues weakness; how weak is thy heart, seeing thou do the
work of an imperious whorish wom^n The more weak the more imperious, and the
more imperious the more evidence of weakness. Pro. 29.8. Scornful (...),
(...) men of derision and scorn, Septuag: (...), men without law, that are
imperious and make their wills and lusts their laws, they bring a City into a
snare, or set it on fire, which shows their weakness; but wise men turn away
wrath, which shows their strength. When men are hasty, violent and imperious,
they exalt folly, Prove. 14.29. and proclaim their weakness. The Apostle says,
that women are the weaker vessels, 1 Pet. 3.7. and being weak they are prone
to be imperious; which Paul observing gave out that rule, 1 Timothy 2.12. I suffer
not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man. Many think that
greatness and strength of spirit consists in imperiousness and stoutnesse,
but its otherwise, they are the weakest are most imperious.

VERSE. 31, 32, 33, 34:
In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and make
thine high place in every street, and have not bin as a harlot in that thou
scornest hire.

But as a wife that commits adultery, which takes strangers in stead of her
husband.

They give gifts to all whores, but thou give thy gifts to all thy lovers,
and hirest them that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom.

And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms: whereas none
follows thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou give a reward, and no
reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary.


THese verses contain a repetition of what this whorish woman did, and also a
further amplification and aggravation of her lewd and abominable practices.

The repetition is in the 31. verse, which falls in with what you have in the
24. and beginning of the 25.

The amplification and aggravation of her lewd ways is set out.

1. From a dissimilitude in the end of the 31. verse; And have not been as an
harlot, in that thou scornest hire; other harlots took hire, but thou would
none.

2. From a similitude in the 32. verse; As a wife, etc. for a wife that has an
husband, to take in strangers, that is great lewdness.

3. From the contrariety of her practice to other whores, verse 33, 34. They
had those followed them, gave gifts unto them which they received; but
Jerusalem had no followers, no gifts, but she gave gifts, and hired men to come
unto her.

Eminent place.
Heb. is (...) which signifies whatsoever excells or appears above another;
here its an eminent place (a place raised above others) its so rendered in the
24. verse. Septuag. translates it (...), there and here. (...) is a stews or
house of fornication. Aquil. (...) foveam, a ditch or pit, whoredom and
idolatry are both deep ditches and pits; these eminent places were for
commission of those sins which drowned them in perdition: from this word (...)
its more then probable that that word Gabbatha in Joh. 19.13. does proceed; the
words are thus; Pilate sat down in the Judgment seat in the place that is
called the pavement; but in the Hebrew Gabbatha, which signifies (...) locum
excelsum, Grote in loc.
such a place as Judges sit in to pronounce sentence against malefactors; its
called the pavement or (...), because it was covered or paved with stones.

Thine high place.
Heb: (...) is a place higher then others, from (...) to lift up; they made
Altars and places for false worship higher then all the rest. Septu: renders it
by two words in the 24. by (...) prostibulum, a place where they did prostitute
themselves to whoredom, or to idolatry, or both; in this verse they render it
(...), it being the foundation of the false worship offered up there.

In that thou scornest hire.
Heb. is (...) from (...) or (...) which has a double, yea, contrary
signification; sometimes it signifies to praise, and so the Jews used it in
their prayers. Psalm 68.5. Pagn. in These. auro.
what there is (...) extol. The Targum has it, (...) praise him rides upon
the heavens. Hence Shindler renders the word (...) ad laudandum: and so the
meaning must be, that Jerusalem was not like other whores, who did praise and
magnify the gifts and hire they had from their lovers, that so they might draw
more, no, she did not value or praise them. Sometimes, and most frequently,
the word signifies to mock, despise, dispraise and villifie. In this ver. it is
generally taken by Interpreters; Meretrices a mercendo.
so the meaning then is, that Jerusalem was so far from praising, that she^
scorned hire; not in policy to increase the hire as common Harlots do, who
make advantage of their sin; but in way of opposition, to manifest that she
was not for profit, but for pleasure; not for the purses of her lovers, but for
their persons. The Sept. has it thus (...). Thou wast as an harlot gathering
or seeking reward; directly opposite to the Original. Vulg. Quasi meretrix
fastidio augens praetiam. Fr, Pour me spriser le salaire.

Hire.
Heb. (...) Merces meretricia; hire that belongs to a whore, from (...), to
hire, Pagn. in These.
and properly it is to give a reward; pro opere turpi and in honesto, Deuteronomy.
23.18. Ethnan zonah, the hire of a whore: So Hos. 9.1. Mich. 1.7. Thamar, when
Judah came into her, would have hire. What will thou give me, Genesis 38.16. and
Hos. 2.12. These are my rewards that my lovers have given me. Steph. in These.
Sept. is (...) which notes frequently among the Greeks, that hire, reward is
given to whores. Lais the Corinthian Harlot asked great sums of Demosthenes,
December drachmarum millia, which was 150l. whence rises that adage: Non cuivis
datum adire Corinthum.

Verse. 32. As a wife that commits adultery.
Heb. is (...) a woman an adulteress. A single woman that plays the harlot
does very ill; but a woman that has a Husband, to leave him, and receive
others in his stead, that is exceeding grievous, especially when she wants
nothing, has abundance, and her Husband is most loving, meek, delightful,
wise, and faithful; this was the case of Jerusalem, yet she plays the
Adulteress, takes in strangers in the room of her Husband.

Verse. 33. They give gifts, and thou give gifts.
The word for gift is (...) and (...) which is merces meretricia, from (...)
which signifies to separate, and remove a thing as unclean. The hire of a
Whore was not to be brought into the Temple, because gotten, ex opere immundo,
and therefore was to be kept, and separated from the Temple, Deuteronomy. ^3.18.

Verse. 34. The contrary is in thee.
Heb. is (...) oppositum, from (...) to invert, change, alter; this Jewish
woman did invert, change, and alter the way that other women went in, for
satisfaction of their lusts, in the abuse of their bodies; they had gifts given
them, but this woman gave gifts; they were hired, this woman did hire. Sept. is
(...) perversum quid. Vulg. Contra consu etudinem mulierum. Calv. Inversio a
mulieribus. Lav. Contrarium mulierum. Whereas none follows thee to commit
whoredoms: the Hebr. runs thus, after thee it has not been whored. So the
Sep. (...), they have not gone a whoring after thee. The meaning is, Jerusalem
sought after the Idol gods of other Nations, was at expenses, gave gifts to
them to get, and fetch in their idolatry; but no Nation did so by them. Hos.
8.9. Ephraim has hired lovers. 2 K. 16.8.10. Ahaz sent the silver and gold of
the Temple to the K. of Assyria, and was at no small charges for the Altar of
Damascus. Isa. 57.7. Upon a lofty and high mountain have thou set thy bed;
that is, Altars, Chapels, Temples, which he calls beds; because there they
committed spiritual adultery: and they were upon the eminent and high places,
because the more might see them turn in and worship their Idol gods, and so
commit folly with them; for it follows, even thither wentest thou up to offer
sacrifice. And in verse. 8. Thou have discovered thy self to another then me, 2
King 21.4. Jer. 32.34.
and art gone up; thou have enlarged thy bed, made a Covenant with them, thou
love ast their bed when thou saw it. The sense is this, the Jewish estate
was not content with God alone to be her husband, but like a whorish wife left
her husband, and went up to the bed of others: and not only so, but enlarged
her own bed, made more room, built more Altars, high places, and Temples for
the gods of other Nations to be taken in to her, and made covenant with them to
worship and honor them: and what ever bed, that is, Altar, Temple, Idol she
saw among the Nations, she fell in love with it, and must have it, cost it
never so dear.

Obser. 1.
That the worship of God is not to be modeled according to the wisdom of
States or Churches. This Jewish State and Church built high places, Altars,
fetched in the worship and ways of it, which other Nations had, were at much
cost and charges to accomplish the same, and thought herein they did acceptable
service; but God was provoked sorely: and the more expensive any State or
Church is that way, the more they exasperate the Lord against them; as a
husband, the more prodigal his wife is to entertain others, the more offended
is he. God is a jealous God, and it is dangerous to alter in, or add any thing
to his worship, especially to corrupt it with idolatrous inventions. Ahaz did
so; but what says the Text, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is that King Ahaz, that spent
the gold and silver found in the house of the Lord, that was affected with, and
brought into the Temple the Altar of Damascus, that sacrificed to the gods of
Damascus, that shut up the doors of the Temple, that made Altars in every
corner of Jerusalem, that burnt incense to other gods, and provoked the Lord to
anger, v. 25.

2. A pure virgin-Church may in process of time become whorish, adulterous,
idolatrous, and worse then others: This Church of Jerusalem was at first chaste,
holy, glorious; but when she had left the Lord, and those ways and rules of
worship which he had given her, then she became a Strumpet, a common whore,
did worse, yea contrary to all whores; she sought for, and hired lovers to
come into her. If Churches would therefore not degenerate, let them hold fast
the form of wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1.13. Let them be content with the way of
worship which God has prescribed them, and lead such lives as may not blemish
the Religion they profess, and then they shall never provoke God to complain
of them.

VERSE. 35, 36, 37, 38.
Wherefore O Harlot, hear the word of the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God, because thy filthiness was powered out, and thy
nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the
idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy children which thou did
give unto them.

Behold therefore I will gather all thy lovers with whom thou have taken
pleasure, and all them that thou have loved, with all them that thou have
hated, I will even gather them round about against thee, and will discover thy
nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness.

And I will judge thee as women that break wedlock, and shed blood are
judged, and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy, etc. to 44.


HEre begins the fifth general part of the Capter, viz. a Commination of
grievous judgments, together with the aggravation of their sins, the cause
of those judgments, and this extends to the 60. verse.

In the words from the 35. to the 44. you shall find, 1. An introduction to the
judgments threatened, verse. 35. 2. A specification of the causes moving God to
bring such judgments upon this woman, namely, her Idolatry, murdering of her
children, and forgetfulness of her low condition, and Gods dealing with her in
it, v. 36.43. 3. The enumeration of the judgments threatened, which are, 1. The
gathering together of her lovers and enemies, and setting them against her, v.
37. 2. Publication of her nakedness and shame, ibid. 3. Condemnation to dye,
v. 38. 4. Rendition into the hands of her Enemies, verse. 39. 5. Plundering,
spoiling, and laying all wast, ibid. 6. Death it self by stones and swords, v.
40. 7. Burning their houses, v. 41.
4. The consequents hereupon, which are two. 1. The cessation of this woman
from her idolatries, v. 41. last part of it. 2. Cessation of Gods anger, v. 42.



Verse. 35. O harlot.
The Lord calls her not wife, but harlot, he would not vouchsafe her that name,
it carries honor in it; but gives her a disgraceful name, Harlot, the Jewish
Nation he calls a harlot.

Obser.
Sin brings reproachful names and terms upon people and persons. Isa. 1.10.
Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah: It causes God to fasten disgracing
titles and Epithites upon them. Deuteronomy. 32.5. A perverse and crooked generation.
Isa. 57.4. Children of transgression, a seed of falsehood. Jerem. 6.28.
Grievous revolters, corrupters. Jer. 2.21. Degenerate plants. Isa. 10.6. An
hypocritical nation. Isa. 65.2. A rebellious people. Isa. 16.4. Outcasts.
Chap. 1.4. A people laden with iniquities. Jer. 6.30. Reprobate silver. Isa.
57.3. Sons of the Sorceresse, the seed of the adulterer, and the whore. Isa.
21.2. Treacherous dealers.

Formerly this people were very dear to God, and he gave them honorable
Titles.

Exodus 4.22. Israel my son, my first borne. 19.6. A kingdom of Priests, an
holy nation. Deuteronomy 32.9. The Lords portion, and inheritance. Psalm 135.4. His
peculiar treasure. Isa. 5.7. The Lords vineyard. Jer. 2.21. A noble vine. Isa.
4.5. The glory. 6.13. The holy seed. Jer. 18.13. The Virgin of Israel.

Its true you see what Solomon gave out long since; Righteousness exalts a
nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.

Obser. 2.
From these words, hear the word of the LORD; They will not hear the word of
the Lord for their consolation, shall hear it for their condemnation. God had
often spoken to this metaphorical woman, this Jewish estate by his Prophets,
and she would not hear. Isa. 65.2. I have spread out my hands all the day unto
a rebellious people. God had sent Prophets at the 3. 6. 9. hour, and yet she
would not hear: he had dealt like a loving Husband by her, invited her to
repent and turn, as you may read, Jer. 3. and 4. and in diverse other places
promised mercy and forgiveness, and nothing would prevail; here therefore the
Lord speaks like a just Judge, giving out a sentence of death. Hear the word
of the Lord O harlot: seeing thou would not hearken to my l^ving entreaties,
gracious invitations, wholesome counsels, the word of grace and mercy; now thou
must hear and hearken to my threats, my words of wrath, of condemnation, and
destruction.

Verse. 36. Thy filthiness.
Heb. (...) which Montanus renders, aes tuum, thy money; showing how lavish and
profuse she was in spending her estate to hire lovers to come in unto her.
Sept. has it (...) as thy brass, or money. Vulg. aes tuum: but others
interpret the word otherwise. Calv. in finum.
Pagn. turpitudo tua. Shindl. says, the word (...) signifies inferiorem portem
faeminae pudendum. Buxtorf. virus seu virulentae sordes ex assidua scortatione
profluentes; Aecol. inferiora tuavas.
ut aerugo ex aere. Jun. virus tuum: so Polan. Pisc. Fr. Tes basses parties.
Prado nomine aeris non vei fed semen potius significatum fuisse videtur.

Thy lovers.
These lovers were the Assyrians, Babylonians, Chaldeans, Ezekiel. 23.12. She
doted upon the Assyrians, verse. 16. She sent messengers unto them into
Chaldaea. Verse. 17. The Babylonians came to her into the bed of love: And in
the 19, 20, 21. you shall find that the Egyptians were her lovers. So Jer.
2.36. and Jer. 3.1. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers. She had
lovers out of most Nations.

Verse. 37. Thou have taken pleasure.
Heb. is (...) dulcuisti, or jocundataes; the word (...) is of the largest
signification amongst the Heb. words, the primitive and chief signification of
it is to mingle: and so here notes that pleasure, delight, comes upon mixture;
this woman mingled her self with strangers, all comers, especially Assyrians,
Babylonians, Egyptians, in bodily and spiritual whoredoms. Vulg. quibus
commista es.
Sept. (...). Cast. oblectasti. Jun. with whom thou have sweetly been
conversant. Pisc. suaviter affecta fuisti.

God would gather together her lovers, and those she hated, having fallen off
from her loves, and they should be against her, and besiege her:

Obser. 1.
When God threatens, or brings judgments upon a people, it is upon
considerable and just grounds: because thy filthiness was poured out, etc.
behold, therefore I will, etc.

2. That when God by the sin of man is provoked, he will set his friends and
lovers aginst him. The Assyrians and Chaldaeans had been Jerusalems lovers; but
because she sinned against God, he turns them to be her enemies. Lam. 1.2. All
her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.
Ahitophel was a choice friend and Councellor to David: and because he offended
the Lord in the matter of Vriah, and Bathsheba, therefore he turned the heart
and head of Ahitophel against David, which went very near to him, and troubled
his heart sorely: he speaks of it twice in the Psalms; once in the 41. verse.
9. Mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, who did eat of my bread, has
lift up his heel against me, i. e. has dealt injuriously with me, and like a
bruit creature, kicked at his Master who feeds him; or thus, he has looked at
me as one down, and lift up his heel to tread me under. Again, he mentions
it in the 55. Psalm. 12, 13, 14. Vasthi refused to come at the Kings call, and
God set Ahasuerus and all the Princes against her, Esth. 1. So Obad. 7. The men
that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee; they that eat thy bread have
laid a wound under thee. See Math. 10.36.

3. God in his infinite wisdom and justice does often times make them
instruments of his wrath, to punish us, with whom we have sinned. The Jews
had pleased themselves in making Covenants with the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, and
Egyptians, in fetching in their gods, forms of worship, in following their
manners, and practices: and what says the Lord here? I will even gather them
round about against thee, they shall besiege thee, and lay thee wast. Rev.
17.16. The ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, and so did sin by the
counsel and power of the beast: those horns being so many Kings, shall hate
the whore with whom they had committed fornication. Verse. 2. And shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. As they
had sinned with her, so God would use them to execute his wrath upon her.

Martia the Concubine of Commodus the Emperor, having espied her own name in
a Catalogue of chief persons, intended to be made away by him, consulting with
others, she poisoned him in a cup of wine.

4. In what kind people sin, in that kind sometimes God does punish them.
Jerusalem sinned in discovering her nakedness to others, v. 36. and God does
punish her by discovering her nakedness to others, v. 37. I will discover thy
nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness. Lam. 1.8. All that
honored her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness. She committed
sin in a shameful manner, and God would punish her shamefully. Adonibezech
cut off thumbs and toes of 70. Kings, and his thumbs and toes were cut off,
Judge. 1.6, 7. Agag he had slain many by the sword, and himself suffers by it.
1 Samuel 15.33. As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be
childlesse among women. Obad. 15. As thou have done, it shall be done unto
thee. Rev. 13.10. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity; he
that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. Isa. 33.1. When
thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: and when thou shall make an
end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

This discovering of nakedness which was the punishment here threatened, was a
grievous judgment, and should have caused this woman to have given over her
whoredom and filthiness, as once it did the Milesian Virgins, their murders;
for they being troubled and perplexed in their minds, were set upon it to make
away themselves, no tears or entreaties of friends could prevail with them;
many did make away themselves, notwithstanding all means used to prevent the
same: At the last, one amongst them, wiser then the rest, made a law; that if
they did make away themselves, they should be drawn naked through the Market;
this so prevailed with them, that they gave over that wretched practice; the
thought of the shame of having their nakedness discovered, kept them from that
bloody sin of selfe-murther.

Verse. 38. I will judge thee as women that break wedlock.
The Heb. is, I will judge thee with the judgments of adulteresses. What the
judgments of whores and adulteresses were, we shall find in Levit. 20.10.
Deuteronomy. 22.22. The Adulterer and Adulteress were both to be put to death, but
what death, is not specified. The Jews had four capital punishments or
deaths.

1. Chenek, strangling: and this was the death they affirm that the Adulterer
and the Adulteress were to suffer; for where the kind of Death is not
expressed, their rule is, it is strangling, because that is the easiest.

2. Is Hereg, beheading.

3. Sheriphah, burning: so Judah judged Tamar, when she had played the whore,
to be burnt, Genesis 28.24. The Priests daughter, if she played the whore was to
be burnt with fire, Levit. 21.9.

4. Sekilah, stoning; so the Pharisees tell Christ, John 8.5. Adulteresses
should be stoned by the law of Moses, yet there is no express law in him for
it, only those committed sins of like nature were to be stoned, as Deuteronomy.
22.24. And its evident from our Prophet, who in the 40. verse. tells this
adulteress woman she shall be stoned with stones.

The manner of stoning was to lead the offender bound to a place without the
gates, where one of the witnesses struck him behind upon the loins; then they
took a very great and heavy stone and threw upon him: and if that did not kill
him, then all the people threw stones upon him, according to Deutr. 17.7. This
death was counted the most grievous.

Among the Romans, Adulterers were beheaded by the Julian law.

Tacitus relates, that among the old Germans, that the Adulteress being found
out by her Husband, she was stripped, and set naked in the sight of her kindred:
and afterward her hair being cut off, her husband with rods drove her through
the street so.

Diodorus Siculus tells that the Egyptians did cut off and maim the nostrils
of the Adulteress, that so they might deforme the face which had pleased: and
the adulterer had 1000. stripes, with which he was almost beaten to death. Vid.
Pet. Mart. upon 2 Samuel 12.

And shed blood.
Their judgment was to have their blood shed, Genesis 1.6. Exodus 21.12. No
satisfaction was to be taken for the life of a Murderer, but he was absolutely
to be put to death, Number. 35.31, 32. What ever friends he could make, what ever
ransom he could give, what ever quality he were of, these were not to be
respected, but die he must. So here, Jerusalem had shed blood, even the blood
of her infants, verse. 20, 21. and now her blood should be shed, she should
be thrust through with swords, verse. 40.

In fury and jealousy.
Heb. runs thus: I will give thee the blood of wrath and jealousy. Sept.
(...). I will put thee in the blood of wrath and zeal. Junius, reponam tibi
sanguinem excandescentiae and zeloipiae. The words show how severely the Lord
will deal with her, even like a Husband, whose rage and jealousy is up, and
nothing will pacify it but the blood of the adulterer and adulteress, Prove.
6.34. Jealousy is the rage of a man; nothing exasperates him more then the
falsehood of his wife; and something exasperates God more then the falsehood
and whoredom of his Spouse. Psalm 79.5. Shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
yea it burns like the hottest fire, and cannot be quenched. His fury and
jealousy consumed Jerusalem before they ceased. These words agree with those
in Chap. 5.11. Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have any pity. God
would give her blood without any mercy; no sacrifices, no tears, no prayers,
no means should prevail with him.

Observe. 1.
Adultery and Bloodshed are sins which the Lord punishes severely, he
propounds the punishment of these sins to be the pattern for Jerusalems
punishment: I will judge thee with the judgments of adulteresses, and of those
that shed blood. Their punishments are exemplary. Jer. 29.22. Zedekiah and Ahab
are said to be roasted in the fire, which was a terrible judgment, a grievous
torture: and what was the reason of it? because they have committed villainy in
Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors wives. Mal. 3.5. I
will be a swift witness against the adulterers: That Is so provoking a sin, and
deserves such heavy judgment, that God will make have to punish them. Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge; that is, punish with emphaticall
punishments. Sodomes great sin was uncleanness, and God judged and punished
them with fire and brimstone from heaven. The forcing of the Levites Concubine
cost the blood of 60000. men, Judge. 20. there uncleanness and murder were
punished with severity. Psalm 9.12. God makes inquisition for blood. He is so
stirred at this sin, that he will up, search out the authors, contrivers, and
Commissioners of this scarlet sin: he will avenge for blood. Hos. 1.4. I will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. Ezekiel. 35.5, 6. Because
Mount-Seir had shed blood, therefore as I live says the Lord God, I will
prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee. See how the spirit of the
Lord is up, he swears to it, that he would prepare them unto blood, and that
blood should pursue them. Chap. 36.18. I powered my fury upon them for the blood
that they had shed upon the land, and for their Idols wherewith they had
polluted it.

2. Note, there is difference of sins and punishments; women that break
wedlock and shed blood, they sin more grievously then others do, and their
punishments are greater then others; their sins are scarlet, and crying
sins, abominations; and their punishments are answerable; they are judged
otherwise then liars, slanderers, drunkards, thieves, etc. God punishes some
sins without blood; but these sins, Adultery, Murder, Idolatry, with
blood, and not only with blood, but with blood in fury and jealousy.

VERSE. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
And I will also give thee into their hands, and they shall throw down thine
eminent place, and shall break down thy high places, they shall strip thee
also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fine jewels, and leave thee naked and
bare.

They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall stone thee
with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.

And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee
in the sight of many women: and I will cause thee to cease from playing the
harlot, and thou also shall give no hire any more.

So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from
thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.

Because thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, but have fretted me in
all these things: Behold therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thy head
says the Lord God, and thou shall not commit this lewdness above all thine
abominations.


THe Analysis of these words is before, I shall open some things in them, and
then give you the observation.

Verse. 39. Give thee into their hand.
This phrase is sometimes expressed, by delivering into the hand, 2 Chronicles. 25.20.
Sometimes by leaving in the hand, Neh. 9.28. Sometimes by giving up, 1 King.
14.16. States, Churches, Cities, Families, Persons, come not into the hands of
wicked men without the providence of God. They may all say as Christ did to
Pilate, John 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above. So neither Chaldeans, Babylonians, nor any other
could have had power against Jerusalem, and the Jews, unless it had been given
them from above. Psalm. 106.41. He gave them into the hand of the heathen: He
brought the Heathens upon them, and delivered them up into their hands, vid.
Jer. 20.5.21.7. Till God puts a people out of his own hands, and into the
hands of others, they cannot hurt them.

They shall throw down.
Heb. (...) from (...) to pull down, subvert, demolish. Sept. (...) they shall
destroy. Suffodiendo evertent, they shall underdigge, undermine, and utterly
lay them wast, Fr. is, ilz ruineront, they shall ruin.

Eminent place.
Not the Temple, or City, but some eminent place they had built, as it is in
the 24. and 31. ver. and with it all other high places where they had been
idolatrous.

Obser.
Gods hatred is so great against idolatry, and idolaters, that he will not
endure the places where they have used idolatrous worship; the places where
they sinned must be destroyed, broken, utterly razed and ruined, 2 King. 18 4.
Hezekiah is commended for 4. things: and the first is, for removing the high
places; then for breaking the Images, cutting down the groves, and breaking
the brazen Serpent. Amos 5.5. Bethel shall come to naught. What was the matter
that that place should come to naught? 1 King. 12.28, 29. Jeroboam had set up a
golden Calfe there, made an Altar, and brought the people to worship God in a
false way, and in a false place: Gods anger was so kindled against this, that
presently he sent a Prophet to cry against that Altar in that place, and to
threaten the ruin of it, Chap. 13.2, 3. And in 2 King. 23.15. it is made good:
Josias breaks down the Altar, the high place, stamps it to powder, and burns
them and the grove to ashes: and after God laid wast both City and Temple,
because they had filled them with Altars and Idols; they would not hear the
Prophets crying out against those things; God raised up means, etc. and so
here against Altars, Crosses, etc.

They shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and take thy fair Jewels.
Heb. for fair jewels is, thy instruments of ornament, or vessels of glory:
those things that did adorn, make thee glorious, as in the 17. verse.

Obser.
When we abuse the mercies of God, we give him cause to take them away: They
decked their high places with their garments, verse. 16. They made Images of
their Jewels, v. 17, etc. Here God threatens to take away both the one and the
other; he would give them into their hands should rob them of their fair
Jewels, and strip them of all their clothes. Isa. 42.22. This is a people
robbed and spoiled, 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers?
did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in
his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law, therefore he has poured
out upon him the fury of his anger, etc. Often times you are robbed of your
clothes and goods, becauese you have abused them to the dishonor of God.

And leave thee naked and bare.
Before in the 8. verse. it is said, that God covered her nakedness; he found
her naked, and now he would leave her naked and bare.

Obser.
When God has showed much kindness to a people, and they have been
ungrateful, he will reduce them to their former condition; he found this woman
naked, and he would leave her naked. God did much for Ephraim, yet Ephraim was
ungrateful, forgot God, went out to other lovers; and what says the Lord,
Hos. 2.2, 3. Plead with your mother, let her put away her whoredoms and
adulteries, lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day when she was
borne. God was upon the doing of it, and therefore put her upon a course of
preventing it; but because she took not his counsel, in verse. 9. he says, I
will return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given to cover her
nakedness, and then her condition would be as at the first. God had spread his
skirt over this Jewish woman, clothed her with imbroidered silk, and fine
linen, decked her with choice ornaments and Jewels, put his comeliness upon
her: but she abused all his bounty, and love, proved ungrateful and whorish,
and therefore he would put her into her first condition, strip her of all, and
leave her naked: she came out of captivity, she should go into captivity: she
was cast out, and now she should be cast out again: she was poor, beggarly,
and had nothing, and should be made so again.

Verse. 40. Verse.41. From the 40. verse. and beginning of the 41.

Note, when God intends the ruin of a people, he will bring sore judgments
upon them one after another, till they be consumed. I will bring up a company
against thee? what company this was you may see, Hab. 1.6. The Chaldeans, that
hasty and bitter Nation: and what should they do?

1. They should stone her like a harlot, with stones; great stones should they
sling in, which should brain many of her children.

2. They should thrust her through with swords, they should slash and cut in
pieces her sons and daughters.

3. They should burn her houses with fire. Each of these judgments were very
dreadful; what sad apprehensions had the Jews, when they saw the Chaldeans
before the walls and gates of Jerusalem, and called to mind what the Prophets
had foretold they should do to Jerusalem. In 2 King. 25.8, 9, 10. 2 Chronicles.
36.17, 18.19, 20. Jer. 52.12, 13, 14, etc. you may find these judgments
executed when the Army came up, and that in Micah made good, where it is said,
That for the Judges, Priests, and Prophets sins, Sion should be ploughed as a
field, Jerusalem become as heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high
places of the forest.

In the sight of many women.
Vatab. Prad. Sanct. Pol. Pisc. Lavat.
By women I find Expositors understand other Nations, Cities and Towns, and it
suits well with the matter in hand; for here the Jewish State and Nation is
treated of under the notion of a woman: and therefore other Nations and Cities
may be meant by the name of women, and so some interpret the word women in Isa.
32.9.11. The Jews say, these women were regna and provinciae: R. David. chald
poraphr.
yet some think by women here are to be understood the women in the Chaldean
Army, which were of diverse Nations. Maldonate thinks here is an allusision to
the punishment of adulteresses, who were to be stoned or burnt in the sight of
other women; for the greater shaming of the sufferers, and for admonition of
the spectators; that they beholding adulteresses brought to so shameful and
dreadful an end, might learn to be faithful both to God and man: and such was
the case here with Jerusalem, she was punished as a whore in the sight of the
nations, for the learning of the Nations. When the Lord punishes a Nation with
sharp and heavy judgments, other Nations should take notice thereof, and be
instructed thereby, to take heed of those sins that nation is judged for,
else God is provoked more, and the judgment will be heavier. Jer. 3.8. I put
Israel away, and gave her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah
feared not, but went and played the harlot also. God looked that Judah should
have learnt by Isreal's judgments to have taken heed of such sins she was
guilty of: but she did not, and that exasperated him the more. So Edom, Obad.
11, 12, 13, 14. Because she made no good use of Jerusalems sufferings, but was
glad at it; therefore the Lord threatens her, that shame should cover her, and
that she should be cut off for ever.

Verse. 10. And I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou
also shall give no hire any more.
These words afford us this Observation.

Obser.
That by great judgments God causes a people to give over their great sins
to cease and rest from them. God would take away Jerusalems wealth, her jewels,
her gold and silver, her change of raiment; diminish her portion, cast her into
captivity, and then she should not have to give to lovers, or spend upon Idols,
then she should not have leisure nor opportunity to seek or serve them. Isa.
27.9. The fruit of Gods judgments is to take away sin; by these soar
judgments God cured them of their Idolatry for ever.

Thus God has dealt of late with Germany, Ireland, England; by his sore
judgments, he has taken away the matter and occasion of sinning from
thousands, they have not wherewithal to sin as formerly.

Poverty, Sickness, Imprisonment, loss of places, make men cease from sin,
though their hearts be still the same.

Verse. 42.
In this verse is mentioned Gods Fury, Jealousy, Anger. Fury is the excess of
Anger. Isa. 22.45. He has poured upon him the fury of his anger. When anger is
boiled up to the height, that is the fury of it: Jealousy is hot displeasure,
vehemens ira, Psalm. 79.5. 1 Cor. 10.22. Anger is a desire of punishing that
which has wronged us; now these are given to God as becomes God; he is not as
man, to become furious, jealous, angry, with perturbation, distemper, and
imperfection; but he does such acts as do entitle him to fury, jealousy,
anger, yet without any change or weakness.

So will I make my fury toward thee to rest.
Some read it, I will make my fury to rest upon thee: so the French, je feray
re poser ma feureur sur coy, and so it may refer to the whole time of their
being in Babylon. Chap. 5.13. The Lord said, he would cause his fury to rest
upon them. It Is very dreadful when Gods fury is out against a people, but it is
most dreadful when his fury rests upon them. Heb is thus, I will make to rest
my fury toward thee; that is, I will be furious no longer: when I have judged
thee as adulteresses and murderers are judged; when I have stoned thee with
stones, thrust thee through with swords, and burnt thee with fire; there will
be no more materials for my fury to feed upon, it shall rest and end. Sept.
(...) I will dismiss mine anger upon thee, there shall be an end of it; this
sense the words following do evince: and my jealousy shall depart from thee,
etc.

Obser. 1.
When Gods people sin against him, especially in ways of false worship and
idolatry, they disquiet and trouble him, they cause his anger to kindle, his
jealousy to burn, and provoke him to fury: a man, when his wife goes to other
men, is enraged, so divided, and perplexed, that he knows not what to do. The
Sept. reads it, for I will be no more angry. (...) I will not be solicitous any
longer; I will not be divided and distracted with cares and thoughts about
thee? The heart and spirit of God was much troubled about his people when they
left him, and went out to sinful practices. Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim what shall I
do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? God was even at a stand with
them. Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
Israel? He was divided in himself; he considered this people were his wife,
and so his mercy led him to spare them; yet a whorish wife, and so his anger,
jealousy, and fury provoked him to punish them. Hence says he, Ezekiel. 6.9. I
am broken with the whorish heart which has departed from me. Jer. 5.7. How
shall I pardon thee, for this thy children have forsaken me. God had a fire and
strife within himself; feign he would have pardoned Jerusalem, but he knew not
how to accomplish it without prejudice to his justice, truth, and glory.

2. When judgments are thoroughly executed upon a whorish and backsliding
people, then God is at rest, and satisfied: When this woman, this Jewish estate
fell into the hands of enemies, was plundered and spoiled, had her children
stoned and thrust through, her City burnt to ashes, and all her glory laid in
the dust; then God caused his fury to rest, his jealousy to depart, then he
was quiet, and angry no more. Before judgment be thoroughly executed, God is
troubled, and restless; but when it is done, he is pacified, comforted, as it
is Ezekiel. 5.13. Before Jonas had judgment passed upon him, there was a great
wind, and a mighty tempest in the Sea, the Lords anger, jealousy and fury
were up, and let out: but when Jonas was sent, and cast into the sea, justice
done, it is said the Sea ceased from her raging, it was so presently: and what
was the reason of it; the Lord first ceased from his fury, he was pacified, and
manifested it by stilling of the Seas; the mariners did it not so much out of
love to justice, as love to save themselves: they saw all like to perish, a
common shipwreck at hand, Jonas was detected to be the Delinquent: and so to
secure themselves, they threw him over, and had their desire. When justice was
executed upon Saul's bloody house for slaying the Gibeonites, the 3. years
samine ceased; till that was done, there was nothing but fury, jealousy, and
anger from God: but being done, the Lord caused his displeasure to cease, and
was at rest, 2 Samuel 21. God would bring the Assyrians upon the Jews, and what
then? the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction, Isa.
10.25. When I have laid all wast, and destroyed them, then shall I be angry,
jealous, furious no more. Esth. 7.10. They hanged Haman upon the Gallows, and
then was the Kings wrath pacified.

VERSE. 43.
Because thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, but have fretted me in
all these things.


THis verse conteins two of the principal causes moving God to bring such
dreadful judgments upon Jerusalem, 1. Her forgetfulness of her youth. 2. Her
fretting of God by her lewd courses.


Of her not remembering the days of her youth was spoken in the 22. verse.

Have fretted me.
Heb. (...) from (...) to move, stir up, provoke. Sept. (...) have grieved
me. Calv: tumultuata es contra me. Polan. Commovisti te contra me.

This lewdness.
Heb. (...) something I said of zimmah in the 27. verse. it signifies properly a
premeditated evil or villainy, which is shameful and abominable, as Levit.
18.17. The uncovering a woman's nakedness and her daughters, it is zimmah, a
wickedness, Chap. 19.29. whoredom is zimmah; now what is this lewdness here
spoken of: Piscat. says, it was the murdering of her children, verse. 20, 21.
upon which act God sets an emphasis: Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter?
Some read the words otherwise, thus; neither have thou made a thought upon all
thine abominations, taking Zimmah in a good sense, viz. thou have never
thought of thy wicked ways and abominations to repent thee of them, but gone
on securely.

Obser. 1.
The Lord expects we should be mindful of our primitive condition and estate
he began with us in: thou have not remembered the days of thy youth: so in
verse. 22. Psalm. 78.42. They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he
delivered them from the enemy. Their poverty and bondage in Egypt they
thought not of, and what God did for them in bringing them out of that Land,
and drowning their enemies in the Red Sea. Verse. 11. They forgate his works,
and the wonders he had showed them. It Is often put upon them to mind their
former estate. Deuteronomy. 15.15. Thou shall remember that thou wast a bondsman in the
land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee. So Chap. 16.12.24.18.22.
And that they might not forget their first condition, the Lord appointed the
offering of the first fruits, all which they were to profess before the Lord:
That a Syrian ready to perish was their Father, who went down into Egypt,
sojourned there with a few, and became a Nation, great, mighty, and populous;
it is the way to keep us humble, make us thankful, and to walk answerably.

2. When man is advanced, he is apt to forget the low, poor, and miserable
condition he was in: Thou have not remembered the days of thy youth. There was
a time says God, wherein thou wast inconsiderable: when Jacob served Laban,
was in Egypt with 70. souls, how mean? how low was thy condition? but this
thou have forgotten. When Pharaoh's Butler was brought out of prison, he forgot
the prison, and Joseph who had been his companion there. Genesis 40. Saul was
taken from seeking his Fathers asses, and set upon the Throne of Israel, where
he quickly forgot God and himself. When men or States are become great Oaks
and Mountains, they forget what little acornes and hillocks once they were;
when arrived to the height of Cedars, they are loath to look what rushes once
they were, growing in the mire. Deuteronomy. 8.12, 13, 14. Beware lest when thou art
full, have built goodly houses, and art multiplied with herds, flocks,
silver, gold, etc. thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord, and the
condition he brought thee out of, viz. Egypt, the house of bondage: and
notwithstanding this caution, Israel did forget her first condition, and Gods
first and great kindness unto her, Deuteronomy. 31.15. Hos. 13.6.

3. When men forget the low, poor, and miserable estate they were once in, and
Gods loving kindness and bounty in exalting them to a rich, high, or
honorable condition; they exasperate the Lord greatly: Because thou have not
remembered the days of thy youth, but have fre^ted me. This sin frets and
provokes God, that he should pity a Nation when it is low, at the door of
death, brinke of despair, do great things for it, and then prove ungrateful
and forgetful? Thus was it with the Jewish estate. God did much for Jeroboam,
preserved his life, called him out of Egypt, bestowed ten Tribes upon him: and
he forgate what he had been, what he was at the present through Gods mercy,
and therefore see what a message the Lord sent him, 1 King. 14.7, 8, 9, 10.
Go, tell Jeroboam, forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people (he was
as low as others) and made thee Prince over my people Israel, and rent the
Kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it to thee: and yet thou have
not been as David, but have done evil above all before thee, etc. therefore
will I bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, etc. God would utterly destroy
it. So Chap. 16, 2. concerning Baasha: Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the
dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel, and thou have walked in the
ways of Jeroboam, and made the people sin to provoke me to anger. Behold I
will take away thy posterity, and make thy house like Jeroboams, dogs and
fowls shall devour those that dye thereof. This was the sin made the Lord
to be a Lion, a Leopard, and as a Bear bereaved of whelps unto Ephraim, Hos.
13.6, 7, 8.

4. God will deal with sinners according to their ways. I will recompense thy
way upon thy head. If thy ways be sinful, thou shall have the fruit and reward
of them upon thy head. Prove. 10.6. Blessings are upon the head of the just. God
recompenceth to the just according to their way, and to the wicked according to
their way: if men shed blood, God will return that blood upon their heads. Joab
he slew Abner and Amasa, and see what is recorded, 1 Kings 2.31, 32, 33, 34.
Benaiah falls upon him, and slayes him at the ho^ns of the Altar: so their
blood which is called his blood returned upon his own head; this blood rested
upon Joabs head all David's reign, 2 Samuel 3.29. and was recompensed upon his
head in Solomon's days: what ever a man's ways be, God will return them upon his
head. Hence says Solomon to Shimei, Thou know all the wickedness which
thine heart is privy unto, that thou did to David my Father, therefore the
Lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head, 1 King. 2.44. Solomon
knew God was so just and exact in this point, that he prays God would
distinguish between the wicked and the just, by recompensing their ways upon
their heads. 2 Chronicles. 6.23. and so Nehem. Turn their reproach upon their own
head, Chap. 4.4. Canald. Rem. p 252.
Edria had slain Edmund the King for the sake of Chu^e, who after put him to
death, saying, his blood be upon thy head.

5. Some sins God eyes, and brands, and beats off from above others: thou
shall not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations. The slaying of
her children, God took special notice of that wickedness, set a mark upon it,
this lewdness, and tells her that he would so punish her, as that she should
not commit it any more. Deuteronomy. 17.4. The serve ng other gods is called there the
committing that wicked thing. When the Jews married the daughters of the
Nations, God was much displeased at it, and brands it with This trespass, Ezra
9.2. This thing, verse. 3. So their sin in Jerem 44.4. is called an abominable
thing: Do not this abominable thing that I hate, Jerem. 2.10. Consider
diligently, and see if there be such a thing: has a Nation changed their gods,
etc? so Judge. 20.30. There was no such deed done nor se^^, Deuteronomy. 13.11. They
should stone the seducer, and then all Israel should fear

VERSE. 44, 45, 46.
Behold, every one that uses proverbs, shall use this proverb against thee,
saying, as is the mother, so is her daughter.

Thou art thy mothers daughter, that loatheth her husband and her children: and
thou art the sister of thy sisters which loathed their husbands and their
children, your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy
left hand: and thy younger sister that dwells at thy rig^^ hand is Sodom and
her daughters.


IN these words you have, 1. Another judgment threatened, which is common
reproach, verse. 44. 2. A comparison of her for wickedness with her parents and
sisters: her parents were the Hittites and Amorites, verse. 45. her sisters
Samaria and Sodom, verse. 46.


That uses proverbs.
Upon the 12. Chap. verse. 22. I opened the word proverb, and showed you the
nature and meaning of it: all Nations have their proverbs, which they much
account of; every one that can jeere and scoff shall disgrace thee.

As is the mother, so is her daughter.
The mother is lewd, idolatrous, bloody, rebellious, and the daughter is such;
look therefore what befell the mother for her sins, what punishment was
inflicted upon her, the like shall befall, and be inflicted upon thee. Proverbs
suitable unto this are these: Ill birds lay ill eggs. Roses grow not out of
shrimps; from the wicked proceeds wickedness; ill seed, ill corn; by the
children you may know the parents. Now these are not always true; but sometimes
it falls out, that wicked parents have good children, and good parents wicked
ones. Noah had a Cham, Isaak an Esau, David an Absalom, Hezekiah Manasses: and
so contrary, Ahaz that wicked King had good Hezekiah for his son, Amon,
Josiah; Lamech, Noah.

Verse. 45. Thou art thy mothers daughter, etc.
We must enquire who was her mother, and wherein the likeness beeween them
lies.

Her mother is said here to be an Hittite, and her father an Amorite, vid.
supra in verse. 3. She was so unlike to Sarah and Abraham, out of whose loins
by nature she came, and so like to the Amorites and Hittites, as that the Lord
calls her the daughter of them.

Her Sisters were,

1. Samaria, that was the chief City of the ten Tribes; the royal City,
it was upon an hill, built by Omri King of Israel, who bought the hill of one
Shomer, so from him called it Samaria, 1 Kin. 16.24. afterward called Sebaste.
Bonfrerius in Onomast.

2. Sodom: This was the City where Lot dwelt, Cognatio hic est communio
impietatis non carnis, Theod.
given so to filthiness and uncleanness, that one sin of that kind has its
name from hence, and is called peccatum Sodomiticum, and was one of the five
Cities, yea the chief, that God consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven.

The daughters of these were the lesser Cities, Towns and Villages which
depended on them for protection, counsel, maintenance, and were under the
government of their Kings.

The likeness between them is set out in these words; which loathed their
husbands and their children. The word (...) signifies to spew, and cast out,
to loath with contempt, and spitting at. Sep. (...) expellentes. The Lat.
expos: fastidientes abominantes. These nations forsook Jehovah the true God
who was their Creator, Lawgiver, and Benefactor, and served idols, They were
rebellious to God and man.
murdered their children, and walked in all lewd ways, not regarding the
light or laws of nature: see Deuteronomy. 18.9, 10. They made their children pass
through the fire. They were so unclean, idolatrous, and profane, that the
Land vomited them out, Levit. 18.25. spewed out those nations, verse. 28.

Jerusalem was come to that pass, that she rejected God, her husband, and
loathed his worship, violated all bonds of Religion and humanity, sacrificing
her children unto Devils: she was exceeding like the Sodomites. Deuteronomy. 32.32.
Their vine is the vine of Sodom. Isa. 1.10. Rulers of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrah. The Jews were transformed into their natures, dipositions, customs.
Samaria was at her left hand, that was the north part, and Sodom at her right
hand, which was the south part.

It seems strange that Samaria here is called the elder sister, when as Sodom
was many years before her, and destroyed ere she had her birth. The original
therefore consulted, and rightly interpreted will help us in this; for the word
for Elder is (...) magna, thy sister, the great Samaria. (...) parva, or minor,
thy sister, the little one in comparison of thee; or Samaria had more power,
Cities, and Citizens belonging to her then Sodom had.

Obser. 1.
When States, Churches, Cities, Persons dishonor God by sinful and lewd
ways, God will dishonor them, and set men awork that are skillful at, and
exercised in jeering, scoffing, and reviling, to disgrace them. This woman had
brought up an ill report upon the land of Canaan, and God of Israel: and
therefore says God, those are used to proverbs, yea, every one that is skilled
and traded that way, shall use this proverb against thee, as is the mother, so
is the daughter. Thy mother was a whore, an idolotress, a murtheress, and so
art thou. Jer. 24.9. I will deliver them to be removed into all Kingdoms of
the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse
in all places whether I shall drive them. 2 Chronicles. 7.20. If they dishonored
God, he tells them he would pull them up by the roots out of the land, make them
and their Temple a proverb, and byword among all Nations. Jer. 23.40. I will
bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall not
be forgotten. Ezekiel. 22.5. Those are near, and those are far shall mock thee
which art infamous. Lam. 5.1. Consider and behold our reproach. Their Princes,
Prophets, people, City, Temple, Land, were all reproached. Job 12.21. He
pours contempt upon Princes.

2. Children usually tread in the steps of their Parents; as is the mother, so
is the daughter, of the same disposition, spirit, practice; drunken parents
have drunken children; unclean, covetous, proud, froward, contentious parents
have had such children, they have learned of them to be and do, as they were
and did. 1 King. 22.52. Ahaziah did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked
in the way of his Father who was Ahab, and of his mother who was Jezabel.
Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat, it is said, he walked in the way of the Kings
of Israel, 1 King. 21.25. for the daughter of Ahab was his wife, 2 King. 8.18.
Take heed who you marry; for partus sequitur ventrem, and take heed what you
do before your children, for your examples have great influence into them;
they are strong traces to draw your children into your ways, especially if bad.

3. Cities, States, Churches, people are their children in the account of the
Scripture, whose manners, ways, and examples they follow. Jerusalem took up
the ways, worship, manners, and customs of the Nations and Cities near to
her: hence her mother is said to be an Hittite, her father an Amorite, her
sisters Sodom and Samaria, according to their ways she fashioned her self.
Those that follow the faith and steps of Abraham, are the children of Abraham,
Gal. 3.7. Romans 4.16. Those are peaceable, and labor to make peace, they are
children of God, Matthew. 5.9. Men that mind the world are provident, frugall,
and saving; they following courses of the world, are called children of the
world, Luke 16.8. So those that do wickedly, they are the children of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8.10.12. Matthew. 13.38. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and
the lusts of your Father you will do, John 8.44. they did imitate him: and
here Jerusalem declared her sin as Sodom, Isa 3.9. and as the nations, and
therefore is styled the daughter and sister of them.

4. Those are in near relation to God, and think well of themselves, may be
hateful to him, and as bad as any. Jerusalem was in covenant with God, his
Spouse, the Jews his peculiar people, and thought themselves more holy,
righteous, in a better condition then any of all the Nations; and thought the
Prophets wronged them when they compared them to the nations, to Sodom and
Samaria; but what says the Lord here, thy mother is an Hittite, and thy father
an Amorite: what ever thou think of thy self, that thou art of the stock of
Abraham and Sarah, Isaak and Jacob, a true Israelite; yet it is otherwise, thou
art of the seed of the nations, and worst of the nations, viz. the Hittites and
Amorites: thou think thou art holy, but art profane; that thou art dear to
me above them, but thou art as odious and hateful as any.

The Priests were near the Lord, stood before him, offered sacrifice, thought
themselves to be somebodies. Mal. 2.1, 2. They thought they did glorify God,
and should be glorified by God: but verse. 8, 9. Ye are departed out of the
way, ye have caused many to stumble at the law, ye have corrupted the
covenant of Leui, says the Lord of hosts. Therefore have I also made you
contemptible and base before all the people, according as you have not kept my
ways, but have been partial in the law. Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many will say unto
me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy
name cast out Devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? You see
they stood in near relation to God, pretend they did all in his name, thought
themselves in a good condition, looked for some good and great reward; but what
follows? then will I profess I never knew you, depart from me ye that work
iniquity. There is vast difference between man's and Gods judgment.

VERSE. 47, 48, 49, 50. Yet have thou not walked after their ways, nor done
after their abominations: but as if that were a little thing, thou wast
corrupted more then they in all thy ways.

As I live says the Lord God, Sodom thy sister has not done, she nor her
daughters, as thou have done, thou and thy daughters.

Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fullness of ^ead,
and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she
strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me, therefore I took
them away as I saw good.


IN these verses, and the two next, the comparison is still carried on between
Jerusalem, the nations, Sodom and Samaria, wherein the sins of Jerusalem are
declared to exceed their sins.

1. This is laid down in general, v. 47. 2. In special, in the 48. verse.
where the sin of Jerusalem is not only asserted to exceed the sin of
Sodom, but ratified with an oath, as I live, etc.
Now concerning Sodom you have, 1. The catalogue of her sins, verse. 49. and
beginning of the 50. 2. Gods dealing with the Sodomites for their sins, verse.
50. therefore I took them away, etc.


Verse. 47. Yet have thou not walked after their ways, etc.
Before he had said, as is the mother so is the daughter, and thou art thy
mothers daughter that loatheth her husband, etc. and here yet have thou not
walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations, how do these
cohere?

The Prophet does not quit Jerusalem from imitation of the Hittites, Amorites,
Sodomites, amd Samaritans, he graunts she had done that: but by a figure called
epanorthosis, correcting himself; he carries it on further, thou have not
walked after their ways, nor done, etc. but thou have gone beyond them all in
thy wickedness. Thou thoughtst to be like unto them, a small matter, a very
little thing (...) as a little, a very little thing. Sept. (...). Call. quasi
parvum pauxillum and exiguum Lav. paululum pauxillumque This contented not
thee, but thou have done more abominably then they, and corrupted thy self
more deeply.

Some take the words thus; Thou have not walked after their ways, nor done
after their abominations for a little and a little time, and so refer the
time to the reign of Hezekiah, wherein Jerusalem having fined greatly in Ahaz
days, after Samaria was taken by Senacherib, repented, and absteined from
idolatry: but presently after, in Manasses days, returned more fully to it,
and exceeded Samaria, Sodom, and the nations, which hints this unto us; That
state-repentance and reformation are seldom sound or long lived; its fear of
authority, not hatred of sin, conscience of duty, love of truth, virtue,
justice, holiness, that set them on work: and when the bridle of fear is laxe
or removed, they return to their old ways, which cannot be otherwise, having
their old natures.

Obser. 1.
The Lord takes notice of the ways of a people even from their beginning to
their end; this Observation rises from the 45, 46. and this verse laid
together; there the Lord said their mother is an Hittite, their father an
Amorite, their sisters, Samaria and Sodom: and here thou have corrupted more
then they in all thy ways. I have observed thee from the first to the last;
from thy birth to thy end. God eyes the infancy, youth, growth, and age of a
State, and what the ways of it are; whose tenets, manners, customs and ways
it follows. 2 Chronicles. 28.26. of Ahaz a wicked King it is said, The rest of his
acts, and of all his ways, first and last, behold they are written, etc. There
was nothing escaped the eye of heaven. Jer. 32.19. Thine eyes are open upon all
the ways of the sons of men, even from the beginning to the end it is so.
God does not chop in like man, and observe here a passage and there a passage:
but he is a constant observer of every thing, of every way. Prove. 5.21. The
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.

2. Sinful Republiques and States think it no great matter to be like their
neighbor nations and Cities in wickedness and villainies; the Lord told this
Commonwealth of Israel that she was like the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites,
Sodomites, Samaritanites in idolatry, uncleanness, and other sins: and she
thought this no great matter, a little, yea a very little thing. Verse. 20. Is
this thy whoredom a small matter? she thought it so. 1 Kings 16.31. Ahabs
walking in the sins of Jeroboam was reputed but a light thing, and Jehu says
of him, that he served Baal a little, 2 King. 10.18. yet 1 King. 21.25, 26.
There was none like unto Ahab which did sell himself to work wickedness in
the sight of the Lord: and he did very abominable in following idols according
to all things, as did the Amorites. Though he equalized the Amorites, yet this
was a little thing. Ezekiel. 8.17. Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that
they commit the abominations which they commit here? they thought it so. Take
any nation, even this nation, is it not like other nations for injustice,
oppression, drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, falsehood, excess,
phantasticalnesse, etc. yet we say it is no great matter: sin the greatest evil
is made nothing.

3. Those God has done much for, taken very near to himself, may degenerate
so far, as to prove worse then others, then any. Thou whom I exalted from so
low an estate, and took into my special favor, even thou have corrupted thy
self more then they in all thy ways. So notorious was Jerusalem in her
abominable practices, that v. 27. the Philistims were ashamed of her lewd
ways. Chap. 5.7. She multiplied sin more then the nations round about her. How
desperately did this State sin in the days of Ahaz and Manasses; is not
Jerusalem called the filthy, polluted, oppressing City, Zeph. 3.1. and is it
not thus at this day? are not many Christian Estates which God has done great
things for, and blessed with choice means and mercies, are they not worse then
Heathenish nations? those sins found amongst us which are unknown to them. I
fear Rome, Madrid, Paris, etc. with Italy, Spain, France, England, will be
found to exceed the heathens.

Verse. 48. As I live.
Heb. is (...) I living, or I live. Sept. (...) I do live: so Vatablus, Vulg.
Calv. Lavat. Polan. the French: but Junius and Piscat. more suitable to the
matter in hand: Jun. has it thus, ne vivam ego, let me not live, if Sodom
have not sinned less then Jerusalem. Pisc. ut vivo ego, as sure as I live
Sodom has not done as thou have done; and if she have, I am a dead dumb God.
Philologia sacra, l. 5. Tractat. 2. p. 540.
When God swears, most usually it is by his life: and Glassius tells us, that
by the life of God is meant his eternal glory, majesty, power and truth, so
that all these are impawn'd in Gods oath, and he had rather not be, then be
found false and unfaithful. Of this oath of God was spoken in the 5 Chap.
verse. 1. The Lord swares thus,

1. To let them know he did not hyperbolize; he had been in an Allegory
before, and spoken allegorically of this Jewish estate: and that they might not
think he did now allegorize or hyperbolize; he swears plainly that their sins
were greater then Sodoms; this assertion was both odious and incredible: to
take away both the odiousness and incredibility thereof, he binds it with an
oath, and the greatest oath of all, by his life, by himself, as sure as he was
God, as he lived it was so.

2. To affect them as with the greatness of their sins, so with the
heynousnesse of their punishments; if they exceeded Sodom in sinning, surely
they deserved more dreadful punishments and judgments then Sodom.

Obser. 1.
That those profess God, and are in common account, Gods people, may come to
such an height of sinning, as exceeds belief; who would, who could have
thought that any City or nation should have been worse then Sodom, especially
that Jerusalem the holy City, the habitation of the Lord: and that the Jews
who were the Lords firstborn, his treasure and peculiar people, that these
should out-goe Sodom and the Sodomites in wickedness? it is matter of wonder,
what! a Jew worse then a Sodomite? who can believe it; Jerusalem and her
daughters worse then Sodom and her daughters?

2. What great Cities are, usually such are the lesser Cities, the bordering
Towns and Villages which are called daughters, they imitate their mothers,
learn their ways, receive their opinions, follow their Counsels, practices,
manners. Samaria and her daughters were alike, Sodom and her daughters, ver.
45, 46. And so Jerusalem and her daughters. Great Cities have great influence
into the adjacent Towns and Villages; if they be idolatrous, unjust, bitter,
contentious, proud, excessive in diet and apparel, so will all about them be.
Rev. 17.3. Babylon the great is the mother of harlots, and abominations of the
earth.

3. To assure us of the truth of things, God is pleased to take an oath. The
Lord knew this would not easily be entertained that Jerusalem and her daughters
were greater sinners then Sodom and her daughters; to put it out of doubt,
therefore the Lord swears a great oath, as I live it is so, as sure as I am
the living God it is truth: so God swears, Ezekiel. 33.11. to assure man. O
beatos nos quorum causa jurat deus, O miserrimos si nec deo juranti credimus.

VERSE. 49. Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom: Pride, fullness
of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither
did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.


IN this 49. verse. he tells us the sins of Sodom, and the first was,

Pride.
Heb. (...) Pride, (...) it is supergressio regulae rationis, or lifting up of
the mind against a precept, or an inordinate desire of excell^ncy in any thing.
Augustine says it is perversae celsitudinis appetitus; it is a tumor and
swelling of the mind, and lies principally in contemning and slighting of God
himself, his word, promises, threats, ordinances, worship, works: in
selfe-esteeme and admiration, in a swelling for gifts and graces, succesfulnes
of endeavors; for birth, breeding, wealth, honor, place, relation, and in
despising of others.

It is either inward in the heart, Hab. 2.4. Prove. 16.5. Or outward, and that

1. In the speech, Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I have built for
the house of the Kingdom? So Chap. 3.15. Who is that God shall deliver you out
of my hands. Here was a tongue that spoke proud things, Psalm. 12.3. 1 Samuel 2.3.

2. In the looks, Prove. 6.17. A proud look. Psalm. 131 1. My heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty.

3. In the habit of the body, so Herod's pride appeared, Acts 12.21. So the rich
man's, Luke 16.19.

4. In the gesture and carriage of the body, Isa. 3.16. The daughters of Sion
were haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, wanton eyes, mincing and
tinkling with their feet.

5. In actions, Isa. 3.5. The child shall behave himself proudly against the
ancient. Nehem. 9.16.29. They and our fathers dealt proudly, hearkened not to
thy commandments. So in feasting and furniture, and in tenacity of opinions.

The evil and sinfulness of this sin will appear in several particulars.

1. It blinds and hardens the mind and heart of man. Dan. 5.20. Nebuchadnezzars
mind was hardened in pride: and reason so blinded, that he became brutish.

2. Pride sets a man in opposition to God: other sins are aversions from God,
this sin is coming against God; in other sins they fly from God; in this
sin they fly upon God. Jam. 4.6. God resists the proud. Men do not resist
till they are set upon: when thieves set upon Travailers, if able they make
resistance: when the Devil sets upon a Christian with his temptations, then he
resis^ so here, proud men set upon God, his Truths, his Church, and then he
resists them. (...), Ps. 73.9. They set their mouth against the heavens.

3. It Is the root of other sins; Absoloms pride carried him on to rebellion and
other vile practices: it was Athaliahs pride which put her upon slaying the
seed royal, that so she might reign, 2 King. 11. Prove. 13.10. Only by pride
comes contention. All the contention in families, in suits of law, in
trading, in the pulpits, in the wars, have sprung from pride. Ezekiel. 7.10.
Pride has budded. It Is the nurse of covetousness: it was Hamans pride put him
upon seeking and plotting the death of all the Jews in Babylon.

4. It Is that makes us like the Devil, it is morbus satanicus, and worse then
the French, or any other disease. 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a novice, lest being lifted
up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. God therefore sets
Satan upon his sometimes to prevent this evil. 2 Cor. 12.7. God had rather see
him buffeted by Satan, then swell with pride.

5. It Is that sin which makes God abhor man. Pro. 16.5. Everyone that is
proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord: A proud look is one of the
things God hates, Prove. 6.16, 17. His hatred is great against proud men. Psalm.
119.21. Proud men are cursed: God delights in nothing more then his glory, and
he hates nothing more then pride, which would rob him of his glory. Domitian
would be called dominus deus.

6. It Is a grand enemy to the spiritual good and salvation of man: the Gospel
says, He that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing as he ought to know:
a proud man thinks he knows something, if not all things; the Gospel says,
a man must become a fool, that he may be wise, deny himself, and go to
Christ for wisdom, righteousness, redemption, grace, salvation: but a proud
heart will not, he will be his own a and o the efficient and end of his own
actions. Ye will not come to me that you may have life, Joh. 5.40. therefore
it is twice upon record, Iam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble: full stomachs loath the honeycomb. Matthew. 11.
Christ thanketh his Father that he had hid the things of the Gospel from the
wise and prudent, from the proud men of the world.

7. It brings sad calamities and sore judgments upon men and places: pride has
blasted many a man's parts. Prove. 15.25. The Lord will destroy the house of the
proud. Haman, Ahitophel were proud persons, and God destroyed them and their
houses. Herod was presently smitten, and eaten of worms, Acts 12. Isa. 2.12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. The day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that
is proud, and he shall be brought low. Upon all the cedars of Lebanon, all the
oaks of Bashan, high mountains and hills. Upon every high tower and fenced
wall. Upon all the ships of Tarshish, and all pleasant pictures: and the
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be
made low.

The Jews would not have Christ to reign over them and they were quickly
after scattered and destroyed, and Jerusalem laid wast: so Moab, Ammon, Assyria
and Nineveh are threatened for their pride, Zeph. 2. Tire, Ezekiel. 28. And here
pride was the prima fax, the first firebrand that set Sodom on fire.

Pride must down, as Christ said of the buildings of the Temple; not a stone
shall be left upon a stone. 2 Samuel 22.28. Gods eyes are upon the haughty that
he may bring them down: he watches his opportunities to do it.

He commands us not to be proud, Prove. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes.

Godly men have prayed against it. Ps. 36.11. Let not the foot of pride come
against me. Psalm. 19.12, 13. Cleanse me from secret faults, and keep back thy
servant from presumptuous sins.

Paul beat down his body lest he should be a reprobate, let us beat down
our spirits, lest etc.

We have spoken of the first sin, viz. Pride, now we are come to the second.

Fullness of bread.
Heb. (...) which Montanus renders saturitas panis. Sep. (...), pride in
fullness of bread: but the reading is distinct in the Original; pride one
sin, and fullness of bread another. Aecol. abundantia panis.

Bread.
Is sometimes used in holy language for all things needful for the support and
comfort of this life, as Lu. 11.3. Give us this day our daily bread; sometimes
only for what is edible and potable, and tends to the nourishment of man. 2 Samuel 9.7. says David to Mephibosheth, thou shall eat bread at my table
continually. In this sense we are to take it here, for whatsoever men eat or
drink, so Vatab. copia ciborum.

Fullness.
Sodom was seated in a most fertile place, in the Plain of Jordane which was
well watered every where, even as the Garden of the Lord, like the land of
Egypt, Genesis 13.10. It was like Paradise and Egypt for fruitfulness; one was
watered with Euphrates, the other with Nylus, and this plain with Jordan, so
that it abounded with grass, corn, cattle, fruit, and other pleasant things.
It was so fertile, that Luther thinks it was the place where Paradise was,
that's disputable: but we are sure it was the place Lot chose for its
fruitfulness when he left his brother Abraham: and it yielded such abundance,
that the Sodomites had great plenty. You may demand whether a plentiful estate
in corn, cattle, oil, wine, foul, fish, fruit, etc. be sinful, because
fullness of bread, which imports these things, is reckoned up among Sodoms
iniquities. The answer is, that plentifulnesse of such things is not evil, but
a great blessing, and men thereby have occasion to do much good. The sin
lies not in having of much meat and drink, but in their excessive eating and
drinking; they were intemperate, feeding and drinking so fully, that instead of
satisfying, they surfeited nature: and here by fullness of bread is meant both
gluttony and drunkenness; of both which, something is to be spoken.

Gluttony may seem to be no sin upon a double ground.

1. From Matthew. 15.11. Not that which goes into the mouth defiles the man:
says Christ, that goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught,
verse. 17. That is a sin does defile, but nothing eaten does so. It Is true,
that the meat eaten in its own nature does not defile; the meats forbidden to
the Jews, if any did eat of them at any time, the defilement lay not simply
in the meat, but in the breach of the command, viz. eating forbidden meat; for
if any meat did defile, ratione sui of its own substance and nature, it were
never lawful to eat that meat; but so does no meat, it is therefore not the
meat, but the inordinate desire of meat which makes the sin, and causes
the defilement.

2. In whatsoever is sinful, the first motion thereunto is so; the first
motion to anger, to idolatry, to uncleanness is so: but now the principle or
first motion to eating is hunger, and its most certain that is not sinful; for
then the more hungry any should be, the greater sinner he is.

For clearing this doubt you must know there is a double desire of meat: one
natural, simply tending to the nourishment of the creature, and subservient to
the vegetative power of the soul: and this rises not from any apprehension of
this or that in the meat, but a naturae indigentia, only from want in nature:
and this is truly called hunger, and so far from being sinful, that the
greater it is, the more it excuses liberal eating.

2. There is another desire of meat which is sensitive, and tends to the
pleasing of the sensual part in man, and falls under the power of reason; which
the other did not, being merely natural: and here the first motion or desire
of meat beyond what sound reason approves, is inordinate in the sensitive
appetite, and so sinful.

Gluttony, the nature of it lies in an inordinate desire of eating, and men are
said to gluttonize several ways.

1. When they desire delicacies, not being content with those meats providence
has given in. Numb. 11.4. The children of Israel being discontented with their
Manna, fell a lusting, and said, who shall give us flesh to eat? Manna,
heavenly and Angelical food was loathed by them, and now they must have some
dainties to satisfy their lusts.

2. When they are too solicitous about the cooking and dressing of their
meats, 1 Samuel 2.15. The Priests servant came and said to the man that
sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the Priest, for he will not have sodden
flesh of thee, but raw. Why would he have raw flesh? that he might prepare and
cook it more curiously.

3. When men eat unseasonablie, and prevent the due time. Eccles. 10.16, 17.
there is a woe threatened when Princes eat in the morning, and the land is
blessed when they eat in due season; the morning is the time for them to do
justice. Jer. 21.12. Execute judgment in the morning. And now for them to
eat, drink, feast, jovalize, when neither nature requires it, nor the time is
seasonable for it, this argues an in ordinate desire of the creature. Isa.
5.11. Woe to them rise up early in the morning to follow strong drink. That Is
not a time to have the heart and thoughts taken up about pots and dishes: So
when men are set upon eating, before there be an half or full concoction of
what they took in before.

4. When men are greedy of meat, not observing such a decorum as becomes men;
dogs, hawks, swine are greedy and hasty of their meat, and ravenous in
eating. The Schoolmen say this was Esau's sin, who slighting his birthright,
sold it for pottage, and nimis avide sumpsit cibum, greedily devoured them.

5. When men eat too much, exceeding in the quantity, and this is most
properly gluttony: and this was Sodomes sin, fullness of bread and drink, now
too much is eaten and drunken.

1. When the health or strength of the party eating and drinking is impaired
thereby; some overcharge nature with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34.
and so bring sickness and weakness upon themselves. Hence Eccles. 10.17.
Blessed is the land when Princes eat for strength, and not for drunkenness.

2. When made heavy and dull, so that the operations of body and mind are
hindered thereby, and men unfitted for the duties of their callings in public
or private. Prove. 23.21. speaking of the drunkard and glutton, he presently
mentions drowsinesse; because too much eating and drinking makes drowsy and
unfits for all action.

3. When men sit much at meat and drink, and through custom or strength can
bear away much, though no prejudice come to their health, though they be not
retarded and dul'd in the operations of body or mind; yet if men are given to
eating and drinking, this false within the compass of sin, and under the notion
of gluttony and drunkenness. When a man is given to covetousness, as Jer.
6.13. he is a covetous man; when one is given to pleasures, as Isa. 47.8. he is
a man of pleasure: so when one is given to eat and drink, he is a man of
eating, a man of drinking, a man given to the appetite. Prove. 23.2. A man that
lives to eat, and does not eat to live,

I shall next come to show you the evil of intemperate eating and drinking.

1. As it respects God. 2. Others. 3. Themselves.
1. In respect of God, and so

1. It makes men forget God and his laws, Hos. 13.6. According to their
pastures so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted,
therefore have they forgotten me. Prove. 31.4, 5. Drinking wine and strong
drink will make men forget the law of God and man.

2. It is setting up another God which is a notorious sin, Phil. 3.19. Whose
God is their belly. The Babylonians had Bell for their God, a god of brass: but
these men make their bellies their god, a god of flesh; their thoughts, care,
endeavors are more to please their bellies, their idol god, then the true
God; they do all things ventris causa. Their end is delight in edibles, and
potables. They are ventricolae, belli-gods, which love good liquor and good
cheer. They serve their bellies, Romans 16.18. The Rabbis say, he is a glutton
or belly-god that eats a pound of flesh, and drinks a quart of wine: we have
many such. And do not those drink healths upon their knees, sacrifice it to
those they drink unto, and make gods of them?

3. They abuse the good creatures of God, which they should use for the honor
and glory of his Name, them they abuse to the maintenance, pleasing and
pampring of their lusts, which are bitter enemies to God and his truths, and
ought to be mortified. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink or what ever ye
do, do all to the glory of God. Wh^t glory has the Lord, when men make their
bellies barrels and pantries; so victual the Camp, that they are unfit for
motion, and must sleep.

4. It Is sacrilegious, robbing God of his worship: you know we must honor God
with all our hearts, mights, strength; for he is an infinite excellency, worthy
of all: but when a man has crammed himself with meats, is much liquor'd, how
unfit is he to do any acts of worship; his head is heavy, his spirits dull,
and God may have his carcass, but as for heart or spirit he has none for him.
Hos. 4.11. Wine and new wine take away the heart. Excess in meat and drink
causes defects in the worship of God; he may have bodily worship, lip-labor,
sleepy performances; but as for spiritual worship, that is not to be had,
though the Lord be a spirit most holy, great and glorious, and ought to be
worshipped in spirit and truth.

2. As it respects others.

1. Those are given to their bellies, they mind not the condition of the Church
or State, at least not so much as they should do; so they may have fullness of
bread, they care not how it goes with others. Amos 6.4.6. They eat the lambs
out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall: They drink
wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are
not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. By Joseph is meant the ten Tribes,
which were greatly inf^sted and afflicted by the Assyrians: but these men laid
it not to heart, did not condole and sympathize with them; they powered not out
prayers or tears for them; they minded their own bellies, not their miseries:
so Isa. 22.12, 13. When Gods hand was upon them, and he called to weeeping and
mourning, what did their gluttenous men? Slay oxen, kill sheep, eat flesh,
drink wine, Chap. 5. 12. They regard not the work of the LORD, neither
consider the operation of his hands.

2. They wrong the poorer sort: Gluttons and Drunkards are like Caterpillars,
Locusts, Canker, Palmer-worms, which devour that should maintain others. Did
not men exceed so much in eating and drinking, there would be more plenty, more
cheapenesse, more relief for the poor; who had they what is superfluously and
sinfully spent in eating and drinking, I believe we should see no beggars in
our streets, nor hear any cry at our doors. Pro. 30.14. There is a
generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth as knives to devour
the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men. Such are the teeth
and jaw-teeth of Gluttons; they make bread, malt, and grapes dear.

3. They wrong the chastity of others. Who make more attempts, or commit fowler
acts then they that feed and drink most liberally? Fullness of bread breeds
fullness of lusts. 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. They rioted, feasted, and had eyes full of
adultery, which could not cease from sinning: High diet is the mark of high
lusts, and they the parents of heinous actions. Jer. 5.7.8. When I had fed them
to the full. God gave them abundance, and thereupon they pampered the flesh,
and then committed adultery and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots
houses: they were as fed horses in the morning, every one neighed after his
neighbors wife. Stallions and horses fed high, are mad after the Mares: and so
were these Jews, they neighed and lusted after the women insatiably. When
persons burn in their lusts toward others, they are said (...) to be furious
and mad like horses. Intemperancy begets incontenency; after ryoting and
drunkenness, follows chambering and wantonness. Romans 13.13. When Lot was
filled with wine, then was he fit for incest, and gate his own daughters with
child, Genesis 19.31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. And the Sodomites, of whom our Text
speaks, were guilty of horrible uncleanness, as appears in that Chap. v. 5.
Where are the men that came into thee this night? bring them out unto us that
we may know them.

Venture mero aestuans cito despumat in libidinem, Hyeron: Not Aetna or Vesuvius
burn with greater heat then young men filled with wine and dainties.

4. They give ill example, and draw others to their own practice, to
intemperate eating and drinking, which is a great evil. 1 Pet. 4.4. They
think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess of riot.
There is a great propensity in men to follow others in eating and drinking
excessively; they not only go, but run to it, a little encouragement that way
does much. Prove. 28.7. He that is a companion of riotous men shames his father;
therefore Solomon counsels his son, Chap. 23.20. thus; be not amongst
wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh: he knew that their example,
company, and cheer, were strong attractives: Hab 2.15. Woe unto him that
gives his neighbor drink; the Heb. is, woe to him that drinks to his
neighbor. (...) vae propinanti socio suo; it is not unlawful to drink to
another, but when it is done with an ill intent to draw him to excess: and
therefore it follows, that put thy bottle unto him, and make him drunk
also. The word for bottle is (...) which Montanus renders, venenum tuum, thy
poison. It Is spoken of Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonians, who drew in
neighbor Princes and others to eating and drinking, and so poisoned them with
gluttony and drunkenness, and sport^d themselves with their sin and nakenesse;
men are poisoned in ill company.

5. This sin, fullness of bread, brings down heavy judgments upon places.
Eccles. 10.16. Woe to thee O land, when thy King is a child, and thy Princes
eat in the morning: the surfeiting of great ones brings woes and great
judgments to Kingdoms. Isa. 5.11, 12. there their intemperance is set down,
feasting, drinking, and merri-making: and verse. 13. Behold the judgments,
therefore my people are gone into captivity because they have no knowledge.
Their gluttony ad drunkenness made them sensual: and their honorable men are
famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst. So Belshazar, he feasts
and revells with a thousand of his Lords, and that night was he slain, and the
Kingdom was taken by Darius and the Medes, Dan. 5.

3. As it respects themselves.

1. The soul 2. The body. 3. The whole man. 4. Their estate. 5. Their name.
1. The soul, and evils which intemperancy causes, are,

1. It clouds the understanding; such fumes and vapors possess the brain
from immoderate eating and drinking, as that ipsa ratio impeditur, and men are
altogether inept to discourse or judge of things. Pro. 27.7. The full soul
loatheth the honey-combe: it judges amiss of it. Fullness of bread infatuates
the understanding, blinds the mind, and dams up the spirits with mudde. Isa.
28.7. The Priests and Prophets were given to their appetites: and what then?
they err in vision, and stumble in judgment.

2. Disorders the affections; for when through overmuch eating and drinking the
government of reason is laid aside, or asleep; the affections take their
opportunity, and grow disorderly, then wanton lusts, thoughts, desires and
pleasures travail up and down the region of the soul, and peep out at the
windows of the house, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14.

3. It hinders the activity of gifts and graces in the soul; when a man is
loaded with any burden, he cannot move nimbly: so when one is loaded with
meat and drink, his soul cannot act lively, there is so much earth and mudde
about it, that the operations of it are greatly impeded. Gal. 5.21. the word
there for Revellings, is (...) commessationes, eating together, and notes such
eating as is a fruit of the flesh, an eating so much as the flesh craves, or
can well bear, such eating as strengthens the flesh, the corrupt part in man,
which opposes and hinders the spirit and activity of it; how poorly does grace
act in those are full, and have pampered their bellies. Paul knew this, and
therefore was very abstemious, temperate, and much in fasting, 2 Cor. 6.5.

2. The body: Excess causes sickness, and is destructive of health; the most
diseases men have, do come from the abundance of humors which are in their
bodies: and whence come these but from intemperancy in eating and drinking?
Take men that are moderate, and sparing in diet, and they are seldom troubled
with any diseases. Sobriety is the best nurse to health, and a greater enemy
it finds not, then intemperancey, 1 Cor. 11.21.30. The Corinthithians were
faulty in their feastings and drinking: and what says Paul? For this cause
many are sick and weak. Hos. 7.5. The Princes made the King sick with
bottles of wine. It weakens the body: Concoction being hindered by nimietie,
crude humors are gendered, and nourishment of the spirits by pure blood is
let.

3. The whole man.

1. By intemperancy a man is brought into bondage unto the creatures, he is a
slave to his appetite, and what ever pleases that: and this is a great evil,
for man that has dominion given him by God over all sublunaries, to become a
servant to any of them: Paul was more heroic, 1 Cor. 6.12, 13. All things are
lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any. Meats for
the belly, and the belly for meats: Let the belly crave what meats it will,
let meats be never so pleasant or desirable, yet I will not be brought under
the power of either of them: but few are so noble spirited as Paul. The most
men are apprentices to their o^ne appetites: the rich man, Luke 16.19. fared
sumptuously every day; no cost must be spared to please his palate.

2. Hereby a man is put beneath a brute creature; for those creatures eat and
drink only to satisfy nature: and when they have taken so much, you cannot
persuade, or force them to take more; they observe the law of nature, and
follow the instinct thereof: but many men do eat and drink not only to
satisfy nature, but to the surfeiting thereof, and without any persuasion or
force overcharge nature with variety of meats and drinks. Yea sometimes they
are so excessive herein, that they become void of sense. Prove. 23.35. when the
drunkard was beaten, he felt it not: so void are intemperate persons often times
of common sense, as that they neither foresee future danger, to prevent it, nor
feel present smart to profit by it; horse and ass may teach men.

3. It hastens death; many might have lived longer; had they been more sober,
more sparing at their Tables. Many diseases breed in the womb of intemperancy,
and one or other of them shortens a man's days. Many dye by the sword, but more
by surfets. In licitis perimus omnes, because it is lawful to eat and drink:
and what we eat and drink is pleasing, therefore we exceed the due bounds, and
so increase humors, quench our natural heat, and precipitate death. The
Corinthians excess sent them to their long sleep: this sin abbreviates or
takes away life: Fowlers make a shrop, hide the net by it, or under it birds
come to feed, and through feeding lose their lives.

4. It makes men very secure and fearlesse. Isa. 56.12. Come we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant. A ship laden much, sinkes deep into the water, if over-loaden,
drowns: so man that is laden with the creatures, sinkes deep into the sea of
security; if he be overladen, he drowns himself. Luke 21.34, 35. If men's
hearts be overcharged, that day will come unawares as a snare suddenly.

5. Intemperancy is such a sin as endangers your eternal estate, yea and
excludes you from coming into heaven; the rich glutton you know was cast into
hell, that was his portion, Luke 16. Gal. 5.21. Those that do such things
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: what things? that eat and drink
intemperately: drunkenness and revelling are fruits of the flesh, and suffer
not men to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Their estates; It brings a Consumption upon them. Prove. 23.21. The drunkard
and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsinesse shall cloth a man with
rags. Many who have gluttoniz'd in their youth, have wanted bread in their
old age, and in stead of feasting, have fasted more then once or twice in a
week. The Prodigalls excess among the Harlots brought him to want among the
swine. Prove. 21.17. He that loves wine and oil shall not be rich.

Diogenes seeing the house of an intemperate person set to sale, said, I knew
the house was so overcharged with meat and wine that it would quickly vomit
out the Cormorant.

He seeing another brought to beggary, and eating Olives for his supper, said,
If you had so dined, you should not have needed to have so supped.

5. Their names and professions suffer by it; Intemperancy brings an ill report
upon men. Noah's intemperancy was a great disgrace to him. Prove. 28.7. He that
is a companion of riotous men shameth his father. If being only a companion of
them be so ill, what is it then to be a riotous person, intemperate in meats
and drinks, that does much more shame the son and the father too, such an
one will men say is a belly-god, a tos-pot. Isa. 28.8. All tables are full of
vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean. What a disgrace was
this to the Priests and Prophets in those days, and to their profession. Romans
13.13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness:
Let us not be intemperate; intemperancy is a night-work, and has no honesty in
it: if it be therefore a work of darkness and dishonesty, as the Apostle makes
it, it must needs disgrace a man. Tyberius Nero was called B^berius Mero.
Fabius who had spent his patrimony, a great estate, was called Gurges; among us
such men are called Heluones.

Let us take heed of this sin: why should we pamper our bodies which must see
corruption, and be worms meat. The Apostles rule is, make no provision for
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. He does not forbid to eat or provide
meat, but to make provision for the flesh, their inordinates desires to
satisfy them. Luke 6.25. Woe unto you that are full, for you shall hunger.

Christ bids us deny our selves: and If we will not do it in a little meat and
drink, how shall we forsake all, Wives, Children, Friends, Lands, Life? It was
a notable saying of Seneca, Major sum, and ad majora genitus, quam ut corporis
mei mancipium fiam: I am greater, and borne to greater things, then to be
servant or slave to my body. He was a Heathen, we are Christians: let us say,
we are greater, and born to greater things, better born, and better taught,
then to be slaves to our appetites.

Let us say, as it is, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that brings salvation,
has appeared to all: Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

And abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters.
Having spoken of two of the sins of Sodom, we come now to the third, which
is abundance of idleness.

Idleness.
Heb. (...) which is from (...) signifying to rest, to live in peace, quietly,
idely. When people are in peace, they grow secure and idle. Sept. is, (...)
affluens lasciviens vino.

Abundance.
Heb. (...) from (...) to be quiet, to rest, to live at ease, and notes
tranquillity: so that both words signify the same thing, and may be rendered
tranquilitas tranquilitatis, rest of rest. Calv. securitas otij vel pax quieta.
Pisc. and Jun. tranquilitas quieta, quiet rest; or according to the Heb.
quietness of rest, the sense whereof is well expressed by our translation:
abundance of idleness, or deep idleness.

I shall show you two things touching idleness.

1. When a man is said to be idle. 2. The evil of idleness.
For the first, a man is said to be idle 3. ways.

1. When he does nothing, is unimploy'd, Math. 20.3. Christ saw some standing
idle in the Market. The word for idle is, (...) quasi (...) or (...) a man
without work: so in verse. 6. Why stand ye here all the day idle. Many are
idle all the day of their life, nothing is done by them: of this sort are many
Gentlemen and others, that have no calling nor employment for the good of the
public: such was Solomon's sluggard, that would not plough by reason of the
cold, Pro. 20.4. but had rather sleep and slumber in his bed, then dig in his
Vineyard. Chap. 24.33. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding
of the hands to sleep.

2. When they do not what they should do; some of the Learned say, he is otio
sus qui opus dei non operatur: Rainer: Alexand: Angl: When men do not the
work of God, opus dei is opus diei. There is work of Gods appointment for the
day, which you ought to take notice of, and do. 2 These. 3.11. There are some
among you which work not at all, but are busybodies. (...), doing no work
yet working about every where: when persons are busy, and do much of that
does not belong to them to do, it is doing of nothing; therefore Paul in the
first Epist. Chap. 4.11. exhorts them to do their own business.

3. When they do not so much as they ought to do, but are lazy in doing
little. Romans 12.11. Not sloathfull in business. Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with all thy might. When men put not forth
themselves to do what they ought to do in conscience, and according to right
reason, they are justly said to be idle, Prove. 18.9.

2. The evil of this sin you may discern in sundry particulars,

1. Its against the end of man's creation: God made man for labor when he was
in the state of Innocence, he was to dress and keep the garden, Genesis 2.15. be
must not be idle there, taking his plea^ure in a Paradise, but work he must,
though not for a living: so after the fall, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of his
face he was to eat his bread; he was now to work for bread, and to work hard,
not only ad ruborem, but ad si dorem, if he will have food, he must sweat for
it.

It Is the end of man's creation and birth to be doing. Job 5.7. Man is borne
unto trouble, labor, says the margent; and Montanus, as the sparks fly
upward.

2. It is a ^n against the light of nature, which puts every thing upon motion;
the heavens, with the glorious lights thereof move, and are constant in their
motions. Psalm. 19.5. The sin rejoices as a strong man to run a race: The
wind and air fly up and down, the waters run, the earth brings forth,
plants and trees grow up; the fishes in the sea, fowls in the air, beasts in
the field, have their motions and operations, which is a loud dictate to man
that he should not be idle. Prove. 6.6. Go to the ant thou sluggard, consider
her ways and be wise. The Ant is a very little creature, but exceeding
laborious; nature has put an instinct into her to be active and working all
the summer; she is early and late at it, and will not lose an hour, unless
the weather hinder: so the Be is little in bulk, but great in employment, and
wonderful busy, and Solomon might have added, go to the Be, and consider
her ways; she flies far, examines the fields, hedges, trees, orchards,
gardens, loades her self with honey and wax, and then presently makes
return. These creatures, with many others, confute the sluggard daily, preach
down idleness, and call for action. Yea, the sluggards own soul is always in
motion and action, and thereby tells him he should not be idle.

3. It puts Gods family out of order: The world is Gods family, and he has
appointed men unto, and fitted them for some employment, as a wise Artist makes
no wheel in a Clock or Watch, but to move and h^lp on the general work: and if
one wheel stand, it is out of order, and hinders all the rest: so here, when
men are idle, they stand still, are out of order, and hinder the motion of
others. Idle persons are disorderly persons, 1 These. 5.14. Warn them that are
unruly. (...) men out of rank, such are idle ones; when others march, they
stand still; when others are up, they are down. 2 These. 3.11. We hear that
there are some among you which walk disorderly, working not at all. By walking
is meant living, and their disorderly living was not working.

4. It sets a man among the dead; an idle man is both unsavory, and unactive as
a dead man is, and therefore may well be counted a guest of the grave. 1 Timothy
5.6. The widow that lives in pleasure, idly, disorderly, neglecting, or out
of a calling, is dead while she lives. Eccles. 9.4. A living dog is better then
a dead lion. The dead Lion says Paris. is the great man in wealth and honor,
but idle and loose: The liv^ng dog is the poor man, but diligent and active:
now the poorest and meanest man in the world, that follows a calling, and is
laborious in it, is better then the greatest, richest, and most eminent man in
the world who lives out of a calling, and does nothing; one is a living, and
the other a d ad man: and what the odds is between life and death, such is the
difference between idleness and action, sloth and labor.

5. Idleness exposes a man to variety of temptations, lays him open to Satan:
a man unemployed, is like a City without walls and gates, whither any Enemy may
ea^^ly have entrance. Ezekiel. 38.11. I will go up to the land of unwalled
Villages, I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them
dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates. What God says
here, that Satan says of idle persons, they are unwalled Vilages, they have
neither bars nor gates, no defensive or offensive weapons, and therefore the
Devil does boldly invade, and easily conquer them with his temptations. Paul
knew this, and therefore counseled the Ephesians to make provision against
Satan, Chap. 6.11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against all the wiles of the Devil. An idle man either has no armor;
or if he have, will not take the pains to put it on. It will require more then
ordinary pains to put on the whole armor of God, to be armed Cap a pea, and
then to stand armed, and withstand all the onsets of Principalities and powers;
this the sluggard will not do, he must needs therefore become a prey to Satan.
A man out of employment, and idle, is like a vessel which is empty, any one
that comes to it may put in what he will: so Satan poures into idle persons
which are empty vessels, what liquor he pleases. Seneca spoke truth, when he
said, res perfect occupata alterius rei non est capax: when men are thoroughly
employed, they are incapable of the Devils temptations; you see it daily, that
those are out of Gods work, are most exercised with the Devils.

6. Idleness is the mother, fostress and nurse of our most dangerous enemies,
viz. lusts: standing waters corrupt soonest, and more mudde, filth, and vermin
are to be found in them then in the running waters. To the sink in the ship is
the confluence of all filth: Idleness is the sink in the ship, and comprehends
all noisome lusts in it: silver, gold, iron, out of use, canker and rust.
Eccles. 13.26. Idleness brings much evil, and breeds many evils. Idle,
lazy, sluggsh persons have the foulest bodies, and breed most diseases: and
such have the foulest souls, and abound with most noisome lusts. Among the
Sodomites was abundance of idleness, and abundance of lusts, which fight and
war against the soul, and what madness is it for a man to harbor, feed his
enemies that seek his life? Idleness like dung upon the earth, fattens the
soil, makes all rank, especially the weeds, so that the flesh and lusts
thereof, even in godly people, they grow headstrong, violent and furious
against the spirit: and in others, they break out into drunkenness, theft, and
uncleanness. Nihil agendo homines discunt male agere. If ever occasion should
put as much power into their hands, as idleness has put villainy into their
hearts and heads, they will be ready to fire your houses, ravish your
daughters, and cut your throats.

7. It Is against common equity and justice to live upon others, who get their
living by the sweat of their brows, and to eat their bread from them. Drones
that eat up the honey of the laborious Be, we condemn; they beat them out,
and sting to death, a just punishment for so unjust an act.

Thieves that rob particular persons suffer death, because they do acts of
injustice against common equity: and what are idle ones but Thieves, robbing
the public of it is maintenance? This made Paul to command the Thessalonians
to work and eat their own bread, 2 These. 3.12.

8. It deprives a man of that privilege which a beast has; you know a beast
may eat, work or work not: but it is not so with man, except he work he may not
eat. 2 These. 3.10. This we commanded you, that if any would not work,
nei-should he eat. If sickness or weakness hinder not, let man be great or
small, rich or poor, what he will, the rule is, if he will not work, he must
not eat, neither the State nor the Church must maintain such an one.

The Jews say, qui non laboraverit in prosabbato, ne edat in sabbato: the
Sabbath was a day of rest, and if any had not so labored on the day before as
to get wherewithal to maintain him on that day, he must fast.

Matthew. 10.10. Christ tells you, the workman is worthy of his meat, others
not: you sin therefore when you relieve such beggars, or persons as are able
to work, but will not, they are neither worthy of meat, nor should you let them
eat. And what if they should perish for want of meat? They are felones de
seipses.
their destruction is of themselves. The ease of the simple slays them, Prove.
1.32. He that will not have a part in daily labor, should not have a part of
daily bread. The Hollanders put idle persons that will not work into a little
place where is a pump, the water coming in, and if he will not pump, he must
drown.


9. Poverty and beggary are the issues of idleness. Prove. 6.11. Solomon tells
the sludggard, that his poverty shall come as one that travaileth, and his want
as an armed man: He lies still, but poverty is up, and marching toward him;
he is without defense, but that comes armed: the meaning is, poverty will come
upon an idle and sloathfull person suddenly and irresistably. Prove. 23.21.
Drowsinesse shall cloth a man with rags. By drowsiness understand sloth and
when men go about things as if they were half asleep, lazily, they shall
certainly come to a poor condition, which is intimated by rags; the coat that
sloth gives is rags. Pro. 18.9. A man sloathfull in his work, is brother to
him that is a great waster. The Heb. is, a man remiss in his work, (...) is
brother to a great waster, a much waster, lebaal maschith; a man that spends
profusely must needs come to beggary, he hastens swiftly to it: so does a
sluggard, who is remiss in his work, and so an idle person. Other things may
bring some to beggary; sickness, sureti-ship, fire, robbery, plundering wars:
but put them altogether, they beget not so many beggars, so much poverty, as
idleness does. This fills Towns and Cities with swarms of them.

10. Idleness is such a sin as exemps a man from the protection of the Angels:
A man that has no calling to walk in, that lives unemploy'd, he is a vagabond
upon the face of the earth. Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee to keep thee in all thy ways: what ways? those which are according to
his will, which his providence leads unto; not in ways of sin. A man that is
idle, is in the Devils way, not in Gods way, he has appointed Callings for
men. 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was
called. Verse. 24. Let every man wherein he is called therein abide with God.
Some refer the words called in both verses, to the spiritual call, viz. to
grace and communion with Christ; be that so, yet there is an outward condition
of life, a calling that God would have men to be in, and abide in, because it is
an abiding with God, God approves it, blesses them in it; if they honor him in
a calling according to the rules he has given in his word, and vouchsafes
them a guard of Angels to defend them therein: but idle persons that have no
calling, go out from God and the guard of his Angels: and it is questionable
whether those that may work and will not, have any true fear of God, or faith
in them; did they fear God, they would walk in a calling, and the Angels of
God would be about them, Psalm. 34.7. and faith is a working grace, witness
Heb. 11. 1 Timothy 5.8

11. Idle persons are burdensome creatures; the Fig Tree that bear no fruit
was a burden to the ground where it stood. Luke 13.7. why cumbreth it the
ground? It was a burden to the garden, to the Gardener, to the other trees, to
the Lord and Master of all. Matthew. 26. Why stand ye here all the day idle? You
do no good to your selves, none to your neighbors, none to the public, none
to posterity, nor bring any glory to God.

An idle and fruitless person is good for nothing, Ezekiel. 15. The vine tree
that bare no fruit was not fit to make a pin of, nor for any use but only for
the fire.

12. It Is a wasting of precious time, an hiding of our Talent, and so a great
provocation of divine Majesty. An idle man trifles away time, which when men
are in streights, they value, and would give thousands for a few days or
hours, as it is like the Sodomites would when their City was on fire: but such
persons make no account of time, how precious soever it be, but pass it away
in doing nothing, which is a dreadful evil. Time that is given us to get
grace, to work out our salvation in, to glorify God, and do good in, even
that does the idle person squander away, though eternity be in the bowels of
it, not minding the Apostolical rule. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, redeeming the time. He sits still and
will not walk, he is a fool, and the greatest of fools that will not redeem
time for the good of his soul, but loyter it away, and lose it daily. Though
God have given him a Talent, yet he will not use it. Matthew, 25.25, 26. The man
had one Talent would not use it, but hid it in the earth, and what followed
hereupon; he provoked God greatly, who said, thou wicked and sloathfull servant
(wickedness and sloth go together) thou ought to have improved my talent
or money well; seeing it is not done, take it from, and cast the unprofitable
servant into utter darkness, verse. 27.30.

Having now heard the evil of idleness, let us gird up the loins of our
minds, stir up our selves, and be more diligent in our Callings. Sloth brings
judgments; the men of Laish were quiet, secure, and had no business with any
man, and the Danites came upon them, smote them with the edge of the sword, and
burnt the City with fire, Judge. 18.7.27. Though all idle people meet not with
such judgments; yet there is a woe pronounced to them that are at ease in
Sion, Amos 6.1. Some woe or other will be the portion of those that live idely:
we have a multitude of such amongst us, and it were well some course were taken
by those in authority to set idle persons on work.

The Athenians did sue idle persons at law, idleness among them did bear an
action, and it was called actio (...) and they made enquiry after each man and
woman, qua arie se alerent, what trade or course of life they had to live upon.
Rivet. in Genesis 3.

When Joseph's brethren came into Egypt, and were before Pharaoh, the first
question he asked them, was, what is your occupation? Genesis 47.3. This was a
good question of a King when strangers were to come and dwell in his Land, to
know whether they had any calling, could get their livings, and not be
burdensome to his Kingdom and subjects. The Massilians forbade any to come
into their City, who had no trade or art to live by: And there was a law among
the Persians, that every subject at the years end should come to the
Magistrate and give account of his years work; it were happy we had some such
laws amongst us.

They were great enemies to idleness, and so was Alexander, who discovering
two idle persons in his Dominions, made one to fly out of them, and the other
to drive him.

In Marcus Aurelius days, the Romans followed their Callings so earnestly,
that having occasion to send a Letter two or three days journey from the
Town, he could not find one idle body in all the City of Rome to carry it;
when will it be so with this City? Idleness abounds in the streets, and I
fear within doors too: but however it be with others, let us hate this sin, be
diligent in those places and callings God has set us; for the hand of the
diligent makes rich, Prove. 10.4. Shall bear rule, Chap. 12.24. And will cause
to stand before Princes, Chap. 22.29.

Neither did she strengthen the hands of the poor and needy.
This is the fourth sin of Sodom and her daughters, unmercifulness,
inhumanity.

Did she strengthen.
Heb. is, (...) non firmavit, or tenuit, she has not taken them by the hand,
and held them up, but let them sink. Jer. 31.32. In the day that I took them
by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt. Being there, they were in
a low, poor, needy, sinking condition, and God reached out his hand from
heaven, took hold of them, and upheld them; he gave them consilium and
auxilium, counsel and help, it is the same word there which you have here; these
Sodomites did not reach out a hand to support and strengthen their poor and
needy. Sept. is, (...), they did not succor and help them: Vulg. they reached
not out a hand to them. Va^a. non firmavit manus, she did not make firm and
strong the hands of the needy; she did not give them counsel and aid that
they might not despair.

The poor.
Heb. (...) from (...) to afflict, humble; because poor men are afflicted and
humbled under the burden of their poverty; the Heb. word (...) signifies both
affliction and poverty, Exodus 3.7. I ^ve seen the affliction of my people
which are in Egypt. 1 Chronicles. 22.14. Behold, in my poverty I have prepared for
the house of the Lord: it is the same word in both places, and poor men find
their poverty an affliction; the Sept. is, (...), a (...) which signifies to be
stricken with fear, to be terrified, dejected. Poverty causes much fear,
care, sadness, dejection of spirit, and has many temptations accompanying it.
Montanus reads the word for poor, egeni, of the needy, or wanting, which
seems to be the true sense of (...) in the Gospel; for as the word is used
there, it notes not absolutely a beggar, but one needy. 2 Cor. 8.9. it is said
of Christ, (...) he became poor, he had not an house to hide his head in, yet
he did not go up and down and beg lodging, bread, and other things, and Mar.
12.42. There came (...), a poor widow, yet she had two mites to throw into the
treasury. Romans 15.26. Those of Macedonia and Achaiah made a contribution for
the poor Saints at Jerusalem; (...), the Church did not suffer the poor
Saints in it to go from house to house a begging, this had been a great
reproach to the Church and way of the Gospel: That has made men to think
(...), notes such poor as go from door to door, has been, that they might
distinguish it from (...) which is a poor man also 2 Cor. 9.9. He has given to
the poor, (...). There is a difference between these words, and so the poor
meant by them; but not that difference which by some learned is made.
Aristophanes in pluto, says, (...) he is a beggar, or poor man who has
nothing, and (...) is (...), who lives sparingly, following his work, that
spends all, he gets and has much ado to live: so Pasor makes (...) to be a
man who by his labor gets his living, from (...) to labor, and he is right in
this, but out in (...) whom he says to be one; qui ostiatim petit, who begs an
alms at men's doors; its true, Lazarus was such, Luke 16.20. But usually in the
Gospel it notes such poor as have something, though not enough to live upon,
be they aged, sick, weak, lame, or compassed about with any other infirmities.

Needy.
Heb. is (...) it comes from (...) to will, desire, and notes a man not simply
poor and needy, but very poor, so poor says Pagnine, quod omnibus carens,
omnia concupiscat; that wanting all things, he desires all things; rich in
desires, but having nothing else, a man of desires. Amos 2.6. They sold the
poor for a pair of shoes: The word for poor is the same we have here: and
certainly they were very poor that were worth no more then a pair of shoes,
and likely old ones too. Montanus interprets the word in our Prophet, mendicus,
a beggar, which notes the extreme poverty that some were in, yet had no help
from the rich and full Sodomites. Aecol: has it humilis, of one so needy, that
he is humbled to purpose, and lies on the earth, desiring relief. Servius upon
Virg: says, pejorem esse egestatem paupertate, that need is worse then
poverty. The vulgar accords with our English, and has it egeno, they reached
not out a hand to the poor and needy, which sorts best with the Original
words.

The sum and scope of the words is this; that the Sodomites were unmercifull,
and hard-hearted: they were not affected with the necessities of the poor:
neither their wants, prayers, tears, nor their sad countenance, mournful
complaints, nor stretched-out hands prevailed at all with them.

Men are backward too, if not averse from giving. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Charge them
that are rich in this world that they be not high-minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches: That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready
to distribute.

Dives would not give the crumms and scraps of his Table to poor Lazarus, Luke
16. So the young man, Matthew. 19.21, 22.

I shall show you what an evil, unmercifulness is,

1. It Is an argument and evidence of covetousness; when Christ, Luke 16.9.
bids them make to themselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness (which
he so calls, because men usually sin in the getting, keeping, or using of them)
and said, they could not serve God and Mammon, verse. 13. The Pharisees who were
covetous, derided him; they thought Christ spoke like an ignorant man; they
could serve God, keep their wealth, and not cast it away upon poor people,
This showed their covetousness: and what an evil that is, let Paul tell you. 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of money is the root of all evil; inward and outward evils
do spring from it. A covetous man is an idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. he has no
inheritance in the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. he is abhorred of God, Psalm.
10.3. Chrysostom. says, he had rather dwell with a thousand possessed, then with
one covetous man; for they hurt their garments and themselves, but a covetous
man hurts his neighbors. Chrysostom. Math. 10. as cited by Stella on Luke 16.

2. It Is argument of unbelief: men think if they give to the poor, and
strengthen the hands of the needy; that themselves shall want and come to
poverty. Prove. 28.27. He that gives unto the poor shall never lack. Here is
the voice of God, who is truth it self, and has power enough to make good
what he has said, for the earth and fullness of it is his, Psalm. 24.1. And yet
man's heart distrusts God, and thinks of other ways to provide for it self: I
will keep what I have; if this be gone I know not what I shall have; it is a
hard world, and one bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. Thus unbelief
discovers it self, and had rather trust in uncertain riches, then in the
all-sufficient and omnipotent God: says God, give to the poor and thou shall
not lack: says the hard-hearted man, give to the poor, and thou shall lack.
Thus does he cross the will of God, and put the lie upon him. Eccles. 11.1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days: No
says the unmercifull man, I will never cast my bread upon them, for I shall
never see it again. And so makes God a liar, and declares himself an
unbeliever.

3. It Is argument there is no love of God in that man; it is a sad charge to
tell any man he does not love God. John is peremptory in it, 1 John 3.17. Who
so has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? he may
think he loves God, and others may think and say so, but there is not any dram
of Gods love in that man, how dwells it in him? this Interrogation imports a full
negation; for if a man loved God, he would love man who is the image of God.
Christ's command is, that we love one another as he has loved us, John 15.12.
He testified his love, by giving his blood, his flesh, his life: and we will
not give a little bread, an old garment, a little silver, it is a clear
demonstration there is no love of God in us.

The primitive Christians were distinguished from others by their love, and
that made them sell all, bring it and lay it down at the Apostles feet for the
relief of the poor Christians, Acts 4.34, 35.

4. It Is a sin has much cruelty and unnaturalness in it. Isa. 58.7. Deal thy
bread to the hungry, cover the naked, and hide not thy self from thine own
flesh; the poor are our own flesh. Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one father?
has not one God created us? Prove. 22.2. The rich and the poor meet together,
the Lord is the maker of them all. Hence he has commanded that we should love
our neighbors as our selves, Matthew. 22.39. Now if we hide away our eyes from
them, if we will not consider their necessities, wants, and relieve them, we
are cruel and unnatural: if a man be naked or hungry, a man will seek to cloth
and feed himself, he will not hate his own flesh. Ephesians. 5.29. No man ever yet
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. When men therefore
refuse to strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, they despise, they hate
their own flesh, they are unnatural: and to prevent this, God has laid a
command to be merciful, where the strongest reason and plea might be against
it. Prove. 25.21. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat: and if he
be thirsty, give him water to drink.

5. It brings a curse, yea many curses upon men and their estates. Prove. 28.27.
He that hides his eyes from the poor shall have many a curse. The poor will
curse them, but who bids them curse? when Shimei cursed David wrongfully, says
he, the Lord bid him do it. So, when poor do curse hard-hearted men that will
not pity them, there is something of God ^n it; this Scripture must be
fulfilled, though it be their sin, yet it is a just judgment of God upon a
merciless man: and not only does man, but even God himself curses them.
Psalm 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the poor: If a man do it not,
shall he have a blessing? Matthew. 25.41, 42. Depart ye cursed, for I was
hungry, etc. The curse of God was upon them before, according to what you find
in Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. Sometimes
they have not a heart to eat, and take the comfort of their estates
themselves: sometimes they are perplexed with fears, cares, sorrows about
their estates; sometimes they are wasted at law, sometimes by fire, plundering;
sometimes in a secret way, that none can give any rational account of, but know
the curse of God was there.

6. It makes men altogether unlike God; he is the father of mercies, and God of
all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sends rain on the just and unjust, Matthew. 5.45. He gives food to
all flesh, Psalm. 136.25. He hears the desires of the humble and poor, Psalm.
10.17. He is kind to the unthankefull and to the evil, be ye therefore
merciful as your father is merciful, Luke 6.36. But now a man that is near,
pinching, miserable, and regards not the condition of the poor, to comfort
their hearts, and strengthen their hands, he is unlike, and contrary to God,
who is love, bowels, pity, compassion, mercy, and very mindful of the poor. He
made a law, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. If there be a poor man in thy land, thou shall not
harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother, but thou shall open
thy hand wide unto him. So Lev. 25.35.

Lu. 14.13. When thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind, and thou shall be blessed.

Lu. 4.18. God anointed Christ to preach the Gospel to the poor: and has not
God chosen the poor to be rich in faith? Jam. 2.5.

Judas was a hard-hearted wretch that cared not for the poor, Joh. 12.6.

7. It puts in a caveat and bar in the Court of heaven against their prayers,
they must have no entertainment there. Prove. 21.13. Who so stops his ears
at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.
This man before he dies shall come to some great straight or other, so as to
cry either to man or God, and when he cries, he shall not be heard; he would
not hear the poor crying, nor God who sent those poor, and cried to him in
those poor; therefore when he cries unto man for help, God will stop their
ears, turn their hearts from him; yea, stop his own ear, and turn away his
own heart. Luke 6.38. With the same measure that ye meet withal, shall it be
measured to you again: you stop your ears, God will stop his ear: you shut
up your bowels. God will shut up his: you withold your pence, God will
withold his talents; the rich man cried for a drop of water being in torment,
but neither Abraham nor God would hearken to his request; he that would not
give one crum, must not receive one drop. Matthew. 5.7. The merciful shall
obtain mercy.

8. It Is a shrewd badge of a reprobate condition; a merciless man's name will
hardly be found in the book of life. Coloss. 3.11. Put on as elect of God,
bowels of mercy, kindness. Those are elect of God have had mercy, and being
called, they find and feel that mercy, and cannot but put on bowels of mercy,
which declares their election: before, as Paul says, Tit. 3.3. Men live in
malice and envy, hateful and hating one another; but when God has once called
them, and manifested their Election, then they put on bowels of mercy, and they
are as natural to them now, as their lusts were before, as bowels are to a
parent, they pity others, as God pityed them: but where there be no bowels of
mercy, but chu^lishnesse, hardness, unmercifulness, there is the black badge
of reprobation rather then of election.

9. It Is a degree of murder; some men hate and curse the poor, and the
Scripture blusheth not to call them murderers. 1 John 3.15. Who so hates his
brother is a murderer. Job 24.14. The murderer rising with the light, kills
the poor and needy. He devises ways how to oppress, suck, and squeeze them,
and this is killing of them, and he is a murderer for it as well as the other:
so, when a man sees his brother or neighbor poor, sinking, and like to be
ruined, and will not relieve him, being able to do it, he falls into a degree of
murder. The heathen, Publius Mimus could see this, who said, qui succurrere
perituro potest, cum non succurrit, occidit: he that has power to succor a
man being ready to perish, and succors him not, he kills him. Suppose a man in
the water or fire, you pass by, and lend him not your hand, which if you had
done, his life had been saved, are not you now guilty of his death? When the
Priest and Levite passed by the man that going from Jerusalem to Jericho fell
among Thieves, and relieved him not, it was their sin; and had he dyed in that
condtion, they had been accessaries to his death. If the poor be our flesh,
then our goods are theirs as well as ours: and if we let them perish, we murder
them and our selves too.

10. The end of that man will be very sad who has been merciless to others,
he must have the end of a fruitless, or dead tree, he must be hewn down and
cast into the fire. Jam. 2.13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy: all judgment, mere severity, pure wrath shall be his portion.
Matthew. 25.41, 42, etc. it is the chief, if not the only sin which Christ
mentions at the day of judgment. I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: You showed me in my poor members no mercy;
therefore depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

Seeing then uncharitableness is so great an evil, let us put on bowels of
mercy, and strengthen the hands of the poor and needy. It Is a hard time,
things are dear, trading little, poor abound, and therefore now its seasonable
for the rich to open the bowels of their compassion, and to succor those that
are in want. Job was a father to the poor, Chap. 29.16. he did not eat his
morsels alone, the fatherless eat thereof, Chap. 31.17. The bellies and loins
of the poor blessed him, being filled and warmed with the flesh and fleece of
his sheep, v. 20 Dorcas, Acts 9 39. It were well if Jobs and Dorcas spirit and
compassions were in all rich men, that so the hungry might be fed, the naked
clothed, and necessities of the poor supplied: spare something out of your
superfluities for them. Can you adorn your houses with pictures and hangings?
your tables with Carpets, your shelves with Pewter and Brass, your Closets and
Cupboards with Plate, and have you nothing for the poor who are the temples of
God? Can you feed your dogs, parrets, monkeyes, pamper your horses, and not
mind poor Christians which lie at your doors? If it be so, how will the Lord
take it at your hands? Remember Dives, he had been better to have given all to
Lazurus, then to have met with such an end for his unmercifulness. The Lord
Christ has told you it is a blessed thing to give, Acts 20.35. You would count
it a blessed thing to show kindness to Christ; the pappes that gave Christ
suck were counted blessed, Luke 11.27. When you give to the poor, you give to
Christ: Matthew. 25.40. In as much as you have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, you have done it unto me. The are Christ's brethren thou do
it unto, and he accounts it done to himself, yea the least or meanest it is
done unto.

Again, is it not a blessed thing to have the Lord of heaven and earth to be
indebted to one. Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him again.

1. God is the poor man's surety.

2. He takes the debt upon himself.

3. Gives thee his word for security; his faithfulness and his honor are
engaged for performance: had you the Cities bond, the Parliaments security, the
public faith for repaiment of what you expend upon the poor, it were nothing
to this: O give, give unto the poor, and make God as much as you can indebted
to you, he is a good paymaster. Luke 6.38. Give and it shall be given unto
you, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over. If you
will not make God your debtor by giving, he will be your Judge for not giving.

We live in dangerous times, and riches are uncertain things; the way to make
them safe, is to bestow them upon the poor. Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon
the waters, for thou shall find it after many days: If you keep it, you lose;
if you cast it away, you shall find it again.

One had this Epitaph upon his tomb: Habeo quod dedi perdidi quod servavi:

If you would keep wine or meal you put them into empty vessels. Isa. 58.10,
11. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul,
then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday,
and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of water whose waters fail not.

Quest. Seeing we are to strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, whether
are we to give to all in such case?

Answ. It Is the judgment of some, that no beggars should be relieved that go
from door to door, they think it an unwarrantable practice for people to do
so, and to be relieved upon so doing, its the nursery of many vagabonds, and
vile persons; such live in no calling, are under no government, are the shame
of the Magistrate, a disorder in a Commonwealth, and reproach of the laws are
made for relief of the poor in their several respective places. Certainly
those that beg up and down, being able to work, and will not, you ought not
to relieve, you sin in doing of it; the Apostles rule is, if any will not work
he must not eat, 2 These. 3.10. And further, when Begging is made a trade, I see
not how it is justifiable before God, or can be countenanced by man; there are
few but can do something toward their living; and if they cannot, they ought
to be relieved otherwise then by begging.

Yet to conclude it unlawful to give to any that beg, I dare not: Christ
healed two blind beggars, Luke 18.35.42. John 9.7, 8. and did not reprove them
for their begging.

Besides, he has given out a rule, Luke 6.30. Give to every man that asks of
thee, which would be void and useless if I might give to no beggars.

1. Then, if you be able, you ought to give to all that are truly poor and
needy, justly necessitated to ask, even those that are able to work, and
willingly would work; but through the ill disposition of the times cannot get
any, or not sufficient to maintain them.

2. If men be not able to relieve all that shall ask, then caution and
Christian wisdom are to be used: you are to observe the rule of nature which
leads you to give.

1. To your kindred according to the degrees thereof.

2. To your affinity.

3. Your friends.

4. Cohabitators of the same Village, Parish, City, County, Kingdom.

5. To strangers whom providence shall offer unto you.

But more specially,

1. You are to consider whether they be godly poor or not: and if godly, there
to place your charity. Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity, etc.

2. Their necessity, and so 1. It may be extreme, they may be in danger of
life, ready to starve, as Lazarus did at Dives door; or in danger of sinning,
as Captives to turn Turks, and poor amongst us of turning to Popery, to steal;
now such are to have help before others. 2. It may be great, attended with some
grivevous inconvenience, as loss of liberty, sinking of a family, scandal to
religion; now these are to have a hand reached out to them, when others may
not. 3. There is a common necessity, when poor want, live not so comfortably as
they would: and these as we have ability and occasion we may, the other we must
relieve.


3. Their impotency; they may be sick, infirm, lame, blind, aged, so that
they are not able to do ought for a livelihood.

4. You are to consider their serviceablenesse formerly; the more useful any
have been in Church or State, the more good they have done to either or both,
the rather should they in case of want feel your charity then others, as many
now that have ventured their lives in the wars.

5. The cause of their poverty and want; if men have been brought to it by
sickness, by special acts of providence, fire, losses at Sea, plundering,
robbery, unfaithfulness of men and their dealings; these are to be pittyed,
supported before others that have brought themselves to beggary by ill courses.

VERSE. 50.
And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me, therefore I took
them away as I saw good.


HEre he goes on in numbering Sodoms sins, and shew^ng Sodoms end; they sinned
against God, and he took them away for their sins.

They were haughty.
The Sept. (...) they gloryed; sin they did grievovsly, and gloryed in their
sins. Mont: they are lifted up. Some Expositors read it participially thus;
exalting themselves, they committed abominations.

In the former verse was spoken of pride, and therefore I shall say nothing of
haughtiness, it being so near of kin to pride, if not the same.

Committed abomination.
By abomination we may understand that sin which is denominated from that
place, viz. Sodomie, unnatural lusts, filthy uncleanness; for they being
proud and haughty, excessive in eating and drinking, abounding in idleness,
neglective of the poor and needy, how could it be that they should be chaste?
no, they were unclean, and abominable unclean, according to that you read,
Romans 2.27. The men leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust
one toward another, men with men, working that which is unseemely. When the
Angels came to Lot, Genesis 19. the Sodomites thinking they were men, both old and
young: And all the people from every quarter compassed his house, and said,
bring out the men that came unto thee, that we may know them, verse. 4, 5.

This lying with the Male an unnatural sin, we first find practiced by these
Sodomites, who as Jude says, gave themselves over to fornication, and went
after strange, or other flesh: the women did not content them, but they burnt
in their lusts men toward men, and committed abomination one with another; it
was other flesh then God appointed for generation: Man and Wife are one flesh;
but man and man, woman and woman can never be so.

Before me.
That is, publicly, at noontide, in the sight of all, suitable to what you
find in Isa. 3.9. They declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Lawful
acts of this nature should be in secret; but they did unlawful acts against
the light of nature, and that openly. Zeph. 3.5. The unjust knows no shame.
Such were these Sodomites.

Their sin is set out emphatically, in Genesis 13.13. The men of Sodom were
wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.

1. They were wicked, and intensively wicked, which the words wicked and
sinners import; for the spirit says not only they are wicked, but wicked and
sinners.

2. Sinners before the Lord; they sinned impudently, openly, and as in the
presence of God, himself looking on: and they were sinners against the Lord,
as some do read the words; that is, they sinned with a high hand. 1 Samuel 2.25.
If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? They are heinous
sins, and these Sodomites sinned against conscience, common equity, and light
of nature.

3. Exceedingly; they were not seldom or little in sinning, but frequent, and
much, and their sins of a transcendent nature: As Nimrod was a mighty hunter
before God, so these were mighty sinners before him, none equal to them then
on the earth.

I took them away.
Heb. is, (...) removere feci, I caused them to be removed: what this removing
or taking away was, you may see, Genesis 19.24, 25. The Lord rained upon Sodom
and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven: And he
overthrew those Cities, and all the Plain, and all the inhabitants of the
Cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

Here is one of the most dreadful judgments, if not the dreadfullest of all
that we find in the book of God, executed upon sinners. The Lord from himself
immediately, miraculously, suddenly sends a rain from heaven, of fire and
brimstone, which was dreadful to the fight, to the smell, but worst of all to
feel: and they having been hellish in sinning, are made hellish in suffering;
for fire and brimstone is the punishment of hell. Rev. 19.20.20.10. Jude tells
us, they suffered the vengeance of eternal fire, verse. 7. They passed through
a temporal, or temporary fire, to an eternal fire: and Peter says, They were
condemned, 2 Epist. 2.6. God turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into
ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, he condemned them here, and to
eternity. And the Prophet Jeremiah, when he was in a cursing vein, curses the
man brought tidings of his birth, thus; Let that man be in the Cities which the
Lord overthrew, and repented not, Jer. 20.16. The Prophet judged them accursed,
and so separate from God for ever, they repented not of their sin, for Sodom
was overthrown in a moment. Lam. 4.6. Neither did God repent of what he had
done, and therefore no reconciliation could be between them, but they perished
utterly. Not only were the men consumed in this judgment, their houses and
buildings turned to ashes, their Cattle, Corn, and what ever grew upon the
ground: but even the ground it self is under a curse still, being lacus
asphaltites, or mare mortuum, nourishing no living creature, and so extremely
salt, that it bears up whatever is thrown thereinto, and bird^ that fly over
fall down into it, being suffocated wiith the poisonous vapors which rise
from it: so that now this Plain which was a fruitful valley, and as Paradise,
is become through the peoples sins, and just judgment of God, a filthy and
sulphurous and poisonous Lake.

As I saw good.
Some read it, as thou have seen. The men of Jerusalem from the Turrets of the
Temple, their prospects in Sion and Jerusalem, could see this lake, and the
hand of God upon the Sodomites therein, and therefore says, as thou have seen:
and so Jerome, sicut vidisti. But the Hebrew is, (...) as I have seen. Genesis
18.21. The Lord went down to see whether Sodom had done according to the cry
of it. The cry of her sins was great and grievous, and the Lord finding it
so, he did as he saw good, and cause, he dealt with it as you have heard.

Obser. 1.
The Lord remembers the iniquities of people long after they are committed, yea
after they are dead and gone. Sodoms sins were not forgotten, though they had
sinned them many hundreds of years before; no vestigiaes left of them or their
Cities.

Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, etc.
God remembered the provocation of him by the Jews at the Red Sea, in David's
days, which was long before. Psalm. 106.7. The Calfe they made at Horeb, verse.
19. Their idolatry, fornication and murmuring were fresh in Gods thoughts, in
Paul's days, 1 Cor. 10.7, 8, 10. Balaam's, Sodoms, the old worlds, the Angels
were minded by God, and mentioned by his spirit in Peter's days, 2 Pet.
2.15.6.5.4. The Angels had sinned 4000. years before, and above, yet was not
their sin forgotten. 1 Samuel 15.2. I remember says the Lord of hosts, what
Amalecke did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way when he came up
from Egypt. This was 400. years before: It was twice 14. generations from
David to CHRIST, and yet there is a gentle touch upon David's sins, Matthew.
1.6.17. God has a firm and tenacious memory, it lets nothing slip which once
it receives: you see sinful acts of men in States are kept upon the file, and
on record, and many hundreds of years after are brought forth. God keeps the
sins of Cities, Kingdoms, Princes and people in his book of remembrance, which
should lesson us to take heed what we do. Men do not more easily sin, then
forget their sins, but God does not so easily or quickly forget them. Job
13.26. Thou make me possess the iniquities of my youth. Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth.

2. Plenty is the Parent of sin, yea many sins. Sodom as has been shown,
was situate in a Plain very fruitful and delightful, as appears, Genesis 13.10.
It had abundance, and what was the effect thereof, pride, fullness of bread,
idleness, unmercifulness, haughtiness and uncleanness. Deuteronomy 32.15. Jesurun
waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxed fat, grown thick, thou art covered with
fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock
of his salvation.

When Israel grew rich, had plenty of all things about her, then she became
like a fatted Ox that kickes at the owner, and cares for none. 1 Samuel 2.29.
Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice, and at mine offering. They slighted the
sacrifices and offerings of God, and in so doing, they slighted, they kicked at
God. Nehem. 9.25, 26. When God had brought them into Canaan, they took strong
Cities, a fat land, possessed houses full of all goods, wells dug, vineyards
and olive-yards, and fruit trees in abundance: so they did eat and were
filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy goodness.
Nevertheless they rebelled, and were disobedient against thee, and cast thy
law behind their backs, and slew thy Prophets which testified against them, to
turn them to thee, and they wrought great provocation.

Solomon when he abounded most with Gods blessings, then he loved strange
women, multipyed Wives and Concubines, and fell to idolatrrie, as you may see
from 1 King. 10. and 11. Chap. Jer. 5.27, 28. They are become great, waxen
rich, they are waxen fat, they shine, they overpasse the deeds of the wicked:
They went beyond the very heathen in wickedness, Ezekiel. 5.6, 7. Jerusalem here
in this Chapter, the metaphorical woman, for whom God had done so much, and
upon whom he had bestowed broidered work, skins of Tachasch, finelinnen, silk,
ornaments, bracelets, chains, jewels, rings, a Crown, gold, silver, fine
flower, honey, oil, she plays the harlot, abuses those choice blessings and
abundance she had, to idolatry: she sacrificed her children to Idols, and
walked in such lewd ways, that the daughters of the Philistims were ashamed of
her, verse. 27. Dives was wealthy, and as wicked as wealthy. Jam. 5. the rich
men that had plenty of all things, withheld the laborers hire that reaped
down their fields: they lived in pleasure, were wanton, condemned the just.

Plenty is dangerous, yet all men labor to be rich, and have much about them:
men's tables and estates prove snares. The bag caught Judas; and many in
prosperity have fallen who stood in the days of adversity.

3. The Lord gives outward blessings, not only to Saints but to sinners, yea to
great and notorious sinners; even the Sodomites that were wicked, and sinners
before God exceedingly, had bread, and abundance thereof; that is, of all
outward blessings, edible and potable; they had variety and likewise other
things plentifully.

Matthew. 5.45. He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and the unjust. Not only Abraham and Lot had the
sun and rain, who were righteous persons: but Sodomites, who exceeded all
sinners then in the world, had the sun shining upon them, Genesis 19.23.

Other Nations had the dewes of heaven, and fatness of the earth as well as
the Jews, Gods own people. The Canaanites and others had that pleasant land
which flowed wi^h milk and honey before they had it: and they were so wicked
that the Land could bear them no longer, but even spew^d them out, Levit. 18.28.

Antiochus a vile person had the Kingdom, Daniel 11.21. So Ahab that sold
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 1 King. 21.25. he was a
King in Israel.

The whore of Babylon was arrayed in purple, decked with gold, precious stones,
and pearls: and when Jerusalem here was grown worse then the Nations round
about her, yet then she had the blessings of God in great store: so that all
things come alike to all, and no man knows love or hatred by all that is
before them, Eccles. 9.1, 2.

If any man should conclude himself a good man, beloved of God, because he
gives him many blessings, much of the creature; then may it be said, the
Sodomites were good men, for they had plenty: If any should say he is an evil
man because he wants these, then Lazarus, the Apostles, Christ himself should
be so, because they had little or nothing. God gives his outward blessings
promiscuously to good and bad, that men may see he is impartial in his outward
dispensations, that good men using them well, and honoring him therewith,
might increase their comforts and rewards; that evil men abusing them to the
service of their lusts, and dishonor of their giver, might have the deeper
condemnation.

4. Cities commonly are guilty of great sins; Sodom was a City, 2 Pet. 2.6.
the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha: and there were two more which you have
specified in Deuteronomy. 29.23. together with the other, Sodom and Gomorrha, Adma
and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger and wrath; these four Cities
perished together, and they were full of crying sins, pride, gluttony,
idleness, inhumanity, uncleanness, and the like, these sins run through
them all. Jude 7. Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, they gave
themselves to fornication, and went after strange flesh.

There were high places and Idols in the Cities of Samaria, 1 Kings 13.32. Isa.
10.10. Hos. 8.5. The woman of one of the Cities of Samaria that talked with
Christ, John 4. was very bitter, lived in uncleanness, and worshipped she
knew not what.

Babylon was full of cruelty and pride, Jer. 50. the bloody City, Ezekiel. 20.6.
Niniveh so abounded with sin in Jona's days, that had they not repented,
destruction had been upon them, see Nahum 3.13. Jerusalem had violence and
strife in it, Psalm. 55.9, 10, 11. Mischief, sorrow, and wickedness are in the
midst thereof, deceit and guile depart not from her streets. Zeph. 3.1, 2, 3,
4. she is called the filthy, polluted, oppressing City: her Princes were
roaring Lions, her Judges evening Wolves, her Prophets light and treacherous
persons, her Priests polluted the Sanctuary, and did violence to the Lord.
Ezekiel. 8. you may read what horrible abominations were in the Temple and City.
Lam. 4.13. her Prophets and her Priests shed the blood of the just in the
midst of her.

5. Sinners in time come to a height and impudency of sinning, they committed
abominations before me. Nothing restrained them, not conscience, light of
nature shame amongst men, fear of punishment, spectacles of death, but they go
on and sin in the sight and presence of God. Isa. 66.4. They did evil before
mine eyes, even in the Temple. Where God dwelt, they sinned, set up Idols, and
worshipped them: to what a height of sinning did Manasses come, and the Jews
in his days, they did that was evil in Gods fight, and provoked him to anger,
2 King. 21.15. in tract of time sinners become stout, and will contest, Mal.
3.13. Your words have been stout against me, yet ye say what have we spoken
so much against thee? ye have said it is in vain to serve God, etc.

6. When God brings terrible judgments upon Kingdoms, persons, he sees cause
for it, therefore I took them away as I saw good.

I saw what sinners they were, I came down from heaven, examined the cry of
their sins, and saw sufficient cause to make me stretch out my hand, and rain
down fire and brimstone upon them. When God drowned the old world, confounded
their language, made the earth to swallow up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, when he
sent fiery Serpents amongst them, famines, plagues, wars, captivity, he saw
cause for all these.

There is never any public or private judgment befalls States, Cities, or
persons, but the Lord has great and just cause to do so: if there were no
sin, there would be no punishment. Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins.

7. We ought to take notice of Gods judgments upon sinful places, and to
beware of their sins; God does therefore tell us in his holy word what he has
done to Sodom and other places for that end. This judgment upon Sodom is often
mentioned, Genesis 13.10. Isa. 1.9. Lam. 4.6. Luke 17.29. Romans 9.29. 2 Pet. 2.6.
Jude 7. And here also when God threatens to Punish sinful persons and places
severely, he tells them they shall be made like Sodom, as in Deuteronomy. 29.23. Isa.
13.19. Jer. 49.18.50.40. Zeph. 2.9. and in Amos 4.11. he says, he had
overthrown some of them as he overthrew Sodom. In 13. places this sore
judgment is mentioned, that so we might frequently meet with it, mind it,
and abhor the sins brought it upon them: If the sins of Sodom be found
in Cities, pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, unmercifulness to
the poor, uncleanness, they shall have Sodomes judgment, or some
aequivalent. It may be we are free from Sodomes sins, and I would we were: but
are we not guilty of worse? I fear we are: If we receive not the Gospel in
the power of it, as Capernaum did not, Christ tells you it shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day, etc. Matthew. 11.

VERSE. 51, 52. Neither has Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou have
multiplied thine abominations more then they, and have justified thy sisters
in all thine abominations which thou have done.

Thou also which have judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins
that thou have committed more abominable then they: they are more righteous
then thou: yea be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame in that thou have
justified thy sisters.


THe scope of these two verses is to convince Jerusalem, that she was more
wicked then others, then Samaria, or Sodom her sisters, and therefore ought
proportionably to be confounded and shamed for her abominations,

Samaria.
This was the chief City of the ten Tribes, and is here put for the Kingdom of
Israel, as it is distinct from the Kingdom of Judah, and is often called Israel
and Ephraim, and the sins of the Israelites or Ephramites were exceeding great.
Their Kingdom was begun in rebellion and idolatry, 1 Kings 12.19.28, 29. They
rebelled against the house of David, chose Jeroboam to be their King, who set
up the golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, and drew the people to worship them;
he made priests of the lowest of the people, set up high places, devised
feasts and worship of his own, verse. 31, 32, 33. And all the Kings of Israel
were wicked, Ahab so abominably wicked, that none was like unto him. 1 King.
21.25. Jezabel filled the land with wickedness: She caused Naboth to be
unjustly accused and stoned to death, Chap. 21.10. the true Prophets were
persecuted, 850. false Prophets countenanced, Chap. 18.

There was no truth, mercy, or knowledge of God left in the land; swearing,
lying, killing, stealing, adultery abounded, Hos. 4.1, 2. They were profound in
slaughtering, Chap. 5.2. The Priests of Israel were murderers, Chap. 6.9. The
pride of Israel was great, Chap. 7.10. They had de pely corrupted themselves,
Chap. 9.9. Confederated with the Assyrians and Egyptians, Chap. 12.1. Provoked
God to anger most bitterly, Verse. 14. They walked in the statutes of the
heathen, and of the Kings of Israel, they sinned secretly and openly: they set
up images and groves on every high hill, under every green tree, burnt incense
in all the high places as did the heathen: They rejected the statutes and
covenant of God, they left all his commandments, caused their sons and
daughters to pass through the fire; they used divination and enchantments, and
sold themselves to do evil, 1 Kings 17.8, 9, 10, 11.15, 16, 17. Now although
the ten Tribes comprised in the word Samaria were guilty of these and many
other sins, yet they were not the half of Jerusalems sins. Samaria has
not committed the half of thy sins: which we are not to account of by
Arithmeticall proportion, as if Jerusalems sins for number were more then so
many more: but the quality and nature thereof were such, so dreadful, so
grievous, clothed with such circumstances and aggravations, that compared
together, and all things considered, those of Sodom and Samaria were not half
so bad. The Sodomites had only the light of nature to direct them: the
Samaritans had a devised worship forced upon them by Jeroboam, and were held to
it by succeeding idolatrous Kings. They had not the Law, the Temple, the Arc,
the Prophets, the true Priests, sacrifices, solemn feasts, and good Kings, as
Jerusalem had, therefore Jerusalems sins were the greater: Samaria had heard
and read of Gods heavy judgment upon Sodom, for her wickedness: Jerusalem
besides that had seen Gods dealing with Samaria, that the ten Tribes were
ruined and carried away into captivity; that she alone was preserved and
reserved as Gods peculiar: and now for Jerusalem to be ungrateful, to fall
into, and to continue in those sins, for which the Israelites suffered so much,
notwithstanding the threats of the Prophets; yea to set up the Image of
Jealousy at the gate of the Altar, to picture the forms of all creeping things
and abominable beasts, and to pourtray all the idols of the house of Israel
upon the walls of the Court, and for the Elders to offer incense, before them;
to place Tammuz in the Temple, women to weep for that abominable Idol, men
therein to worship the sun toward the East, and put the branch to their nose,
and fill the land with violence, Ezekiel. 8. These things make the Lord to say,
that Samaria committed not half of thy sins, but thou have multiplied thine
abominations more then they: And as it is, Jer. 3.5. Behold thou have done and
spoken evil things as thou could. She was become so wicked, had sinned with
to high a hand. that she could not do worse, she exceeded all. Ezekiel. 5.6, 7.
She has changed my judgments into wickedness more then the nations, and my
statutes more then the Countries that are round about her: and multiplied more
then the nations, more sins, more aggravations.

And have justified thy sisters.
Heb. (...) justificati, not have made them holy, just, righteous, as the
papists do intrpret the word, when they treat of justification; but by the
greatness of thy sins have declared them to be less sinners then thy self:
so Sanct. says, that justificare in this place is the same with justum
ostendere: and Vatab. justiores to esse ostenderis, thou do manifest that
they are more righteous then thy self; for set their sins with thine, and the
disproportion is so great, that they are not half such sinners as thou art,
they seem just in comparison of thee, thy sins are heavy, and theirs are
light; this does not lessen the sins of the Sodommites or Samaritans, or
suppose them to be innocent; but only shows that their sins had not such
heinous aggravations as theirs of Jerusalem had.

Verse. 52 Have judged thy sisters.
Heb. (...) have pronounced judgment says Montanus (...) signifies to pray,
to appeal, and it is likely the Latin word, appello, and English, appeal, do
come from it; but frequently to judge. Avenarius says, its verbum juridicum,
and (...) is judges, Exodus 21.22. Deuteronomy. 32.31. Job 31.11. Vatab. ^aith, that
pilalti signifies in alios decernere sententiam tanquam merito punitos. Thus
Jerusalem, when she heard of Gods severe proceedings with Sodom, she said
their sins were great, and those judgments deserved: When she saw Samaria
besieged, taken, and the ten Tribes carried away by Salmanezer into captivity,
she did not pity, but censure them, looking at them as Rebels, Idolaters,
Apostates, and Persecuters, and so adjudged all those punishments due unto them
which they under went, thinking her self more righteous then they of Sodom or
Samaria.

Bear thine own shame.
Heb. (...) the word for shame notes more then ordinary shame, ignominy,
reproach, from (...) which signifies to be calumniated, to have such words and
usage as if one were a dog, or esteemed no better then a dog: hence the word
calumnia, calumny, and it is always used in contemptuous, or in an ill sense,
as some Critics observe; whereas (...) is not, neither notes so deep a shame,
reproach as (...) does. Jer. 14.3. They were ashamed and confounded (...) here
are both words; one imports shame, the other confounding shame, exceeding great
shame. Isa. 50.6. I hid not my face from shame and spitting. When Christ was
put to death, you know how ignominiously they used him, scoffing at him, and
spitting upon him, they slighted and reproached him to the utmost. The Sept.
renders the word shame in our Prophet, (...) torment, because such shame is a
torment, a burden. Vulg. thy confusion. Castal. thy obscenity or filthiness.
Others, thy ignomine. Calv. probrum tuum.

Bear thine one shame.
The meaning of the phrase is this; seeing thou have done shameful things, yea
so shameful, as the sins of Samaria and Sodom seem little in respect
thereof; now look for, and submit unto shameful judgments which I shall
bring upon thee. I will bring the Assyrians, they shall discover thy wickedness,
strip thee of all thy Jewels and Ornaments, stone thy Children, burn thy
Habitations, carry thee away Captive: I will make thee a reproach and hissing
in the open view of all the world, as I did the Sodomites and ten Tribes, when
I punished them for their abominations: I know it will be very heavy for thee,
but however bear thine own shame.

This expression of bearing shame you have it not elsewhere then in this
Prophet, its peculiar to him, and frequent. It follows here in this verse
again, be thou confounded, and bear thy shame.

The word for confounded is, (...) which in the Sept. is, (...), and the Latin
Expositors generally, tu erubesce, or pudefias, be thou ashamed. Only Aecol.
and the Vulg. confundere, be thou confounded, and so our Interpreters of the
Bible have put it: and if we take it for granted, that (...) notes
confounding shame, yet not such as (...) does.

The words being opened, and sense given, we should come to the Observations;
but before we do that, one quere is to be made and answered.

The quere is, seeing that Jerusalems sins were greater then Sodoms and
Samaria's, and they righteous in comparison thereof; why had she not greater
punishments then they? Sodom was consumed with fire from heaven; the 10.
Tribes so extirpated and captivated, as that they never returned, or became the
Lords people to this day: God is just, and the greatest sinners should have the
gr^atest punishments.

To this I answer,

1. That as God would have wholly spared Sodom had there been ten righteous in
it, Genesis 18.32. So there being many righteous in Jerusalem, who cried for
mercy, and bewailed the abominations thereof, the Lord lessened the judgment.
That there were many righteous in it, who sighed and cried to the Lord, you may
see, Ezekiel. 9.6. And if God will divert judgments for their sakes, he may also
lessen them.

2. Gods judgments upon Jerusalem, all laid together, were greater then the
fiery hand of God upon Sodom: the Famine, which made the pitiful women to
eat their children, Lam. 4.10. The fathers to eat their sons, and the sons
their fathers openly, Ezekiel. 5.10. The Pestilence, the Sword, and Captivity
were, all things considered, soarer strokes of God upon Jerusalem, then the
fire from Heaven upon Sodom, and you have divine testimony for it, Lam. 4.6.
The punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is greater then
the punishment of the sin of Sodom that was overthrown in a moment, and no
hand stayed on her.

Sodoms punishment was sharp, but short: Jerusalems was sharp and long; to kill
a man by degrees, by cutting off fingers, toes, ears, arms, legs, is far
worse then cuting off the head at once; such was Gods dealings with Jerusalem.

3. If the punishment of the ten Tribes were greater; for they endured three
years siege, 2 Kings 17.5. and were carried away into Assyria, and never
returned?

I answ. God has his prerogative to punish sinners with what degree of
punishment he please here in this life; he may punish lesser sinners with
greater punishments, and greater sinners with lesser punishments, and yet be
free from partiality or injustice, because he has a day to reckon with sinners
hereafter, and then will render to them fully according to the merit of their
sins. Ezra 9.13. God punished them less then their iniquities deserved. And
if Jerusalems punishment came short of the ten Tribes, the more remained behind
without repentance, and God rendered it in due time; but upon search into the
word, it may appear that Jerusasalems punishment was not short, but beyond the
ten Tribes. Ezekiel. 5.9, 10, 11, 12. God says there, he will do that in her
which he had not done, and whereunto he would not do any more the like. The
meaning is, he would punish Jerusalem more, and otherwise then he had done
Sodom, Samaria, or any other before. God swears there, that he would not
spare them, nor have any pity. Samaria was not burnt, when taken, and the
Tribes carried away; but Jerusalem, the Temple, and all the holy things in it
were burnt, and taken away, the people divided into 3 thirds, and each third
pursued with judgment.

4. God may show mercy to the greatest sinners, and bring them to a condition
of enjoying the greatest privileges, to show the riches of his free grace and
mercy: and so he did here those that sinned more then Sodomites or Samaritans;
after great sufferings and 70. years captivity, he brings back to Jerusalem,
bestows a new City and Temple upon them, with the privileges and ordinances
thereof: and besides we may remembe^ that the promise of return from Babylon
was not made to Samaria or the 10. Tribes after 70. years, but unto Jerusalem,
and the two Tribes that were left. Jer. 29.10. The 10. Tribes were gone into
captivity before Jeremiah's days; about the sixth year of Hezekiah they were
carried away, and Jeremiah prophesied not till the 13th year of Josiah, Jer.
1.2. and he was then come to the days and reign of Zedekiah, as appears, Chap.
21.1. And it was above 120. years that the Tribes had been then carried away,
as is evident upon compute of the years, from the 6. of Hezekiah, to the times
of Zedekiah: therefore its said, Ezra 1.5. When the time of return came, that
the fathers of Judah and Benjamine rose up to come and build the house of the
Lord at Jerusalem. Gods promise was given out to show mercy to them, and bring
them back, which he did, notwithstanding their great sins, to show his
faithfulness and fullness of mercy.

Obser. 1.
The sins of one people may be greater then the sins of another; all sins are
not equal, nor all sinners equal^y guilty. Jerusalems sins exceeded Samariah's
and Sodom's, they were not half so great sinne^s as she was.

The more mercies any people enjoy, the greater are their sins if they answer
not those mercies.

Jerusalem was taken from a low, bloody, beggarly, perishing condition: God
blessed and multiplied her exceedingly, entered into covenant with her, and
took her to be his; he bestowed upon her beauty, honor, renown, wealth, all
things desirable; he set her in the midst of the Nations, Ezekiel. 5.5. that all
might see what he had done for her. She was thy holy City, Matthew. 4.5. and had
those privileges, ordin^nces, and advantages which no City in the world had;
he had often delivered her out of the hands of enemies, especially in the days
of Hezekiah, when Senacherib lay before her by with 185000. men, 2 K. 19.35.
Yea God had woed her by his Prophets, made many gracious promises to her,
water^d her and watched her night and day, Isa. 27.3. done what he could for
her, Chap. 5.4. and yet she sinned notoriously, excessively against God more
then the Nations. Those had not half her mercies, did not commit half her
sins; such abominations, lewdness, villainies, were not to be found
elsewhere. She fined wilfully, Jer. 44.16, 17. She continued in sin,
notwithstanding great means used to reclaim her, Neh. 9.26. She provoked God to
his face, Isa. 65.3. She was insatiable in wickedness, verse. 28, 29. of this
Chap. She caused other Nations to sin with her, Ezekiel. 23.16, 17.

These and many other aggravations were in her sins: and as the Jews then
sinned greater sins then the Sodomites and Samaritans, so Christians now sin
greater sins then the Jews did then. Gospel-sins are the greatest sins: In the
Gospel is held out the greatest grace, mercy and love to sinners, and if these
be refused or abused by them, their sins will be exceeding sinful, and it will
be more tolerable for Sodomites, Samaritanes, Hiero solymites, Ninivites, or
any, then for such. Christians sins will be found the scarlet and
unparalellable sins.

2. That comparing of sins and sinners together, makes great sins seem little,
and great sinners seem righteous.

Sodomes and Samariah's sins were great and grievous; yet compared with
Jerusalem's, they seemed little, not half so great or grievous: thou have
justified thy sisters, and they are more righteous then thou. Neither of them
were little sinners, or had any righteousness; but being laid together, sins
and sinners, Jerusalem was transcendently sinful, and unrighteous, and they
less sinful, less unrighteous. Great things when they are exceeded by
greater in view, they seem little: a great house is nothing to a great rock, a
great mountain or City; a great River is nothing to the Ocean, so a great
heap of sins is as nothing to a greater; what is a cart-full of dung to a great
dunghill, and as it is in quantities, so in qualities: some poisons are so
poisonous, so strong, that they kill immediately, others, though more in
quantity, yet are longer in producing such an effect, and in comparison they
are no poisons: so some sins and sinners compared with others, are as none.
Luke 18.14. The Publican went down to his house justified rather then the
Pharisee: This Pharisee compared himself with the Publican, and thought
himself righteous; but the Publican in comparison of him was righteous. There
is a righteousness which does condemn, and there is a sinfulness which does
justify, and both are naught: A Pharisaicall righteousness damns a man, when
a Jerusalems sinfulness justifies a man: take heed therefore of comparing your
selves with others who are worse, and greater sinners then you, and from thence
of framing a righteousness to your selves notwithstanding. Sodom and Samaria
were less sinners, more righteous then Jerusalem, yet you know how God dealt
with them, and destruction will be the end of all those who trust to such
righteousness.

3. Great sinners see not, or forget their own sins, and are apt to censure,
judge, and condemn others who are less sinful then themselves, and especially
when they are under the hand of God.

Jerusalem, whose iniquities and abominations were incomparable, beyond Sodoms
and Samariah's, sees not her own sins, remembers not how she had dealt with
her God, her Lord, and Husband, but forgets him, Jer. 2.32. and here judges her
sister Samaria, and thought her sins and courses so grievous, so foul, and
provoking, that when she was besieged three years, carried into captivity, and
suffered sad things; it was well done of the Lord to deal so by her, that
she was more wicked then her self or any others. Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. When
some out of Galilee were sacrificing, Pilate gave command they should be slain,
and so made sacrifices of them: they that saw them brought to such an end,
presetnly judged them to be the greatest sinners of all the Galileans: So those
were slain by the fall of the Tower in Siloe, they thought Jerusalem had not
greater sins in it; but it was otherwise, Christ told them that they were as
great, or greater sinners; Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
It Is not warrantable to conclude them to be the greatest sinners who are
smitten with some heavy hand of God; then Job and Josiah might have been
censured to be the greatest sinners of their times. You may observe in humane
politics, that often accessaries and instruments in plots, treasons, rebellions
and murders, do suffer, when principals escape; and so God sometimes executes
judgments upon lesser sinners, and lets others who are greater, supervive. Let
us in stead therefore of judging others, judge our selves, and fear we are
reserved for the like, or worse judgments, if we repent not.

Jerusalem who judged her sister to be the greatest of sinners, and justified
her by the greatness of her own sins, was reserved for greater judgments, and
a worse end, because she repented not.

4. It is a shame for those who are guilty of the same, or greater sins, to
judge others. Jerusalem committed the same sins, and did worse, yet she judged
Samaria; and this was her sin and shame; in the Heb. the words run thus, Thou
also bear thy shame, who have judged thy sisters in thy sins, in which thou
have done abominations more then they. It Is a shameful thing to reprove,
censure, or judge those are less sinful then our selves, and especially being
under the hand of God for their sins.

1. We justify our selves in so doing, and step into Gods throne.

2. We give occasion to the censured to say, Thou hypocrite, pull the beam out
of thine own eye, before thou meddle with the woate in mine.

3. We condemn our selves in so doing. Romans 2.1. He that does the same thing,
or worse, and judges another, he condemns him self.

4. We insult over them, and add affliction to affliction if they be judged by
the Lord.

And all these are matters of shame, he that reproves or judges others, should
be innocent himself.

When the Scribes and Pharisees brought, and complained unto Christ of the
woman taken in adultery, he said unto them, he that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone at her. Christ did not mean simply, he that is
without sin, for he knew there were none such living except himself; but he
that is without that sin or sins equivalent (as they were not, who came to
tempt Christ, and get advantage against him, being malicious, and bloodily
minded) let him first throw a stone at her, hereupon being convicted by their
own consciences, that they were sinners, and very faulty, they were ashamed,
hung down their heads, and went sneaking away, John 8.9.

Obser.
5. Sin brings shame; bear thy shame for thine iniquites: thou have sinned
and sinned more then others; thy sins are thy shame, and will bring shame upon
thee: What a shame was it to Jerusalem, that she was a greater sinner then
Samaria, then Sodom; that she did such things as made the daughters of the
Philistims ashamed of her, verse. 27. of this Chapter When Moses was in the Mount,
this people would have God to go before them; and the Calfe being made, what
says the Text, Exo. 32.25. Aaron had made them naked unto their shame amongst
their enemies: They were made naked of their Ornaments, of Gods protection by
this Calfe, and changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eats
grass, Psalm. 106.20. And this was their shame: When Ammon would have his will
upon Tamar, she opposed him with an argument taken from the shame of sin, 2 Samuel 13.13. Whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee thou shall
be as one of the fools in Israel, it will be a great reproach unto us both.

The Corinthians lawing it before the unjust, and not taking up the matter
among themselves, was their shame, 1 Cor. 6.1.5. and Chap. 15.34. Some have not
the knowledge of God, I speak this to their shame. Ignorance is a shame to
people, and so is all sin, Romans 6.21. The Romans were ashamed of their fal^e
worship, and sinful lives. Shame is the lacky that waits upon sin, and causes
the conscience to blush as well as the face. Prove. 14, 34. Sin is a reproach
to Nations.

6. Shame in it self, or as it accompanies the judgments of God upon sinners,
is a burdensome thing; bear thine own shame, reproach, disgrace. Women that
are common ^hores, yet cannot endure to be called so; much less to be used, as
sometimes they are, carted, pumped, or sent to Bridewell. Barrenness in women,
because it was a reproach unto them, how burthensom was it of old to them.
Rachel was pincht upon this consideration as much as any other, when she said
give me children, or else I dye, Genesis 30.1. For so soon as she had a child,
she acknowledged God had taken away her reproach, verse. 23. that was the
burden upon he^. Psalm. 69.20. Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of
heaviness. His adversaries did unjustly accuse, slander, and di^grace him,
and this lay so heavy, like a mountain or millstone upon him, that it broke his
heart, and filled him with heaviness: what did the reproach then, and shame
which came upon his defiling Bathsheba, and murdering Vriah do? they brake and
ground his heart to powder: when men are touched in their reputations, it goes
near them; the burden of dishonor and disgrace is so heavy, that sometimes
they will venture their lives in duels and quarrels, and rather dye, then bear
the burden of reproach: shame and reproach have caused many to make away
themselves. Saul fearing the Philistims would abuse and disgrace him, fell upon
his own sword, and slew himself. When this City Jerusalem was laid wast, the
inhabitants thereof made a curse, reproach, and hissing among all Nations, was
it not a torment, a burden, and vexation to them? Ezekiel 5.14.15. Jer. 23.40. I
will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall
not be forgotten.

7. Sinners must bear the judgments of God, and the shame that is due unto
them whoever they be. Thou also, even thou Jerusalem bear thine own shame.

Jerusalem had been the faithful City, Isa. 1.21. but was become an Harlot:
Judgment and Righteousness did lodge in her, but now murderers.

She had sinned, shamed her self before God and man, and she must bear her
burden, bear Gods judgments, bear shame before heaven and earth.

VERSE. 53, 54, 55, 56. When I shall bring again your captivity, the captivity
of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughterss,
then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them.

That thou may bear thine own shame, and may be confounded in all that
thou have done, in that thou art a comfort unto them.

When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former
estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then
thou and thy daughters shall return to their former estate.

For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride.


THese verses contain more judgment, and the cause thereof, in them you have,

1. Jerusalems irrecoverablenesse of her former estate, in the 53. and 55.
verses, laid down under a double comparison, viz. Gods dealings with Sodom and
Samaria, and their daughters.

2. The scope and end of God in it, verse. 54. that she might bear her own
shame, etc.

3. The causes of this judgment, which are, 1. Her being a comfort to them,
verse. 54. 2. Her pride and forgetfulness, verse. 56.


Verse. 53. When I shall bring again their captivity, etc.
Heb. is (...) and convertam captivitatem eorum* Some make this verse. and so
the 55. to be promissory, not minatory, affirming that the Lord here promises
to show mercy to the captives of Sodom, Samaria, and Jerusalem, and to bring
them all back again. But because Sodom and her daughters were utterly
destroyed, and they saw not how they could be returned; therefore they labor
much to prove, that by Sodom is meant the two Tribes and half on the other
side Jordan; Reuben, Gad, and half Manasses; but these are comprehended in
Samaria, which was the head City of the ten Tribes: and if that should be
yielded, the difference between Sodom and her daughters, and Samaria and her
daughters would be great, yet taken away.

Others therefore by Sodom here understand the Moabites and Ammonites that
came from the loins of Lot, who dwelt in Sodom, as appears, Genesis 19.37, 38.

But the Scripture gives no warrant to account these among the Sodomites,
rather they should have been called Lothites, or Lottites, seeing they descended
from his loins.

Besides, the word Sodom is to be taken in it is proper and native sense here
as well as Samaria and Jerusalem, and that Sodom to be meant, of which he
spoke in the 49. and 50. verse. which was destroyed with her daughters by fire
from heaven, and so destroyed that no man can or shall dwell or abide there,
Jer. 49.18.

Again, if the words do hold out a promise of mercy, it is first to Sodom and
her daughters; next to Samaria and hers; and last to Jerusalem and her
daughters: so that they must be restored to their former estate before
Jerusalem; but neither Sodom nor Samaria were restored before the captivity
ended in Babylon. It Is clear enough that the words are not a promise of mercy,
but a threatening of severity, and it lies thus: When I shall bring again the
captivity of Sodom and Samaria, which I will never do, then will I bring
again thy captivity. I have destroyed them utterly, and intend not to replant
them, but to let them lie in the dark, and abide in captivity, and thy
condition shall be like unto theirs.

Some read the words with an interrogation, thus; Shall I bring again their
captivity? the captivity of Sodom and her daughters? the captivity of Samaria
and her daughters? and shall I bring again the captives? No, I will neither
do the one nor the other; thou have sinned above them, and have no cause but to
expect more rigorous dealings from me then they have had. Pisc. Junius, Polan.
read the words conditionally thus; If I shall return the captivity of Sodom
and Samaria, then I will return thine: but it is not in my thoughts, counsels,
or purposes, to return and restore them, who never provoked me as thou have
done; therefore much less do I intend to do so by thee.

Some take the words ironically: when I restore Sodom and Samaria, then will I
restore thee. But they are so destroyed that they are past recovery; I intend
never to bring the Sodomites out or the fire and seat them in Sodom; nor the
ten Tribes out or captivity, and settle them in Samaria, and no more do I
mean to restore thee and thy Captives.

Quest. Did not the Lord return the captivity of Jerusalem after 70. years?
how is it then true which is said here if this be the sense?

Answ. 1. When God threatens them with utter desolation, it is to be meant of
the body of people in general who had apostatized from God as the ten Tribes
had done, and there was no hope left for them; they were destroyed the most of
them in the war, famine, plague, captivity: and so not they, but some of their
posterity were restored, and brought back again. God had promised the Jews
came out of Egypt, that they should enter into Canaan: but observe, Numb. 14.
The people murmured, and God told them, v. 29, 30, 31. Their carcasses should
fall in this wilderness, and all from 20. years old, and upward, that none of
them but Caleb and Joshuah should come into the Land: Only their little ones,
which they said should be a prey, he would bring into it. So here it was not
the body of the people that returned, but some of their posterity.

Those Jews were at Jerusalem when Ezekiel thus prophesied, it is probable were
utterly destroyed, and never had their captivity returned.

2. We may understand it of a full return, which never was; though some Jews
came back again, yet multitudes staid behind, and continued in Babylon, as may
be gathered from Ezra 1.5.

3. Though the Jews were brought back from Babylon, yet never was Jerusalem in
that glory as before; neither was her Temple, State, or Kingly dignity such as
formerly. Ezra 3.12. Many wept when they saw the difference between the latter
Temple and the former.

Verse. 54. Of bearing shame, and being confounded, was spoken in the 52. verse.

In that thou art a comfort to them.
Sept. reads it thus (...), in that thou have provoked me to anger.

Jerusalems sins exceeding the sins of Sodom and Samaria, this justified them:
Some refer it to the punishments and judgments of God upon Jerusalem, which
was some ease and comfort to Sodom and Samaria, when they saw her in a
suffering condition with themselves.

Verse. 55. When thy sister Sodom, and her daughters, etc.
This verse is the same for substance with the 53.

Verse. 56. Thy sister Sodom was not mentioned, etc.
Hebr. is, (...) in auditu in ore tuo; there was no hearing of Sodom in thy
mouth. Thou did neither think nor speak of her and my dealings with her for
her sins, that so thou might have feared, and not fallen into her sins, or
greater.

In the day of thy pride.
Heb. (...) in the day of thy prides or prosperities.

When thou had honor, wealth, renown, greatness, and abundance of all things,
thy heart was lifted up; thou thought thy self happy and innocent,
disdaining to mind or mention Sodom whom thou contemnedst and slightedst: but
thy wickedness is come to such an height that Sodoms sin is little in
comparison of thine.

Obser. 1.
The sins of people may come to such an height, admit of such dreadful
aggravations, as to cause God to cut off all hopes of mercy, and cast them into
irrecoverable misery; Jerusalem had so sinned here, provoked God so heinously,
that he says he would sooner bring back the captivity of Sodom and Samaria,
then hers; they were cut off and cast into such conditions as were
irrecoverable, for lesser sins, and therefore what could she look for, God
would not show her any pity, Ezekiel. 5.11.7.4. read Jer. 15.1, 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
where you shall find God was so provoked by the sins of this people, that
though Moses and Samuel should plead for them, his mind could not be toward
them; he would cast them out of his sight, and death, sword, famine, captivity
should devour them.

Jer. 51.25, 26. I am against thee O destroying mountain, I will stretch out
my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a
burnt mountain. And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a
stone for foundations, but thou shall be desolate for ever.

It Is spoken of Babylon, whose sins had gotten up to such an height, that the
Lord threatened her with irrecoverable ruin; he would deal with this
Babylonish state as with a thing burnt to ashes, which is unserviceable,
irrecoverable; he would so break the power and state of the Babylonish Empire,
that it should never recover it self more.

2. One great end of Gods denying hope of mercy, and casting into irrecoverable
misery, is to bring sinners to shame and confusion: God says he will never
return her captivity, that she might bear her own shame, and be confounded in
all she had done. You have disgraced the holy Temple with your Idols; the holy
City and Land with your violence and bloody crimes; my holy name with your
inventions and abominations; therefore when once I have sent you into
captivity, you shall not return thence at all, but live in disgrace, perish in
what you have done, your estate is hopeless and helpless; you have made me to
bear shame, but in your captivity you shall bear shame and reproach enough,
even to confusion. Jer. 22.22. Thy lovers shall go into captivity, surely then
shall thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.

3. Great sinners and great sufferers afford comfort, such as it is, to other
sinners and sufferers.

Jerusalem was a greater sinner, and all things considered, a greater sufferer
then Sodom or Samaria: and it is here said, in that thou art a comfort unto
them. Her sins justified their sins, her sufferings justified their sufferings:
When Cities, Republiques, or Persons do see others to exceed them in sins or
punishments, they conceive theirs are the less, and so frame a kind of
comfort. Consolatio miserorum est habere socios pares aut transcendentes. Those
are miserable, through sin or punishment do think it some relief to have
companions, equals, or those go beyond them, especially in the same kind. Mar.
6.11. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
judgment then for that City. This will be a comfort when that day comes, that
any have been worse then they in sinning, and suffer more grievously for their
sins When the Jews in Babylon saw those of Jerusalem brought into the same
condition with themselves, to be captives, it eased their hearts. When men
suffer alone, it stings. In a storm at Sea, if one man be ship-wrack'd that
afflicts more deeply; but if there be fellows, and those suffering more hard
things, it eases in some measure.

It will be an ease to thousands at the last day, when they shall see the
children of the Kingdom cast out into utter darkness, that their sins and
punishments exceeded theirs.

4. Gods blessings, and abundance of creature comforts, through the corruption
that is in man, swells them with pride.

Jerusalem had variety of mercies, peace and plenty, and she was puffed up. In
the day of thy pride.

Prosperity makes proud, and fills with windy conceits of happiness, and
continuance in that happiness. Prove. 18.11. The rich man's wealth is his strong
City, and as an high wall in his own conceit. He thinks himself fenced and
guarded so strongly, that he is secure, and despises dangers. Ezekiel. 28.5.
Speaking of the Prince of Tyrus, the Prophet says, By thy great wisdom and
thy traffic have thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up
because of thy riches.

It Is a hard matter for men of high estates, not to have high minds; therefore
Paul counsels Timothy to charge those that be rich in this world, that they be
not high-minded, 1 Timothy 6.17. I have lately spoken of this subject; it was
Sodoms sin, Jerusalems sin, and I shall not insist upon it.

5. Proud persons mind not Gods dealings with others, though like themselves.
Sodoms sin was pride, haughtiness, and for these sins she and her daughters
were destroyed with fire from heaven; but Jerusalem in her pride forgets
Sodom, and never once names her; thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy
mouth. She should have considered Gods severity against Sodom for her sins,
and seen to it that they had not been found in her self: but plenty bred
pride, pride blinded, and made her forgetful of that example of divine
vengeance. It was near unto them; the place where Sodom stood was a
sulphurious lake, a lively monument of heavens displeasure against pride and
other sins: Lots wife turned into a pillar of salt to season them with fear,
yet they took no notice of these things, Isa. 5.12. They regarded not the work
of the Lord, neither considered the operation of his hands.

6. The Lord expects that we should take notice of, and improve his judgments
upon others: he blames Jerusalem here for not minding Sodomes condition; thy
sister Sodom was not mentioned. God dealt so severely with Sodom, Gomorrha,
and the other Cities, that all should hear thereof, might be instructed, and
fear to offend that God which can at his pleasure rain fire and brimstone.
Though judgments were executed long before, yet the Lord would not have men
forget them, but keep them fresh in memory and advantage themselves by them.
Jer. 7.12. Go to my place which was in Shilo, where I set my name at the
first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people. They had
forgotten the judgment of Hophny and Phinehas, and the Ark, and therefore he
minds them of it. In 1 Samuel 4.11. Psalm. 78.60. Jer. 26.6. he mentions it unto
them.

There are no judgments of God in the world or Scripture, but men ought to mind
them, and make use of them. The drowning of the old world, confusion of Babel,
7 years famine in Canaan and Egypt, the ten plagues of Egypt, the fiery
Serpents in the Wilderness, Earth opening her mouth, and swallowing up Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram: the men of Bethshemesh, Senacheribs Army, Jezabel, Ahab and
his sons, Baal's Priests, Athaliah, Ananias and Saphirah, etc. These and many
others ought to be thought upon to awake our secure Spirits to breed and
maintain fear in us, to provoke us to repentance for what is past, and more
exact walking for time to come. Luke 17.32. Remember Lots wife. And 2 Pet. 2.6.
God has made Sodom and Gomorrha ensamples to those that after should live
ungodly. There is much in the words that after should live: what, has God
turned those Cities into ashes? set them up as burning Beacons, to warn all in
the world that they live not ungodly? and shall their very sins be found in
Cities and families? will any dare to do such things as draw down such
judgments? surely none will? if they do, they must suffer such things for
their sins, and hotter fire, yea more scalding brimstone, because they took
not warning by these examples.

VERSE. 57, 58.
Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the
daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the
Philistims which despise thee round about.

Thou have borne thy lewdness, and thine abominations says the Lord.


THe Prophets had told Jerusalem of her wickedness, but she would take no
notice of it; much like Strumpets, who though they be the common talk of the
world for wickedness; yet because they enjoy their lovers, have pleasure and
prosperity, mind not their sin or shame: but when some stroke of God is upon
them, then their wickedness appears wickedness indeed, however they think of
themselves. The 57 verse. sets out Jerusalems pertinacy and stubbornness.

Of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria.
Heb. is, of the reproach of the daughters of Aram. Aram was one of the sons of
Sem, Genesis 10.22. from whom the Aramites descended, who peopled many places,
which therefore are mentioned with distinction. Genesis 28.2. Padan-Aram, 2 Samuel
10.6. The Syrians of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians of Zobah: the Original is, the
Aramites of Beth-rehob, and the Aramites of Zobah. Aram Naharaim, Psalm. 60.
Title, that is Aram which was between two Rivers called Mesopotamia, Genesis 24.
10. So Aram-Maachah, 1 Chronicles. 19.6. Syria-Maachah; the Original is,
Aram-maachah: and 2 Samuel 8.5. Aram-Dammesecke, which in our translation is the
Syrians of Damascus. The Septuagint renders the word Aram Syria constantly, as
Mizraim, Egypt, and Cush, Aethiopia: and under the name of Syrians were
included also the Mesopotamians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians, as Pliny testifies
in the fifth book of his natural History.

Some refer this time to the days of Ahaz, who was exceedingly wicked. In his
reign Rezin King of Syria, 2 K. 16.6. the Edomites and Philistims invaded the
land, and brought Judah low, and Tiglath Pilezer, King of Assyria, whom he
sent for to help him, distressed him, 2 Chr. 28.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. and helped
him not, though he gave him the gold and silver of the Temple, a portion of his
own, and of the Princes. This was a great reproach that they were impoverisht,
disappointed, and spoiled: And in the time of this distress did Ahaz trespass
yet more against the Lord.

This did Jerusalem no good, but she sinned more, and so her wickedness was
discovered, both former and present.

Or thus you may take the sense; before thy wickedness was discovered by my
sending the Syrians and Philistims upon thee, thou did never take notice of
my proceedings with Sodom and her daughters.

Which despise thee.
Hebrew is, (...) from (...) or (...) a Chaldie word which signifies to
despise, contemn, disgrace, as also to spoil, or from (...) spinam immittere,
as Kerker interprets it, to prick as with a thorn, and so are either spoylings
or despisings, they are as thorns in the sides of those that are spoiled or
despised.

Verse. 58. Thou have born thy lewdness.
By lewdness here is meant, the punishment of lewdness. In verse. 52. he
says, bear thy shame: here, thou have born thy lewdness. She had had a part
of her punishment, not all, more was behind then she had received. The Hebrew
word for thou have born is rendered diversely: by some in the future, thou shall
bear: by some in the imperative, bear thou. The context seems to me to call
for one of these, either bear thou thy lewdness; or, thou shall bear it. The
learned do observe, and say, that in the Hebrew tongue often the preter tense is
put for the future, and so it is most suitable here; God was bringing of
judgments upon her, and says in the next verse. I will deal with thee as thou
have done.

Obser. 1.
That wickedness is a close and covert thing, it walks masked, and in the
dark: before thy wickedness was discovered. Jerusalems wickedness lay hid.
Chap. 8.12. Son of man have thou seen what the Ancients of the house of
Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? Sin loves
corners and chambers: they that were the chief men in public, were the
chief sinners in secret. Isa. 29.15. They seek deep to hide their counsel
from the Lord, and their works are in the dark; they would neither be seen of
men or God. Job 24.15, 16, 17. The eye of the adulterer waits for the
twilight, saying, no eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face. In the dark
they dig through houses which they had marked for themselves in the daytime;
they know not the light. For the morning is to them as the shadow of death,
they are afraid of being discovered.

Men whose deeds are evil hate the light, John 3.20. Wickedness is a
night-bird, and loves darkness, veiling, muffling, secrecy. Wicked ones take
secret counsel, Psalm. 64.2. and privily lay snares, verse. 5. and secretly
murder the innocent, Psalm. 10.8. and slander their neighbors, Psalm. 101.5.
Paul tells you it is a shame to speak of those things are done in secret, Ephesians.
5.12. The greatest mischiefs, treasons, rebellions, murders are hatched in the
dark, and covered over with the fairest pretenses. Wickedness has a black and
ugly face, which if seen, would affrighten men; she therefore appears covered
and disguised.

2. Wickedness shall not always be veiled and hid; God will reveal and make
known the wickedness of men, Cities, States, and Kingdoms; he will pluck the
vizard from their faces, and discover them to the world, how closely soever
their sin was contrived and acted. David sinned closely and cunningly, 2 Samuel
^2.12. but God discovered it. The Israelites did secretly those things that
were not right against the Lord their God, 2 K. 17.9. and God made them known.
Sinful thoughts, counsels, affections, words, actions, gestures have been
discovered, Psalm. 50.21. Nahum 1.11. James 4.4. Mal 3.13, 14, 15. 1 King.
21.19. Prove. 6.13. Christ told you long since, there is nothing cov^red which
shall not be revealed, or hid which shall not be made known, Matthew. 10.26. And
before Chr^sts time Solomon left i^ upon record, Eccles. 12.14. That God shall
bring every wor^e into judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good,
or whether it be evil.

Let us judge our selves thoroughly for wickedness committed, that so it may be
hid, and take heed for the future that we do evil no more, l st it be
discovered to our shame and confusion. You may remember what discoveries God
has made of Treasons, Murders, Plots, and Mischiefs in our days. Things
have been brought to light that lay in deep darkness, and men have wondered at
the discoveries. Job. 12.22. He discovers deep things out of darkness.

3. Times of trouble are times of discovery; when great afflictions are upon
sinners, then their wickedness is made known.

When the Syrians and Philistims came against Jerusalem and her Territories,
spoiled and plundered them sorely, then her wickedness appeared. Before thy
wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach, etc.

Somewhat her wickedness was seen before, but not so fully, so greatly as
then. When Cities and States have peace, prosperity, they dissemble and clo^k
their wickedness, and many that know things, are afraid to speak out: but
when Gods hand is heavy, by war, plague, or other sad judgments, then men will
speak freely, and judge of the sins by the punishments; what grievous
punishments; there were grievous sins. When Sodoms judgment was so dreadful,
it was a proclamation to the world that her sins were answerable. When winter
comes, the birds nests are seen that were hid before: And so, when the
winter of affliction comes, the nests of wickedness do appear. When the
leprosy clave to Gehezi, it discovered his covetousness, 2 K. 5.26, 27 Have
not the troubles of England discovered the wickedness of England? I believe
England never appeared abroad or at home more ulcerous, black and loathsome
then now.

4. Times of warring, plundering, spoiling, are times of reproach. When the
Syrians and Philistims warred against the Jews, took Elath, 2 King. 16.6.
Beth-shemesh, Aialon, Gederoth, Shocho, Timnah, Gimzo, with the Villages
thereof, 2 Chronicles. 28.18. This was a time of reproach, as at the time of thy
reproach.

It was a reproach to have Strangers come armed and invade their land, to beat
their men of war, to carry away their wealth, to conquer and keep their Towns
and Cities.

5. When people are unfaithful with God, and fall to base ways, and
unwarrantable courses, it is just with God to leave them to be contemned and
despised of all about them.

Jerusalem was not faithful to her God and Husband, but fell to foul courses,
dealt unjusty with God and man: and what then? the daughters of the Philistims
despised her round about. Those that honor God he will honor, but those
despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Jerusalem despised the holy things of God, Ezekiel. 22.8. Thou have despised mine
holy things; therefore the Lord caused her to be despised, and so he will any
that turn from him after lying vanities. Job. 12.21. He pours ontempt upon
Princes. Psalm. 107.40. And causes them to wander in the wilderness where
there is no way.

VERSE. 59.
For thus says the Lord God, I will even deal with thee as thou have done,
which have despised the oath in breaking the Covenant.


THis verse. is the conclusion of the fifth part of the Chapter, which was a
commination of threatening, and conteins the sum of all those judgments
forementioned. The parts of it are these: 1. A judicial sentence, I will
deal, etc. 2. The cause of Gods so dealing, which is, despising the oath, and
breaking the covenant. 3. The ratification of this judicial sentence; Thus
says the Lord.


I will deal with thee as thou have done.
Sept. is, I will do in thee as thou have done: the Heb. is, with thee. Thou
have broken the Covenant thou made with me, promising to worship, honor, and
obey me: and I will not keep it, who promised to counsel, comfort, and protect
thee. Because I entered into Covenant with Abraham and your Fathers at
Mount-Sinai; you think that whatsoever you do, howsoever you provoke me by
your ingratitude, disobedience, idolatries and apostacies, yet that I am bound
by Covenant and promise to you, and that there must be performance on my part,
however things are on your part. But you are deceived, seeing you have first
broken with me, I am free, and shall render to you according to your merits;
you have sinned ^xcessively, and I will punish you answerably. (...) h^ve you
cause to blame or cen^ure me as being (...) and fa^^^, when as you your selves
are perfidious and Cov^nant-breakers.

Which have despised the Oath.
Heb. is, (...) which is from (...) or (...) to contemn, despise, di d^^e: ex
^^sta quo^am; and Avenarius makes it to have aff^inty with (...) conculcare, to
tread under foot, because we tread upon ^^ings d^spised. The Sept. is (...),
as thou have dishonored, di^grac'd the oath. Fr: tu as me sprise. Lavat.
contempsisti.

The oath.
Hebrew is, (...) which signifies not simply an oath, but an oath with
execra^ion, or cursing: it is such an oath as ties a man to keep promise or
Covenant, cum imprecatione mali, if he do not, and di ers from (...) which is
an oath without imprecation of evil, as you have it, Nehem. 6.18. Deuteronomy. 7.8.
Psalm. 105.9. But (...) notes swearing with a wishing of evil, as that a man
perish, be annihilated, suffer some grievous thing if he do not perform what
he swears. Numb. 5.21. it is called an oath of cursing: And Jer. 44.12. They
shall be (...) for an execration or a curse. So the verb is u^^d, Judge. 17.2.
Hos. 10.4. 2 Chronicles. 6.22. And when they did ^weare, it is said, Nehem. 10.29.
they entered into a curse, (...) and sometimes the curse was expressed, as 1 Samuel 14.44. Says Saul, when Jonathan had tasted the honey, God do so, and more
also. His meaning is this; I have cursed the man that shall eat any food this
day before evening: and seeing thou have transgressed, God do so to me and
more, let me be accursed, let me dye the death, if thou dye not. The like to
this is that of Jezabel, 1 King, 19.2. So let the gods do to me, and more
also, if I make not thy life as the life of on^ of them by to morrow this time.
So Chapter 20.10. sometimes it was employed, as Genesis 14.22, 23. I have lift up my
hand to the Lord that I will not take from a thread to a shooe-latchet, and
that I will not take any thing that is thine. Now it is employed here, i^ I do,
let the Lord do so and so by me. Psalm 95.11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath if
they enter into my rest. ^o it runs in the Hebrew; here is a part of the oath
concealed, employed, and not expressed, as thus; if they enter into my rest let
not me live, or let not me be God any longer.

The Sept. render (...) by (...) malediction and execration. They wished
themselves accur^^d and execrable, if they did not perform what they had sworn.
It Is the judgment of some, that the curses mentioned in Deuteronomy. 27. by which the
law was established, and unto which they said Amen, are here meant, and
doubtless they are; for there curses are pronounced against idolatry, bribery,
murder, and other sins; yea against every man that should not confirm all the
words of the law to do them. Now they did not observe them, but violate them
all in a grievous manner, and so despised the oath, that is the execrations and
curses which are called the curses of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.21.

In breaking the Covenant.
God entered into a Covenant with his people, verse. 8. and they joined in
Covenant with him. Exodus 24.7. Moses took the book of the covenant and read
in the audience of the people: and they said, all that the Lord has said we
will do, and be obedient. Here was a solemn engagement. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou
have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and
the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people. Here was a
mutual avouching and owning one another; and Deuteronomy. 29.12. the people are said
to enter into covenant with the Lord, and into his oath which he made with
them. This covenant they brake.

The H brew word is, (...) from (...) to break; which in Hiphil is to weaken,
make void, abrogate. Psalm. 33.10. The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen
to naught (...) he makes them frustrate, (...) Sept. He scattered and dashed in
pieces their counsels. Here in Ezekiel. the Sept. is, (...) to violate, or
transgress. When any thing material is done contrary to agreement, that is a
breaking of Covenant.

There be some things set down in the word more particularly, which are
violations of the Covenant, as not circumcising their males, Genesis 17.14.
Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3. Josh. 23.16. Making a league with the inhabitants of
Canaan, Judge. 2.2.20. Bringing the uncircumcised into the Sanctuary, who
polluted the worship and Ordinances, Ezekiel. 44.7. And the general was, the not
observing all things which God had commanded them in the Law, Lev. 26.15, 16.
If they did not all his commandments they brake covenant.

This breaking of covenant is set out in the word by several expressions;
sometimes it is called not continuing in the Covenant, as Heb. 8.9. They
continued not in my covenant. Sometimes unstedfastnesse in it, Psalm. 78.37.
They were not steadfast in his covenant. Sometimes forgetting of it, Deuteronomy. 4.23.
Take heed lest ye forget the covenant. Sometimes, yea often forsaking of it, as
Deuteronomy. 29.25. Jer. 22.9. 1 King. 19.10.44. and transgressing it, Hos. 6.7. Judge.
2.20. 2 Kings 18.12.

Quest. The Scripture says that God is a God which keeps covenant, Nehem.
9.32. yea faithful in keeping covenant, Deuteronomy. 7.9. And God says, he will not
suffer his faithfulness to fail, nor break his covenant, nor alter the thing
gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89.33, 34. How does the Lord then say here, I will
deal with thee as thou have done? Is not he bound up by his faithfulness and
promise to do them good though they fail? according to that in 1 Timothy 2.13. If
we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.

Answ. If the Covenant were made upon conditions, and those not observed, no
imputation could be laid upon the Lord if he perform not what was his part. The
Covenant you may see how it runs in several places, Deuteronomy. 7.9. The Lord thy
God he is God, the faithful God, which keeps covenant and mercy with them
that love him, and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations, and
repayeth them that hate him to their face to destroy them. All the blessings
and cursings, Deuteronomy. 28. depend upon obedience and disobedience, keeping and
breaking Covenant, so that the Lord is free to punish if man perform not.
Levit. 26.15, 16, 17. If ye will not do all my commandments, but break my
covenant: I also will do this unto you, appoint over you terror, consumption,
the burning ague. I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain
before your enemies. They that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall
flee when none pursues. So Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. They will forsake me, and break
my covenant, then my anger shall be kindled against them. In that day I will
forsake them, hide my face from them; they shall be devoured, and many evils
and troubles shall befall them.

2. Though God afflicted them very sorely, and cut off the body of this people
by severe judgments, yet he reserved some, continued his faithfulness, kept
covenant with them, and manifested his loving kindness unto them, according to
that written, Psalm. 89.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. God owned them in Babylon
for his people, and dealt like a God in covenant with them there. Ezekiel. 37.12.
O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your
graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

Obser. 1.
The tie of a Covenant between God and man is a strong tie, it has the nature
of an Oath, and an oath is the strongest tie of all. Thou have despised the
oath in breaking the covenant, that strong tie of an oath wherewith thou wast
bound to me thou have broken.

God promised unto Abraham to give him and his seed the land of Canaan, Genesis
12.7.13.15. Chap. 15.18 it is said, God made a covenant with Abraham, saying,
unto thy seed have I given this land.

Now this promise and covenant is ca^'d an oath, Genesis 26.3. I will perform the
oath which I swear unto Abraham thy father. Deuteronomy. 34.4. This is the land which
I swear unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob.

The covenant also which God made with them at mount-Sinai is is called an
oath, Dan. 9.11. It Is to called because of the bindingnesse of it: A man that
enters into covenant with God is bound as much as it he had taken the most
^olemne oath. Acts ^3.1. They bound themselves under a curse, or wi^h an oath
of ex^cration. As was at the giving out of the Law, and making the Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 11.26, 27, 28. They agree d to it, that if they did not do what God
commanded, what they covenanted, that the curse should come upon them, Deuteronomy.
27. when they said Amen to the curses: so that there was a strong obligation
upon them. Hence you have that express^on, Ezekiel. 20.37 The bond of the
covenant. A Wife is not tied more strongly to her Husband by the bond of
marriage, then a people is unto God by the bond of that covenant they make with
him.

God would bring th m under the bond of the Covenant by those judg^ments and
curses he wou^d pour out upon them, and make them, acknowledge him for their
God and King, as they did. Dan. 9.10, 11 We obeyed not the voice of the Lord
our God, to wal^e in the laws which he set before us by his servants the
Prophets. Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, therefore the curse is
powered upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses.

2. Such is the corruption of man, that it violates, frustrat s, and makes void
the st ongest obligations. They brake the Covenant, which was a sacred bond,
and had the strength of an oath, and bound them under penalty of being cursed.
God had set life and death before them, good and evil, Deuteronomy. 30.15. blessing
and cursing, Deuteronomy. 11.26. He had hedged them about with promises, with threats,
bound them in a covenant and oath; yet all would not do, such strong bands
held them not in, they brake all: God had broken the bands of captivity, Levit.
26.13. and bound them with cords of love, and looked they should have kept
close to him: but Jer. 3.20. Of old time I broke thy yoke, burst thy bands: and
thou said I will not transgress, when upon every high hill, and under every
green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.

God brake the Egyptian yoke and bonds by a mighty power, and freed them: and
they brake his yoke, his bonds by the mighty power of their corruption, and
would rather be in bondage to sin, then in covenant with him; neither was it
here and there a man that did so, but it was the body of the people; therefore
Jer. 11.10. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant
which I made with their fathers: All Israel and all Judah have done it: Lest
God should mistake, he would make trial of those he thought were most likely
to have kept his Covenant. Jer. 5.5. I will get me to the great men, and will
speak unto them, for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgments of
their God. They are in places of authority and honor, and resemble me, they
have understanding, knowledge, and time to consider of the covenant, the
engagements they are in, the benefits of keeping, and evils of breaking it:
but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds,
notwithstanding their breeding, the means of knowledge, and many mercies they
had above others, and such strong ties to have kept them in bounds, yet they
have not regarded me, my commands, threatenings, covenant or curses. Man's
corruption is violent, and will violate all engagements and relations.

3. Breaking of the covenant by sinning against God, is a slighting and
despising of the threats and curses of God: Thou have despised the oath in
breaking the covenant.

God has threatened all sin with woes and curses, see Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.
Cursed is every one continues not in all things written in the book of the law
to do them, Gal. 3.10. And the wrath of God it revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.18.

Now if men did not slight and despise threatening, wrath, curses, they would
not dare to sin, and break covenant with God; they think words are but wind,
that threatenings are but scar-crowes, having no great matter in them; or if
they have, they will not suddenly come, as Ezekiel. 12. When the Lord threatened
destruction to the Prince, people, Cities, and the whole land, they flighted
all, and said, The days are prolonged, and every vision fails, verse. 22.
Yea, the vision is for many days to come, 27. and so went on in their sinful
ways, and despised the truths of God.

When a man reproacheth and slanders another privily, he despises that branch
of the oath, cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly.

When children set light by their parents, they despise that part of it, cursed
be he sets light by his Father or his Mother.

When men take bribes or reward to pervert justice, they despise that clause of
the oath, cursed is he that takes reward so slay an innocent person: and so of
the rest, Deuteronomy. 27.

Now what presumption and boldness is it in men to despise the Oath, break the
Covenant of God, presume they shall do well enough though they sin, and
continue in sinful ways. Lev. 26.15. If ye shall despise my statutes, or if
your soul abhor my judgments, so that you will not do all my commandments,
but that ye break my covenant, I will do so and so by you.

Despising of the law is a despising of God, judging both to be little worth:
Shall the infinite, wise, great and glorious God magnify his law, and make it
honorable, Isa. 42.1. yea magnify it above all his name, Psalm. 138.2. And
shall sorry, sinful, foolish man slight, contemn the same? Shall he despise
the Oath, and break the Covenant?

5. See here the admirable justice of God, I will deal with thee as thou have
done: Thou shall be judge thy self; is it not equal to do like for like?
Thou have despised the oath, I will despise thee: Thou have broken the Covenant
unjustly to sin against me; I will break it justly to punish thee. Marvel not
at that expression of Gods breaking the Covenant, you have in the word that is
equivalent to it, Numb. 14.34. Ye shall know my breach of promise. God had
promised them, sworn to them that they should enter into Canaan; but they
brought up an ill report concerning that Land, murmured against God, who
thereupon told them they should not come into that Land, but wander forty
years in the Wilderness till their carcasses were wasted, and so they should
know his breach of promise: had they made good their promise, he would have
made good his promise; but because they brake with him in sinning, he brake
with them in punishing, and so here was exact justice, lex talionis, as in our
Prophets words also: they brake Covenant, and despised the Oath, and so made
God and his ways contemptible: whereupon God breaks with them, and makes them
and their ways despicable. Jer. 22.28. Coniah a despised broken Idol. Lam.
1.8. speaking of Jerusalem, he says, all that honored her despise her. She
was a derision, Chap. 3.14. a reproach, Ezekiel. 5.14. They said, sing us one of
the songs of Sion, Psalm. 137.3. An hissing, Jer. 19.8. All that passed by clapped
their hands at her, hissed and wagg'd their heads, Lam. 2.15. A Curse, Jer.
44.12. They despised the Curse God made them.

6. Breach of Covenant is so provoking a sin as God will certainly punish. Thus
says the Lord God I will deal with thee; Thou have broken the Covenant, and I
will not put it up at thy hands. The Lord appeared in a judiciary way, and gave
out a judicial sentence, ratifying it with thus says the Lord God: He is a
God of truth and power, and will undoubtedly punish the breach of Covenant. God
is infinitely byond all creatures: The nations to him are as the drop of a
bucket, the small dust of the balance, Isa. 40.15. Yea all nations before him
are as nothing, less then nothing, vanity, v. 17. What was this Nation of the
Jews then for the great God to mind, and so far to mind, affect, as to take to
be his people, to enter into Covenant withal; to counsel, comfort, protect,
prosper, and exalt with privileges above all the Nations in the world? It was
no better nor bigger then other Nations: but it pleased God to bestow himself
and his love upon this People, and to join in Covenant with them, the highest
favor a people could have; but what did they? they brake Covenant with God,
left him the fountain of life, love, mercy, and of all good, fell to other
gods, other worship, and went a whoring after the sight of their eyes, the
inventions of the Nations and imaginations of their own hearts: this provoked
God greatly, and made him say, Be astonished O heavens at this, and be horribly
afraid, be ye very desolate: For my people have committed two evils, they
have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no water, Jer. 2.12, 13. They violated the
Covenant, and God would visit for it. Josh. 23.16. When ye have transgressed
the covenant of the Lord your God which he commanded you, etc. Then shall the
anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from
off the good land which he has given you. God will make quick work with them.
Hos. 8.1. He shall come as an Eagle against the house of the Lord because they
have transgressed my covenant. Eagles fly swiftly; the Eagle was the King of
Assyria, who hastened to their destruction. Needs must breach of Covenant
provoke sorely, when it causes God to pronounce a curse upon the man shall do
it. Jer. 11.3. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, cursed be the man that
obeys not the words of this covenant.

A curse is a consuming thing: Persons, Towns, Cities, Nations consume away,
because the curse of God is upon them for breaking Covenant with him. Isa.
24.5, 6. The earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have
transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, broken the everlasting
covenant. Therefore has the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell
therein are desolate.

One place more, Levit. 26.25. I will bring a sword upon you that shall avenge
the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your
Cities, I will send the pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into
the hand of the enemy.

When the Covenant is broken, it has a quarrel with man, pleads against him,
calls for vengeance: the Original is, (...) vindictam faederis, the vengeance
of the Covenant. As there is much mercy in the Covenant if it be kept: so there
is much vengeance if it be broken: all the woes and curses mentioned in the
book of the law, are the vengeance of the Covenant; therefore when the Lord
told them by Huldad what he would do for the breach of Covenant, he said,
Behold I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof,
even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before
the King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 34.24.

VERSE. 60, 61, 62, 63.
Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth,
and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.

Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shall receive
thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger, and I will give them unto thee for
daughters, but not by thy covenant.

And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the
Lord.

That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done says the Lord.


We are now come to the sixth and last part of the Chapter, which is
Evangelicall, and conteins promises of mercy and comfort. Formerly the Prophets
had thundered out the threats of God against the multitude and wicked ones; here
he brings forth cordials to refresh the sad hearts, and drooping spirits of the
Saints who were amonst them.

In the words are held out, 1. Mention of a covenant made, and the time of it;
My covenant with thee in the days of thy youth. 2. A double promise. 1. Of
remembering that Covenant. 2. Of establishing an everlasting covenant, verse.
60.62.
3. The benefits of the Covenant, or effects thereof, which are, 1.
Evangelicall repentance, verse. 61. Then shall thou remember thy ways, and be
ashamed. 63. That thou may remember, etc. 2. Reception of her sisters to
mercy, the incorporation of Jews and Gentiles into one body, which is done by
way of gift and free grace; I will give them unto thee, but not by thy
covenant. 3. Acknowledgement of the Lord, verse. 62. And thou shall know that I
am the Lord. 4. Patient submission unto the hand of God, verse. 63. And never
open thy mouth any more. 5. Propitiation or pacification; When I am pacified
tow^rds thee.



Verse. 60. Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee.
God properly does neither remember nor forget; they are humane acts;
remembrance is an act of the understanding, recollecting the species of things
forgotten: and forgetfulness is a separation between the understanding and the
species of things, not always an abolition, in these senses neither the one nor
the other does befall God: He is said to remember, when he does that which
demonstrates he has regard to us, and so to remember his Covenant, when he
deals with us according to the grace and mercy comprehended in it. Psalm.
115.12. The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us. His blessing is
evidence of his mindfulnesse. 136.23. who remembered us in our low estate. God
did that convinced them that he was mindful of them. So Psalm. 98.23. The Lord
has made known his salvation, his righteousness has he openly showed, he
has remembered his mercy and truth.

God is said to remember in regard of us, not of himself. Chrysostom. Hom. 27. in
Genesis because he makes us to know and remember. When he does such things as are
documenta and indicia, that he is mindful of his Covenant. As when God
punishes, lays his hand heavy upon people, he remembers them and their
iniquities: and thus Maldonate carries it here, I will remember my Covenant;
that is says he, I will punish you; for punishments are part of the Covenant
as well as promises: but although he be right in this, that when God punishes,
he remembers men, and makes men remember him; yet he is alone with all
Interpreters I meet with, in putting that sense here upon the words. They all
take them to be meant of a gracious remembrance of his Covenant; I will
remember my covenant. I showed thee much kindness then, and I will again show
thee kindness,

My Covenant.
I spoke largely of the word berith, whence it was derived, and of the nature
of a Covenant in the 8. verse. He says here not the covenant, but my covenant:
he was principal in it, he swear and entered into Covenant with them.

In the days of thy youth.
When thou wast in Abraham's family and loins, or when thou wast brought out of
Egypt, and wandredst in the Wilderness at mount-Sinai, I made a Covenant with
thee, being newly come out of the house of bondage.

I will establish.
Heb. is, (...) I will confirm. You have the same word, Isa. 29.3. and it is
translated, I will raise forts against thee. ^^pt. is, (...) suscitabo,
constituam, you have broken, nul'd the Covenant what lies in you; but I will
raise it up again, and put life and power into it, make it firm and stable:
so Vatab. and Vulg. suscitabo.

An everlasting Covenant.
Heb. is, (...) pactum seculi. Sept. (...) an eternal testament. Vatab. Vulg.
Lavat. pactum sempiternum. Calv. Aecolampad. Jun. Pol. faedus perpetuum. Fr:
une aliance eternelle.

What covenant this was is to be opened. When this people had so grievously
sinned, as to be in a great part ruined, and the rest sent into captivity to
outward view, God seemed to have no people; the promise made to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, that in their seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed,
seemed to be void, and the Covenant made between God and them at Mount- Sinai
wholly dissolved; but however things appeared, it was otherwise: God minded his
Covenant, and would establish it with the remnant of them; and make additions
of more grace and mercy to it, before he gave them the Law in Tables of stone,
now he would write it in their hearts, and give them power to keep it. In Jer.
31.31, 32, 33, 34. you have the Covenant set down which our prophet here
means, and it is called a new Covenant, because of the new addition and new
administrations, not that the substance of it is altered: It Is the same law is
written in the hearts of those God makes his Covenant with, as was writ in the
tables of stone. It Is again mentioned in Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. That covenant at
Mount-Sinai some make to be mixed partly of works, and partly of grace; some
looked for life and justification by it, but therein it was faulty and weak,
Romans 9.31, 32. Gal. 3.21. Romans 3.20. Chap. 8.3. And so far as it comprehended
ought of the Covenant of works, it was antiquated, and more grace added, Christ
and the Gospel brought in more clearly and fully.

Observe. 1.
Although Gods people sin greatly, break covenant with him, meet with sad
judgments, yet he will spare some of them, and show mercy to them. Jerusalem
had grievously sinned, despised the oath, broken covenant, deserved as ill at
Gods hands as could be; but what says God; Nevertheless I will, etc. However
the people of God sin, however he deal with them for a season, yet he will
not altogether take mercy from them. Judge. 2.13. They forsook the Lord, and
served Baal and Ashtorath; whereupon God sold them into the hands of their
enemies round about: God was against them for evil, and they were greatly
distressed. Verse. 16. Nevertheless the Lord raised them up Judges, which
delivered them out of the hand of their spoilers. Psalm. 106.78. They understood
not the works of God in Egypt, nor remembered the multitude of his mercies,
but provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea. Nevertheless he saved them
for his name sake. Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. If they break my statutes, and keep
not my commandments, I will visit their transgressions with the rod, and
their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from you. Isa. 57.17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousness I
was wrath, and smote him, and hid me, and was wrath, he went on frowardly in
the way of his heart. This was bad enough: and though God hid himself, yet he
saw what he did. I have seen his ways, cross, perverse, provoking.
Nevertheless I will heal him also, and restore comforts unto him.

This sets out the glory and greatness of divine mercy: Are a people rich in
sinning? God is rich in mercy; are their sins great? his mercies are greater;
are their sins old? his mercies are from everlasting. Let not sour, hard,
sinking thoughts lodge in our breasts, whatever our sins have been. Psalm
147.11. The Lord has pleasure in those hope in his mercy.

2: However men forget their promises, covenants, yea break them; yet God will
not forget his promises, his covenant, I will remember my covenant. Though man
had a strict charge not to forget the covenant: Deuteronomy. 4.23. Take heed to your
selves lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God. Yet he forgate it;
yet God does not so, he is a God forgets not covenant, verse. 31. He is mindful
of it, Psalm. 111.5. He keeps covenant, 2 Chronicles. 26.14. He remembers it for
ever, Psalm. 105.8. Men are deceitful, lying, vain things. Psalm. 62.9. Surely
men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: but God is
real, faithful and true; hence i'ts said, Deuteronomy. 7.9. The faithful God which
keeps covenant. Tit. 1.2. God which cannot lie, promised. And 2 Timothy 2.13. If
we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. However the
creature prove, God does things upon the acount of his faithfulness. 1 These.
5.24. Faithful is he who has called you, who also will do it.

Solomon justifies God in this point of his faithfulness observably. 1 King.
8.56. Blessed be the Lord which has given rest unto his people Israel,
according to all that he promised, there has not failed one word of all his
good promise which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant. So in Josh.
23.14. says he, I am going the way of all the earth, and ye know, in all your
hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good
things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you, all are come to pass unto
you.

Therefore doubting of Gods performance is a great sin; to distrust him cannot
fail us or deceive us is intolerable; we apprehend it so through weakness of
grace and strength of corruption. Psalm. 89.39. Thou have made void the covenant
of thy servant. Because things went ill, the Church was sorely afflicted, and
many suffered hard things, he thought so. God had told David a little before,
that he would not suffer his faithfulness to fail. Psalm. 77.8. says Asaph,
is his mercy clean gone? does his promise fail for evermore?

Let us trust in the Lord for ever, and trust perfectly, he is a God of truth,
remembers his covenant. Psalm. 146.5. Happy is he whose hope is in the Lord, etc.

It should be encouragement to prayer, Psalm. 89.49. Lord where are thy former
loving kindnesses which thou swarest unto David in thy truth. Psalm. 74.20. Have
respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of the
habitations of cruelty. The covenant with Abraham, Isaac, etc. Abraham father
of all the faithful now, and we may press God with the Covenant, as David,
For the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.

3. Mercies come from God to a people through the Covenant, or for the
Covenants sake: had not the Lord been in Covenant with this people, he would
have minded them no more then other Nations: but because he had made a covenant
with them in the days of their youth, therefore he would show mercy, do for
them. 2 King. 13.23. The Lord was gracious unto them, and had respect unto
them, and compassion on them because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Though they were very wicked, murmuring, provoked God many ways, yet
for his Covenant-sake he did show them kindness. Psalm. 105.42. He gave them
quails, water out of the rock: and why? did they deserve it: no, for he
remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant. Moses knew this, and
therefore when the people had sinned, so as that God was resolved to destroy
them, Exodus 32. Calfe, etc. Verse. 13. he sets upon God with this argument;
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servant, unto whom thou swarest by
thine own self. As it is a great condescension in God to make Covenant with
any, so it is unspeakable mercy to those that are in Covenant with him.

4. When a Covenant is shaken, broken, fallen to the earth, and nulled on man's
part, God can raise it up again; I will establish. Jerusalem had sinned,
suffered grievous things, was carried into Babylon, abode there 70. years, and
lay buried as in a grave, the Jews were even out of hope, Ezekiel. 37.11. Our
bones are dried, our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts. But in the
next verse says God, O my people I will open your graves, cause you to come up
out of them, and bring you into the land of Israel.

5. When God does renew the covenant with his people, he makes some
comfortable, or gracious additions; as when an house, Town, or City are
repaired or new built, some enlargements or beautifyings there are, which were
not before. So here, I will establish to thee an everlasting covenant. The
Covenant before, they brake; but this was a Covenant they should not break,
Jer. 31.32. Therefore this Covenant is said, Heb. 8.6. to be a better covenant,
and established upon better promises. The promises are; That he will write his
law in their hearts: That all shall know him from, etc. That he will forgive
their iniquity, and remember their sin no more. These promises are better.

1. More spiritual.

2. More free without conditions.

3. More extensive.

Second editions have additions. Adam had the promise. Abraham more fully, etc.
with an oath.

6. God does all here upon the account of his own good pleasure; I will
remember, I will establish.

What saw God now in Jerusalem to cause or incline him to renew the Covenant:
She had despised the Oath, broken the Covenant, run out to excessive idolatry;
yet says God, I will, etc. Isa. 43.25. I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my own sake, not their sakes. 1 John 2.12. I write unto you
little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his mames sake.

A new heart will I give you, a new spirit will I put within you.

I will put my spirit within you, etc. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

VERSE. 61. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shall
receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger, and I will give them unto
thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.


GOd having renewed and established the Covenant with Jerusalem, yea an
everlasting Covenant; here begin the benefits and fruits thereof, which are, 1.
Remembrance of her ways, and shame upon it. 2. Reception of her sisters, Elder
Younger
amplified. 1. From the true ground and cause thereof, Gods free grace. I will
give, etc. 2. By removal of a supposed and false ground; not by thy covenant.



Thou shall remember thy ways.
It imports more then a bare remembrance; for the word (...) as Avenarius
observes, signifies reservare and revolvere in cord, to keep and roll a thing
up and down in the mind, so as thereby to be stirred up to the avoiding of
evil, or doing good. Psalm. 119.55. I have remembered thy name O Lord in the
night, and have kept thy law. Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it
holy: that is, so muse, meditate on it, as to be stirred up thereby to do those
holy duties belonging to it. So here, thou shall remember thy ways. So think
of, consider and mind them, as to be stirred up thereby to renounce them, and
turn from them, suitable to that of David, Psalm 119.59. I thought on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. It was an efficacious thinking on them.

Thy ways.
The Hebrew word (...) signifies a path which leads from place to place which
men do walk in, and metaphorically it is applied to the customs, manners,
actions, religions, and lives of men. Jer. 10.2. Learn not the ways of the
heathen: That is, their customs and manners. Prove. 1.19. So are the ways of
every one is greedy of gain: That is, their actions. 2 Chronicles. 28.2. Ahaz
walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and made molten images for Baalim:
That is, he did idolatrously, his religion and worship was as theirs were.
Prove. 4.19. The way of the wicked is as darkness: That is, their lives and
conversations are as darkness; the ways of sinners in the word are said to be
crooked, Ps. 125.5. Stubborn, Judge. 2.19. False, Psalm. 119.104. Grievous, Psalm.
105. Pernicious, 2 Pet. 2.2. Jerusalems ways had been crooked, stubborn,
false, grievous, pernicious, and these she should remember.

Be ashamed.
The Heb. is, (...) Erubesces, shall blush; the word (...) I opened in the 52.
verse. when I spoke of those words, bear thine own shame. The Sept. is, (...)
which Kircker renders despicies, thou shall despise thy ways; but Steph. in
Thesaur. says, it is prorsus and penitus infamia notare, utterly and thoroughly
to brand and infamize: Yea, infami and ignominiosa damnatione plectere, to
sentence and punish in an infamous and reproachful way. So should Jerusalem
upon serious remembrance of her ways, she should utterly renounce them, brand
them, yea shame and condemn her self for them, as not worthy to live.

When thou shall receive thy sisters.
Heb. is, in thy receiving, there is no when. Here the calling and
incorporation of the Gentiles into the Church is presented to consideration, of
which much had been said and promised of old: That is Genesis 9.27. falls in here;
God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. The
posterity of Japhet spread over many parts, and became heathenish; but God in
his time did bring them into the tents of Shem, that was the Church, by the
sweet voice of the Gospel they were wrought upon, and brought in. The promise
was to Abraham, that is him and his seed all the Families and Nations of the
earth should be blessed, Genesis 12.3.18.18.22.18. The heathen were promised
Christ for his inheritance, Psalm. 2.8. Isaiah makes frequent mention of the
calling and coming in of the Gentiles, Chap. 54. throughout. Isa. 42.4.60.3.4,
5. etc. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising: Thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed
at thy side; the abundance of Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of
the Gentiles shall come unto thee, etc.

This was made good in Christ's time, and after; when the Apostles who were
Jews preached the Gospel, converted some out of several Nations, and received
them into the Christian Church.

Thy Sisters.
The Nations were sisters to the Jews, coming from the posterity of Noah, as
the Jews did; or here they may be called sisters, for their likeness in
qualities and conditions. Jerusalem was very wicked, and so were the Nations.
Upon this account you may take that expression, Jer 3.7, 8. Her treacherous
sister Judah. Judah was like Israel in treachery and apostasy from God.

Thine elder and thy younger.
Not Sodom and Samaria, unless taken synechdochically for all the rest. Sodom
was not, and Samaria, by which is meant the 10. Tribes to this day is not come
in to the Christian Jerusalem; we must therefore include the Nations. The
words elder and younger in the Original are the greater and lesser (...) those
Nations are greater in extent, in people, in honor, in wealth, or lesser then
thy self, that were before thee, or since thee, when thou shall receive them.

I will give them unto thee for daughters.
Thou shall by the preaching of the Gospel beget them unto thee. In Jerusalem
was the first Christian Church, which consisted most of Jews: and when any
were converted in Jerusalem, they were added to that Church, Acts 2.41.47.
Hence Jerusalem had the honor to be called the primitive Church. Yea the
Christian Church is called Jerusalem, and said to be the mother of us all, Gal.
4.26. All converted Nations or persons are the daughters of the Christian
Jerusalem.

But not by thy Covenant.
Lest thou should think it is for thy faithfulness, holiness, obedience
that I do this; I tell thee I will do it, but not by thy covenant; which as thou
did carry it, gendred unto bondage, and made the very sons servants, Gal.
4.1, 2, 3.24. Thou shall have daughters, but not ex vi testamenti veteris, but
ex vi pacti mei, by virtue of my Covenant made with Abraham; not by the law of
works, but by the law of faith. Faith in Christ the promised seed, who is called
a Father, Isa. 9.6. and acknowledges the children which God had given him, Heb.
2.13. Behold I and the children which God has given me. So that thy covenant
does nothing herein, but all this shall be done by the Covenant of grace.

Obser. 1.
The love, kindness, and mercy of God is that which causes a sinful, guilty,
unfaithful people to remember their ways, and turn from them: says God in
the words immediately before, I will establish with thee an everlasting
covenant, show thee much kindness and mercy: and then thou shall remember thy
ways. Then thy heart shall melt, break within thee, and renounce the ways
thou have walked in, Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. God would gather
them from the Heathen, plant them in their own land, cleanse them from their
filthiness and idols, give them new hearts, new spirits, be their God, own
them for his people, multiply their corn and fruit: and what upon all this?
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings, that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities and
for your abominations.

When God did let out love, show kindness, and multiply mercy, then did they
remember to purpose their evil ways, how they had profaned his Name, his
Sanctuary, rejected his Counsel, his Ordinances, his Prophets; despised his
threatnins, broken Covenant, apostatized from him, turned idolaters, became
heathenish, yea worse then heathenish, and loathed themselves for such things.

Undeserved, or unexpected kindnesses do work upon the hearts of men have any
ingenuity in them; they are coals of fire, and will warm, yea thawe a frozen
icie heart. Pro. 25.21, 22. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat,
and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink, for in so doing thou shall heap
coals of fire on his head. Thy kindnesses will work in his head and heart,
make him reason thus: why should I think, speak or do evil to this man who is
so loving? who relieves me in my necessities, and preserves my life? ah! what a
wretch was I that had such hard thoughts, spoke such bitter words, and did so
ill by him, I will never think, speak, or do so more: Here are coals upon his
head and heart, that have warmed and melted him to good purpose. If man's
kindness prove such coals, how much more will the Lords? When he heaps
kindness upon a people unexpectedly, undeservedly, they will be coals of
Juniper, causing a flame in their bosoms, making them to say, ah what have we
done, how have we sinned against a God of love, against mercy, against grace?
we will do it no more. Ezekiel. 6.9. They that escape of you shall remember me
among the nations, whether they shall be carried captives, and they shall loath
themselves for the evils which they have committed.

When God did give them their lives for a prey, which was a great mercy; this
affected them, caused them to remember how they had sinned against God, and to
loath themselves for what they had done: If common mercies will do this, much
more covenant-mercies, which was the case here.

So when Christ looked upon Peter, how did it affect and break his heart, make
him go out and weep bitterly for what he had done, Luke 22.61, 62. It was a
covenant-look, such a look as had influence into his heart, and made him to
think with himself; what, will the Lord Christ vouchsafe to look upon me, who
denied him to be my Lord and Master? who denied that I knew him? who forsware
him? will he yet mind me? Ah wretch, that, etc.

2. Former ways are matter of shame to true Converts and Penitents: Thou shall
remember thy ways, and be ashamed; not only because she had wounded her
honor, her conscience, but especially because she had broken Covenant with her
God, violated his law, defiled his worship, and stained his glory. That which
causes shame is something evil and naught properly, things forbidden,
dishonest, dishonorable. Romans 6.21. What fruit have you then in those things
whereof you are now ashamed?

When the Romans were converted to the faith, they were ashamed of their former
ways, those sins mentioned, Chap. 1.29, 30, 31. When grace has got possession
of the heart, such a deformity is seen in men's former ways, that their blood
appears in their cheeks, and they are greatly ashamed of them. Jer. 31.19.
After that I was turned, I repented: and after that I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth.

After Ephraim was converted, became truly penitent, then Ephraim's sins were
burdensome, shameful, and confounding: When men are changed by grace, then
they loath their sins and themselves. Ezekiel. 20.42, 43. They should know God,
and remember their ways, and loath themselves in their own sight for all the
evils that they had committed; every sin would be matter of shame and
selfe-abhorency. They should loath themselves, not for evil to come upon them,
but for evil done by them for the evil of sin.

3. The Church under Christ, and the Gospe^, they are extent then that under
Moses and the Law: the Ch^^r carnal then shut up under the narrow bounds of
Judea, or the sense, ly land, but since it is enlarged to other Nations; In thy
receiving thy sisters, the greater and the lesser.

The Gentiles were a long time aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenant of promise: They were sisters, but not espoused or
married till Christ's time. Jerusalem was taken in to be the Lords, but not the
Gentiles. Cant. 8.8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what
shall we do with our sister when she shall be spoken for. Here the Church by a
prophetical eye seeing what should befall the Gentiles, that they should be
spoken for, and taken in by Christ, or spoken against, when taken in, (for
(...) will bear both) calls her sister, and a sister without breasts; she had
no means of grace, which are breasts, and breasts of consolation, Isa. 66.11.
But however a sister she was, and what shall we do for her? The Jewish Church
minded the Gentiles, and had it in her thoughts to do for her; why; she was a
sister? yet not a daughter: when it pleased God actually to bring in the
Nations to Christ, then they were Jerusalems daughters. Some were formerly
received in from the Gentiles, who were neither called daughters nor brethren,
but strangers, Exodus 12.48. and these were few; but in Christ's time the
partition wall was broken down, and they came flocking in as doves to the
windows, Isa. 60.8. And they were no longer strangers and forreiners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. And
Jerusalem was the mother of them all: So that was made good, Isa. 66.18. It
shall come that I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and
see my glory, my glory in Christ, my glory in the Gospel, read Isa. 54.23.

4. The coming in of the Gentiles, as it was of special grace and favor, so
most certain, infallible; it notes a powerful giving, John 6.37. I will give
them to thee: He says not they will come to thee, others will bring them: no,
but (...) ^^ve them. God would work upon them by his (...) spirit, and cause
them being given, to come in. (...) had given the Gentiles to Christ long
before, Psalm. 2.8. And though they minded not prophecies, promises, Christ,
Gospel, Jerusalem, themselves, or their own good; yet God minded them; and as
he had freely given them, so freely brought them in, and powerfully. Hence
these expressions, Psalm. 72.11. All Kings shall fall down before him, all
nations shall serve him. Psalm. 86.9. All nations whom thou have made shall come
and worship before thee O Lord, and shall glorify thy name. Isa. 11.10. In
that day there shall be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the
people; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious.

While Christ lay in the Sacrifices and Ceremonies, in the Prophesies and
Promises, he was a dark hidden thing, like a root under ground: but when God
sent him into the world, then he was as an Ensign lifted up; then he caused the
Gentiles to see him, and seek to him, and Jerusalem the place of his rest was
glorious. Isa. 49.20, 21. Zion should have so many children come in from the
Nations, that she should say, who has begotten me these? It was the Lord
begat them by the power of his spirit, he made them to run unto Christ. Isa.
55.5. read the 60. of Isa. consider and observe the conclusion, I the Lord will
hasten it in his time. And he did so, pouring out his spirit upon the Apostles,
whom he sent abroad into the Nations to preach Christ and the Gospel, to bring
all their brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all Nations unto his
holy mountain Jerusalem (that was the Christian Church) Isa. 66.20. So the
Kingdom was given to the Gentiles, Matthew. 21.43, etc. They made subjects of
Christ, and that fulfilled which you have in Psalm. 22.30, 31. A seed shall serve
him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation; they shall come and
shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall he borne. That he
has done this, the Lord did it, and that powerfully, nothing could hinder,
neither ignorance, profaneness, nor unbelief.

5. When Nations or any People receive the Gospel of Christ, they have a new
relation put upon them, they are daughters of Jerusalem: not Jerusalem in a
literal or carnal notion, but of Jerusalem in a spiritual and mystical
sense, as it notes out the Church, which is the Spouse of Christ and God. Hos.
2.19, 20. 2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.32. Christ and the Church are a great mystery.
Rev. 19.7. The church is called the Lambs wife. So Chap. 21.9. and she is the
mother of the faithful, as Abraham was the Father of them; for she brings
forth, and with difficulty. Rev. 12.2. The woman clothed with the Sun, viz.
the Christian Church, was with child, fell into labor, and was pained to be
delivered: and when any are born of the Spirit, and immortal seed of the word,
they are her children, and their privileges are great, I will name two.

1. God will be their Teacher, Isa. 54.13. All thy children shall be taught of
the Lord: And, who teaches like him, Job 36.22.

2. They shall have peace, yea great peace: Great shall be the peace of thy
children, Isa. 54.13. Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they which love thy law,
and nothing shall offend them. They are taught of God, and cannot but love the
law of God: Therefore let us walk as children of God, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. As
obedient children, not fashioning our selves according to our former lusts, in
our ignorance: but as he which has called us is holy, so let us be holy in all
manner of conversation. It Is an honor to be a son or daughter of Sion. Psalm.
87.5. Of Sion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her.

6. When holy things are abused, many times, God ownes them not, but calls them
theirs that have abused them, as here; thy Covenant. Jerusalem had broken the
oath, and despised the Covenant, and God calls it her Covenant. Isa. 1.11. To
what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices. 14. Your new moons and your
appointed feasts my soul hates.

7. People are apt to think, who are in relation to God, that for their sakes
God does much. Jerusalem was near unto God, he had taken her to be his: and
she thought when the Gentiles should be given into her for daughters, it was
for her sake; but the Lord tell's no, it is not for thy sake, thou have not kept
covenant with me, nor pleased me; thou could not challenge any such thing at
my hands, had thou walked never so exactly, much less now, having walked
contrary unto me; It Is not for thy covenant. When God showed mercy to the
Jews, Ezekiel. 36.32. Not for their sakes do I this says the Lord God, be it
known unto you. You may think it is so, but it is otherwise.

8. Not legal, but Evangelical dispensations, tenders of free grace and mercy
by Jesus Christ wrought upon the Gentiles. It was Christ, not Moses prevailed
with them. The commission was, Mar. 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature: The Gospel is semen fidei. Vehiculum
spiritus, 2 Cor. 3.8. Word of grace. Acts 20.32. Grace of God. Titus 2.11. Word
of life. Phil. 2.16. Power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16.

VERSE. 62, 63.
And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the
Lord.

That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done says the Lord.


THe former verse. contained two benefits of the Covenant established with
Jerusalem after her breach of Covenant. These verses tell you of more, which
we shall open to you, and finish the Chapter.

I will establish my covenant with thee.
Of establishing or raising up the Covenant was spoken in the 60. verse. and
therefore I shall not insist upon that; only note, the repetition of it argues
our backwardness to believe it, and Gods readiness to assure us of it: Men
once sensible of breach with God, are not easily induced to believe that God
will bestow great mercies upon them to make a Covenant with them, and to bestow
covenant-mercies: The Lord therefore out of his abundant goodness doubles the
promise of making and establishing his Covenant with Jerusalem, that so her
fears, doubts, and disputes may cease, and she be ascertained thereof.

Thou shall know that I am the Lord.
The Heb word (...) signifies to know, to acknowledge, to understand, to be
certain, and properly refers to the mind and understanding. Genesis 48.19. I know
it, I know it: that is, I certainly know it. The Sept. for the word here says
(...) thou shall acknowledge that I am the Lord.

The knowledge here meant is not common knowledge, but a saying knowledge; not a
legal, but an Evangelical knowledge; for he speaks not of that knowledge which
rises from afflictions and judgments, of which he had often spoken before. Chap.
6, 7.13: 7.4.9: 11.10.12: 12.20: 13.9.14.21.23: 14.8: 15.7: Thirteen times the
Lord says, they should know that he was the Lord, that it was by his
judgments; but here he speaks of such knowledge as springs from a fountain and
foundation of mercy. I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall
know me: That is, in another manner then thou did before; thou shall know me
spiritually, with a knowledge of faith and salvation: so much the word know
imports in John 7.17. Chapter 10.4. Now this knowledge differs from vulgar, legal,
and literal knowledge; for

1. It Is a more distinct knowledge of God, humane is more mixed, dark, and
confused. Job 10.22. The light is is darkness: Every ungodly man's light is
darkness; but he has light from God in Covenant, his light is clear. Prove.
13.9. The light of the righteous rejoices. If it were confused and obscure, it
would not rejoice. Jam. 3.17. The wisdom from above is pure: and the more
pure, the more clear, the more distinct.

2. It Is a savory, relishing knowledge, the soul is affected with it: Taste and
see that the Lord is good. No meat, no wine, no spice tastes more pleasant to
the palate of a man, then the goodness of God does to a man has the
spiritual knowledge thereof. Experientia and examen mentis dicitur gustus, R.
David, tasting notes knowledge and experience, Prove. 31.18. She perceives that
her merchandise is good: The Heb. word is, she tastes. The gain of her labor
is pleasant and delightful, Exodus 16.31. Manna had a taste like wafers, made of
honey. The true knowledge and taste of God is as sweet as any gain, as ever Manna
was. Cant. 2.3. His fruit was sweet to my taste, and his knowledge has a savor
in it, 2 Cor. 2.14.

3. It Is a deep-rooted and wel-setled knowledge. Job 38.36. Who has put wisdom
in the inward parts? or who has given understanding to the heart? the Lord
does it to those he strikes his Covenant with: thou shall know me. Thou shall
have a deeper and more rooted and settled knowledge then others. 2 Cor. 4.6. God
who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts: Not
in our heads only, not on our hearts only, but in our hearts. God seats the
knowledge of himself in the hearts of his; he puts and writes his law in their
hearts, Jer. 31.33. Wicked men have knowledge and light in their heads, but
darkness in their hearts.

4. It Is a knowledge distinguishable from other knowledge by the effects.

1. It Is peaceable, and causes men to live peaceably, Jam. 3.17. The wisdom
from above it pure and peaceable. Isa. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord.

When men know God savingly, they love peace, and pursue peace: but when
knowledge is literal, they are contentious and bitter.

2. It humbles much; the more men know God in his holiness, glory, and
goodness, the more humble they will be. Ezekiel. 20.42, 43. Ye shall know that I
am the Lord, and remember your ways and doings: And ye shall loath your selves
in your own sight for all your evils that you have done. When Job had a clear
and spiritual sight of God, he abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Chap. 42.5.
So Isa. 6.5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips,
and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen
the King, the Lord of Hosts, 1 Cor. 15.9.

3. It Is working and powerful; like fire it consumes the lusts of men's hearts,
and separates the dross of their spirits, 1 Pet. 1.22. The truth purified
their souls. Psalm. 119.34. Give me understanding and I shall keep thy law, yea
I shall observe it with my whole heart. Divine knowledge keeps under what
hinders practice, and leads out the soul to action. 1 John 2.4. He that says
he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him. Men have not the true knowledge of God when their lusts overpower them,
and make them disobedient.

4. Trust and confidence in the Lord; the knowledge we speak of has certainty
in it, and causes venturing. Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put
their trust in thee. They that know God spiritually, his truths, promises,
covenant, faithfulness, will resign up themselves to him, and lean upon him.
What is the bottom and ground of the Prophets exhortation, Isa. 26.4. Trust in
the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. When a man
has the true, real, and clear knowledge of this, he will trust in God. David
had the right knowledge of God, he said of him, He is my refuge and my
fortress, my God, in him will I trust, Psalm. 91.2.

Obser.
The true knowledge of God is a covenant-mercy; those are in covenant with God,
they have the saving and spiritual knowledge of him. I will establish my
covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord Jer. 31.33, 34.
Speaking there of the covenant of grace, says the Lord; I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. And they shall all know me from the least of them to
the greatest of them. So Heb. 8.10, 11. The knowledge here spoken of is not a
common, but a choice knowledge, and it is given to those are in covenant, it is a
covenant-mercy; none have such knowledge are out of covenant. They may by their
industry get a general, unsavory, and powerless knowledge of God, but they
have not this knowledge we speak of, it is given, 1 John 5.20. and is called
seeing of God, Job 42.5. Isa. 6.5. Mic. 6.9. The true light, 1 John 2.8. The
truth which is after godliness, Tit. 1.1. The mystery manifest to Saints, Col.
1.26. Sound wisdom, Prove. 2.7. Mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. The light of
life, Joh. 8.12. Excellent knowledge, Phil. 3.8. The teaching of God, Psalm.
32.8. and his spirit, Joh. 14.26. according to that in Isa. 54.13. All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord. He speaks of Jerusalem in covenant: God
would give her spiritual children, and they should have spiritual instruction,
whereby they should know God to be their God, a father of mercies, and God of
consolations; they should know the riches of his grace, and things freely given
them of their God, all the good of the Covenant.

Verse. 63. That thou may remember, and be confounded.
Of remembering and being ashamed was spoken in the 61. verse. And of being
confounded in the 52. and 54. v.

And never open thy mouth more.
Heb. is, (...) the words run thus; and there may not be to thee further
opening of thy mouth; that is, that thou may be silent, and not open thy
mouth any more. In the book of Divine things you read of several openings; the
opening of the hand, Deuteronomy. 15.11. Of the eyes, 2 King. 6.17. Of the womb, Genesis
30.22. Of the ear, Job 36.10. Of the lips and mouth, Psalm. 51.15.78.2. And
likewise of answerable shuttings, as the shutting of the hand, Deuteronomy. 15.7. Of
the eyes, Isa. 6.10. Of the womb, 1 Samuel 1.6. Of the ears, Prove. 21.13. Of the
mouth, Isa 52.15. Kings shall shut their mouths at him: that is, they shall be
silent, and submit to Christ. So here the not opening of the mouth imports
silence, patience, quiet, submission. Thou shall have nothing justly to
complain of me, or excuse thy self; thou shall justify me in all my
proceedings with thee, give me glory, and take shame to thy self.

When I am pacified toward thee.
Hebr. is, (...) in propitiando me, in my being propitious (...) properly
signifies to cover a thing, materia tenaci, with that which cleaves and
sticks to the thing covered; not with dust, grass, earth, wood, for such
things may easily be removed; but with pitch, glue, cement, so that the thing
covered cannot easily be brought to sight again. Genesis 6.14. Pitch it within and
without with pitch. It Is the same word; when a thing is pitched over, you
cannot suddenly come at the sight of it, and by way of metaphor its applied to
the covering of sin, and wrath caused by sin. Isa. 22.14. This iniquity shall
not be purged till ye dye: Heb. is covered. So Ps. 78.38. He forgave their
iniqui^y: Heb. he covered it. When sin is so covered as not to be seen again,
it is purged away, it is forgiven: So for wrath and anger stirred up by sin. Genesis
32.20. Jacob had offended Esau by getting the blessing, and he says, I will
appease his face: Heb. is, cover his face, or anger that appears in the face.
To come to our purpose; Jerusalem had sinned grievously, and Gods anger was
greatly up, and something there must be to cover her sins, and appease his
wrath, and that was the sacrifice, death, and blood of Christ, who is the only
coverer of sin, and appeaser of anger: he is (...) the true propitiation for
man's sin, and only pacifier of Gods anger, 1 John 2.2. He is the peacemaker,
Ephesians. 2.14. The purger of sin, Heb. 1.3. The mediator, Heb. 9.15.
Reconciliation, Ephesians. 2.16.

Some read the words thus; when I shall expiate thee from all that thou have
done. Others, when I shall pardon thee, or blot out all thou have done. Sept.
is, (...) in propitiating my self to thee.

Obser. 1.
Godly sorrow and shame for sin rises from the right knowledge of God in the
covenant of grace. I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall know
that I am the Lord: gracious, faithful, merciful, and what then? That thou
may remember, and be confounded and ashamed. Men's sorrow is according to
their knowledge; a vulgar knowledge, and a vulgar repentance; a legal
knowledge, and a legal repentance: but if the knowledge be spiritual and
Evangelical, the fruit of the covenant, men's repentance will be suitable;
sanctified knowledge will produce sanctified shame, sor^ow and tears. Zach.
12.10. I will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of supplication: and they shall look upon
him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for
his only son.

When men are in covenant with God, and have the spiritual knowledge of his love
and bounty, in giving Christ to take away sin, and look upon him in his
piercings and sufferings by, and for their sins, then will they mourn with a
great, but a spiritual mourning, which is the most kindly and acceptable. When
we apprehend God to have taken us into Covenant with him, to be our God, to
have done great things for us, to have promised great things to us, and to have
been very good to us, then the remembrance of our wretched ways causes a holy
shame, and a holy sorrow.

2. Those who rightly know God in the covenant of grace will not murmr
against, or accuse God for any of his dealings with them, but be silent and
submissive before him: They know God is infinitely wise, just, and holy, that
all their afflictions, chastisements, troubles, temptations, sufferings are
exceeding short of what they deserve; that nothing comes to pass without his
providence; that he can wrong none; that he does use unholy instruments
holily, and has holy ends in all his ways. Till men know the Lord spiritually,
in a covenant and Gospel-manner, they are apt to open their mouths, to accuse
and blame God; yea often they utter unsavory speeches, but when it is known, it is
otherwise. Job 1.22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. He
met with very hard things; but knowing God the right way, he opened not his
mouth against him, but for him, verse. 21. So David, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it. He was silent, and patiently
submitted unto the hand of God; he neither accused him, nor excused himself:
If I be reproached, persecuted, afflicted any way, I know it is thy doings, and
I will be dumb.

When Absalom that rebellious and unnatural son had driven David out of all,
and sought his life; what said he to it? If God have no delight in me, behold
here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him. If he will have me cut
off, and cut down by the hand of mine own wicked son, I am content: if he will
have me driven out from the holy City and Land, and live in a profane land
amongst his enemies, I leave it to him, let him do what he pleases, I know what
I have deserved. 2 Samuel 15.26. When God sent out a fire which consumed Nadab
and Abihu for offering strange fire, it was a sad affliction even for a godly
parent, and might have made Aaron open his mouth; but says the Text, he held
his peace, Lev. 10.3. It Is fit all flesh should be silent before the Lord, as
it is Zach. 2.13. And that every mouth should be stopped, Romans 3.19. But most
mouths are open against God, more or less; only those have spiritual knowledge
of him, and spiritual sorrow for their sins, are most silent, what condition
soever they be cast into; they will say with the Church, Mic. 7.9. We will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him.

3. Sin is such an evil as provokes God: when I am pacified toward thee, There
can be no pacification where there is no provocation. Esth. 7.10. Then was the
Kings wrath pacified. Haman had offended Ahassuerus before, and being hanged
for it, his wrath was pacified. Eccl. 10.4. Yielding pacifieth great offenses.
If there were not offense, no place would be found for pacification: where this
is to be made, provocation has gone before. Sin is that provokes a God of
patience and long suffering, it makes him angry and wrathful. Jer. 44.8. Ye
provoke me to wrath. Sin provokes him bitterly, Hos. 12.13. and makes him angry
every day, Psalm. 7.11. Yea it provokes him to jealousy, 1 K. 14.22. Let us
take heed of sin, and offending God any way; to kindle his anger but a little
is a dangerous thing, Psalm. 2.12. Paul knew it when he said, Do we provoke the
Lord to jealousy, are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22. We would not provoke
a Lion, a man of War, such an one as Smapson was: and shall we provoke God, who
puts all strength into beasts and men, who is a roaring Lion and the Lord of
hosts?

4. Though sin do provoke God greatly and bitterly, yet he is to be pacified:
when I am pacified toward you, he is not unpacifyable. Jer. 3.12. He says, I
will not keep anger for ever. His mercy endures for ever, but not his anger;
his wrath is momentany, but his kindness is everlasting, Isa. 54.8. Aaron made
an atonement for the people, Number. 16.46. Phinehas turned away his wrath, Numb.
25.11. Moses prevailed with God, and pacified him when he was very angry, Exodus
32.14. The Lord is a God ready to pardon, Neh. 9.17. Though men have sinned
much, long, provoked exceedingly; yet if they sue unto him, he is facile and
ready to forgive. When the man ought 10000. talents came to the Lord for
patience, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all; He hid not only
forbear him, but forgave him, Mat. 18.26, 27. With men it falls out often, that
they will never forgive: but the Lord is forward to it: And when the people
were full of sin, had greatly trespassed; He being full of compassion,
forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; yea many a time turned he his
anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath, Psalm. 78.38.

When man persists in sin, God cease from his wrath, and reaches out mercy.
Isa. 57.17, 18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him.

5. Gods being pacified toward a people is a great mercy, which appears herein
two things.

1. All that has offended is pas'd by and forgiven: When I am pacified toward
thee for all that thou have done: Not for one, two, or three, or an hundred
things done, but for all done; thy Idolatry, Oppression, Pride, Fullness of
bread, Idleness, Neglect of the poor, Injustice, Profaneness, etc When God is
once pacified, he is fully pacified for all sins. And here is magnitudo gratiae
divinae, be sins never so great, old, many, they are all done away.

2. He is so pacified, as that he will not be angry again with them for those
evil deeds. I told you in the opening the words, that Caphar notes such
covering of them, as they cannot easily be seen again; expiation, blotting out.
Isa. 43.25. I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake,
and will not remember thy sins. God so blots out when he is pacified, as not to
remember them. Heb. 8.12. God being in Covenant, and so pacified toward his
people, he is merciful to their unrighteousness, and their iniquity will he
remember no more.

Jer. 50.20. The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found.

Ezekiel, CHAP. 17.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying:

Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of
Israel.

And say: Thus says the Lord God, A great Eagle with great wings, long winged,
full of feathers, which had diverse colors, came unto Lebanon, and took the
highest branch of the Cedar.

He cropped of the top of his young twiggs, and carried it into a land of
traffic, he set it in a City of Merchants.

He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field,
he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willowtree.

And it grew and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned
toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and
brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.


THis 17. Chapter conteins, 1. A preface in the two first verses. 2. A riddle
or parable, from the beginning of the 3. unto the end of the 8. verse. 3. The
application of this parable, from the 11. verse. to the 22. 4. A promise of
mercy, from the 22. to the end.


In the Preface you have, 1. The author of what is prophesied in this Chapter,
which is the Lord, The word of the Lord. 2. The instrument by which it was
conveyed, Ezekiel, it came to him. 3. His appellation or title, Son of man.
4. A command laid upon him, Put forth, speak. 5. What, a riddle, a parable. 6.
Unto whom, to the house of Israel.


I shall pass over all in the Preface but these words; Put forth a riddle, and
speak a parable, which I shall open.

Put forth a riddle.
Hebrew is chud chidah, riddle a riddle, or sharpen a sharpning, whet a
whetting. (...) signifies acute dicere, to propound hard questions, difficult
and obscure THESES, to sharpen and whet the understanding. Judge. 14.12. I will
put forth a riddle. Magis animi quodam acumine quam certa indagine explorantur
secreta.
Sampson put it forth to try and exercise their wit. Verse. 14. They could not
in three days expound the riddle; for says Avenarius, it is acuteness rather
then search which discovers such secrets.

A riddle is a dark and subtle sentence or allegory containing a sense
different from the sound of the words: as that Jud. 14. Out of the eater came
forth meat, It Is called a dark saying, Psalm. 49.4.
and out of the strong came forth sweetness. The sense and meaning of the
riddle is another thing then the words import. The Sept. here put (...) for
riddle, which is a narration; but in other places (...) a problem or hard
question, as Psalm. 78.2. The Greeks were wont to propound riddles at feasts,
which were called (...) or (...) feast-riddles, (...) questiones aenigmaticae
in convivijs propositae. Phavor.
Dan. 8.23. The Vulg. and others have it aenigma from (...) to speak obscurely
and perplexedly. French is, propose une doubt.

Speak a parable.
Heb. (...) paraboliza parabolam: of this word was spoken, Ezekiel. 12.22. where
we insisted largely upon it. There it is called proverb, here parable. Mashal
is a sentence, a speech, axiom, metaphor, allegory, which has choiseness in
it, and is worthy memory. Solomon's wise and excellent sayings are called
Proverbs; quasi probata verba, tried, proved words. Parables are similitudes;
qubus res dissimiles conferuntur: much like unto riddles, comprehending the
same in them, Vid. Bonfrerium in Jud. 14.
as Psalm. 78.2. compared with Matthew. 13.35. Mashal and Chidosh are called
parables or similitudes. Heb. 11.19. Abraham received Isaac from the dead.
(...) in a figure, figuratively, (...) Parabola est (...) Explicatio rerum per
similitudinem quandam. Su das. Commentaria in Concord: and historia^, Evang. l.
2. c. 2. Si quid in uno loco videatur obscurius dictu^ id in alijs dici
planissime. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 26.
or representatively; he was dead, and rose. The Rabbis say it was in the hand
of a parable. Here was a lively parable or representation of his death and
resurrection. The words are used promiscuously here: and whether riddles or
parables, they present one thing in words, another in sense, and require
interpretation.

The Papists assert the Scriptures are obscure. Barradius the Jesuit says
they are aenigmatical, and brings this place for it. Son of man, put forth a
riddle, speak a parable unto the house of Israel: but he forgot the
explication of the riddle and parable afterward in the Chap. And the Father
says, if a thing be spoken obscurely in one place it is cleared up in another.

We grant there are riddles, parables, hard and deep things in the Scriptures,
1 Cor. 15.29. Heb. 6.4. and many places in the Revelations and other Books, are
difficult, obscure, and the wisdom of God is seen in it: For hereby man's
pride is stained and beaten down, his abilities what ever, moral or spiritual
exercised, and the dignity of Scripture kept up; but in things necessary to
salvation it is plain and easy. Timothy knew the Scriptures when he was a
child, 2 Timothy 3.15. And they are compared unto a light, 2 Pet. 1.19 shining in
a dark place: And Christ gives thanks, that the Father hid the things of the
Gospel from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes, Matthew. 11.25.
And Chrysostom says the Scriptures are so divinely written, Homil. 3. de
Laza. and hom. 10. ad Philip.
that all may read them profitably, both idiots and Artists.

The holy Scriptures are frequent in parables; some say they are as many as the
weeks in the year, 52. our Prophet and Christ do much parabolize. The use of
parables is,

1. To veil divine things, and keep them secret from the knowledge of profane
and wicked spirits, as Matthew. 13.13, 14, 15.

2. To help the memory: Parables are taken from things obvious to the senses,
and so make a stronger impression upon the memory; as similies are better
remembered then naked truths, they take stronger hold of a man's memory: so
parables.

3. To stir and quicken the affections and spirits of men. There is a sweetness
in truths conveyed by parables, so that they please and provoke to a further
inquisition after knowledge. When Christ had spoken in parables, the Disciples
came to him and said, declare unto us these parables, Matthew. 13.36. Chapter 15.15.

4. To convince, and that strongly. When David sinned greatly in slaying Vriah,
and defiling Bathsheba. Nathan came with a Parable unto him of a rich man
having Flocks and Herds, and a poor man having one Lamb, which the rich man
took from the poor man, and slew for his friend. David hearing this, gives
sentence: As the Lord lives, the man has done this thing shall surely dye.
Says Nathan, Thou art the man. Now David's mouth was stopped, the conviction
strong, he had sentenced himself, 2 Samuel 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. So the
parable of the householder letting out his Vineyard to Husbandmen, who beat his
servants, and slew his son: when the Lord comes what will he do to those men:
They being convinced of this great injustice, pass sentence against
themselves, and say, he will miserably destroy those wicked men, Mat. 21.41.

It Is the third use our Prophet intends here, viz. to quicken their attention,
affections, and spirits to those things he was to commend unto them; which had
they been in a common and familiar style, they would not have listened unto:
but being in a parabolizing way, they caused the greater attention, and made
the stronger impression.

Observe.
The wisdom of God in giving out Scripture; he ordered it so that all should
not be given out in one way, but in several ways, fitting it to the
capacities, conditions, and necessities of people: some parts are given out in
higher streins, others in lower; some in a plain manner, others in parables and
riddles. Isaiah is lofty, Amos is low: sometimes Christ spoke plainly,
sometimes parabolically: and Ezekiel sometimes is in visions and
hieroglyphicals, sometimes in riddles and parables: and sometimes he passes at
a lower rate. The manifold wisdom of God shines in it; hereby he invites men
to mind his word, to be affected with it so, that whether great or small, we
might repent of our sins, and prevent his judgments.

We come now to the riddle and parable it self.

VERSE. 3.
A great Eagle with great wings, long winged, full of feathers which had diverse
colors, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the Cedar, etc.


THis parable leads us to the consideration of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon,
who is likened unto an Eagle. This Eagle is discovered, 1. From its greatness;
A great Eagle, etc. 2. From the extent of it is wings; long winged. 3. From its
featherinesse; full of feathers. 4. From the variety of these feathers, which
had diverse colors. 5. From its actions, two whereof are set down in this
verse. 1. He came to Lebanon. 2. He took the highest branch of the Cedar.



A great Eagle.
This Eagle is called the King of Babylon, verse. 12. who was Nebuchadnezar, and
now it concerns us to see the correspondency between him and an Eagle, and upon
what grounds it is that he is so called. Some have told us an Eagle was the
Babylonian Ensign: but that is denied by those who affirm a Dove to be their
Ensign, which they gather from Jer. 25.38. where the words, because of the
fierceness of the oppressor, in the Original are, (...)
because of the fierceness of the Dove: And in Jer. 46.16.50.16. where the
words are the oppressing sword; in the Original they are the sword of the
Dove; that is the sword of Nebuchadnezar, who bare in his Ensign a Dove: but
the root whence jonah, (...) Pagn. Shindl. Avenar. Bux^. Critic. Sac.
a dove comes is janah, which signifies to oppress, and therefore is not
amiss rendered by our Translators in the places mentioned: and so has not
sufficient strength to prove that the Ensign of Chaldeans or Babylonians was a
Dove. It might be an Eagle notwithstanding this conjecture: but because both
these opinions are uncertain, we shall enquire after truth.

1. Eagles mind high and great things; Aquila non captat muscas.
flies and petty things they look not after (...) Eagles soar aloft, and are
in the clouds. Job 39.27, The eagle mounts up, and makes her nest on high. So
Nebuchadnezar had a high spirit, Dan. 3.15. Who is that God shall deliver you
out of my hands.
and minded high, great things, as Monarchs and Princes do: He made an Image
of gold, sixty cubits in height, and six in breadth, Dan 3.1. He minded
Kingdoms and Nations, Jer. 27.8. His heart was lifted up high when he said, Is
not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the
might of my power, vnd for the honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30. He set his nest
on high above others.

2. Eagles are swift in their flight and motions. Job 39.30. Where the slain
are, there is she. She flies swiftly to the prey, and upon all occasions.
Deuteronomy. 28.49. God threatened if they sinned, to bring a nation as swift as the
Eagle flies, Jer. 4.^^. ^peaking of Nebuchadnezar; He shall come up as clouds,
and his chariots as a whirlwind; his horses are swifter then eagles: They
found it so, Lam. 4.19. Our persecutors are swifter then the Eagles of heaven.
Alexander was quick in his undertakings. Julius Caesar expeditious, and
Nebuchadnezar had his excellency, that he was celer in conficiendis rebus, Jer.
48.40. He shall fly as an eagle, and spread his wings over Moab.

3. S^rong and cruel; they are the chief of all has wings, they are stronger
then other fowls. Isa. 40.31. They shall mount up with wings like eagles. They
have much strength in them, and being strong, do gripe and tear their prey
cruelly. Job 39.30. Her young ones do suck up blood. It Is natural to the
eagle to be bloody: so Nebuchadnezar was strong and cruel. Nations served him,
Jer. 27.7. He is called an oppressor. Isa. 14.4. He smote the people in wrath
with a continual stroke, he ruled the nations in anger. Persecu^ed, and none
hindered, verse. 6. This Nebuchadnezar brake the bones of Israel, Jer 50.17. He
heated the fiery furnace seven times hotter then ever, and caused the three
children to be thrown in.

4. Eagles are quick-sighted. Job 39.29. She sits upon the rock, and her eyes
behold a far off. And we use to say of men sagacious and discerning, that
they are Eagle-eyed. Nebuchadnezar sat on high in a Throne, and so other
Princes, and they see afar off; they see where prey is to be had; they are
greedy of honor, greatness, and wealth, and look every way, far and near to
find out what may satisfy; they have eyes and spies in all parts of their
Kingdoms, to search and sift out things, and make them known unto them.

Great.
(...) The Eagle, the great, he was a great K. and had many Ks. under him, as
appears by Jer. 52.32.
This Eagle was no ordinary eagle: Nebuchadnezar was a great King. Dan. 2.37.
Thou o King art a King of Kings, for the God of heaven has given thee a
kingdom, power, strength, and glory. He was great in titles, great in
attendants, great in possessions, great in power, and great in name.

With great wings.
This notes his power: wings are for motion and flight. Nebuchadnezar had power
to move, and move speedily, Sep (...).
as you heard before, for his power was great. By wings we may understand his
military forces. Jer. 49.22. Behold he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and
spread his wings over Bozra.

Long winged.
Hebrew is, long in feather or wing. (...). Sep. Longo membrorum ductu. Vulg.
Alatissima. Jun. Piscat.
If you will refer this to the long spears the Babylonians used, you may; but I
rather judge it is meant of the vast and extensive greatness of this King; for
Dan. 33. There were many Provinces under him, all the rulers of the provinces
were gathered unto him. Chap. 4.1. Nebuchadnezar the King, unto all people,
nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth. His wings were long that
reached to all people: and more then this; Verse. 22. O King thy greatness is
grown, and reaches unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth. He
had the largest dominions of any Prince then living.

Full of feathers.
Hebr. full of feather, the singular put for the plural. The Sept. is, full of
nails or talons. Others read the words as we do; what is meant by feathers
must be seen. (...)
Some do understand thereby the great riches and wealth this King had, (...)
they were his feathers: and it is a common speech among us that when men are
grown rich, we say they have feathered their nests: And the Germans when they
will punish a man's purse, say, his feathers must be lessened. Plumas alicujus
minuendas. Lavater.
This Eagle had store of these feathers; his Empire was oriental, and had
exceeding great riches in it: so full of gold, that the King made such an Image
thereof, as the world never saw before or since, Dan. 3.1.

But without prejudice to this opinion, I conceive principally by feathers
people are understood, they are the feathers of Kings. Prove. 14.28. In the
multitude of people is the Kings honor: but in the want of people is the
destruction of the Prince. A King may want wealth, and yet be in honor, if the
hearts of the people cleave to him, like feathers to the body of an Eagle, He
is like an Eagle without feathers.
there is his honor: but though he have treasures of gold and silver, and no
people, he is without honor, he is at the border of destruction. That which
invites me thus to interpret feathers, is the next words.

Which had diverse colors.
(...)
Hebrew is, variegation; or variety; we had the word in the 16. Chap. verse. 10.
where I penned it at large, and therefore shall not critizize upon it at all.
Sept. turns it, (...) tacitly implying the people by feathers: For, not his
wealth, Voluntatem ingrediendi.
but his people had a will and desire to come to Lebanon, and spoil the Jews.

Besides, as the feathers of the Eagle is of diverse colors, and carry a kind
of embroydery upon them which adorn her much: so these people were of diverse
colors, being of diverse Provinces, and of diverse customs, manners, habits,
ranks and orders, which served Nebuchadnezar in his wars with the Jews, and
this variety was an embroydering of the Army, and a glory to the King.

The next thing is the action of this Eagle, which is twofold.

1. He comes to Lebanon.
Lebanon is a mountain in Canaan, rising from the back of Sidon, and running
out 1500. furlongs toward Symira, as Masius observes out of Pliny. It Is a
hill very high, delightful and fruitful: It Is so called from the whiteness of
it; for the hight is such, that the snow continues upon it. Jer. 18.14. Can a
man leave the snow of Lebanon? Or from the abundance of Frankincense there,
which is white: It Is very delightful by reason of the sweet Frankinsense trees
which grow there, as also the sweet Cedars. Cant. 4.11. Thy garments are as the
smell of Lebanon: whereof it is very fruitful, as appears, 1 King. 5.6. and
thrived greatly, Psalm. 92.12. and excelled, Cant. 5.15. Of the Cedars grew upon
this mountain Solomon built the Temple, which therefore metonimically is called
Lebanon, Zech. 11.1. Open thy doors O Lebanon. That is, O Temple which art
built of the goodly Cedars grew upon that mountain, open thy doors. This Eagle
Nebuchadnezar came to Lebanon; that is, invaded the holy land which lay
contiguous to Lebanon.

And took the highest branch of the Cedar.
Heb. the top. Sept. the choice things. Vulg. is, (...)
medullam Cedri, the marrow of the Cedar. The Hebrew is plural, and notes not
one, but many branches, the highest branches: but most Interpreters render it
singularly, and understand by it Johoiachin King of Judah. There is much
written by Pliny of the Cedar, which rather has a show of truth, then
reality. L. 13. Nature. hist. c. 5. l. 16. c. 18.
It Is a tree of goodly stature, and therefore they are called Cedars of God,
Psalm 80.11. Like the goodly Cedars. Hebrew is Cedars of God. And the wood of
it is very durable; therefore the Temple was built of it, and Solomon made
himself a Chariot of it, Cant. 3.9.

The Cedar is in Scripture used to set forth a thriving, growing, flourishing
condition. Psalm. 92.12. The righteous shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Numb.
24.5, 6. Jacobs tents and Tabernacles were goodly as Cedar-trees beside the
waters. Here the Kingdom of Judah is represented by the Cedar, which was very
high and flourishing, so you may see the state of the Amorites, Amos 2.9. whose
height was like the height of Cedars. And as Cedars have some branches higher
then other, so had this State a toppe-branch, Jechoniah.

The taking away the highest branch, was the removal of the King from his
throne, 2 Kings 24.

VERSE. 4. He cropped off the top of his young twiggs, and carried it into a land
of Traffic, he set it in a City of Merchants.


THe Prophet here proceeds in setting down the actions of the great Eagle he
had spoken of before, and here are three actions.

1. Cropping. 2. Carrying. 3. Setting.
He cropped the top of the Cedars young twigs.

He carried it, whether? into a land of Traffic.

He set it, where? in a City of Merchants.

He cropped off the top of his young twigs.
Hebr. is, he pulled away the head of his tender branches. (...) is from (...)
to suck, because those tender shoots or branches do suck the juice of the
tree. Sept. is, (...) he has cut off, or taken away the top of his
tenderness. French, le bont de ses jeunes plants.

These twigs or plants were the Nobility of Judah, the Princes and Potentates
that were highest in the Kingdom, and next unto the King. These did
Nebuchadnezar deprive of their power and greatness, and so spoiled the glory of
the Land, those were most eminent he took away. Being young himself, he had
such about him.

And carried it into a land of Traffic.
Heb. is, into the land of Canaan: and so the Sept. But the word Canaan is not
to be taken properly, but appellatively, and notes Chaldea, which is so called,
because it is a land of trading and merchandising; for Canaan in Hebrew is a
Merchant. Prove. 31.24. She delivers girdles unto the Merchant. (...) so its
used Isa. 23.8. Hos. 12.7. And some render that in Zach. 14.21. In that day
there shall be no more THE CANAANITE in the house of the Lord, a Merchant in
the house of the Lord. Chaldaea was a land of traffic, as appears by Rev.
18.11. The merchants of the earth shall weep over Babylon, for no man buyeth
their merchandise any more. And it follows in our Prophet.

He set it in a City of Merchants.
The word here for Merchant is (...) and notes especially merchandising in
sweet things, grocery, spicery, perfumes, powders, and therefore in Can^. 3.6.
With all powders of the merchant. It Is the same word, and imports they dealt in
Myrrh, Frankincense, and all powders. Junius reads it in the City of
Aromatists, those that sold sweet things, which he thinks was so called because
they were so luxurious, as that they seemed rather molles Aromatarij quam viri
fortes.


The meaning of this verse is, that Nebuchadnezar took away the chief men,
Princes, Nobles, Counselors, Judges, Warriers, and carried them to Babylon,
and set them amongst those were Merchants, trading for the chief things the
world had. This you may see in the 12. verse, and also in 2 Kings 24.12.14, 15,
16.

VERSE. 5.
He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field, he
placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow-tree.


The seed of the land.
IEhoiachin, the Princes and Nobles being Captives in Babylon, he took
Mattaniah who was of the seed of the land of Judah, not of Babylon, of the seed
of the Cedars; for he was of the blood-royall, Uncle unto Jehoiachin, 2 King.
24. 17. Him did Nebuchadnezar set up for King, and changed his name, Sanct. in
4. Reg. 24.
calling him Zedekiah. His first name was Mattaniah, signifying the gift of
God, and according to the Syriack, the expectation of God; In the 13. v. of
this chap. it is expressed more fully: and has taken of the Ks. seed, and made a
covenant with him, and has taken an oath of him.
this he had from Josiah that godly King, whose son he was. His second name
was Zedekiah, given him by N^buchadnezar an heathen King, which signifies the
justice of God, whereby he minded him, being set up King by him, and sworn to
be subject unto him, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. Of the justice of God if he should break
with him.

Planted it in a fruitful field.
(...)
Heb. in a field of seed, in a field fit to receive, and fertile to bring forth;
he did not plant it in Babylon, or any other Province of his, but in Judaea,
which was a fruitful place. Isa. 5.1. It was a land flowed with milk and
honey, and abounded with good things exceeding all lands, Ezekiel. 20.6.

He placed it by great waters.
Husbandmen when they plant trees are observant of the soil, whether dry or
moist. So here, Nebuchadnezar placed this seed and young plant Zedekiah (for he
was but 21 years old when he began to Reign, 2 Chronicles. 36.11.) near unto, or
among the waters, that so he might root, grow, and bring forth fruit.

Jehoiachin was planted before, but he took no rooting; he reigned but three
months and ten days, 2 Chronicles. 36.9. and then was pluckd up; Vt firmaretradices
supermul^s^ aquas.
but Nebuchadnezar aimed at the rooting and settling of Zedekiah; the Vulg.
reads it, that he might strengthen his roots upon, or amongst the great
waters. Some by waters understand people: so Rev. 17.1. The whore sat upon
many waters: which verse. 15. are interpreted people.

They are inconstant, moveable, this way or that way as waters are. By waters
are to be understood the poor.

And set it as a willow-tree.
(...)
Heb. he put it a willow, or as a willow, so Interpreters have rendered it, but
upon what ground I cannot find; for the word safsaphah is either from a word
which is to peep, (...) is stridor and mussitatio aquilae.
make a noise like birds; as it is in Isa. 8.19:10.14. And so Avenarius deriving
the word from hence, interprets our Prophet thus, Stridore and sibilo emisso
posuit semen quod ore sustulerat aquila, he set it with noise and muttering.
It Is like Nebuchadnezar was troubled at the doings of former Kings, both
Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin, and therefore might murmr at the setting up of
Zedekiah.

Or else its from a word that signifies to spy, watch, (...)
observe, and so signies circumspection, and here is used adverbially, and may
thus be rendered; he set it most circumspectly, or with great circumspection,
and so both Junius, Piscator, and Polanus do render it,. The Sept. is, (...)
he looked into the thing: and Castal. composite collocavit; fearing lest he
should fall off, he took an oath of fidelity of him, and he became tributary
to him.

VERSE. 6.
And it grew and became a spreading vine, of low stature, whose branches turned
toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and
brought forth branches, and shot forth twigs.


HEre you have the effects of the seed planted, the meanning is this: That
Zedekiah being advanced to the Throne, he reigned: and while grateful and
faithful to Nebuchadnezar who raised him, he prospered.

It grew.
This plant or seed budded presently, he let the people of Judah see and know
that he had power.

Became a spreading vine.
Heb. is, (...) a luxuriaut vine. The vine abounds with leaves and sprigs, and
runs out far. Zedekiah increased in riches, friends, power, strength, but never
came to any considerable greatness: He was not like the tall Cedar, but as a
low vine; for it follows,

Of low stature.
(...).
Heb. is, low in stature; the vine is a plant that creeps upon the earth, and
grows not high, unless helped by others. Sept. says, he became a weak vine,
and little in greatness.

There was as much difference between his Reign and Jehoiachins, as between a
tall Cedar, and a low shrub: he was under Nebuchadnezar.

Whose branches turned toward him.
By branches, Nobles, Cou^sellors, Officers and chief attendants that depended
on him.
Some doubt there is, whither this him be Nebuchadnezar the Eagle, or Zedekiah
the Vine, to me it is appar nt, Nebuchadnezar is pointed at; for both Zedekiah
and his branches did depend upon the King of Babylon: and whilst they looked to
him, and kept Covenant, they flourished; both root and branches grew and
spread: but when they failed to perform engagements, the branches were plucked
off, and the vine rooted up.

The roots thereof were under him.
Nebuchadnezar gave rooting to this vine; what power soever Zedekiah had, it
was under him; he planted it in Judaea, his own country, tied him to
conditions, would have defended him from any other invasive power, and had it
in his hand to hold him under, or to make him a free Prince again at his
pleasure. The root has life, communicates virtue, and bears up the body and
branches. But whence has it all? is it not from the earth, in and under which
it is? So Zedekiah had his political or Kingly life, all his power and
strength from Nebuchadnezar under whom he was.

Obser. 1.
That Heathen Princes may come to much greatness. Nebuchadnezar who was an
Heathen, is called an Eagle, who is the chief of all birds, and not simply an
Eagle, but a great Eagle, with great and long wings, full of feathers. He had
great power, great territories, multitudes of people, yea Kings and Princes
under him. Dan. 2.37. Thou O King art a King of Kings; for the God of heaven
has given thee a kingdom, power, strength, and glory. And where ever the
children of men dwell, the beast of the field and the fowls of heaven has he
given into thy hand, and has made thee ruler over them all, verse. 38. He had
vast power over men, fowls, and beasts; he was the greatest Eagle of those
times.

Profane Authors make an Eagle an emblem of majesty and greatness. King
Pyrrhus would be called an Eagle, as Plutarch observes in his life. Alexander
the great that day he was born, two Eagles were seen to sit upon the top of
the house, which presaged his greatness; for he conquered Europe and Asia, two
great parts of the world; he was an Eagle had great and long wings, which
extended from East to West. Ahasbuerus was such an Eagle, he reigned from India
even unto Ethiopia over 127. Provinces, Esth. 1.1.

2. Princes, Potentates, who are the Eagles of the world, have an ill eye at
the Church and people of God. This great Eagle came to Lebanon, his eye was
upon the Jews that dwelt in the holy Land, that were the only people of God,
and them he made a prey of. Eagles have piercing eyes, strong beaks, terrible
talons: and let the Doves look to it, if any be in danger, it is they; not
Puttocks, Kites, Buzzards do Eagles mind, but Doves. The Church is in holy
writ called a Dove, Cant. 6.9. Psalm. 74.19. and it is subject to spoil and prey.
The Eagles have their eyes upon it, and watch their opportunity to tear and
devour it. Did not Senacherib that great Eagle, who had strong and long wings
come to Judah and take the defenced Cities thereof? came he not up to the gates
and walls of Jerusalem with full purpose to spoil and devour? Isa. 36.1, 2.
Did he not say, I am come to the side of Lebanon, and I will cut down the
tall Cedars thereof, and the choice Fir-trees thereof, Chapter 37.24. It Is Sion,
Lebanon, Jerusalem, that the Monarchs and great ones of the earth have spite
at. Did not the great ones of Edom, Ishmael, Moab, Hagaren, Gebal, Ammon,
Amalek of the Philistims, Tyrians and Assyrians conspire togther against Gods
people, consult against his hidden ones, and say, Come, let us cut them off
from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance
Mount-Seir had a perpetual hatred against the children of Israel, Ezekiel. 35.5.
Ammon, Moab, and Mount-Se^r, though spared by the Israelites when they came out
of Egypt; yet they came against Iehoshaphat and Judah to cast them out of
their possessions, 2 Chr. 20.10, 11.
, Psalm. 83. They would not only plunder them, but root them out; they would
utterly extirpate them, and the memory of them. Such was the intention and
attempt of Haman. Do not the Eagles and great ones of the earth seek to lay
wast Sion, and root out the generation of the righteous?

3. States may rise to a great height, even the height of Cedars; the Jewish
state is called a Cedar, yea, a Cedar upon Lebanon, an hill; Cedars are very
high. 2 King. 19.23. The tall Cedars: (...)
Heb. is, the tallnesse of Cedars. Amos 2.9. whose height is as the height of
Cedars, and they were higher then fir-trees. Zach. 11.2. Howl fir tree, for
the Cedar is fallen. Inferiors howl, mourn, when higher then themselves do
fall.

It Is said of the men of this State, they are become great, waxen rich, they
are waxe^ fat, they shine, Jer. 5.27, 28. But so evil that they over-passed
the deeds of the wicked.
The Jewish State being likened to a Cedar, was great, high, glorious,
powerful, God prospered it so that it flourished greatly; it was like the
Cedar for tallness, but not for sweetness; for Jehoiachin who was the top of
this Cedar, did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 24.9.

4. No Kings or Kingdoms are so high or great, but the Lord can bring them
down, and abase them. A great Eagle comes and crops the highest branch of the
Cedar, and the top of his young twigs: Jehoiachin, the Princes and Nobles a^e
taken away by him, and deprived of all their greatness and glory. The top of
this tall Cedar was broken off, and thrown to the ground, and it was done by
the counsel, appointment, and providence of God. Thus says the Lord, a great
Eagle came to Lebanon. God sent this Eagle to do it: He has means, ways,
times, to un-power Kingdoms, to un-king Kings, to un-noble Nobles: He can at
his pleasure remove Kings, and take them and others from all rule and
government. Dan. 2.20, 21. Wisdom and might are his, he changes times and
seasons. The times of all States, Empires, governments are in his hand, and he
removes the Kings and Governors of them at his pleasure: Job tells us, he
loses the bond of Kings, Chap. 12.18. The bond of Kings is their authority,
the laws and covenants by which people are bound unto them, the Lord takes away
the one, and makes people regardlesse of the other. He leads Princes away
spoiled, and overthrows the mighty, verse. 19. He pours contempt upon Princes.
Thus did he deal by Jehoiachin, he loosed his bond, led him away, spoiled and
made him contemptible.

Sometimes God takes them off from the throne by a stroke in War: so Ahab
was removed, 1 Kings 22. The Roman Emperors were 63. and only 6. dyed a
natural and peaceable death, as Fitzherbert observes in his Treatise
concerning policy and religion p. 2. c. 13. they were bloody, tyrannical, and
God took them off by unnatural deaths.
Sometimes by the act of their own hand: so Saul, 1 Samuel 31.4. Sometimes by
stirring up their own Subjects against them: so Nebuchadnezar this great Eagle,
that cropped the Cedars of Lebanon, was driven from his nest by the inferior
birds. Dan. 4.32. They shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be
amongst the beasts of the field. And verse. 33. he was driven from men.
Christian, King of Denmark was put from the Throne by his Nobles for his great
cruelty, himself, Wife, and three children banished, as Sleid. l. 4.

Other Kingdoms, and this also can tell you of Cedars whose top-branches have
been cropped: how it fared with Edward the 2. is not unknown unto you.

If Kings would not have God to loose their bonds, let them take heed how they
break his bonds, and go beyond the bounds of Religion and justice which he
sets them.

5. Though God do deprive great ones of great mercies, yet not always of all
mercies. The highest branch of the Cedar, and the top of his young twigs are
cropped, but they are not thrown away, or thrown into the fire; but they are
carried into a land of traffic, and set in a City of Merchants. Jehoiachin,
the Princes, and glory of the Land are deprived of their power and greatness,
that was a sad affliction; but they were provided for in a strange land,
suffered to trade and live. God mingles mercy with judgments; yea when they
are great, sharp, proclaim the severity of God; yet even then there is some
matter of comfort twisted together with them; if there be severity on the one
hand, there is goodness in the other.

It seemed to be the height of rigor to pull Jehoiachin a young King from the
Throne, and to deprive him and the Nobles of all the comforts that Canaan,
Jerusalem, and the Temple could afford, but it was not: their limbs might have
been pulled from them, their eyes put out, their lives taken away; but these are
spared, and they are seated, not in a Country-village, but in a City, and a
City of Merchants, that so they might have commerce with men of quality, be
taken up with merchandising affairs, and not mind their losses too much.

6. God prevents men's expectations, and raises up to that honor and greatness
they looked not for. God ordered the spirit of Nebuchadnezar, so that he took
of the seed of the land and planted it: that is, he made Zedekiah King, who
looked not for it; he was Jehoiachins fathers brother, 2 Kings 24.17. And
seeing the Cedar of Lebanon now cropped, had little cause to think himself or
any of the Jewish race should be advanced, he might have concluded warrantably,
that himself should have been carried into Babylon, set in the City of
Merchants, and not have abode in Canaan, be planted in the fruitful field and
City of God: but Gods thoughts are not the thoughts of men, he exalts whom he
pleases, Psalm. 75.6. Promotion is neither from the East, nor the West, nor from
the South; but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another,
and does it unexpectedly many times. Saul when looking for Asses had a
Kingdom, and Kingly honor bestowed on him, 1 Samuel 9. and 10. Chap. When
David's thoughts were-upon the Sheep and Sheep-folds, Gods thoughts were upon
him for higher purposes; he took him from his sheep, and sheep-folds, to
feed Jacob his people, and Israel, etc. Psalm. 78.70, 71. How unexpeandedly
were Hazael and Jehu raised to Kingly dignity, 2 King. 8.13. Chap 9.5, 6.
Joseph in Egypt, Daniel, Mordecai, and Esther in Babylon; did not God prevent
their thoughts, and set them higher then their expectations advanced. Hannah
saw, and confessed it long since, that the Lord raises up the poroe out of the
dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes,
and to make them inherit the throne of glory. Poor and mean men look not for
such high things, but the Lord freely bestows it on them. Psalm. 113.8. He sets
them with Princes.

7. The disposing of subdued Kingdoms is a difficult work, and requires
wisdom, care, and caution. Nebuchadnezar had subdued the land of Canaan, and
what does he? he wisely takes of the seed of the land, not of the seed of
Babylon, not a stranger, which would have bred divisions, contentions, wars,
and blood, but one of themselves, and places amongst them, and that with
circumspection: He made things sure as he could for himself, and sure for
Zedekiah whom he planted amongst, and set over the people; he was very
circumspect in this weighty business: so the word saph-saphah signifies: men
of this world are wise in their generations. This K. when he took away
Jehoiachin, carried away all Jerusalem, and all the Princes, and all the mighty
men of valor, ten thousand captives: and all the Craftsmen and Smiths, the
Kings wives and his officers, and all that were apt for war, and none
remained save the poorest sort of the land, 2 King. 24.14, 15, 16. He took
away all that might be of use to the new King, he would leave him none to give
him ill counsel, or assist him in ill enterprises; he planted him by great
waters, among multitudes of poor people, that had little for themselves, and
less for their King.

8. Tributary Princes and Kingdoms at first are respective and grateful to
those that they depend upon. Zedekiah was planted by Nebuchadnezar in Judea,
and his branches turned toward him, and his roots were under him: Himself,
and those belonged to him acknowledged their dependence on Nebuchadnezar.
Kindness, favor, is to be owned and confessed, though from Strangers and
Heathens. He sent to Nebuchadnezar, Jer. 29.3. yea he went to him, Jer. 51.59.
So that he was very observable of him: and while he was content with this
condition of being under that potent King, and faithful in keeping Covenant,
and performing Articles agreed upon, he and the Kingdom thrived; it is said of
him, he grew and became a spreading vine, which brought forth branches, and
shot forth twigs. He grew in estate, in children, in Nobles, in Offices and
Officers; he came to the condition of a vine, yea a spreading Vine that has
leaves and branches.

9. When the glory and strength of a Kingdom is marred and broken by wars,
it does not easily recover it is pristine condition, if ever. The Kingdom of
Judah, after Nebuchadnezars plundering and spoiling of it, in time became a
vine, but of low stature, in all Zedekiah's days it did not recover it self.
When a tree is cropped, it requires time to grow up again, and it may be never
attains its former height and glory. This Kingdom was a tall Cedar before, now
it was a low shrub; it had not that wealth, power, dignity, greatness it had
before. If a Family or Town be ruined by wars, it may be 7. years before they
get up again, and 7. to that, much more when Kingdoms are shaken, battered,
wounded.

10. See hence the instability of all earthly greatness. Kings and Kingdoms
that were high and most flourishing, are soon brought low: The Kingdom of Judah
was glorious, powerful, like the highest Cedar upon the hill of Lebanon: but
it continued not, it suffered many changes. Ten Tribes were rent from it in
Rehoboam's days. Senacherib infested it in Hezekia's days. Pharaoh Necho in
Jehoiakims, and put it under tax. Nebuchadnezar he cropped, Cropped the Cedar,
took off the highest branch, and lop of the young twigs, etc. So that the
kingdoms of this world cannot be holden long by any. Let us fear that God who
batters and shakes Kingdoms in pieces, look after, and labor for that
Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28.

Let us not mind the riches of the world, but labor to be poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

VERSE. 7, 8.
There was also another great Eagle with great wings, and many feathers, and
behold this vine did bend her roots toward him, and shot forth her branches
toward him, that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation.

It was planted in a good soil, by great waters, that it might bring forth
branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.


HEre you have the second part of the parable wherein the King of Egypt and
Zedekiah's revolting come into consideration.

Another great Eagle.
This Eagle was the King of Egypt, as the 15. and 17. verse. do certify. Kings
are called Eagles, and upon what account was opened unto you out of the third
verse.

This Eagle was great in power and dominion, but not so great as the other; for
though this Eagle had great wings, yet it is not said, he had long wings as the
other had.

Many feathers.
Much wealth, many people and Soldiers.

This vine did bend her roots toward him, and shot forth her branches toward
him.

Zedekiah looked at the power and greatness of the King of Egypt, Contrary to
his oath he entered into league with the Egyptians and hoped by their help to
recover the former liberty of the Jewish state.
and sent Ambassadors to him that they might join Forces. The roots of trees
do incline that way there is moisture and succor for them: so Zedekiah
apprehending that Pharaoh King of Egypt would succor and relieve him; he
falls off from Nebuchadn^zar, and seeks to him; he sent his Ambassadors, which
were as the branches of this Vine, into Egypt for horses and people, verse. 15.
Jer. 2.18. What have thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink The vulgar
reads for waters of Sihor, aquam turbidam, troublesome water, the waters of
Nylus were thick and slimie, troublesome to drink. (...) Deuteronomy. 11.10. it is said
they watered Egypt with their feet, by digging decks, furrows lines, or
passages for the water to run in, they had no rain there, as appears, Zach.
14.18. but they watered the country by letting out the waters of Nylus.
the waters of Sihor? Sihor was a little River before Egypt, Josh. 13.3. and
is put for Nilus or Egypt, and waters for the people and forces. Zedekiah sent
thither to draw the forces thereof unto his assistance.

That he might water it with the furrows of her Plantation.
Heb. From or by the lines of her plantation, the Hebrew word signifies a bed:
so it is used, Cant. 5.13. And a furrow which is a line drawn: and Avenarius
says it is sulcus aquarius, a water line or furrow through which the waters
ran. In Egypt they made furrows and lines through which the waters of Nylus
ran and watered the Country: so here Zedekiah endeavored by his Ambassadors
and presents to join interest with Pharaoh, and so to gain the help of men and
horse from him, whereby he might defend himself against Nebuchadnezar, whom
deserting he provoked against him. Pharaoh enterteining this motion, sends
Forces, as you may see, Jer. 37.5.7. And this was the watering of the Jewish
vine in the furrows of her Plantation. Sept. (...).
is, with the turfe of it is plantation. Vulg. in areolis germinis sui, in the
beds of it is budd or budding.

Verse. 8. It was planted in a good soil, etc.
This verse sets out the ingratitude of Zedekiah, who might not only have kept
his kingdom, but have prospered in it, and come to greatness, for
Nebuchadnezar had planted him in a good soil, etc.

If a Vine be planted in a good and rich soil, it roots, grows, flourishes
with branches, leaves, clusters, and becomes useful, delightful unto many: so
might this metaphorical Vine Zedekiah, for the soil he was planted in was the
land of promise, a fruitful field, as it is expressed in the 5. Verse. a good
field, as the Hebrew has it, (...)
here a good field is a fruitful field, and a fruitful field is a good field.

By great waters.
What was meant by waters was shown in the fifth verse. When trees are planted
by waters, there is no fear of wanting moisture and withering thereupon. Vines
do need much moisture, and draw abundantly from the soil: Zedekiah was among
the waters, viz. the poor people, who contributed their endeavors to make him
great.

That it might be a goodly vine.
The Heb. word for goodly is (...) which signifies comely, magnificent, strong,
Sept. (...) that it might be a great vine. Vatab. vitis egregia, an excellent
vine. Calv. a beautiful comely vine. French, Pour estre une vigne excellent.

Nebuchadnezar dealt honorably and Prince-like by Zedekiah, who being a
private man before, and liable to captivity with the rest carried away when
Jechonias was, was not only spared, but advanced to Kingly dignity, and set in
such a condition that he needed not the help of any, he needed not the waters
of Egypt and Nylus; he had Nebuchadnezar that great Eagle to be his Protector:
and had he been faithful in his engagements to him, he might have become a
goodly, great, strong, beautiful, excellent and fruitful vine.

Obser. 1.
That the Lord takes special notice of the Monarchs and Kings of the earth, of
their greatness, power, honor, wealth and glory. In the third verse. ke speaks
of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon; A great Eagle with great wings, long winged,
full of feathers, and of diverse colors. In this 7. verse. of Pharaoh King of
Egypt, A great Eagle, with great wings, and many feathers. Gods eye is much
upon Princes and Potentates of the earth. Psalm. 89.27. I will make David higher
then the Kings of the Earth. He observed them and their height, he sees and
notes their rising. Hos. 8 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me: Their
greatness, Dan. 4.22. Thy greatness O King is grown, and reaches unto
heaven. Their doings, Luke 22.25. The Kings of the earth exercise Lordship over
them. How they set themselves against God, Psalm. 2.2. Against him and his
people, him and his Army. Rev. 19.19. I saw the Kings of the earth and their
Armies gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and
against his Army. They are Gods upon earth, Psalm. 82.6. They bear his image,
have his authority: and if they step aside, and turn their greatness against
God, his cause and people, the Lord will strike through them in the day of his
wrath, Psalm. 110.5. He will cut off the spirit of Princes, and be terrible to
the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.12. Let Kings therefore be wise, kiss the
son, Psalm. 2.10.12. and improve all for the interest of Christ.

2. The Kings and Monarchs of the earth are not all alike, they are diverse,
and admit of disparity. Nebuchadnezar and Pharaoh both were Eagles, but the
Egyptian eagle was not so great and potent as the Babylonian; this was full of
feathers, that had many feathers; this had great and long wings, that only
great. Pharaoh's power extended not so far as Nebuchadnezar's. Some Princes are
little Eagles, some are great, and others very great. Those 31. Kings whom
Joshuah smote, were Kings of Cities, Josh. 12.9. to the end They were little
Eagles, and had little nests. Hamor was Prince of a Country, Genesis 34.2. he was
a greater Eagle: so Tidal King of Nations, Genesis 14.1. he went beyond Hamor, but
others exceeded him. Ahashuerus was an Eagle with great and long wings, his
nest was large, 127. Provinces over which he spread his wings, Esth. 1.1. So
Senacherib the King of Assyria, is called the great King, the King Assyria, Isa.
36.4. And Nebuchadnezar for his greatness is titled a King of Kings. The
Babylonian, Assyrian, Grecian, and Roman Emperors were great Eagles: God gives
power, honor, greatness, to whom he pleases, and in what proportion he
pleases; some are Eagles with greater, longer wings, and more feathers then
others.

3. Men's natures are such as that they are seldom content with any condition
they are set in. Zedekiah was set in the Throne, exalted to Kingly honor, but
this satisfied him not: this vine did bend her roots toward the Egyptian
Eagle, and shot forth her branches toward him. Adam and Eve at first were not
content with their condition they were set in, but must have and know more then
God allowed them, Genesis 3.6. Man being in honor, abides not, Ps. 49.12. He
abides not satisfied, his brutish desires carry him after forbidden fruit.
Habakuk speaking of a Chaldean Prince, says, He keeps not at home, he
enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but
gathers unto him all Nations, and heaps unto him all People, Hab. 2.6. Isaiah
tells you the King of Babylon was so unsatisfied with his present condition,
that he said he would ascend into heaven, and exalt his Throne above the Stars
of God, be like the most high. He had made the world a wilderness, and
destroyed the Cities thereof, and now he would up to heaven, Isa. 14.4.13,
14.17.

Pyrrhus King of Epirus, Plutarch in Pyrrho.
having enlarged his Dominions by the conquest of Macedonia, thirsted after
Italy: and demanding the advice of Cineas his great Counselor, he asked him
what he meant to do when he had conquered Italy, next I mean to get Scicily,
which is near, rich, and powerful; when you have gotten Scicily said Cineas,
what then? Africa says the King is not far off, and there be many goodly
Kingdoms, which through my fame and valor of my Soldiers I may subdue. Be it
so, said Cineas, when you have Afric and all in it, what will you do then?
said the King, Then thou and I will be merry, and make good cheer. Cineas
replied, Sir, if this be the end you aim at, what need you venture your
Kingdoms, person, life, honor, and all you have to purchase that you have
already; Epirus and Macedonia are sufficient to make you and me merry: had you
all the world you could not be more merry, nor have better cheer.

4. Discontentednesse with the present condition puts men upon unwarrantable
practices to relieve and free themselves from what they apprehend burdensome.

Zedekiah was discontented that he was tributary to, and dependant upon the
King of Babylon, he apprehended this a grievous burden; his Predecessors most
of them free and absolute Kings, and he to be under the power of another, and
he a Heathen? This kindled an ill, fiery, malignant spirit in his breast, and
made him sue to Egypt for help to shake off the Babylonish yoke, which was
unwarrantable and unlawful for him to do: This is like an ill wife, that
finding the yoke of her Husband a little pinching, deserts him, and betakes her
self to another. Zedekiah should have applied himself to Nebuch. for relief if
any thing were grievous to him, and not to Pharaoh on whom he had no
dependence, from whom he had received no favor; but discontent, and hope of
liberty puts him upon perfidious practices. The Israelites being discontented
with the taxes laid upon them by Solomon, su'd to Rehoboam for relief, he
unwisely gives them a rough answer, and exasperates their spirits; presently
they fall off from him, stone Adoram the Tribute-gatherer, make Jeroboam King,
and submit to him, 1 King. 12.14.16.18.20.

The Jews hearing the ill report of the land of Canaan, murmr and say, Would
God we had dyed in the land of Egypt, or in this wilderness: wherefore has
the Lord brought us to this land to fall by the sword, that our wives and
children should be aprey? were it not better for us to return to Egypt? And
see what their discontent put them upon: They said one to another, let us make
a Captain, and let us return into Egypt, Number. 14.2, 3, 4. They were weary of
Moses and Aaron, and their government, and now they would make them a Captain,
a King say the Rabbis, and return to Egypt to the Onions and Garlic, to
their old ways; such has been the condion of the people here. Jeroboam
thought by setting up the Calves, to secure himself and the Kingdom, but that
very thing was his ruin.

5. The condition divine providence sets any in is good, and therein they may
prosper if wise and contented. This vine was planted in a good soil, and to
what end? that it might bring forth branches, bear fruit, and be a goodly vine.

Zedekiah being made King in Israel, was set in a good condition: and had he
wisely managed the affairs of the kingdom, and been content with what God gave
him in by the hand of Nebuchadnezar, he might have prospered greatly, had a
glorious Kingdom, been a renowned King.

The Kingly office is honorable, and when God sets up Kings over people, they
might be happy, and grow potent. Solomon who was a wise King, he prospered
exceedingly in that soil he was planted in, and lived happily; but Rehoboam
his son through his folly and discontentedness with his people, lost 10.
parts of his kingdom, and made his reign troublesome afterward, 1 Kings 12.
Zedekiah by his folly and discontent undid himself, being impatient of the
yoke God had put upon him, he foolishly sends to, and relies upon Egypt, and
thinks by Egyptian hands to re-lift himself into a better condition than God
had put him in, but this was his ruin. Isa. 31.1. Woe to them that go down to
Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are
many, and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto
the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord. Had Zedekiah sought to the
Lord, he could have watered the furrows of his plantation better then Egypt.
It is a common sickness among men, and especially great ones, Kings and
Princes, that they make the good condition God has set them in unhappy to
themselves: would they keep within bounds, be content with what God has
allowed them, and use that wisely, they might do well, and live happily.

The God of Israel and his worship would not content Ahaz, but he must set up
the Damascene Altar, sacrifice to the gods of Damascus, hoping for help from
them, but they proved his ruin, and the ruin of all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28.23.

VERSE. 9, 10.
Say thou, thus says the Lord God, shall it prosper, shall he not pull up the
roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof that it wither? it shall wither in
all the leaves of her spring, even without great power or many people to pluck
it up by the roots thereof.

Yea behold being planted shall it prosper? shall it not utterly wither? when
the East wind touches it? it shall wither in the furowes where it grew.


THese verses do aenigmatically proclaim the event of Zedekiah's revolt; he
thought to have mended and made himself by it, but it was his ruin. Being
formerly compared to a Vine, here the Vine is sentenced.

1. Not to prosper; shall it prosper? 2. To be rooted up, so that it shall
wither, and neither have fruit nor leaves. 3. How; not by any great power,
verse. 9. but by an East Wind, verse. 10.
Shall it prosper?
Heb. (...) the word (...) signifies to divide, cut, pass through, and
metaphorically to pass, break through happily, to prosper. Sept. If it shall
invade. Cast. Shall it happen well to it. Others, shall it do or speed well?
Shall the counsels, designs, plots it has on foot take? This vine was planted
under the wings of the great Eagle, who did preserve and protect it while it
looked and leaned toward him, and then it prospered, verse. 6. But seeing the
roots and branches of this Vine bend and move another way, viz. toward Egypt,
shall it prosper? No, perfidiousnesse is not the way to prosper, it will bring
the axe to lop and cut it down. This interrogation is a vehement negation;
shall it prosper? It Is so far from prospering, that it is utter ruin is at
hand.

Shall he not pull up the roots thereof? etc.
This metaphorical vine Zedekiah should be deprived of kingly power: yea, his
Children, Nobles, Counselors, Officers, People, which were the branches and
leaves of this Vine, should wither and come to nothing; yea the place it grew
in, Jerusalem it self should be laid wast. The destruction of Zedekiah and his
Kingdom is likened to the cutting down and casting up of a flourishing vine:
The fulfilling of this you may see in 2 King. 25.7.18, 19, 20, 21. it is said at
Riblah they gave judgment upon Zedekiah, there Nebuchadnezar called a Council
of War, told him what he had done for him, in what engagements he stood bound
to him, which he expected should have been made good: how he had perfidiously
revolted from him, betaken himself for help to the King of Egypt against him,
and therefore now he should suffer for it: whereupon he slew his sons before
his eyes, put all the Nobles of Judah to death; and when he had seen these sad
spectacles, then he also outed Zedekiah's eyes, Jer. 39.6, 7.

Without great power, or many people to pluck it up.
Heb. is, and not in or with a great arm; that is, without great power, arm
noting power. The French renders it; There shall not be need of great power, or
many people to pull up the roots of it. Some read the words by way of
interrogation, thus, shall he not with great power? Insinuating that
Nebuchadnezar should come with great power and many people, as he did to cut
down and pluck up this vine; but this is rather forced then natural. Without
great power, or many people. Nebuchadnezar will bring multitudes and great
strength, but half or a third part will do the business; for Zedekiah has
sinned by his perfidious dealings, provoked me against him says God, and
therefore I will give him up to the hand of Nebuchadnezar without much ado; I
will be so far from helping him with counsel or protection, that I will
facilitate the way for his utter extirpation and ruin.

10. When the East Wind touches it.
Eastern winds are prejudicial, as to other things, so especially to Plants,
Vines, Trees. See Hos. 13.15. Ezekiel. 19.12. An east wind dried up the fruit. It
was an East Wind made Jonas to faint, Chap. 4.8. An east wind that blasted the
ears of corn, Genesis 41.6.

By east wind here is meant the King of Babylon and his Army, who is so called,
either because he should be as an eastern wind unto this Vine, dry up all the
moisture and sap of it, that it should wither in the branches and roots: or
else from the situation, Babylon being North-east from Jerusalem.

Hence is it that Nebuchadnezar and his Forces sometimes are called a wind out
of the North. Chap. 1.4. A whirlwind came out of the North: And here a wind of
the East, which should no sooner touch this Vine but it should languish.
East-winds are violent, sudden, and destructive: so should this be to this
Vine, even a scorching wind.

Obser. 1.
When men are perfidious and false in their trust and obligations, though
Princes, they shall not speed well, they shall not prosper. Shall it prosper?
Shall Zedekiah, his sons, Nobles, Counselors, People, that have had a hand in
his perfidious doing prosper? No, they shall not prosper, I am resolved upon
it. Let them take council together, it shall come to naught, as Isa. 8.10. No
counsels, no enterprises, no wars shall succeed well, I will blow upon, and
blast all; let them get all their power, their soldiery and strong men
together, go out to War, and see what shall be the issue. Jer. 32.5. Though
you fight with the Chaldeans you shall not prosper.

When men are false to God and man, they cannot thrive and prosper in their
ways. See what is upon record in 2 Chronicles. 24.20. Why transgress ye the
commandments of the Lord that ye cannot prosper? These words were spoken to a
King, and to Princes. Joash, his Princes and People had covenanted through
Jehoiadah's means to be for the Lord, Chap. 23.16. But Jehoiada being dead, the
Princes violated the covenant, and drew the King to Idolatry; hereupon says
Zachariah unto them, why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord that ye
cannot prosper? God is not with you, and you cannot prosper in any thing: have
any prospered in the late Wars amongst us who were perfidious? Let Wales, Kent,
Essex, and Sea it self speak.

2. Perfidiousnesse, treachery in Kings, Nobles, or any, is so provoking a
sin, as often it moves God to bring severe judgments upon them are guilty
thereof, yea utter destruction upon them and thei^s. Says God of this
metaphorical Vine, Shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the
fruit thereof, etc? Zedekiah thought by his perfidious ways to advance
himself; but his perfidiousnesse so provoked God, that for it he rooted him
and his Family up, and ruined the whole kingdom: Zedekiah loses his Crown,
Kingdom, Sons, Nobles, People, Eyes at once, and afterward his life. What sad
things did that perfidious act bring upon them, vid. Turkish Histor. page 287.
battle of Varna between Vladislaus and Amurath, etc.

3. It Is no difficult thing; for God being provoked to pluck up, root out,
destroy Kings and Kingdoms, how strong and well accommodated soever they be.
Here was a Vine planted in a good soil, by many waters, was likely to prosper,
grow, and continue long; but shall he not pull up the roots thereof without
great power or many people? A Gardener can easily, quickly pluck up a Vine, and
God did as easily pluck up Zedekiah who was planted in Jerusalem, compassed
about with mountains, assisted with the strength and power of Egypt; it is but
sending of a wind, when the east wind touches it. I will but call for a wind
says God, it shall be an east-winde, and as soon as that touches this Vine,
it shall wither: A wind seems an unlikely thing to do any great matter, yet
it is such as none can prevent, withstand, trees, ships, mountains, etc. have
suffered greatly by it.

2 Chronicles. 24.23, 24. The Syrians came with a small company of men, and the Lord
delivered a very great Army into their hand; because they had forsaken the Lord
God of their Fathers, they destroyed all the Princes of the people.

Let the power, policy of Princes be what it will, if they sin with a high hand
against God, he can without a high hand punish them; he has an East Wind, or
a North Wind, etc.

4. God magnifies his justice in punishing wicked men even in the place where
they sin, and turning that to their ruin which they thought would have been
their raising: It shall wither in the furrows where it grew. It grew at
Jerusalem; there it fined in bending its roots toward Egypt, and fetching
help from thence, and there it shall wither.

Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.30, 31. where he lifted up himself there it was said,
the kingdom is departed from thee. Those built Babel, smitten, etc. Genesis 11.
Sodomites, Genesis 19. Two Captains with their fifties, 2 King. 1. If you sin
where God has planted you, even there he can punish you, he can make you
wither in the furrows of your Plantation.

VERSE. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Say now to the rebellious house, know ye not what these things mean? tell
them, behold the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and has taken the King
thereof, and the Princes thereof, and led them with him to Babylon.

And has taken of the Kings seed, and made a covenant with him, and has taken
an oath of him: he has also taken the mighty of the land.

That the Kingdom might be base,, that it might not lift it self up, but that
by keeping his covenant it might stand.

But he rebelled against him, in sending his Ambassadors into Egypt, that
they might give him horses and much people: shall he prosper? shall he escape
that does such things? or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered?


HEre begins the explication and application of the former parable concerning
the Eagle, the Cedar, and Vine, and it extends unto the 22. verse.

1. You have a transition in the 11. verse. from the parable it self to the
explication of it. 2. An introduction to the explication by way of quere in the
first part of the 12. verse. 3. The explication it self: Tell them, behold the
King of Babylon it come, etc.
There is nothing in the transition and introduction needful to open, but
these words,

The rebellious house.
Hebr. is, the house of rebellion or bitterness. Sept. is, (...), to the house
of Israel that is contentious, so Kircker renders it. Stephan. in Thesaur.
says (...) is amaram iram concitare, to stir up to bitter anger: and so did
this house, which was not the house of Israel strictly taken, but the Tribe of
Judah; but in a large sense it was called the house of Israel,, verse. 3. Castal.
has it, nationi contumaci, to the contumacious or stubborn nation.

Obser. 1.
The Messengers of God must deliver the mind of God, be it pleasing or
provoking, be it matter of comfort or terror. Ezekiel must go and tell this
rebellious house sad things; that it should not prosper, that it should be
rooted up and utterly ruined; they must denounce judgments to the wicked, as
well as pardon to the penitent; threats to the stubborn, as well as promises to
the fainting, they must not give out what pleases themselves, but what the Lord
hints and commands them: The word of the Lord came to me, saying, say now to
the rebellious house, etc. It Is grievous to the servants of God to be Heralds,
Trumpeters of War, judgments and death; but they must not decline the
service, if they do, it may cost them dear. Jonas when sent of God to proclaim
war against Nineveh; yet forty days, and Nineveh, etc. He fled another way,
but God pursued him with a Tempest, and set the winds and waters in battle
against him, and his life was almost gone.

The Ambassadors of God and Christ must neither flatter the persons, nor fear
the faces of the greatest among the sons of men.

Jeremiah dealt roundly with Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin, and thundered out Gods
judgments against them, though great Kings, Chap. 22.17, 18, 19.21, 22.24,
etc. So Paul against Elymas, Act. 13.10, 11. Neither favor nor fear must
strike a Prophet dumb; when God has given in commission, he must give out, let
the event be what it will.

2. Truths disaffective, find cold entertainment; judgments threatened are
little minded. Know you not what these things mean? Do you not understand what
is pointed out in this parable and riddle? You may easily attain thereunto,
but that you have no heart to it, the things delivered please you not, are
cross to your wills, desires, humors, and therefore care not to know the
meaning of them: quae nol^mus facile and libenter ignoramus, men shut their
eyes against those things dislike them, and care not for the knowledge of them.
Jeremiah counseled Zedekiah to yield himself to the Babylonians, told him it
would be the means to save his life and the City from fire, Jer. 38.17. but it
suited not with his spirit, and he minded it not. Micaiah prophesied truths
distasteful unto Ahab; what followed upon it? he did not only disaffect those
truths, but the person also for the truths sake. 1 King. 22.8. I hate him says
Ahab, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil. And when he
told him that if he went up to Ramoth-Gilead he should not prosper, but his men
be scattered, and himself not return in peace; he believed it not, but
commanded the Prophet to prison for declaring the mind of God. So Luke. 16.13,
14.

Verse. 12. Tell them, behold the King of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, etc.
Do you not know what the parable means? the meaning is this: The great
Eagle, with great and long wings, full of feathers, and of diverse colors, is
the King of Babylon, Lebanon is Jerusalem, the top of the Cedar and twigs
thereof are Jehoiachin, his Princes and Nobles; the land of traffic is
Babylon, them has he taken away, brought thither, and seated there. The seed
of the Land is Zedekiah, (...) Excidit, percussit cum eo faedus. (...).

Lavat. Inij^ cum eo faedus. Fr. A traitte alliance auec luy.


whom he set up to be King in Jerusalem, invested with power, that he might
flourish and spread as a vine, etc.

Verse. 13. And made a covenant with him.
The Hebrew is, cut out, or struck a covenant with him. Sept. he ordered or
disposed a covenant to him. Lav. he entered into a covenant with him. French,
he made alliance with him. As for the word Covenant, I spoke of it largely in
the 16. Chap. verse. 8. The manner of making a covenant among the Jews you may
read of in Jer. 34.18. But whither the Babylonian King made this covenant with
Zedekiah in such a manner is not evident; a covenant he made with him that he
should be tributary to him, and bound it with an Oath, as follows.

And has taken an oath of him.
(...) and induxit eum in jusjurandu^. (...). Fr. a convenu avec luy en
juremont adduxit eum in exsecrationem. (...) potentes, fortes. (...)
Heb. has brought him into an oath. Sept. into a curse. French, has agreed
with him in an oath. Pisc. has brought him into an execration. The Heb. word
(...) signifies an oath with cursing or execration: a man ties himself with
imprecation of mischief if he perform not his promise, or things agreed upon.

He has also taken the mighty of the land.
Heb. is, the rams of the land. Sep. the leaders. Others, the potentates;
mighty and great men are called rams.

1. They are strong creatures, and have their name from a word signifies
fortitude, strength, virtue: so great men are strong, they are strengthened with
riches, honors, friends, counsel, strong holds, arms, and what the creature
can afford, yea with strong lusts. Dan. 8.20. The ram which thou saw having
two horns, are the Kings of Media and Persia.

2. Rams go before the flock, they have the precedence. Great men they are the
leaders, and go before the people, they carry multitudes after them: People
follow the great men, as flocks of sheep do the Rams, Ezekiel. 31.11.
Nebuchadnezer is called the mighty one of the heathen; the Hebrew is, the ram of
the heathen, he went before them and led them.

3. Rams are pushing things. Dan. 8.4. I saw the ram pushing Eastward,
Westward, Southward, no beast could stand before him; they often do fiercely
assault one another. So great men are pushing and butting with their power, and
who of the people can stand before them. Eccles. 4.1. On the oppressors side
was power. Ezekiel. 46.18. Princes and great men use to take of the peoples
inheritance by oppression, and to thrust them out of their possessions.

Many times great ones push and butt at one another till they break each in
pieces.

Verse. 14. That the kingdom might be base, or low.
This was Nebuchadnezar's design to take away the mighty men who were the
strength of the Kingdom, and held it up in greatness and glory, that so it
might be base, low, weak, and so the Sept. renders it, (...) that it might be a
weak kingdom of low stature, as it is verse. 6. regnum humile. Nebuchadnezar
left none but poor people, 2 King. 24.14. None remained save the poorest sort
of the people of the land.

That it might not lift it self up.
Nebuchadnezar conceived this People having been free, would hardly submit to
his yoke and depend upon him; he dealt politickly, as Princes in such cases use
to do, when they fear rising and rebellion, they carry away the wise,
skillful, strong, and honorable men, disarm them, break down their strong
holds, and plant Garrisons among them: so he took that course, he thought
should prevent this kingdoms lifting up it self any more. It Is like, the great
ones were of turbulent, stirring, and active spirits, and he ordered it so as
might secure the Kingdom to himself, and keep all quiet under Zedekiah.

That by keeping of his covenant it might stand.
Had it kept the Covenant Nebuchadnezar made with it, the Kingdom might have
continued; but breach of covenant was the breaking of the Kingdom: they did
lift up themselves, and God threw them down.

Verse. 15. But he rebelled against him.
Zedekiah growing impatient under the Babylonish yoke, shook it off: (...).
the Hebrew word for to rebel signifies abjicere dominationem superioris, to
cast away the authority of him has power over one. Sept. says, he receded
from him: and so he did, and went or sent to Egypt.

In sending his Ambassadors into Egypt.
Here was the bending of his roots toward the second Eagle, verse. 7. He sent
his Angels, as the Sept. has it, into Egypt, and made a league with Pharaoh,
which he had little cause to do, having no such hard conditions put upon him
by Nebuchadnezar as might have been: and besides, the Egyptians had oppressed
the Jews of old with bitter and sore bondage, and not long before had put down
Jehoahaz, carried him into Egypt, condemned the land in 100. talents of silver,
and one of gold, 2 Chronicles. 36.2, 3, 4.

That they might give him horses.
Egypt had plenty of horses; Solomon had horses from thence, 1 K. 10.28. And
when Shisack King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, he came with 1200.
Char^ts, and 60000. hors-men, which clearly evidences, they abounded in horses,
and were notable horsemen. The Jews were apt to look unto the Egyptians and
their horse, and placed too much confidence in them, as being mighty and
strong, Isa. 31.1. which occasioned the spirit of God to say, The Egyptians
are men and not god, and their horses are flesh and not spirit. You think they
are strong, swift, serviceable, as if they were all spirit, but I tell you they
are all flesh.

Shall he break the covenant?
(...). Ambrose. Isidorus.
Heb. shall he make void the covenant? transgress, violate the covenant? It was
no unlawful oath or covenant that Zedekiah took or made: such oaths or
covenants bind not, juramentum non debet esse vinculum iniquitatis: impia est
promissio quae scelere impletur. Herod sinned in performing his oath made to
Herodias, Mat. 14.7, 8.

Quest. What if Zedekiah were forced to this? it may seem it was so; for the
Heb. is, he brought him to an oath, verse. 13. If so was it binding, are
extorted oaths and covenants to be observed?

Answ. If there be nothing simply evil in them, they do bind, and are to be
performed. Men when they make covenants, take oaths; though they do them not
with full consent of will, yet they never do them against their wills; for there
is something expressed or employed that begets a willingness, if not a complete
will. As suppose a Thief sets upon a man, robs him, and threatens to kill him,
if he will not vow, covenant, swear, never to discover or pursue him: now
rather then lose his life, let the Thief spill his blood, add sin to sin, he
does it: So Zedekiah might fear captivity and his life, and upon those
considerations enter into covenant: and had it been so, he had been bound in
conscience to have made good his engagements. But there were other inducements
to bring him into covenant; as advancement to Kingly power, enjoyment of the
Kingdom upon conditions, preservation and protection by Nebuchadnezar.

Object. It was to his great loss, the prejudice of him and his posterity to
become tributary to a foreign King.

Answ. It Is a rule, that in injuria nullum jus fundatur, in injustice no right
is, or can be bottomed; but volenti non fit injuria; if a man will take a
Kingdom upon such and such terms, it is no injury to him, though abridged of
Privileges and Prerogatives his Predcessors had, it is mercy he has the
Kingdom, no injury he wants what others had: If he take the Kingdom
willingly, he takes the terms, conditions of it willingly. Conquerours may put
their own terms upon those they do promote. This case of loss and prejudice
is resolved by David, Psalm 15.4. If a man have sworn to his own hurt, he
must not change, break covenant, falsify his oath, if he will be a child of
God, or a Citizen of Heaven.

Obser. 1.
God would have people understand his mind and meaning in Scripture, even
riddles, parables, dark sayings, Know ye not what these things mean? Tell
them, behold the King of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, etc. He will have
Ezekiel to interpret the whole business unto them, what is given out darkly at
one time, in one place, at another time in some other place is cleared up,
opened, and made more intelligible. The types and sacrifices were expounded and
opened in Christ; he often spoke Parables, and often opened them, see Math. 13.
The service of the Passover God would have made known to the children should
come after, Exodus 12.26, 27. It would have been a dark business to them, God
therefore provided they should understand it: so for the heaps of stones set
in Jordan, and out of it God took care that they and their Posterity might
know the meaning thereof, Josh. 4.8, 9, 21, 22, 23.

The vision that Peter saw was afterward opened unto him, and he knew the
meaning of it, Acts 10. Truths, Scriptures that are difficult, God causes us to
know the meaning of by some other Scripture, or by his spirit, revealing his
mind to us in them.

An Angel was sent to Daniel to make him understand those dark visions he had,
Chapter 8.9, 10.

2. No rank or sort of men are exempt from common and grievous calamities, not
Kings, not Princes, not mighty men. The King of Babylon is come to Jerusalem,
and has taken the King, the Princes, and the mighty men of the land, and led
them with him into Babylon, they were conquered, plundered, taken, and carried
into captivity. Such is the condition of human things, that even kings lose
their kingdoms, their glory, greatness, and excellencies. Nebuchadnezar whose
greatness did reach to heaven, and dominion to the ends of the earth, Dan.
4.22. even he was driven from men, and did eat grass like oxen, verse. 33.

Dyonisius the King, or rather Tyrant, was driven out from Syracusa, and glad
to teach a School at Corinth. Great men do prey upon, and seek the ruin of
one another. Caesar ruined Pompey: Cassius and Brutus ruined him. Berengarius
the Emperor, and Albertus his son being overcome by Otho, were banished.
Bajazet K. of the Turks was brought to that misery as to be a stirrup for
Tamberlane to get up upon his horse.

Nimrod was a mighty hunter, he hunted men, and after a Kingdom, and by
ruining of others he raised himself. No sort of men, especially if wicked, can
promise any security to themselves long.

Rodericke King of Spain to assure himself against the children and friends of
K. Vitiza whom he had deposed, dismantled all the strong holds in Spain, and
disarmed the people; whereby, though he strengthened his state in regard of
Domestic dangers, yet he weakened it in respect of foreign attemps. For the
Moors invading him shortly after, and overthrowing him, found so little
resistance, that in 7. or 8. months they conquered almost all Spain. Look
abroad, and you may see the Kings and mighty men of the earth brought low, if
not wholly broken; let China, Turkey, Muscovia and nearer parts speak what they
feel and find.

3. That Covenants and Oaths are securing and binding things. Nebuchadnezar
makes Zedekiah King, but he will not take his word for dependence on him, and
being tributary to him: But he makes a covenant with him, takes an oath of him,
and hereupon he thought all was safe.

Oaths are arguments of man's weakness; all humane credit is so feeble, that
it had need be strengthened with something more firm then it self. Psalm. 62.9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: There is
no truth, fidelity in them, or their words. Men's hearts and tongues are so
deceitful and false, even Kings and Princes as well as others, as that they
deserve little or no trust to be given unto them, especially in matters of
weight, as Government and Rule. Oaths therefore being by the great God, who
knows the heart, and hears what the tongue utters, came in to strengthen
humane credit; for had not man sinned, there would have been no need or use of
oaths, Chrysostom. in Act Apostol.
man's corruption made way for them: Juramentum est fidei jussio, ubi mores
fidem non habent. An oath therefore is to further man's credit, and it has bin
of great authority and weight in all ages, Nullum vinculum ad astringendam
fidem majores nostri jure jurando aretius esse voluerunt. Offic. 1. Aqui. 22.
q. 89. art. primo. Plat. de legib. dial. 12. Ferdinand brother to Henery the
third, King of Castile, being left Tutor to his son who was but 8. months
old, and pressed by the 3. Estates of Castile to take the Crown to himself,
said, I will never be false either to my brother dead, or to my Nephew living,
to whom I have promised fidelity.
and amongst all people: and Tullie says, antiquity knew no bond stronger then
an oath to strengthen men's credit and fidelity: juramentum says Aquinas, a
jure dicitur, an oath was as a law, and some used no other law to decide
controversies but an oath, and it were well that according to the Apostle, an
Oath did end our strifes.

4. God knows how to imbase Kingdoms and keep them under; When wisdom, wealth,
justice and power are taken from a Kingdom, it is base.
he caused Nebuchadnezar to take away the mighty men of the land, that the
Kingdom might be base, and not lift up it self. Men mighty in power, in
wisdom, in justice, in wealth, they are the glory and strength of a land, they
uphold it; but when a land becomes guilty by sinning grievously, God can bring
it low, by foreign Forces, as its in the Text, or by civil Wars, as it is with
us at this day: and not only does God bring down kingdoms, but keep them so
that they cannot get up.

5. Faithfulness and justice uphold kingdoms, that by keeping of covenant it
might stand. Had Zedekiah been faithful in the Covenant, just in performing
the Oath made to Nebuchadnezar, the Kingdom had stood, himself continued
reigning, his Princes and mighty men abode in honor, and all things flourished.

Fidelity in observing and performing men's words, promises, Tull. l. 1 de Offic.
covenants, oaths, is fundamentum justiciae, the foundation of justice, and
justice is nervus and salus reipublicae; If people be not faithful in their
covenants and promises, how can a Prince confide in them, that they will be
loyal: and if a Prince be false in his word, violate protestations, covenants,
oaths, what protection, safety, or justice can they expect from him: where is
no faithfulness, there can be no justice, and where that is wanting, can be no
security to any State. Its justice establishes a land, but he receives gifts
overthrows it, Prove. 29.4.

Should not a King receive gifts? no, not to pervert justice: if he be
covetous, he will be injust, false, and so overthrow all; but if ^ighteous, he
will preserve, uphold all, for righteousness exalts a nation, Prove. 14.34.

6. Violating of Covenants, Oaths, and perfidious doings, falsifying of trust
is very ill in any, especially in Princes, who resemble God, and so ill that
God will not suffer it to go unpunished. Zedekiah rebels, falls off from
Nebuchadnezar, breaks all bonds and engagements made unto him, and sues to
Egypt for help. This was a sin of that nature, as made the Lord to say, Shall
he prosper? shall he escape that does such things? shall he break covenant, and
be delivered? No, he shall not prosper, nor escape, nor be delivered: I appeal
to thee Ezekiel. to al men, whither such a man should find any favor, whither such
a man does such things should not be made exemplary to all the world? yes he
does, and God made him so: when men are perfidious, and violate oaths, they are
in credit neither with God or good men, their very names stink, and they live
under perpetual infamy. Men's credits are like glasses, which if broken, can
never be mended again, especially if stained with perfidiousnesse, breach of
Oath and Covenant. Other sins may be imputed to frailty and error, and so be
more pardonable: but this sin argues a base, vile and treacherous nature, and
is not excusable in any, least of all in Princes, who should be noble and
ingenuous, and stand more upon their word, Covenants, and oaths then others,
because they are public persons, and their actions have great influence into
all sorts of persons, they greatly dishonor God whom they represent, abuse his
Commission, and shamefully profane his Name, God is therefore greatly set
against such. Psalm. 55.23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days.

Usually men of treacherous spirits are bloody, and God by one judgment or
other cuts them off, or their posterity, or both. It fell out so with Zedekiah
and with Saul who was false and bloody toward David, and toward the Priests
whom he caused to be slain: he brake the Covenant with the Gibeonites,
himself fell by the Philistims and his own sword, and 7. of his sons hanged
for it, 2 Samuel 21.

The Duke of Burbon being made Governor of Millan by Charles the fifth, did so
exact of, and oppress the people that they rose up against him; he to pacify
them bound himself by oath to certain conditions, wishing if he did not
faithfully perform them, he might be killed with a bullet in the first occasion
of war should be offered. Notwithstanding his oath and his imprecation, he
tyrannized over the people, and shortly after at the siege of Rome by a Soldier
of his own negligently discharging a piece of Artillery, he was slain.

Henry the third, King of France, after great differences between him, the
Cardinal, and Duke of Guise, was reconciled unto them, confirmed the
reconciliation with many oaths, took the Sacrament upon it, and gave himself
to the Devil, body and soul, in case he meant or should attempt any thing
against them. Yet says the story, he caused the Duke to be killed in his own
presence, and the Cardinal his brother the next day after. Here was breach of
Covenant: but did he prosper, escape, do such things, and have deliverance? No,
within 8. months after he was slain by a Friar in the midst of his Army.

The Ancient Romans were very religious and conscientious in observing their
Leagues, Covenants, and Oaths made publicly: and if any violated them, they
were held for cursed and damned creatures, and counted unworty to live in
humane society.

VERSE. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. As I live says the Lord God, surely in the
place where the King dwells that made him King, whose oath he despised, and
whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall dye.

Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company make for him in
the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts to cut off many persons.

Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, (when lo, he had given
his hand) and has done all these things, he shall not escape.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely mine oath that he has
despised, and my covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head.

And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I
will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his trespass that
he has trespassed against me.

And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they
that remain shall be scattered toward all winds, and ye shall know that I the
Lord have spoken it.


THese verses comprehend Zedekiah's sin, with some aggravation thereof, and the
punishments threatened for the same, and these ratify them.

His sin is despising the Oath, and breaking the Covenant of Nebuchadnezar,
verse. 16.18. which God calls his Oath and Covenant, v. 19. and the trespass
trespassed against him, verse. 20.

The aggravations are two,

1. Is from Nebuchadnezar's kindness and bounty toward him, verse. 16. that
made him King, whose oath he despised.

2. Is from his own act, verse. 18. when lo, he had given his own hand.

The punishments threatened are, 1. Death, verse. 16. he shall dye, and that in
Babylon. 2. Disappointment by the Egyptian Army, verse. 17. Neither shall
Pharaoh, etc. 3. Obstructing all ways of escaping, verse. 18. he shall not
escape. Verse. 19. I will recompense it, viz. his perjury upon his own head.
Verse. 20. I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare. 4.
The execution of his fugitives; they shall fall by the sword, verse. 21. 5. The
dispersion of those should be left: they shall be scattered into all winds,
ibid.


The ratification of them is by an oath, verse. 16. and 19. As I live says the
Lord.

For the words they need not much opening.

Verse. 16. As I live.
As sure as I am God, and live, it shall so come to pass, he shall dye in
Babylon. Of this oath was spoken, Chap. 5.11.14.16. and 16.48.

Whose oath he despised.
(...)
The word in Hebrew for despised, notes despising, ex fastu quodam, out of pride
and disdain. Zedekiah thought, what should I that am an Israelite keep an oath
made to an Heathen? Should I that am of Sion, be subject to Babylon? No, no, I
will be in bondage no longer. It Is true, I have made an oath, but that is no
great matter, it will be more advantage for me to break with that Heathnish
King, then to keep the oath; thus did he despise the oath.

In the midst of Babylon he shall dye.
Zedekiah had his eyes put out that he never saw Babylon, and yet he was
carried captive thither, and kept in prison there till his death, Jer. 52.11.
Ezekiel. 12.13. He shall not see it, though he shall dye there.

17. Neither shall Pharaoh, etc.
The first Pharaoh the Scripture mentions was in Abraham's days, Genesis 12.15.
And the last was this here mentioned, who is called Pharaoh Hophra, King of
Egypt, and was delivered into the hands of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, Jer.
44.30. From the first to the last was 1336. years, all which time this name was
common to all the Kings of Egypt, Rivet in Genfin.
but afterward ceased. Some have thought this word Pharaoh to be taken from an
Island so called. Others fetch it from the Hebr. word Pharah, which signifies to
be free from bondage, (...)
whence A lapide derives the word baro, a Baron. Kings, says he, are called
Pharaones quasi barons, free Princes. In Genes.
But its most probable that Pharaoh was an Egyptian name or title, noting
Sovereignty. Genesis 41.44. Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without
thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt. Josephus
says, Libr. Oct. Antiq.
Pharaoh was a name of honor and Principality.

Make for him.
Hebr. with him: let Pharaoh come with never so great an Army, it will not make
with him, he shall never accomplish what he intends thereby. Pharaoh with all
his power shall not be able to free him from the King of Babylon, and make him
great. The vulgar and French read it against him, and then it is to be
understood of the King of Babylon, all the Egyptian forces shall do nothing
to hinder him from taking Jerusalem, and carrying away Zedekiah into Babylon.
Pharaoh came forth with his Army, but was forced to return, Jer. 37.7.

Building Forts.
The word for Forts signifies a wooden tower. (...)
In those times they made great Engines of wood like Towers, out of which they
threw stones or darts into the Towns or Cities they war'd against, and so
weakened them. Whether the casting up Mounts, and building of Forts were the
work of the Babylonish, or Egyptian King, is questioned among Expositors, but
to me it seems evident by the words that it was the Egyptian King.

18. When lo, he had given his hand.
To give the hand imports,

1. Society, equality, as Gal. 2.9. Cephas and John gave Paul and Barnabas the
right hand of fellowship.

2. Subjection, as 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Be not stiff-necked as your fathers were,
but yield your selves unto the Lord: the Heb. is, give the hand unto the Lord,
and serve him. So 1 Chronicles. 29.24. They submitted themselves to Solomon the
King. Heb. is, They gave the hand under him, or to him.

3. Confirmation of a Promise, Covenant, or Oath, Ezra. 10.19. They gave their
hands that they would put away their wives. They promised it, and they
confirmed it, by giving their hands to Ezra. Lam. 5.6. We have given the hand
to the Assyrians and Egyptians to be satisfied with bread. We have covenanted
to be theirs for bread, and have impawned our fidelity and honesty by giving
our hands. So here Zedekiah had made a Covenant with Nebuchadnezar, and
confirmed it, not only with an oath, but also with his hand, that he would be
subject unto him. If he forgot his oath, yet how could he look upon his own
ha^nd and not remember how it was engaged.

19. It will I recompense upon his own head.
The Lord would bring his perjury upon him. Of recompencing upon the head has
been spoken, Chap. 9.10: 11.21:16.43.

Verse. 20. And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare, and I will b^ing him to Babylon.
These very words you have had opened in the 12. Chap. Verse. 13. VVild beasts
to be taken.
The net and snare were the Babylonish Army; the Jews the fishes, etc.

And I will plead with him there.
Heb. is, I will be judged with him; so Montanus reads it. (...) Judicaber cum
eo.
That I may be judged with him; so Vatablus: and the sense is this; I will so
clear my justice in punishing this perfidious King, that I will be judged even
by Heathens, whither he has not deserved what I shall inflict, and whither I
be not righteous in inflicting the same, I know they will justify me, and
condemn him: But others render the word actively, I will judge, or plead with;
as here, that is, I will punish him. After the City was taken, his Sons,
Princes, and Nobles slain, his eyes put out, he was carried into Babylon, where
he was put into prison, and imprisoned till his death, Jer. 52.11.

21. All his fugitives.
When Jerusalem was besieged, and began to be broken up, Zedekiah and many with
him fled, who are threatened here all to fall by the sword; yet presently it is
added, they that remain shall be scattered. How are these words to be taken,
so as to make truth out of them?

Answ. Universal notes are not always to be taken universally. All, that is
the greatest part, so it is to be taken, Jer. 13.19: 44.12. Math. 2.3: 3.5.

Observe. 1.
Judgments threatened are not readily and easily believed; if so, there need no
swearing to confirm the certainty of them; but man as he is backward to
believe what should do him good; so what is threatened and tends unto his
ruin, therefore God swears, as I live Zedekiah shall dye. Jeremiah had often
told Zedekiah that he should be taken and carried to Babylon, Chap. 32.45:
34.23. but he believed it not, 2 Chronicles. 36.12. He humbled not himself before
Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord, verse. 16. he and
others mocked the Messengers of God, despised his word, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy. Much was given out by the Prophets anent the destruction of
Jerusalem, but none would believe that the enemy should ever have entered into
the gates of it, Lam. 4.12. What, God destroy his own City? his own people? how
can this be? Judgments are sour things to the spirits of men, very unwelcom,
and therefore they shift them off with some pretense or other. God is a
merciful God, and will not do such severe things; or if he do, it will not
be in our days, as they in Ezekiel. 12.22. The days are prolonged: or if not,
yet we shall escape.

2. Ingratitude to those instruments God has used to do us good by, he takes
special notice of, and will punish. Nebuchadnezar was the man whom God used to
make Zedekiah King: and he being exalted by him, and having tied himself by the
strongest bonds to be grateful and serviceable to him, forgets his Benefactors
kindness, and breaks with him; here was hellish ingratitude: hereupon the Lord
says, In the place where he dwells that made him King, even in Babylon, he
shall dye. His ingratitude so provoked God, that he would punish him
exemplarily in that place, where the King of Babylon and all the Babylonians
might see how greatly the God of Israel abhorred ingratitude.

Jehoiadah was the hand of God to set Joash in the Throne, 2 Chronicles. 23. And
after the death of Jehoiadah, Joash slew his son because he dealt faithfully
with him and the Princes in reproving them for falling to idolatry. This the
Lord took special notice of, for it is said, Thus Joash the King remembered not
the kindness which Jehoiadah his father had done unto him, but slew his son,
who dying, said, the Lord look upon it, and require it, 2 Chronicles. 24.20, 21,
22. And it was not long ere God did require it; for shortly after an Army of
the Syrians spoiled him, and his own servants slew him for his ingratitude
toward Jehoiadah in slaying his sons, verse. 25.

Ahitophel was advanced by David to be his Counselor, he fell in with
Absalom's conspiracy against David, the Lord was offended at this wretched
ingratitude, and left him to lay hands upon himself, and become a monument and
warning-piece to posterity to take heed of the like sin: so Judas. Gideon was a
man God used to do Israel much good by: and though the people soon forgate it,
yet God did not forget their ingratitude. Judge. 8.35. They showed not kindness
to the house of Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had showed
unto Israel. God expects men should be thankful unto those men he has employed
to do them good; if they be not thankful to men whom they see, they will not
be thankful unto God whom they see not.

3. God is so resolved upon the punishing of perfidiousnesse, that he swears
unto it: As I live says the Lord, seeing he has despised the oath, and
broken the covenant, he shall dye. And again, As I live I will recompense it
upon his own head. Himself, his Princes, false Prophets, may think, hope,
say, swear it will be otherwise; but as sure as I live, as I am God, he and
they shall feel the weight of my displeasure for their perfidiousnesse and
perjury. Kings on the Earth take oaths and little regard them, but the K. of
heaven does not so. If the Lord once swear, he will perform, and there is no
possibility of escaping. Perjury is a sin which violates the name of God
exceedingly, and evidences that men have no fear of God in them, that they
make an Idol of him to serve their own turns; That such men are neither for
God nor man to trust; not only Religion, but even common honesty suffers by
them. No marvail then that the Lord swears, and swears again, that he will
recompense such sins upon men's heads.

4. Such is the condition of humane affairs, that even Kings and great men may
fall into the hands, and dye in the hands of foreign enemies. Zedekiah fell
into the hands of Nebuchadnezar, and even with him in the midst of Babylon he
shall dye. He made no account of meeting with such a condition, and dying in
that place, but his sins brought those evils upon him. Jehoahaz fell into the
hands of Pharaoh Necho, and was carried to Egypt, 2 Chronicles. 36.4. Jehoiachin
with his Princes, Officers, and mighty men was a captive in Babylon, 2 King.
24.15, 16. God had told them by Moses, that if they did provoke him by their
sins, they should be removed into their enemies land, Levit. 26.34.41. And
Solomon was jealous of it, 1 K. 8.46. As it is a mercy to live and dye in ones
own Land, so it is a judgment to be driven or carried out of it, and to dye in a
strange Land.

From the 17. verse.
1. Men look for help from an arm of flesh when in streights. Zedekiah
expected that Pharaoh's mighty Army, and great company, his Chariots and
Horses should make for him. It Is very incident to us to look unto second
causes and creature-help more then Gods. Asa being in distress did so: he
relied says the Text on the King of Syria, and not on the Lord his God, 2 Chronicles. 16.7. And in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians, verse. 12. Confidence in man is a common practice of the sons of
men. Ahaz he sent to the King of Assyria to help him, 2 Chronicles. 28.16. So
Ephraim when he saw his sickness, he went to the Assyrian, and sent to Jareb,
Hos. 5.13. Men's spirits look any way, tun any whither for relief rather
then unto God; the arm of flesh is more to them then the arm of God. Psalm.
20.7. Some trust in chariots, some in horses, some in riches, Psalm. 52.7. Some
in falsehood, Jer. 23.25. Some in strong holds, Zech. 9.3. Some in men, Isa.
2.22. But it argues Atheism, Ignorance, Pride, Unbelief, that men look not
unto God at such times; yea, it proclaims the baseness of our spirits, that
we fall upon what is visible, weak, unfaithful, at distance, and neglect God
who is strong, all-sufficient, near; and all because invisible, not seen of
us.

2. Divine providence overrules and orders things so, that wicked men are
frustrated and disappointed of their hopes and expectations. Zedekiah hoped and
expected that Pharaoh with his great Forces should make much for him; but
neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army and great company make for him: It
is not Kings, Armies, Counselors, and Counsels will do it. Pharaoh's Army
came forth of Egypt, raised the siege when Nebuchadnezar was before Jerusalem,
Jer. 37.11. Yet it did not make for him; the Chaldeans returned again, sat
down before the City, took it, Zedekiah, the Princes, and others. Ahaz
expected help from the King of Assyria; Tilgath-Pilneser comes, and what then?
he distressed him, but strengthened him not, 2 Chronicles. 28.20. Absalom expected
much from the counsel and advice of Ahitophel, but God turned it into
foolishness, 2 Samuel 17.14. and all the strength he had, made not for him,
Chap. 18. Job 5.12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their
hands cannot perform their enterprise. Haman could not perform his enterprise.
Herod could not accomplish his design to murder Christ when he slew the
Infants, Matthew. 2. Kings and People imagine vain things, and the Lord laughs
them to scorn, Psalm. 2.1.4. The Lord sees what fools they are to project, plot,
expect help from arms of flesh, and makes them to see, find and feel it in
time. He brings the counsel of the heathen to naught, and makes the devices of
people, Princes, Armies of none effect, and establishes his own thoughts and
counsels, Psalm. 33.10, 11. and that to all generations. God served his own
will upon Pharaoh and his Army. Zedekiah was frustrated, he looked for light,
and met with darkness: He leaned upon Pharaoh a broken reed, that ran into his
hand, and pierced him, 2 King. 18.21. The Armies and Forces raised in this Land
have not made for the King, nor had the Scots that assistance they looked for,
1648.
when they so lately came in. Gods providence works in all by all, and
overrules all, and he brings to pass his own sacred purposes by Kings
Armies, by men's wits, wills, policies and powers.

Obser. from verse. 18.
The Lord takes notice of the Circumstances and aggravations are in men's sins,
especially Kings. He despised the oath in breaking the covenant (when lo, he
had given his hand.) I saw him says God reach out his hand, give it as a pawn
and pledge of his fidelity to Nebuchadnezar, he engaged himself thereby to be
subject and tributary unto him. This aggravated his sin much; it was against
light of nature, special mercy; for he had made it a royal hand, the
strongest engagement, done upon d^liberation: It was against his Superior
Nebuchadnezar, the greatest King then on earth, it was against the good of the
whole Jewish State, for it brought War, Famine, Plague, Captivity upon them
all: Yea, more then all these, it was an high offense against God and his
Attributes, and therefore the Lord says, verse. 20. It was a trespass, he
trespassed against him. God minds with what circumstances men's sins are
clothed; he noted not only Ahaz sin, but the time when he sinned. In the time
of his distress, when he should have considered his sins, and repented of
them, even then did he sin more, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. So Solomon's sin has the
aggravation nailed to it, 1 King. 11.9. His heart was turned from the Lord God,
which had appeared to him twice.

Obser. from verse. 19.
Oaths and Covenants made with men are divine things, and not to be slighted.
Mine oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he has broken. It was
made with Nebuchadnezar an Heathen king, an Idolater, yet God ownes it as made
with himself, because his sacred and dreadful name was used therein, and judges
the breach and violation thereof as bad as if it had been formally made with
himself. If Zedekiah had sworn to God, and covenanted with him, and given him
his hand that he would have been faithful to him, obedient to any thing
propounded by his Divine Majesty, it had not been worse.

Oaths made between man and man are called in Scripture the oaths of God,
Eccles. 8.2. And the Covenant made between Jonathan and David is called the
Lords Oath, 2 Samuel 21.7. Let not men therefore slight Covenants and Oaths they
have made with men, but remember they have to do with God, who is faithful;
performing what he swears, and keeping Covenant for ever. It Is good to be like
unto God, as in other things, so in this. When Joshuah had made a league with
the Gibeonites, and the Princes had sworn unto them; though they were
fallaciously brought thereunto by the Gibeonites craft, yet they durst not
violate the league made and sworn, and so put them to the sword as they did
others; but said, We will let them live, lest wrath be upon us because of the
oath, Josh. 9.15.20. You know what great wrath of God has fallen upon those
invaded us, breaking the Covenant, and despising the Oath.

Obser. from the 20. verse.
The Lord has nets and snares to catch and take perfidious Princes and people
in. I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare. There is
no evasion when God fishes for, and hunts after sinners; if he throw the net it
shall encompasse the greatest Leviathan; if he set the snare, it shall take the
stoutest Lion.

God had a net for Pharaoh, and caught that great Leviathan in the Sea. An Oak
was the net he caught Absalom in, 2 Samuel 18.9. The earth was his net to take
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. A heap of stones was his net thrown upon Achan. A
cave was the snare he took five kings in, Josh. 10.16, 17, 18. The kings of
Sodom and Gomorrha were snared in slime-pits, Genesis 14.10. Herod could not
escape the worms, they were Gods net and snare to catch him. The Babylonish
Armies were his nets and snares to take Hosheah, 2 King. 17. Manasses, 2 Chronicles.
33. Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah who were all Kings, 2 Chronicles. 36.
Zedekiah had thoughts he should escape, but he did not escape besieging,
taking, carrying into Babylon. When the City was taken, he fled by night, Jer.
39.4. But God spread his net so, that it fell upon him, and all with him.

Let men take heed of offending the great God of Heaven and Earth, he has nets
and snares to take them withal; if once he throw his net, and set his snare,
he will take them, and being taken, you may struggle, but shall never get out.
Nets and snares are hidden things, they catch suddenly, and hold certainly.

Obser. from verse. 22.
Not only Princes, but Counselors and Copartners in wickedness shall be
punished. All his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword. The
King was not alone in this defection from Nebuchadnezar; his Princes, Nobles,
Counselors joined with him in sending to Egypt, they and the Militia in
opposing Nebuchadnezar who had given them their lives and power, but they all
fell by the sword, or were scattered.

2. Events declare the truth of threatening, and cause men to see their follies.
Zedekiah and others would not believe what was threatened against them and
Jerusalem; but when things came to pass, they were convinced, and made to see
their errors: They shall know that I the Lord have spoken it.

VERSE. 22, 23, 24.
Thus says the Lord God, I will also take of the highest branch of the high
Cedar, and will set it: I will crop off from the top of his young twig, a
tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain, and eminent.

In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it, and it shall bring
forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly Cedar: and under it shall dwell
all foul of every wing, in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down
the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and
made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have spoken and have done it.


THese verses contain a promise of mercy, which is the last general part of
the Chapter: and it is no mean promise, but an exceeding great and precious
promise, namely of Christ and his Kingdom.

The Lord having resolved and sworn in the former part of the Chapter, the
rooting up the Jewish vine, namely the destruction of Zedekiah, his Princes,
Nobles, City, People, and laying all wast. Some among them might say, what will
now become of his promise to Abraham, to David, and others, that out of their
loins and seed should come a blessing to all Nations, that the Messiah should
spring out of their root? if all Judah be rooted up, and carried out into
Babylon, what truth in the promise of God? how will this be made good has
proceeded out of his sacred lips? What, will the God of truth be unfaithful,
and fail now? No says the Lord, I am mindful of what I have promised: and
though you see not how it shall be accomplished, I do; I have ways not
thought of by you. I will take of the highest branch of the high Cedar, I will
set and plant it, etc.

In the words you have these things considerable, 1. The high Cedar, verse. 22.
2. What God will do to it; take of the highest branch, etc. ibid. 3. What he
will do with that branch, set it, plant it, ibid and 23. 4. Where; upon an
high mountain and eminent, verse. 22. which is specified to be the mountain of
the height of Israel, verse. 23. 5. The effects of this plantation. 1. Growth;
It shall bring forth boughs, verse. 23. 2. Fruitfulness; and bear fruit, ibid.
3. Greatness, or goodlinesse; and be a goodly Cedar, ibid. 4. Security to all
fowls: Under it shall dwell all foul of every wing.
6. The product of the whole, verse. 24.


I shall open the words, and then give you the Observations.

Verse. 22. I will take of.
The pronown, I, seems to be mentioned in opposition to the great Eagle
Nebuchadnezar, who took the highest branch of the Cedar, verse. 3. which he did,
to weaken, make tributary, and destroy the kingdom of Israel; though he
planted it, yet it prospered not any considerable time: And seeing he did so,
says God, I will also, who am a greater Eagle, and more mighty Monarch than
he, take of the highest branch of the high Cedar, and plant it, so as it shall
grow, prosper, and thereby the Kingdom of Israel be raised to a greater height
and glory then ever.

The highest branch of the high Cedar.
The high Cedar was the Tribe of Judah, which had the pre-eminence above the
rest, the head whereof was the family of David, out of which came the Kingly
race. The highest branch of it was Jehoiachin, who though in Babylon, God
looked at, and minded not Zedekiah who was perfidious, his sons were slain,
himself laid by, and God would take of Jehoiachins seed, and from thence raise
up the kingdom of Judah. Jehoiachin who also was called Jeconiah, 1 Chronicles.
3.16. In his captivity was said to beget Salathiel, and Salathiel, Zorobabel,
Matthew. 1.12. who was the tender one cropped off from the young twig, as the Jews
expound the place, and make all spoken here to be meant of him and his
Successors, for he was the chief man that brought them out of Babylon unto
Jerusalem again, and reared up the Tabernacle of David and Jewish polity.

Be it granted that he is included in this allegorical promise, yet it cannot
be principally understood of him; for something is here spoken that was never
verified in him or his Successors according to the Jewish account. In the 23.
verse. it is said, under it shall dwell all foul of every wing. This is of
larger extent then the power of Zorobabel or the Jewish estate reached unto. It
clearly points at the kingdom of Christ, and all sorts of people coming under
his wing and protection: The evidence whereof has caused some absolutely to
interpret all of Christ. But we may look at Zorobabel in it as a Type, out of
whose root and stock Christ came, as appears, Matthew. 1. and safely conclude
it had its real fulfilling in him, whom our Prophet chiefly aims at in this
place, and upon him we shall fasten what is to be said.

A tender one.
The Heb. word (...) from (...) signifies such a tenderness as is opposed to
hardness; when a branch of a tree is grown up, it is hard, firm; but when it
first shoots forth, it is soft and tender, such an one was Christ. The Sept. is,
(...), or the heart, which is the tenderest part in man. Others a little twig.

I will plant it upon an high mountain, and eminent.
This tender one he would not plant in the Wilderness in some obscure place,
but upon a mountain, and not any ordinary mountain, but an high and eminent
one, which was Mount-Sion. Psalm. 2.6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of
Sion.

Mount-Sion was the place he loved, Psalm. 78.68. and where he resolved to dwell,
Ps. 132.14. It Is put often for the Church and people of God, Isa. 60.14. 1 Pet.
2.6. Heb. 12.22. And so the high and eminent mountain here is put for the
Church, in and over which Christ was to be planted King. God would raise up
this tender one, and make him King. Sion was a little hill in it; but because
the law and glory of God was to go out from thence, therefore it was eminent.

Verse. 23. In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it.
That is, in the Church which is the height of Israel, Mica 4.1. In the last
days it shall come to pass that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall
be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the
hills. Christ's Kingdom shall be above all kingdoms. Luke 1.29. He shall be
called the son of the highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the
throne of David his father. Verse. 33. He shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever, and of his Kingdom, etc.

It shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit.
Their tender ones being planted in the mountain of God did not wither, but
rooted, grew, had boughs and fruit. The boughs you may call Christ's Apostles,
seventy Disciples, his fruit was judgment and justice. Jer. 23.5. I will raise
unto David a righteous branch, a King shall reign and prosper, and shall
execute judgment and justice. David long before prophesied what his fruit
should be. Ps. 17.12.13, 14. He shall deliver the needy when he cries, and him
that has no helper. He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the
souls of the needy. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and
precious shall their blood be in his sight.

The fruit of this Plant is specified by Isa. Chapter 61.1, 2, 3. Preaching good
tidings, binding up the brokenhearted, proclaiming liberty to captives,
opening prison to those are bound; comforting mourners, and making trees of
righteousness. He went up and down, doing good, healing all that were
oppressed of the Devil, Act. 10.38. The Gospel with all the Ordinances,
promises, miracles, and benefits of it are the fruit of this tree.

And be a goodly Cedar.
A great Cedar says the Sept. A stately one say others. An excellent one says
the French. A noble Cedar, Castal. The Cedar excells other trees in height, in
sweetness, in duration, and hereby the excellency of Christ's kingdom is set
out in the spiritualnesse, fragrancy, and lastingnesse of it. His kingdom is
not of this world, Joh. 18.36. He rules in righteousness, Isa. 11.4. So that
his name is an ointment poured forth, Cant. 1.3. And of his kingdom there is
no end, Isa. 9.7. This Cedar is the most excellent, goodly, odoriferous, and
durable, that ever grew in Lebanon. The top of this Cedar does not only reach
up to heaven, but is in heaven, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.

Under it shall dwell all foul of every wing.
Heb. all foul, all of wing. Sept. every beast, and every flying thing: Omnes
aves and omnes alites, Cast. all little and great birds: That is, the Tribes
and the Gentiles, all the Elect out of both, they should come flying like birds
unto a tree for shelter. All Nations should come unto the Church for relief.
Not all Kings nor Angels, but all Nations should come under this Cedar, as in
Dan. 4.12. The fowls of the heaven dwelt in the great tree there mentioned. So
here, all fowl should come under this goodly Cedar. In and under the trees the
birds were safe sheltered from the violence of weather, heat of sun, and
vermin on the earth; there they bred, there they sung, and there they quietly
rested themselves; such benefit should the faithful find by coming under Christ
the goodly Cedar in Sion. That which is called all foul of every wing here, is
called all nations and tongues, Isa. 66.18. and all flesh, verse. 23.

24. All the trees of the field.
By trees of the field some understand all the Kings, Princes, and Potentates
of the world, who are so called, because,

1. They are deeeply rooted and fastened in the world, as trees are in the
earth: you may easily pluck up a flower, a little plant, but not a tree, and so
great ones are not easily moved, or plucked up.

2. They are eminent above others, as trees are above bushes, shrubs, little
plants, under-wood, whose growth they hinder by over-shadowing and
over-dripping them.

3. They are trees in respect of their spreading and extension; the arms,
boughs, and branches of trees extend every way, and far; so great men, their
power reaches far, and often too far.

4. In that they succor and harbor others; many shelter themselves under their
shadow, as trees do the birds: Often great men shelter the beasts and vermin of
the earth, not the birds of heaven.

5. Trees in regard of fruitfulness. Great men are very fruitful one way or
other, but mostly in wickedness. Zedekiah had his fruit, falsnesse and perjury.
Every tree that bears not good fruit, etc.

However great ones be trees, yet I conceive not only they but the people of
the Nations are here meant by trees, for he calls them Trees of the field. The
Jews were the trees of the Orchard and Garden of God; but the Gentiles were
the trees of the field or world, and they should see and know what the Lords
ways were with this Jewish estate and people.

Have brought down the high tree.
This high tree was Zedekiah, who would not hear Jeremiah, nor keep Covenant
with Nebuch. but being stubborn and haughty of spirit, would go his own
ways, 2 Chronicles. 36.12, 13. Some would have it understood of the Kingdom of
Zedekiah, but that is not congruous with what is in the 6. verse. where that is
likened to a vine of low stature. It Is better therefore to expound it of the
person of Zedekiah; for though the Kingdom was low, yet he was haughty and
high. Others make this high tree to be the Kingdom of Babylon, which was
overthrown by the hand of Cyrus, and so way made for the low tree, the Jews in
captivity to return by the hand of Zorobabel. They, Christ and his kingdom in
them were very low during the captivity; but the Lord brought them forth,
exalted them, Christ and his Kingdom in due time.

Have dried up the green tree.
Zedekiah and his kingdom were like a green vine with branches and sprigs,
verse. 6. but the Lord rooted up this vine, threw it into Babylon, where it
dyed. Green with apprehension, they only were the people of God. Green with
conceits of their own righteousness. Green with hopes of liveliness.

Have made the dry tree to flourish.
By the dry tree Lavater understands the Gentiles, who were without promises,
covenant. Others Jechoniah, who was a Captive in Babylon, and after 37. years
imprisonment exalted by Evilmerodach, and his Throne set above the Throne of
other Kings with him: and so the kingdom of David that had been long like a dry
tree, began in him, Salathiel, Zorobabel, and afterward in Christ to flourish.

Obser. After grievous judgments threatened to come upon a State or Church, God
propounds matter of comfort to his Elect and faithful therein, that so when the
execution is, their hearts may be supported and comforted. When God should root
out Zedekiah and his, the Kingdom would be laid wast, the faithful should
suffer much, lose estates, friends, liberty, Country, Temple, Ordinances, and
worship of God. Now for comfort against all these evils, he tells them of the
Messiah, whom he would take care should come into the world. I will take of the
highest branch of the high Cedar, and will set it. However things went, God
would take care that the line of which Christ was to come should be preserved,
and that his promise should be made good. So Isa. 11.1. There shall come forth
a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. Now
the stem of Jesse seemed to be cut down, and the root of Jesse to be pulled
up; but the Lord preserved the root and stem, out of which he brought a rod
and a branch for the comfort of the faithful suffering Jews. This promise of
the Branch is often mentioned in holy writ for the comfort of the Jews, Jer.
23.5, 6. Chap. 33.15, 16. Zach. 3.8. Chap. 6.12, 13.

2. The Lord Christ descended from the highest: I will take of the highest
branch of the high Cedar. He came from the Ioins of Jechoniah, who was King of
Judah, and from 14. Kings before him, as appears Matthew. 1. he was the son of
Nobles, and born a King, therefore when the wise men came from the East to
Jerusalem, they said, where is he that is born King of the Jews, Math. 2.2. He
was the firstborn of the Kings of Judah, the right heir to, and should have
succeeded them in the Kingdom, which Herod at that time usurped. Such an hint
being given out by the Wise men, it is strange that neither the Sanedrim, the
high Priests, Scribes nor Pharisees should search out the truth of it. They
were wise and learned in their generation, but blind in all the things of
Christ. However they failed, let us take notice of it, that Jesus Christ was
the son of Nobles, and came of Royal blood.

3. The beginnings of Christ were mean and low. I will crop off from the top of
his young twig a tender one. Christ at first was as a little tender shoot of a
tree set in the earth, and how weak, mean, low, and inconsiderable is such a
thing? If one should take a little twig of a Cedar, or an Oak, and prick it in
the earth in some obscure place, men would not regard it. Christ's beginnings
were such, he took flesh of a poor mean Virgin, the wife of a Carpenter, Math.
1. He was born in a poor Village, Mic. 5.2. In a stable, laid in a manger, Luke
2.7. He was subject to his Parents, being poor and low, v. 51. He lay in the
dark til 30. years of age, Luke 3.23. and then he began with 2 or 3 poor
Fishermen, Matthew. 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. then some others to the number of 12.
and even now when he seemed to be some body, he had not an house or bed for
himself or them. Luke 9.58. Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests, but the son of man has not where to lay his head. And for his
maintenance, is was the good will of others. Luke 8.3. Joanna, Susanna, and
many others ministered unto him of their substacne.

4. The Lord Christ is planted in the Church, and become a fruitful and goodly
Cedar therein. I will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent, the mountain
of the height of Israel, and it shall bring forth boughs, bear fruit, and be a
goodly Cedar. Christ was planted in Sion, there he grew, there he brought forth
fruit; with the Timber of this Cedar was the Church built, with the fruit of
this Cedar it is maintained. Isa. 4.2. In that day shall the branch of the Lord
be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth be excellent. The branch
was Christ, and he should be for beauty and glory to the Church, and the fruit
that should come from him should be excellent, never tree bare such fruit: the
Church says, His fruit was sweet to my taste. Wisdom, righteousness,
redemption, and sactification, are the fruits of this Cedar, 1 Cor: 1.30. the
life of the world, Joh. 6.33. the ordinances of the Gospel, Math. 28.19. 1 Cor.
1.23. Exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. Reconciliation, Col.
1.20. The gift of the Spirit or Comforter, Joh. 16.7. Revelation of the
Counsels of God, Joh. 15.15. Fellowship with the Father and the Son, Joh.
14.9. 1 John 1.3. Eternal life, Joh. 10.28. Such was the fruit this Cedar
bear. In the midst of the Church he was planted, fruitful, and sang praise to
God, Heb. 2.12. And so high is this Cedar grown, that its now in heaven at the
right hand of God, far above all principalities and powers, might, dominion,
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which
is to come, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. So that the mountain of the Lord is on the top of
all mountains, and this Cedar on the top of that mountain.

5. Unto Christ and his Kingdom shall come in all that are elect both Jews
and Gentiles, Under it shall dwell all foul of every wing; they shall come,
and come flying; let them be in what Kingdom they will, in what condition
soever, learned, ignorant, rich, poor, weak, strong, sound, sick, young or
old, they shall come to Christ. Isa. 60.3. The Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Ver. 4. Thy sons shall
come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side. He speaks of
the Church under Christ: verse. 8. They should come flying as Doves to their
windows. Chap. 66.23. It shall come to pass, that from one new Moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
before me, says the Lord: both Jews and Gentiles, nothing shall let or
hinder, he will bring them, Isa. 56.7. And Christ says, Joh. 6.37. All that
the Father has given me, shall come unto me. Nothing in Satan, in
themselves, in the world shall keep or let them from coming under this Cedar.

6. There is safety under Christ, he will protect and defend his from all
harms; Under it shall they dwell. Men will not dwell where is no safety;
fowls and birds when they get into a great tree, they are secure from any
pursue them, from all harms, from above or from beneath: so those come under
Christ's shadow, Christ's power and government, they shall dwell there safely.
Ezekiel. 34.24, 25. God will set up his servant David a Prince among them, that
is, Christ; and what then; I will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the
land; that is, by the power of Christ. Isa. 11.4. And they shall dwell safely,
there shall be no hurting, nor destroying in the mountain of God, ver. 9. And
Chap. 25.10. In this Mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moah shall
be trodden down under him as straw is trodden down for the dunghill. Christ
will protect his Church, and tread down the enemies thereof, what ever their
power, policies, and pretenses are; he is a Cedar in Wisdom, Col. 2.3. a Cedar
in Power, Math. 28.18. a Cedar in his providence and vigilancie, Isa. 27.3.
Hence says the Church; I sat down under his shadow with great delight,
Cant. 2.3. Its Christ secures from sin, from the wisdom of the flesh, the
storms of the world, temptations of hell, and what ever is dangerous. Isa.
25.4. Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his
distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat when the blast of
the terrible ones is as a storm against the Wall; if you be under the shadow
of this Cedar, though the winds blow hard, the floods beat sore, and rain fall
with strength, yet you shall be as safe as the house built upon the Rock, Math
7.24, 25.

Under other Cedars there is no safety; Kings of the earth are Cedars, but
they prey upon their Subjects rather than protect them: they think that all
men are made to serve their lusts, and therefore mind themselves, and care not
what becomes of the people, so they may grow great and fatt on earth; its
otherwise with Christ, he seeks the good, the comfort, the safety, the
greatness and glory of his Subjects.

7. Princes that are haughty and proud, God will bring them down though they
be in flourishing conditions; I have brought down the high tree, and dried up
the green tree. Zedekiah was an high tree; the King of Judah and his spirit
was high, he would not stoop to God or man, he hearkend not to the God of
Israel, nor to his Prophets; he would not keep Covenant and promise with the
King of Babylon, but his will was his law; but God laid the axe to the root of
this tree, and hewd it down, and great was the fall thereof. No trees are so
high, but the Lord who is higher than they, can lay them low, let them be
green with boughs, branches, leaves, let them have many children, many
Nobles, many Soldiers, many Counselors, many Kingdoms, all cannot preserve
them from ruin. Nebuchadnezzar was a high tree, his top reached to Heaven,
Dan. 4.11. he was proud and bloody, and what fell out; A watcher, an holy One
came down from Heaven, cried aloud, and said; Hew down the tree, cut off his
branches, shake off his leaves, scatter his fruit; let the beasts get away from
under it, and the fowls from his branches, ver. 13, 14. There is a watcher
observes the spirits, plots, practices of Kings, and hewes them down at his
pleasure, and when they fall let the beasts and fowls have harbourd under them
and been instruments to accomplish their wicked wills, take heed least they be
crushed in their fall.

Pharaoh was an high tree, the highest in all Egypt, he said, I will pursue, I
will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them;
I will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy them: Here was pride and cruelty,
which usually go together; and what followed hereupon; Thou did blow with
thy wind, the Sea covered them, they sanke as lead in the mighty waters,
Exodus 15.9, 10. Amaziah King of Judah grew proud upon a victory, and provoked
Joash to battle, by him God brake him in pieces, brought him low, and
afterward he was slain by his own Subjects, 2 Chronicles. 25. Saul was a goodly
man, a high tree in Israel, he was proud, cruel, false, disobedient to God,
and he rejected him, and cut him down by the Philistims, and his own sword, 1 Samuel 31. So Ahab, 1 Kings 22. Herod. Act. 12.23. Belshazzar lifted up himself
against the Lord of heaven, and would not see the hand of God upon his father
Nebuchadnezar, and humble himself, and presently a hand was seen, writing his
doom, and that night was he slain, Dan. 5.21.23.30. Haughty spirits, who
ever they be, God will humble and lay low, he beholds them a far off, he
resists them, and will scatter them. Isa. 10.33. Behold the Lord, the Lord of
hosts shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of nature shall be
hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled. 34. He shall cut down the
thickets of the forests with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.
It Is spoken of Senacherib, and his Army, this God hewed down by a mighty
Angel, and himself by his own sons, Isa. 37.36.38. The Lord has days and
times to reckon with the high and haughty ones. Isa. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
The day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, upon all the
Cedars of Lebanon, upon all the Oaks of Bashan, upon all the high mountains,
and upon all the hills that are lifted up, etc. And the loftiness of man shall
be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day; and then men shall run into holes and caves
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to
shake terribly the earth, ver. 19.

8. How low so ever the conditions of Kingdoms, Families, or persons are, God
can, and it is his way to raise them. I have exalted the low tree, and made the
dry tree to flourish. The Kingdom of Judah, the house of David, the person of
Jechoniah, were very low in Babylon, like low shrubs, dry trees, but Gods eye
was upon them, he wrought for them, he exalted them, and brought a glorious
Kingdom and Church out of those low beginnings. Was not Christ like a low and
dry tree, when he lay in the loins of Jechoniah, a prisoner, a captive, when
he lay in the womb of the Virgin, hewed timber, made houses for his living;
especially when he was cut down and laid in the heart of the earth; was he not
as a dry tree then? but God exalted him, set him at his right hand, Act. 2.33.
and Peter proclaimed it; Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made that same Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ, ver. 36.
Thus did he grow up before the Lord as a tender plant, and as a root out of a
dry ground, Isa. 53.2. Luke 1.52. He has put down the mighty from their
seats, and exalted them of low degree.

9. God will do these things so eminently, that the world shall take notice,
and be filled with the glory thereof; and all the trees of the field shall know,
that I the Lord, etc. not only the orchard trees, but the field trees, not
domestic alone, but wild ones. Isa. 2.19. Men shall fear and hide themselves
for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake the earth terribly.

Ezekiel, CHAP. 18.
1. And the Word of the Lord came unto me again, saying,

2. What mean ye that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel,
saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge.

3. As I live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use
this proverb in Israel.

4. Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul
of the son is mine: the soul that sins, it shall die.


THe Jews in Babylon meeting with much hardship in their captivity, in stead of
being humbled for their sins, which brought sad miseries upon them, took up an
unjust complaint against God, and charged him to deal unjustly by them; viz.
That their fathers had sinned, and they who were their children suffered for
their sins: We being innocent are grievously afflicted for their iniquities.
This false charge God cleares himself of in this Chapter, and shows them that
he is most just in punishing and rewarding, that every one shall bear his own
sins, and not another, be rewarded according to what he is, and has done,
be he just or unjust. If the unjust repent of his evil ways, he shall have
mercy; if the just turn from his righteousness, he shall have judgment. And
this is the sum and maine argument of this Chapter.

In the Chapter, you have two general parts.

1. Gods expostulation with the Jews by the Prophet from the 1. ver. to the
30. 2. An exhortation to repentance and newness of life, from the 30. ver. to
the end.
Concerning the expostulation, you have 1. The ground of it, ver. 2. What mean
ye that, etc. 2. A threatening to take away that evil proverb, v. 3. 3. Gods
vindication of himself. 1. In general in the 4. v. Behold, all souls are
mine, etc. 2. More particularly from the beginning of the 5. ver. to the 19.
4. The Jews replication in the 9. v. and Gods further vindication of himself
against their unjust accusation from the middle of the 19. v. to the 25. v.
where 5. They treble their charge upon God, and tell him his ways are not
equal; from which God retorting the accusation upon themselves, does as
formerly vindicate himself to the 30. ver.


1. Verse. And the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying.
Thus began the 6. 7. 12. 13. 15. 16. 17. Chapters, the holy Spirit inspired
him, as that moved him he spoke, and not of his own head, as the false Prophets
did. Though he were in Babylon, he wanted not divine inspiration, which he
often tells them of, that his Prophecy might be weighty and authoritative.

2. Verse. What mean ye that, etc.
Here is the matter of the Expostulation, propounded by way of reprehension;
you do use a strange proverb that tends to my dishonor, and represents me
to the world to be an unjust God, but what cause have I given you to speak in
this manner? surely I know no cause given you why you should utter such a
proverb, if there be, bring it forth, and let me hear it.

That ye use this Proverb.
Heb: is, Proverbizing a proverb; as Chap. 17.2. and it notes the frequent use
they made of it, tossing that proverb up and down amongst them; they did not
now and then speak it, but it was frequenly and constantly in their mouths. Of
the nature of a Proverb was spoken Chap. 12.22. and 17.2.

Of the land of Israel.
That is, of the people of Israel, not the ten Tribes, for they were gone into
captivity long before, but those of Judea.

The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge.
The word for sour grapes is (...) which signifies an unripe or wild grape,
Fructus immaturus and acerbus, Shindl: green and bitter fruit. Septu: is
(...), which the Latin Expositors render, Vvam immaturam and acerbam, an unripe
and bitter grape. French is, L'aigrett.

Are set on edge.
Heb: is from (...) which signifies to make blunt and dull, as iron without an
edge; therefore Avenarius renders it, Hebescent in this place, and in Jer.
31.30. Septu: (...) obstupescent, shall be stupefied; which agrees with what
Shindler says of (...) its such fruit as dentibus comedentium stuporem
inducit, which unedges, dulls, and makes the teeth unusefull. Whether the
English words, are set on edge, are so proper, and hold out the sense, I leave
to judgment of the learned, they seem to me to hint a sharpning rather then
a dulling. All Expositors I meet with make the word to signify obstupescency
and hebetation.

Sour grapes, and many other sour things, do dis-affect the teeth; sometimes
they cause the tooth-ake, sometimes they dull and stupefie the teeth, so that
those which stand by and see the parties eating them, have their teeth ill
affected also; as Aristotle observes in his Problemes, and experience teaches
us.

Two things are to be considered concerning this Proverb.

1. The meaning of it. 2. The occasion.
1. For the meaning, by sour grapes, Per labruscam and vuam acerbam
intelligitur peccatum, qualis est idolatria, fiducia humana, subversio judicij
and immisericordia. Oecolam.
the Jews understand sin, not sin simply, but such sins as do bring heavy
judgments of God upon a land or people, as idolatry, murder, oppression,
trusting in an arm of flesh, unnatural pollutions, illegal mixtures,
drunkenness, profaneness, etc. The Prophet Isaiah warrants this sense of
sour grapes, Chap. 5.2.4. where he calls the sins of Judah, wild grapes; God
looked his Vineyard should bring forth grapes, good fruit, justice,
righteousness, truth, and it brought forth wild grapes, oppression, a cry,
covetousness, lasciviousness, drunkenness, pride, of which he speaks in the
Chapter.

Such sins are called sour or wild grapes, because they wound conscience, are
burdensome unto others, are as distastefull and disaffective unto God, as such
grapes are to us, they grieve his Spirit, and exasperate him to lay wast the
Vine bears such fruit.

By this Proverb thus much is signified, Majores nostri deum peccatis suis
offenderunt and nos a deo propter illo peccata punimur bellis.

Patres peccaverunt and filij vapulant Chaldeus.


that the fathers had sinned, and the children sufferd for their sin; the
fathers did that was very offensive unto God, and the children were punished
for it: They did eat the sour grapes, brought forth the bitter fruit, and
these smarted for it, the childrens teeth were set on edge, or st^pefied, that
is, they were punished for what their fathers had done, they thought and said
that their fathers were the cause of all the evils befell them, like unto this
proverb are these, Kings sin, and the people suffer: the child offends, and
the servant is beaten.

2. The occasion. The Princes and people going on in the idolatrous,
oppressing, profane, bloody and wicked ways of their fathers, the Prophets
did threaten them with destruction of their Temple, City, and Estate: Hereupon
they said, our fathers did as we do, and they were spared, why should we
suffer? And when the Prophets pressed the sins of Manasseh, as Jer. 15.4, 5. I
will appoint over them four kinds, says the Lord, the sword to slay, the
dogs to tear, the fowls of heaven, the beasts of the earth to devour and
destroy, and I will cause them to be removed into all Kingdoms of the earth,
because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah King of Judah for that which he did in
Jerusalem. Manasses sin stuck much upon the heart of God, he made them do more
evil then the Nations which God destroyed, he filled Jerusalem with innocent
blood, 2 Kings 21.9.16. He made Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err,
and do worse then Heathen, 2 Chronicles. 33.9. When God stirred the Prophets to tell
them that for his sins he would lay Jerusalem wast, as he had the ten Tribes
for Jeroboams sins; they then took up this proverb, and said; The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. Ahaz, Manasses,
Amon, and others of our forefathers have sinned, and we must suffer, or thus;
Zedekiah and his Counselors had perfidiously broken Covenant with
Nebuchadnezar, for which the Prophets threatend utter ruin to all; hereupon
the people said, Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth
are set on edge; the Kings and Nobles have transgressed, and we shall be
ruined for it; but the former occasion is the better, because Zedekiah and the
Nobles did suffer with them, and were punished for their own sins.

This proverb was grown common amongst them, both in Babylon and in Sion it was
tossed up and down and spread; Ezekiel tells them of it in Babylon, and
Jeremie in Sion, Chap. 31.29. They shall say no more, the fathers have eaten
sour grapes, etc. The evil of this proverb was great, for besides their
charging of God with injustice and partiality, hereby they discovered their
fathers sins and nakedness, and that without sorrow or repentance for them.

2. Made light of any thing the Prophets threatend against them.

3. Obstructed the way against future repentance, or profitting by the
judgments of God should come upon them; for being persuaded and possessed with
this opinion, that they suffered unjustly for their fathers sins, not their
own, they would never submit, mourn, condemn, but justify themselves.

Verse. 3. As I live, says the Lord God.
This oath of the Lord has several times been spoken of, and therefore I
shall now say nothing of it.

Ye shall not have occasion any more to use this Proverb. Si erit vobis ultra.


Heb. is, If there shall be to you any more to proverbize this proverb. Septu:
If this parable shall be said any more in Israel; I will take a course that
this wicked proverb shall cease. The words may be taken either as a
commination, thus; If any of you shall use this proverb any more, as I live, I
will punish you; let me be as a dead dumb idol God, and not as the living
God, if I do it not; or they may be taken by way of asseveration, I swear
that this proverb shall be no more used, I will clear my proceedings with
them, so that themselves shall acknowledge, and all the world see and say, they
suffer justly; or I will destroy them for this blasphemous proverb of theirs,
and so it shall be heard no more in the land of Israel.

Verse. 4. Behold, all souls are mine.
Here the Lord does vindicate himself from that unjust crime they laid to his
charge, viz. that he punished one for another, the child for the sin of the
parent; you mistake, says God, all souls are mine, I am the common father of
all, I observe the ways of all, and render unto them all according to their
works, I do not accept the persons of any in judgment, I neither pronounce
nor execute any unjust judgment, but being essentially just, am righteous in
all my ways, and holy in all my works, Psalm. 145.17. None in heaven or earth
has any sufficient warrant to accuse me, and if I should punish the son for
the fathers sin, I could give you satisfactory grounds for it. Hehraeis in more
est parte^ pro toto, animam pro animante usurpare, denominantes totum a part
nobiliori, Pradus.


By souls, we are to understand persons, a part being put for the whole; and
the Scripture does frequently put animam pro animante, the soul, for that is
endued with the soul. Levit. 7.18.20, 21. The soul that eats, the soul
that touches any unclean thing, that soul shall be cut off. Josh. 20.3. The
slayer that kills any person; the Heb. is, any soul. And so here soul is
put for the person. Some think that where it is said, the soul of the father,
and the soul of the son, its to be taken properly: but without prejudice to
others, I conceive in those expressions the person is meant; the soul of the
father is mine, that is, the father is mine; and the soul of the son is mine,
that is, the son is mine; the principal part being put for the whole by a
Synechdoche. Soul, Father, Son, Man, are Synonymaes here. Ver. 20. Its said,
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father. There its expressed in
the person; and Jer. 31.30. Every one shall die for his own iniquity, every
man that eats the sour grape, etc. He speaks of the same thing our prophet
does, and puts it upon the person. Hence is no warrant for the death of the
soul, though it be said; The soul that sins, it shall die; that is, the
person, whatsoever he be that sins, he shall die for it, he shall be punished
for his sins.

There is an opinion among some, that the soul sleeps and dies with the
body, and so is mortal for the present, though afterward both body and it
put on immortality; but this opinion is repugnant to divine truth. Eccles.
12.7. Speaking of man's death, says Solomon, Then shall the dust return unto
the earth, and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it; the body goes one
way, the spirit another; if the spirit or soul were mortal, 1 These. 4.14. If
the soul sleep, its in Jesus, not in the dust, its with Christ, not the body,
how will he else bring it with him?
it should have gone with the body. Math. 10.28. Fear not them which can kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul; that is such a transcendent and
precious thing, as that it is beyond the reach of all mortal power; Death the
King of fears cannot approach it, but if it were of the same constitution or
condition the body is, it might fall by the same hand and stroke the body
does. Joh. 8.51.11.26. Christ says, He that keeps his sayings, and believes
in him, he shall never see death, he shall never die. The greek is, (...), to
eternity, not as if he should see death for a time or times, but he shall
eve^ live; this must be verified of the soul, which sees not the second death,
as the souls of the wicked do, nor the first death, as the bodies of all do.

The soul that sins, it shall die.
These words seem easy, but they are very difficult, and have greatly
perplexed Interpreters, and others. The words import only thus much, that the
man which sins, what ever he be, he shall suffer, and be cut off for his
sin, himself not any other shall bear the burden thereof.

The difficulties concerning these words are three.

1. That many sin, and that notoriously, who die not for their sins, but live,
ruffle it out in the world, adding drunkenness to thirst, and at last go off
the stage of the world with as much ease and quiet as other men, and die dry
deaths.

Answ. 1. Its granted that many do not suffer for their sins, though such as
deserve suffering, and that

1. To convince men there is a judgment to come; some suffer here to show
there is a providence that takes notice of men's ways in the world, and some
pass away without any observable judgment upon them, to assure men there is a
day of reckoning to come, 2 Pet. 2.9.

2. That the world might not be unpeopled, for if all should be cut off deserve
death, if every soul sins should die, how few would be left. In the
destruction of the old world you know how few were spared.

3. That Gods long suffering toward sinners might appear, according to that
you have, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is long suffering to us word.

2. Sometimes, yea often it is so, those are notoriously wicked, they die for
it. Pro. 10.27. The years of the wicked they shall be shortened. And Psalm.
55.23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; not
that all bloody and deceitful men do fall by the stroke of justice, but it
is so many times, that by the Judge, by their enemies, by themselves, or some
hand of God they perish therefore the words in the Psalmist are not to be
taken, Mathematice, too subtlely, but note out abbreviation of sinners lives,
which is frequently made good. As in Shime^, Joab, Amnon, Ahab, Jezabel, Judas,
etc.

3. They die before they can bring to pass fully what they aim at, they
break bounds, pervert justice, change times and seasons, think to subject all
to their wills, and now while they are in the pursuit of such things, they die,
which is a just and heavy judgment of God upon them.

4. By death we may understand a metaphorical death, viz. afflictions,
judgments, war, plague, famine, captivity, loss of comforts formerly
enjoyed; so its taken, Exodus 10.17. 2 Cor. 11.23. And in this sense there is
scarce any man who sins beyond the ordinary rule of men's common infirmities,
but dies for it, that is, suffers sad afflictions. When David sinned his great
sins, the sword was drawn against him, and never departed his house, 2 Samuel
12.10. Much more is it so with wicked men, some hand of God or other is upon
them.

5. They may humble themselves for their sins, and so they may be spared;
Ahab humbled himself, 1 Kings. 21.29. If they do not suffer themselves for
their sins, the judgment follows and falls upon their posterity for their
sins, which makes the next difficulty.

2. Difficulty. If the soul that sins shall die, how is it th^n that the
children suffer for their fathers sins? Where its laid, 1 Kings 21.29. I will
not bring the evil in his days, that was Ahabs, but in his sons days I
will bring the evil upon his house. And 2 Kings 24.2, 3. for the sins of
Manasseh after he was dead, came sad things upon Judah, 2 Samuel 12.14. For
David's sin the child was stricken with death. Saul's sons were punished for
his bloody dealings with the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.

Answ. 1. We must make an exception here in the point of original sin, for
that sin of our first parents, death com^s upon all their posterity, Romans 5.12.

2. For the sin of the father, the child suffers, not eternal death, no man
is eternally damned for another sin simply considered; its a man's own sin
which is his everlasting ruin.

3. Temporal and bodily punishment^ do often befall the children for the
fathers iniquities, and that justly; for they are parts of them, they come out
of their loins, too often inherit their corruptions, imitate and live in their
sins; they are part of the family, they make the house: therefore God said
he would bring the evil upon Ahabs house, and so he suffered in the suffering
of his. When subjects rebel, fall into treasonable practices, Princes deal so
with them, that not only they, but their posterity, to diverse generations,
do suffer; yea Princes themselves have done such acts, as have excluded their
posterity from sitting in that throne; and that without imputation of
injustice. Besides what is said, children are under the same Covenant with
their parents; and when Magistrates who are metaphorical parents, or those are
natural parents, do transgress, God may strike the children upon that
account, and that to prevent the like evil in them. When fathers are troubled
with the gout or stone, Physicians prescribe their children to forbear such
meats as are dispositive that way.

Whether may the sins of parents being under one Covenant, be visited upon
the children being under another. As, suppose the parent under the Covenant of
works, and his children under the Covenant of Grace, does it fall out ever
that such children suffer for their parents sins? Yes, they do, as in the case
here, Manasses sinned, and for his sins not only the wicked ones, but Ezekiel
and other precious ones suffered in Babylon: Zedekiah sins, and those that did
mourn and sigh, Ezekiel 9.4. for his and others abominations, suffered greatly:
so on the contrary, for the sins of godly parents who are in one Covenant, may
their children suffer, that are under an other, as in David and Absalom, 2 Samuel
12.11. I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house. Absoloms
rebellion and death, David's sin had the greatest influence into. So Solomon's
sin fell heavy upon Rhehoboam, 1 Kings 11.11, 12. and Chap. 12.15, 16.20. But
there is an observable difference in the suffering of the children for the sins
of the parents. When the children are gracious, their sufferings upon the
account of their parents sins are chastisements, mercies, and from love, but
where they are ungodly, their sufferings are real and true punishments coming
from divine justice and wrath.

3. Difficulty is, the Lord tells them here that for the time to come, it
should not be so, if the children have suffered for their fathers sins
heretofore, and you have had cause to complain, yet henceforward you shall have
no occasion, the soul that sins, it shall die, and no other. Yet short^y after
those at Jerusalem sufferd; and Lam. 5.7. took up the complaint here spoken of,
Our fathers have sinned, say they, and are not, and we have borne their
iniquities. Moreover, its evident to the whole world, that the Jews now do
suffer for their fathers sins. They put the Lord Christ to death, wished his
blood to be upon them and their children, and it is upon them in a dreadful
manner to this day.

Answ. This is a riddle which I believe will not be fully expounded till the
great day of the Lord; only thus much may be said beforehand: Men have
extended the sense of those words further then God intended, if we exceed not
our limits, but keep to the persons, time, and matter in hand, we may make out
the difficulty; as thus; the Prophet speaks of the Jews that were already in
Babylon, and the other that should suddenly be brought from Jerusalem into the
same captivity with them, and principally he has reference to the sin of
Manasses, as may appear by 2 King. 21.11, 12, 13, 14. Chap. 23.26, 27. Chap.
24.3, 4. Jer. 15.4. For which they suffered, and made them so complain. Now the
Lord intimates, yea assures them that after their suffering in the Babylonish
captivity, he would be satisfied, and they should never suffer more for the
sins of Manasseh, but should return again, and if they suffered afterward, it
should be for their own sins, not his. In this sense you see the difficulty
cleared, but if you enlarge the words to all times and persons, its beyond the
reach of men to answer the difficulty; for we see it daily, that one sins,
and others suffer for it; parents sin, and their children suffer; Magistrates
sin, and Cities suffer; Princes sin, and people suffer. The Lord did not divest
himself here of that power and privilege of visiting the iniquities of
parents upon the heads of their children, but takes away that accusation they
laid against him for suffering so long and grievous a captivity for the sins
of Manasse. That this is the meaning of the words, and their not using the
proverb any more, I am confirmed out of Jeremie, Chap. 31.27, 28, 29, 30.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel,
and the house of Judah, with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast, and
it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and
to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I
watch over them to build, and to plant, says the Lord. This is meant of their
return from Babylon; and what then; In those days they shall say no more the
fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, but
every one shall die for his own iniquity. So then after the return this
proverb ceased, and to those Jews that suffered upon the account of Manasses
sins; but its still of force to other Jews, and among us Gentiles.

The soul that sins shall die.
Quest. May not God spare a soul that sins? he says peremptorily here; The
soul that sins shall die; and if so, it obstructs, bars up mercy, and leaves
us all without hope, and ties Gods hand, etc.

Answ. 1. I will answer this quaere by clearing another Scripture like unto it;
Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. This
threatening or law was not purely or simply legal, nor from absolute justice,
because if we look at the Elect, it included the good pleasure of God in the
death of Christ for them, and so it had somewhat Evangelicall in it; but in
respect of the reprobate it was merely legal, and from pure justice, whereby
God determined to punish sinners: so here; This threatening has mercy in it,
the soul that sins must either die it self, or in Christ; so that in some its
fulfild Evangelically, in others legally.

2. Sin is not against the essence and nature of God, for sin is transgression
of a law, Et lex est liberrimum dei statutum, had not God made such a law,
there had been no sin; Where no law is, there is no transgression, Romans 4.15.
Therefore sin not being against the nature of God, he might have left all free
to man, as well as to beasts, fowls, and fishes: had sin been against his
nature, he had been necessitated to punish it, but being against his will, he
does freely punish it, and therefore may not punish it, but spare the sinner.
Those rules and laws of justice in the Word, are to tie us, and not God, he
has his prerogative above all those laws, and says; I will have mercy on
whom I will, Romans 9. And if this do not satisfy, cast your thoughts upon the
death of Christ: That Christ dyed is justice, and so respects the Covenant of
works; that he dyed for us is mercy, and so respects the Covenant of grace.

Obser. 1.
Men are apt to quarrel against Gods Word, Ministrations and proceedings in
the world, they think and say, he deals hardly, if not tyrannically with
them; if he cause wars, send famines, plagues, cast into captivity, and lay
his hand heavy upon a nation or family; how apt are the sons of men to
murmr and charge God foolishly? But what is flesh and blood unto God? Shall
clay dispute with the potter, dust with the balance, the drop with the Bucket?
He is the Maker of the whole world, let us be silent before him.

2. God is just and righteous in his government of the world, and in all his
dispensations therein; however things appear, and are accounted of by men.
Sometimes the ways of God with the world, Kingdoms, families, persons, seem
strange, crooked, dark, unequal, not because they are so, but because men are
weak, purblind, and cannot penetrate into the depths of them. Gods drowning
the whole world, shutting up the knowledge of himself so many hundred years
in Judea, from the rest of the world, his consuming Sodom and Gomorrha with
fire and brimstone, slaying so many thousand for looking into the Arc, his
casting off the Jews from being his people, and letting them go under the
curse now 1600. years, his blessing of the wicked, and afflicting of the
godly, Jer. 12.1, 2. His casting off Saul for lesser sins, and sparing David,
Solomon, who were guilty of greater. His sending unseasonable weather, to
blast, corrupt, and make both Corn and Cattle unwholesome, unusefull, or less
serviceable; his setting Tyrants over his people, to impoverish, persecute, and
destroy them, without any mercy; his ordering it so, that the young of all
bruit creatures can shift for themselves presently, and Infants, the birthes of
more noble creatures should be shiftles so long. That so many thousand innocent
creatures are cut off, even infants in public calamities. That the Baptists
head must off, when a Barabbas goes free: that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor riches to men of
understanding, nor favor to men of skill, etc. Eccl. 9.11. These and such
emergents in the world, prompt occasions unto shallow silly man, to think that
there is no Providence, or that the Government of the world is not righteous
and just. But as there is a God, so in his wise Providence he orders and rules
all things, and that righteously. Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all
his ways; no ways of his general or special Providence, have any crookednes
in them; when ever thoughts rise in any to that purpose, let them remember what
Jeremie said when his heart was troubled in the same case; Righteous art thou,
O Lord, when I plead with thee; though I cannot see the ground, cause, reason
of thy ways, yet thou art righteous, and that shall suffice me: God is most
righteous, he will punish none unjustly, nor neglect to reward any have done
well, Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

3. God may give and impose what laws he pleases: Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our
Lawgiver; Heb. is, Our Statutemaker; all legislative power is fundamentally in
God: James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver: He has given all creatures, as limits
for their essence, so laws for their operation. Psalm. 119.91. They continue
this day according to thine Ordinances: for all are thy servants, they all do
the work God appoints, and observe the laws he prescribes. He may command
what he pleases; he licensed Adam to eat of some trees, and not of others; he
bad Abraham go out of his Country, sacrifice his son; the Israelites to rob
the Egyptians; He forbad the Jews to eat of several fowls and beasts; He
appointed Ezekiel to eat his bread baked in dung, Chap. 4. Saul to slay
Amaleck, and not to spare man, woman, nor child, 1 Samuel 15. He bad Hosea take
a wife of whoredoms, Chap. 1.2. He laid Circumcision, Sacrifices, and all the
Ceremonialls upon the Jews, easier things upon the Gentiles; all souls are
his, and what Laws, Statutes, Ordinances seem good to him, he may put upon
them. The Gospel, not the Law, faith, not works he has made the way to glory;
He may prescribe what he list, his will is Law unto the creature; He may give
us easy, or harsh Laws, such as tend to our ruin as well as our good. Ezekiel.
20.25. I gave them Statutes were not good, and judgments whereby they should
not live. Men may not do so, their Laws must be for good, else they are
sinful, and not binding.

4. Then may the Lord choose whom he will; Romans 9.13.15.18. Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardens. May Kings choose from among their Subjects whom they please to
serve them in their Courts, and shall not the Lord, whose are all souls, take
whom he pleases to serve him in his Court of glory? has every Potter power
over the clay to make one vessel to honor, another to dishonor, and shall
not the Lord, who is the greatest Potter of all, have that prerogative? ver.
21. Shall the servant have more than the Master? In this great house of the
world, there are vessels to honor and dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. There be some
appointed unto disobedience and stumbling, 1 Pet. 2.8. Yea unto wrath, 1 These.
5.9. and who shall question God for so doing? he is not to give account to any
man of his actions; he may absolutely do with his own what he list; he made of
the same earth man and beast, and shall the beast say to God, Why made thou
me a beast, and not a man? it may as well as man dispute it with God, and say,
Why did thou make me a vessel of dishonor, and not of honor? Should Adam
have reasoned it with God, and said; Why did thou make me the first Adam a
natural man, and Christ the second Adam a spiritual man? There is no
reasoning with God. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in
heaven and in earth; and whatsoever pleases the Lord, that does he now in
heaven and in earth.

5. Then may the Lord bestow what gifts he will upon the children of men,
excellent or mean, greater or lesser; he may give one five talents, another
two, a third one. A father gives to his children several portions, to one
more, to another less, he is not bound to give all alike, but as seems good
to himself: men furnish some rooms with richer hangings and materials than
others, and that without blame; they plant and beautify some grounds with
choice plants and flowers; so deals the Lord with men, some have admirable
gifts, others very mean, if you observe Gods distributions that way in the
world. God has given the earth to the children of men, Psalm. 115.16. yet one
has more, another less, one a fat, another a lean portion; so for reason,
wisdom, judgment, understanding, memory, utterance, etc. God has given these
to the sons of men; but some have them in a lower, some in a higher degree.
David, Solomon, Daniel, were very wise, Sampson very strong, Absalom very
beautiful. The Corinthians were enriched with all utterance, and all
knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.7. Bezaleel and Aholiab excelled others in skill, Exodus 31.
And as its in gifts, so in graces, one has a little, another a greater
portion, one a single, another a double portion; Jonas but little patience, Job
much, the Disciples of Christ had little faith, the woman of Canaan a great
faith; God does of his own give to his own, what and how much he pleases. By
variety of gifts and graces, his manifold wisdom, bounty, and goodness are
seen, the world and Church are beautified, and each made useful unto other.

6. All being the Lords, he will take care and provide for them; Nature
dictates, yea provokes every creature to provide for its own. There is no good
or wise man, who will not do it, much more the Lord. If husbands must provide
for their families, 1 Timothy 5.8. God will provide for his. The whole world is
Gods family, all the living wait upon him, and he feeds them, Psalm. 104.27.
Esp^cia^ly man is his, and for him he takes care. 1 Timothy 4.10. He is the
Savior of all men, specially of those that believe; its not meant of eternal
salvation; (...), imports a temporal Savior: Math. 8.25. (...), They were in
danger of drowning. Psalm. 36.6. Thou preservest man and beast. The word for
preserving is (...) whence the name Joshua and Jesus comes, it notes a common
external temporal salvation. God is good to all souls, his Sun shines, and
reine falls upon good and bad, Math. 5.45. Acts 14.17:17.28. In him we live,
in his Providence, power, goodness, blessing, as worms in the earth, fishes
in the Sea, and birds in the air. And this should be a foundation of comfort,
as unto all, so especially unto those are poor, and mean, and cast upon hard
times, and why, because be you never so poor, weak, sickly, destitute; all
souls are the Lords, and he looks after them. Math. 6.31. etc. Christ
assures you of it, Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall
we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? for your heavenly father
knows that you have need of all these things; but seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you; not some, but all shall be given unto you.

7. He may set up or throw down whom he will. Isa. 3.4. I will give children
to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them; children in years, and
children in understanding, God sets over people. God set up Solomon, and set by
Adonijah, though the elder, 1 King. 1. He took David the least and unlikeliest
of all the sons of Jesse, even from the Sheepfold, and set him upon the
throne, 1 Samuel 16. Gideon was of a poor family, and the least in his fathers
house, as himself confesses, Judges 6.15. yet him did God exalt: so that its
true which Hannah said; He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up
the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them
inherit the throne of glory, 1 Samuel 2.8. And contrary, as God sets up so he
pulls down whom he pleases. Isa. 42.15. I will make wast mountains and
hills, and dry up all their herbs; be the mountains never so great, the
hills never so high, God will lay them wast, and level them with the earth,
and whatever their issue, wealth, power, wisdom, relations be, God will dry
them all up, and they shall be hearbles. Dan. 2.20, 21. Wisdom and might are
his, He changes the times and seasons; He removes Kings, and sets up
Kings. Did not the Lord lay by Saul and his family? did he not drown Pharaoh
in the bottom of the Sea like lead, Herod, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, and
others? did not the Lord lay them low? They were high and green trees, yet the
Lord cut them down, and dried them up. You may remember what the Lord said to
Ahab; Have thou killed? In the place where the dogs licked the blood of
Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine, 1 King. 21.19. And likewise
what he says in Jer. 22.24. As I live, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim
King of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck him thence:
and Ezekiel. 17.15. of Zedekiah its said; Shall he prosper? no, by the roots shall
he be pulled up. God plants and pulls up whom he pleases.

8. Then are they in safe custody, and no evil can befall them without the
Lords good pleasure. Men stand for those are theirs against all opposition, but
cannot hinder evil from coming: God stands for his, and he can hinder any
mischief. None can have any power over or against his without leave. If God
give not Commission, nothing can be done by men or Devils. Joh. 19.11. Christ
told Pilate, he could have no power against him, unless it were given him from
above; I am in the hand of my Father, he can defend, deliver me from thine and
all adversary power; and if he do not, it is by his hand and determinate
counsel that thou do ought against me, and I am content with it: so Luke
22.53. This is the hour and power of darkness; before you could do nothing,
now through divine dispensation you have leave to cease upon me, to judge me,
and take away my life, and I submit thereunto. The Devil could do nothing
against Job, his sons, camels, sheep, or asses, till he had leave from the
Lord, Job 1. He is the God of the world, Prince of the air, and has bitter
envy, great enmity against man, but is not able by all his power or policy
to take an hair from the head of any man, till the Lord say do it, Math.
10.30. All souls are the Lords, they are in his hands: It was comfort to David
to think his times were in Gods hand, Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hand;
and so nothing could befall him unseasonably; yea his person also was in Gods
hand, and who could touch or harm it without the Lord. Isa. 45.7. The good or
evil that befalls us, is from the Lord.

9. Then it belongs to God to hear the pleadings, determine the controversies
that are between those are his, and to right their wrongs. If all souls be
his, he is Judge, and so to hear their suits, decide their differences, and
see that one wrong not another. The people Moses was over, are called his people,
Exodus 32.7. and he heard their pleadings, ended their controversies, and
righted their wrongs, Exodus 18.13. All souls being the Lords, he has an ear
open to hear their suits, Psalm. 125. and he sits in Judgment to do them
right that suffer. Hence is it that David appeals to God, Psalm. 43, 1. Judge
me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly Nation. Others judge
unrighteously, but I come to thee, do thou judge me, that art the great
Judge, all souls are thine, do thou plead my cause, it belongs to thee to do
it, and I wait upon thee for it. So the Church in Micah 7.9. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause. The Babylonians oppressed the Jews, Jerem. 50.33, 34. and the Prophet
says, The Lord of Hosts shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give
rest to the Land, and disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon. Let Babylonians,
others, any molest, oppress, God hears, sees, knows what is done, he will
plead and maintain the cause of his. Psalm. 9.4. Thou have maintained my right,
and my cause; thou sattest in the throne judging right. If the cause be a cause
of blood, as it was Rev. 6.10. where the souls cried, How long, O Lord, holy
and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth; the Lord will not neglect it, for the answer was, ver. 11. that they
should rest yet for a little season, and then God would avenge their blood; God
has his times to make inquisition for blood, Psalm. 9.12. And the earth shall
disclose her blood, Isa. 26.20.

10. God may employ whom he will, and in what ways and works he thinks
good; he is neither tied to any sort of men, nor to the laws or Customs of
any Kingdoms. Nathan thinks David must build the Temple, but God imployes
Solomon not David in that work, 2 Samuel 7. He took Amos, who was no Prophet,
nor son of a Prophet, but an Heardman, Meminit artificij abjecti, ut discamus
deum personas non respicere and infirma eligere, ut fortia co^fundat, Vatablus.
a poor mean man, and would have him to Prophecy unto Israel, Amos 7.14, 15.
He took Cyrus an heathen King, to perform all his pleasure about Jerusalems
rebuilding; He held up and used his right hand to subdue Nations, to loose the
loins of Kings, to break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the
bars of iron, Isa. 44.28.45.1, 2. God employed David a stripling, despised by
his brethren and others, to slay Goliath, and free Israel from the Philistims, 1 Samuel 17. He took a Woman to kill a great Prince, even Jael to slay Sisera,
Judge. 4.21. As the Lord may take whom he will, so he may lead them in what
ways, and put them upon what designs himself judges fit and meet, however
they seem unwarrantable to us. Isa. 42.16. I will bring the blind by a way
that they know not, I will lead them in paths that they have not known; I will
make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. The blind, that
is, men perplexed, in streights and difficulties, not seeing what to do, which
way to turn them. Now God as he is not tied to go in one and the same way, to
proceed by the Laws, Statutes, Privileges, Customs, Usances of Kingdoms,
Cities, or Corporations, but has unknown ways and unwonted paths to tread in
himself: so he has unknown and unwonted paths to lead his servants in upon
any occasion. It was no trodden path that Phinehas went in when he a Priest or
a Priests son, no Magistrate, thrust a Prince and a Princess through their
bellies with a javeling, and that in the presence of Moses the chief
Magistrate, Numb. 25. So Esters going into the King, was not according to Law,
Chap. 4.16. She ventured her life upon it; and David's eating the Show bread,
was an unlawful act if judged by Exodus 29.32, 33. Levit. 8.31.24.5. yet
justified by Christ, Math. 12.3. Sampson takes a wife of the daughters of the
Philistims, and that against the will of his father and mother, and it was
against Law for him to marry among the uncircumcised, but he sees a Woman at
Timnah, falls in love with her, and must have her, Judge 14.4. This was of the
Lord, his burning the Philistims corn, his slaying a thousand of them with the
jawbone of an Ass, pulling down the house upon his own and others heads,
were irregular ways, yet such ways as God led him in, and he is in the
Catalogue of believers, Heb. 11. The Eunuchs throw Jezabell out at the window
upon the command of Jehu, and he trod her to death with his Horses, 2 King.
9.33. Jehoiadah the Priest calls forth the Soldiers, sets them in ranges, and
makes a Martial Law, that whosoever enters those ranges should be put to
death. Athaliah the Queen (who had reigned six years) enters, and at his
appointment she is put to death, 2 King. 11. These and many other (as Solomon's
sacrificing in Gibeon, 1 King. 3.5. Paul's shaving of himself, circumcising
Timothy) were irregular and unwonted ways, yet were approved of God, and
brought forth unwonted mercies; let us not be too hasty to condemn persons
doing extraordinary things, least we justle against God, and entrench upon his
providence and prerogative; if Peter walk upon the waters, there is somewhat
of Christ and God in it, Math. 14.28, 29.

11. Let all be faithful in their places, all souls are his, he has his eye
upon all, and upon every one, and there is none but must give account unto him.
What ever talents we have, he will reckon with us for the use or abuse of
them. Math. 25.19. The Lord called and reckoned with his servants he had given
the talents unto, those had talents of grace, and used them well, were advanced
to heaven to their Masters joy; he had a talent of nature, for the abuse was
thrown into hell. Oh let us be faithful in our places, and use our talents to
the honor of that God whose we and our talents are. Belshazzer was set on
high, had a talent in his hand, but the charge was heavy upon him when he that
is Lord of all souls called him to an account, Dan. 5.23. The God in whose hand
thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified; and
thereupon he was doomed to death, he did not lay out his power and greatness
for the honor of God and good of his people, and better he had been a poor
beggar than so great a King. Paul had this consideration in him when he said;
Woe to me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17. And if I yet please
men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. And when he wrote to
the Corinthians: We labor that we may be accepted of him; for we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether good or bad,
2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Men must give account of all they have received, and if they be
found false and unfaithful, they shall smart for it. Seeing then every one of
us shall give account of himself to God, Romans 14.12. Let us all be faithful
in the least, in the greatest things committed to us, and so shall we have
peace within, praise of God, if not of men, and a sure reward.

12. He may take away or continue men here as long or little while as he will,
all souls are his, and he may cut off the thread of life, or lengthen it out
at his pleasure. Moses speaking to the Jews as one man says; He is thy life,
and the length of thy days, Deuteronomy. 30.20. That is, the shortening or prolonging
of thy life and days are in his hand. God therefore told Solomon, that if he
would keep his commands, he would lengthen his days, 1 King. 3.14. The keys of
life and death are in the hand of the Lord, and in a moment he can let out our
souls, bring down to and back from the gates of death: Hence is it that some
are taken away at the first hour, some at the third, some the sixth, some the
ninth, and some lengthend out unto the twelfth, and live more years than
others do days or hours: Methushelah lived 969. years, and many children
attain not to so many days or hours; from the birth, the womb, and
conception, God takes them away, Hos. 9.11. He cut off all flesh by the flood
young and old; and long since that he has threatend to cut off evil doers,
Psalm. 37.9. and man from off the Land, Zeph. 1.3. and when he pleases he does
it.

The soul that sins shall die.
Hence obs: 1. God may lay what punishment he pleases upon the soul that sins,
all souls are mine, and the soul that sins shall die, it shall suffer what
ever I see good, according to the nature of its sin. How ever the words seem
to import an equal punishment for all sins, yet its otherwise according to the
intrinsecall nature, circumstances, and demerit of the sin shall be the death.
God will proportion the one unto the other, secundum ordinem justitiae, as he
rewards men according to their works, so he will punish them according to
their sins. God has variety of deaths, and various degrees of those deaths,
variety of afflictions, and various degrees of the same, he lays on which, and
in what measure he pleases; how are sinners tortured with collicks,
stranguries, gouts, stone, plague, and other diseases. If States think good to
inflict upon Delinquents several punishments, and in a high degree as they
find men guilty, how much more may God? he smote Jehoram with incurable and
sore diseases, so that his bowels fell out, 2 Chronicles. 21.18, 19. He sent fire
and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19. He did that in Jerusalem which
he never did before, nor ever would do the like, he punished them so with
famine, that fathers did eat their sons, and sons their fathers, Ezekiel. 5.9,
10. Neither these nor any that suffer in what kind soever, do suffer
unjustly; men may pretend innocence, but if they suffer, and that severely, God
is not cruel, they are not guiltless; for the soul that sins shall die.

2. Sin is a deadly thing, the soul that sins shall die, sin is the great
murderer, it let death into the world, and keeps death alive, if there were no
sin, there would be no death, no punishment, but if men sin, they must suffer;
the old world sinned, and dyed for it; Sodomites sinned, and dyed for it; the
Bethshemites sinned by looking into the Arc, and 50000 of them dyed for it;
Jerusalem sins, and is burnt for it, and her children buried in a Babylonish
grave; Ananias and Sapphira die for their dissimulation; the wages of sin is
death, Romans 6.23. Let us then take heed of sin, whereby we offend that God who
has said, The soul that sins shall die; he is a dreadful Majesty, and ought
^^^^y to be feared. Jerem. 10.7. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations?
for unto thee does it appertain; fear is Gods due, and your duty; Stand in
awe then and sin not, Psalm. 4.4. If you sin, you must die; death is the King of
fears, and God is the King of death, he can command it to cease upon you in a
moment.

VERSE. 5, 6.
But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right.

And has not eaten upon the Mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the
Idols of the house of Israel, neither has defiled his neighbors wife,
neither has come near to a menstruous woman, etc.


THe Lord having vindicated himself in general, v. 4. from that unjust
accusation, that their fathers sinned and they who were the children suffered, he
comes here in a more particular manner to quit himself from that false
imputation. I have told you that the soul which sins shall die, but

1. If a man be just, he shall not die, but live, as appears from the 5. ver.
to the end of the 9.

2. If his son be unjust and wicked, he shall not live but die, as appears
from the 10. ver. to the end of the 13.

3. If this unjust man beget a son, who lives not in his fathers sins, but is
just and deals justly, notwithstanding all his fathers sins, he shall live, he
shall not die, as is evident from the beginning of the 14. ver. to the end of
the 17.

The words in the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, verses, contain and specify.

1. A subject, which is a man just, or a just man.

2. The description of this subject, which is set out.

1. In general, ver. 5. And do that which is lawful and right.

2. In particular, and that 1. In duties respecting God, ver. 6. which are set
down negatively, and they are two. 1. Not eating upon the Mountains. 2. Not
lifting up the eyes to the idols of the house of Israel.
2. In duties respecting man, and they are diverse. 1. Continency, Neither has
defiled his neighbors wife. 2. Chastity, Neither has come near to a
menstruous woman. These two be in the 6. ver. 3. Innocence in four things. 1.
Not oppressing any. 2. Restoring the pledge. 3. Not spoiling by violence. 4.
Withdrawing his hand from iniquity.
4. Charity, which is held out in 1. His feeding the hungry, ver. 7. 2.
Clothing the naked, ibid. 3. In lending freely, ver. 8. He that has not given
forth upon usury, nor taken any increase.
5. In righteous judgment, between man and man, ver. 8.



Lastly, a general comprehending of these and all other duties, ver. 9. Has
walked in my statutes, and has kept my judgments, to deal truly.

3. The thing predicated on this subject so described, He shall live.

I shall open the words, and after come to the observations.

Verse. 5. If a man be just.
Qui culpa vacat aut reatu cujus factus approbatur.
Hebrew word (...) is a man free from fault, doing things approvabie, such an
one was Noah who is called, Genesis 6.9. (...) such an one was Zachary, Luke 1.6.
(...), as the Septua^renders it in this place, and the word for just is opposed
to (...) a wicked man. Psalm. 37.16. A little that the righteous man has, is
better then the riches of many wicked. So Ps. 1.6. there is an opposition
between the righteous and ungodly, the just and wicked.

Do that which is lawful and right.
Hebrew for lawful and right, is judgment and justice. To do judgment, is
not only to do things judiciously and rationally, but here it notes one part
of the office of a Judge, which is reos condemnare, to sentence and condemn
the guilty, and so to do justice, is not only to judge without respect of
persons, but innocents absolvere and vindicare, to absolve and vindicate the
innocent. Thus Pradus interprets the words, who thinks these words coming
together, not to be exegeticall, but signifying distinct things, in a more
narrowed sense, then when they are taken absolutely and in their latitude. So
Isa. 5.7. he looked for judgment, that the guilty should be condemned, but
behold oppression, iniquity, a scab, as the word signifies, the Delinquents
being spared, there was iniquity in the Judges, a scab upon the State. I
looked for righteousness or justice, that the innocent should be vindicated
and freed from the accusations, aspersions, oppressions of the wicked, and
behold a cry, they suffered, were condemned, and this was a crying sin. When
men in place do act according to the laws of God, suppressing the wicked,
defending and countenancing the good, then they do judgment and justice. Some
by these words understand the fulfilling of the Law, when a man gives to God
and man what is required, then he is a just man, he does judgment and justice.

Verse. 6. And has not eaten upon the Mountains.
Upon mountains and hills both the Jews and Nations used to build high
places, Images, and Altars, 1 King. 11.7: 2 King. 17.10: Jer. 17.2: Ezekiel. 6.13.
And there they did sacrifice to their idoll-gods, Hos: 4.13. They sacrifice
upon the tops of the Mountains, and burn incense upon the high hills: see
Ezekiel. ^0.28: 2 Chronicles. 28.4: Isa. 57.7. And of those things were sacrificed to
the idols they were wont to eat, Psalm. 106.28. They ate the sacrifices of the
dead, of those beasts, fowls, or whatsoever things they sacrificed to the dead
idols, of those they did eat. Such was the eating, Exodus 32.6: Judge. 9.27:
16.23.25. This eating of idolothites noted their communion with idols, that
they were in near relation, even as near as those that live, sit, feed and
feast together. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. By their eating and drinking those things
were offered to idols, they had communion with idols and devils.

This eating of such things was a grievous sin, they left God the holy One of
Israel, and joined themselves to dumb and dead idols, which could do nothing
for them but procure the wrath of the true and living God against them.

Not to eat upon the mountains then is to keep ones self free from false
worship. Super montem comedunt omnes qui cultu alio, quam juxtaverbum dei,
religionem habent, Oecolamp.
They eat upon the mountains, who worship God any other way then he has
prescribed in his Word.

Neither has lift up his eyes to the idols.
The lifting up the eye in sacred Writ notes.

1. A serious and affective consideration of a thing, as, Isa. 40.26. Lift up
your eyes on high, and behold who has created these things; that is, seriously
and affectively consider, contemplate the heavens, and host of them; so here,
to lift up the eyes to idols, signifies to affect, mind much, to think upon
them, as if they had some special beauty, excellency, or deity in them.

2. To countenance; Psalm. 4.6. Lift thou up the light of thy face upon us; the
eye is the light of the face, when that is let down, it notes dis-favour,
discountenancing; but when that is lift up, it imports the contrary; so here,
lifting up the eyes to idols, imports a favoring, gracing, countenancing of
them.

3. Adoration, Lifting up the eyes is an adoring gesture, Eze. 8.16. Levatio
oculorum est gestus adorantis.
The 25 men there stood with their faces toward the East, their eyes were lift
up to the Sun, and the Sun they worshipped. Job 31.26. If I beheld the
Sun when it shined; Did not he see the Sun when it shined? Yes; but he did
not lift up his eyes to adore it, though it were a beautiful and glorious
creature, a great benefactor unto the whole world.

4. Invocation and expectation of something the party would have. Joh. 17.1.
Christ lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, father glorify thy son; he
looked up to heaven, praid and expected glory. Psalm. 123.1. Unto thee lift I up
mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens. Here was invocation and
expectation of mercy, ver. 2. So lifting up the eyes to idols, argues invoking
of, and expecting help from them, and the not lifting up the eyes unto them,
implies a dis-affecting, discountenancing, and detesting them as lies, vanity,
abomination.

Idols.
Hebr: word is (...) from (...) dung which is trodden down in the streets. They
are stinking, loathsome, Stercus quod in platea convolutatum est, Avenarius.
defiling things, a man cannot be more annoyed with the dung of man, or any
other creature, so as he is with idols, they defile the whole man; James 3.6.
An ill tongue defiles the whole body, and an idol defiles the whole soul and
body; Septu: renders the word for idols (...), thoughts, devices; because they
are the mere inventions of men's brains, the imaginations of their hearts. God
said thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing, Exodus 20.4. Yet vain, silly, weak, wretched man, will be making to
himself likenesses of every thing; and fancy a deity in that which is most
unlike, yea most opposite to the true deity.

Of the house of Israel.
These words are added,

1. To prevent an evasion and excuse of theirs; had the Prophet said. Neither
has lift up his eyes to idols, and no more, they would have said, we hate
the idols of the Nations, and have nothing to do with them, we know such
idols are forbidden; to cut off this plea therefore, the words run thus,
Idols of the house of Israel.

2. To mind them of Gods dealing with the ten Tribes for their idolatry, who
properly are called the house of Israel, and were carried into captivity, 2
King. 17.

3. If by house of Israel be meant those of Judah and Benjamin, which I
conceive to be the Prophets mind, it is to take away a false conceit they had
of their gods above others: be it that others have worshipped their idols,
given more honor to them then was due, yet we worship the true God, use these
idols and images in worship to further our honoring and worshipping God by
them, we do not terminate our worship in them, but transmit it by them unto
God; what ever conceits you have of your idols, they are idols, no better
then those of the ten Tribes and Nations, by which they provoked God against
them, so do you by these.

Neither has defiled his neighbors wife.
From duties respecting God, he comes to duties respecting man, and begins with
that concerns the married estate.

By neighbor, understand not only him that dwells next you, but any man
whatsoever: so neighbor is taken, Luke 10.36. The meaning of the words is not
that a man may lie with a strangers, forreiners, or an enemies wife, but not
with his neighbors; no, the meaning is, a man must not lie with any man's wife
whatsoever, be he single or married, he may not defile the wife of another man,
he may not commit adultery with her, which is meant by the word defiling.

(...) Which Montanus renders, Non violaverit: Septu: (...), has not
contaminated: others, Non polluerit, non stupraverit, has not defiled: I shall
insist a little upon the evil of this sin.

1. It breaks the order which God in his great wisdom has set, he has
appointed that two should be one flesh, not three, or more, Genesis 2.24. and its
often set down by the Spirit of God, as Math. 19.5, 6: Mark 10.7, 8: 1 Cor.
6.16: Ephesians. 5.31. that this divine institution may take the deeper impression
upon men, and so be kept inviolable; but when adultery is committed, its
against the institution of an infinite wise God, and dreadful breach of his
order, and however it be done in secret, yet the Lord sees it, Prove. 5.21.

2. It stains the ordinance of God, marriage is honorable, both in it self,
and as its a resemblance of Christ and his Church, Heb. 13.4: Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
Now if adultery be committed, the bed is defiled, the honor of the married
estate laid in the dust, and the members of Christ made the members of an
harlot, 1 Cor. 6.15. Adulterers therefore sin against Christ, they take away
that resemblance is in marriage between Christ and his Church, and prostitute
their bodies, what lies in them, to dishonorable acts.

3. It brutifies a man, besots and makes him is a rational creature, the
chief of Gods works here in the world, to be like unto the bruit creatures,
and to do irrational things; Hos. 4.11. Whoredom is one of the things take
away the heart, that is, rectum judicium, a right understanding; Jer. 5.7, 8.
Like horses they neighed after their neighbors wives; they were more like
horses then men, and acted like those brutish unruly creatures. Whereupon the
Lord says, Chap. 13.27. I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings.
Adultery makes men so sensual, that they forget reason, it blinds and
infatuates them exceedingly. Solomon who had the greatest portion of wisdom,
by his pleasing himself with women, doated and did strange things, he became
as blockish as the idols he set up. Men that live in such pollutions of the
world, as adultery and other uncleanness are; the Apostle likens them to
dooges and swine, 2 Pet. 2.22.

4. In this sin, man sins against

1. His own body, 1 Cor. 6.18. Fornication and adultery are sins in a special
manner against a man's own body.

1. In that he subjects it to another, its called a bowing down, Job 31.10. To
bow down to an adultresse, to bow down to an adulterer, is a subjecting
themselves to be one with each other: the thief is not one with the thing he
steals, nor the murderer one with him he murders, but the adulterer is one
with the adulteress.

2. Weakens it, brings diseases, and hastens death, the more prodigal men are
in pouring out themselves in filthy practices, the faster they wear out. A
King of Navarr weakened himself so by lascivious courses, that his body grew
very cold, and no heat could be kept in it. The Physicians after consultation
wrapped him in a feare-cloath dipped in aqua vitae, and burning off the thread they
fastend it with, the fire caught hold of the cloth, and immediately burnt him.

3. He defiles it; Matthew. 15.19, 20. Adulteries, fornications, are among the
things that do defile a man; they are unclean persons, who fall into those
sins: Ceremonial defilements, as touching a leprous person, a dead body,
were evil, but this is a moral defilement.

2. Its a sin against their names and credit, Prove. 6.33. Dishonor shall he
get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away; it sticks fast like a
Blackamores skin and Leopards spots, nothing makes more infamous. Eccles. 23
26. A shameful report shall she leave, and her reproach shall not be put out,
speaking of the whorish woman.

3. Its against the peace and comfort of a man, it wounds them sorely; Prove.
6.33. A wound shall he get, a wound in his conscience, which is the worst of
all wounds. There be some sins that do vastare conscientiam, and adultery is
one of the chief of them, it devoures all the peace, quiet, content, comfort,
the soul had; and wounds it so greatly, that sundry times it proves uncurable,
yea so fiery, stinging and tormenting it is, that men make away themselves;
some have hanged, some pistol'd, some drowned themselves. Prove. 7.26. She has
cast down many wounded.

4. Its against a man's own soul; Prove. 6.32. He commits adultery, destroys
his own soul; the soul is a precious thing, yea most precious, its better
then all the world; what an evil is it then to destroy that is so excellent.
Adultery is the destruction of a soul, Incidit in gehennam qui incidit in
mulierem peregrinam, therefore its said, Pro. 7.27. Her house is the way to
hell, going down to the chambers of Death, Prove. 23.27. An whore is a deep
ditch.

5. Its a great offense to the innocent parties; to the wife of the man commits
it, to the husband of the woman falls into it. Mal. 2.14. If a man leave his
wife, who is his companion, and the wife of his Covenant, he deals
treacherously and perfidiously with her; he promised before the Lord to be for
her and none else; so the woman when she does so, forsakes the guide of her
youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God: what greater wrong can a man do to
his wife, or a wife to an husband, then to be treacherous the one to the other;
they rend themselves each from others, and bestow themselves upon strangers;
strangers have their hearts, affections, and company; strangers have power over
them, and not their wives or husbands, which they ought to have, 1 Cor. 7.4.

6. Its a sin that prejudiceth the family, and may bring ruin upon it;
bastards, those are mis-begotten, are brought into the family, bitter
jarrings, contentions and jealousies raised therein. Prove. 6.34. Jealousy is
the rage of a man, and so of a woman: and Job tells you that this sin is a fire
that consumes to destruction, it consumes the body, the estate, the family.
Chap. 31.12. And if I were guilty of it, it would root out all my increase;
not one or two, but all his increase. This is a sin that has ruined many
families, and is against not only the good of families, but of mankind. Hos.
4.10. They shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase. And what if an
adulteress should bring forth, Ecclesiasticus 23.25. Her children shall not
take root, and her branches shall bring forth no fruit.

7. It occasioneth, if not causes, many other sins; sometimes the
adulteress pilfreth from her husband, and wastes his estate, neglects him and
her family; sometimes it has idolatry following it: Solomon's Wives,
Concubines, and Whores brought him to idolatry. Jer. 13.27. I have seen thine
adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thine whoredoms, and thine
abominations on the hills Corporal and spiritual adultery go together very
often. And not only these, but it has been the cause of untimely deaths and
murders; David defiles the wife of Vriah, and he must first be made drunk,
and after be murdered, that the fact might be concealed, 2 Samuel 11. Edgar once
King of this Nation, falling into adulterous practices with Alfreda a Noble
man's wife, one Ethelwolfe, they gat him dispatched out of the way, Chrysostom. in
Ps. 51. Hom. 1. Fructum adulterij dicit esse homicidium and veneficium and Hom.
42. in Math. Dicit mulieres adulteras frequentissime homicidium moliri.
that so they might marry. The father says, that the fruit of adultery is
murder and witchery, and that adulteresses do frequently practice murders.
Prove. 6.26. The adulteress will hunt for the precious life. Its also
accompanied with much lying and perjurie.

Lastly, The evil of this sin is seen in that it sets Christ and God against
a man, and shuts him out of heaven. Mal. 2.5. I will be a swift witness
against adulterers; Men are backward to meddle in that case, but Christ will be
forward to witness against them. Its spoken of him, Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge; he reserves such to be punished at the day of
Judgment, 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. and then he will shut them out of heaven, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10: Rev. 22.15. and they shall have their portion in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. And so shall be punished with an
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
power, 2 These. 2.9.

The punishment appointed by God for this sin here in this world, was no less
then death, as you may see, Levit. 20.10: Deuteronomy. 22.22. Both the adulterer and
the adulteress were to be put to death. Job intimates so much, who lived
before the Law was given, Chap. 31.11. This is an heinous crime, yea it is an
iniquity to be punished by the Judges; he means its capital, Fitzherb: out of
Baronius Anno 745. in his first part of policy and relig. Chap. 1.20.
and deserves death. Boniface, Bishop of Mentz, in a Letter of his to Theobald
King of the Mercians here in England, dissuading him from unclean practices,
tells him of the Paynims in old Saxony, who knew not the true God, lived
chastely with their wives, and if maid or wife were taken in fornication or
adultery, they first strangled them and then burnt them, and he that corrupted
either, was hanged over her he had corrupted, or else the woman offending in
this kind, was stripped naked to the middle, whipped by chaste Matrons from Town
to Town, and pricked with sharp knives till she dyed therewith. And if the
Gentiles who knew not God, had such a zeal and love to chastity, what should
you do that are a Christian King? if Paynims did so hate this sin, how
should we Christians much more do it? Some would have it punished with death,
because the sin is the same it was then, and God the same, hating it as much as
ever; be it so, yet the change of punishment makes the sin neither less
hateful or grievous, nor God changable. Under the Law he that gathered sticks
on the Sabbath was stoned to death, Number. 30. But Christ excused his Disciples
when they pulled and rubbed the ears of Corn on that day, Matthew. 12. The
thief was then to restore fourfold; but under the Gospel, Let him that stole
steal no more, only make restitution of the thing stolen, or recompense for
it; neither does it argue change in God, to change or mitigate the punishment;
for then he should be charged with change for changing the Ceremonial Law and
Judicials belonging to it. The Law came by Moses, but grace and mercy by
Christ, and the times of the Gospel abate the rigorous punishments of the Law
rather then intend them: neither do I co^ceive there should be no punishment
for this sin, as some gather from Joh. 8. where Christ did not condemn the
woman taken in adultery; he did not thereby abrogate that Law, but by his
silence showed, that it is not always necessary for States to punish that sin
with death, but with punishments of a lower nature; Willet upon Exodus 20.
and some of note observe that it was not single but double adultery when they
were put to death for it under Moses Law. Let every one know how to possess
his vessel in sanctification and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence,
1 These. 4.4, 5.

Neither has come near to a menstruous woman.
Heb: is (...) a woman separate or put apart for her monthly courses or
terms; for niddah is from nadad or nadah, to remove, separate, put away:
divine providence has so ordered it, that in that sex there is naturalis
fluxus sanguinis every month, both for purgation of their bodies, and
preparation of them for conception, so that its not a disease, as some
ignorantly conceiting, have had great prejudice against their wives, and been
too rigid toward them, but its a benefit unto them, and great advantage to
nature; but when this flux came upon them, they were by the Law of God, during
that time, accounted unclean, that is, unfit for matrimonial acts and use,
Levit. 12.2. and so separate a loco and sanctuario, from companying with their
husbands, and coming to the Sanctuary, Levit. 15.31.

This practice also was among the Heathens, which its probable they learned
from Moses. The Zabians had a law, that such women should dwe^l apart for a
time, and they purged with fire the places where they were.

Orpheus gave charge, that women in that condition should not come to the
sacred rites of Bacchus.

Willet on Levit. 15. Euripid. Iphig: in Tauris.
And Diana suffered not a man had touched a slain person, or a woman in
childbed, or a dead corpse, to come unto her Altars, but counted him as
unclean.

Come near.
That is, has not only not lain with her, known, enjoyed her, but not had any
thing to do with her. Levit. 15.19. Whosoever touches her shall be unclean
till evening. If an Husband or any other man touched the woman in time of her
separation, they were unclean for it.

Why men should not come near their wives at such times?
1. It Is against the light and law of nature, which never puts men upon things
uncomely and horrible, but startles at them: and surely if any should be so
vile and vicious, to do such a thing, he would find a reluctance even in
nature it self, unless he be become unnatural: The Heathens have detested
it, and the Mahometans have decreed against it in their Alcoran.

2. in regard of posterity and good of mankind; for children begotten then at
such times are either unhealthy, weak, or deformed, as Aristole observes, de
genesis animal. And Jerome upon this place; If men be careful of having good breed
and seed of all other things, as Cattle, Fowl, Corn, Plants, Flowers; how much
more should they be careful of their own seed and posterity, that it may be
sound, strong, comely and useful to the public.

3. It Is that which the wisdom of God has forbidden, and if there were
nothing else in it, that is sufficient. Levit. 18.19. Thou shall not approach
unto a woman to uncover her nakedness as long as she is put apart for her
uncleanness. In this Chapter, unlawful marriages and unlawful lusts are
forbidden, and it is as unlawful for men to meddle in that case as to marry
their Mothers, Sisters, Aunts, or Daughters in Laws; the same authority that
has forbidden one, has also forbidden the other.

4. The punishment of this sin is great, Levit. 20.18. The man and woman are
both to be cut off from among their people; the meaning is, not to be separated
from the Congregation as defiled, but they were to dye for their unseasonable
lusts, and approaching near to each other. This may seem very severe; but
know, if the man did it ignorantly, he was judged unclean seven days, and was
to wash and cleanse himself, Levit. 15.24.27. But if wittingly and knowingly
it were done, they were both to dye for it. Answerable to this is what our
Prophet says here: If he have not come near to a menstruous woman he shall
live. Solomon understood this, when he said, Eccles. 3.5. There is a time to
embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; or as the Heb. has it, to be
far from embracing: and no time has the Lord so punctually and severely
forbidden it as at that time. Though there be not the same punishment in
practice amongst us, yet God hates this sin nevertheless, and questionless
visits with sharp sickness, yea strange and sudden death for it.

Let men and women moderate their affections, Adulter est uxoris propriae,
amater audentior Corystus pythag^ricus.
mortify their lusts, live soberly, and take heed of provoking God by
unseasonable embracings, who would have his people to be chaste both in body and
soul.

Verse. 7. And has not oppressed any.
Heb. (...) has not afflicted, molested, sadded, oppressed; for so the word
janah signifies, and it is mostly applied to rich and great men who usually
molest and oppress the poor, Contristare affligere opprimerem, vin facere
significat, id quod clam and pulam verbis and factis fiere potest.
the fatherless, widows and strangers. Levit. 19.33. If a stranger sojourn
with thee in the land (...) Ye shall not vex him or oppress him. Jer. 22.3.
Do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow. (...) do not
afflict, molest, oppress either of them. Ezekiel. 22.29. They have vexed the
poor and needy. (...) you have all these together. Zach. 7.10. Oppress not
the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor.

Besides these, there were servants also whom they might not oppress. Deuteronomy.
24.14. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant. These chiefly are subject to
oppression, but great and small may vex and oppress one the other. Lev. 25
17. They shall not oppress one the other. Sometimes it falls out so, but more
frequently the great, rich, men in place and power do oppress those are
inferior to them, and under them. The Sept. renders the words we are upon,
(...), has not by his power, greatness, or strength, oppressed a man: where
these are, it is hard but to oppress others. James attributes oppression to
rich men, Chapter 2.6.

Wherein this oppression consists.
1. In out-reaching men in buying or selling. Levit. 25.14. If thou sell ought
unto thy neighbor, or buyest ought of thy neigbours hand, ye shall not
oppress one the other. Men must neither sell too dear, nor buy too cheap,
which is contrary to the practice of the world; for most men, if not all men,
will buy as cheap, and sell as dear as they can.

1. It Is oppression when the buyer will wring a Commodity out of his neighbors
or brothers hand, which he is unwilling to part withal: Ahab will have
Naboth's Vineyard, 1 King. 21.

2. When he makes advantage of the sellers necessity, and so many monied men
will furnish sellers and needy men with money, upon condition they may have
such wares, such an house, such land at an easier and under rate; such
advantage they made of them. Neh. 5.3. Who were necessitated to morgage their
lands, vine-yards and houses for money to buy corn: So those sell to the
shops, you will have their commodities at, etc.

3. When he disparageth the Commodities of the seller, who being not so well
insighted into the thing to be sold, as the subtle buyer, is over-reached and
defrauded. Prove. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught says the buyer. He brings
up an ill report upon it, casts a mist before the sellers eyes, that so he may
get it at a cheap rate: So in the Seller.

1. When you sell that for good which is not so. Amos 8.6. They sold the refuse
of the wheat for good wheat. And so for meats, wares, fruits, wines, many help
off ill commodities with lies, oaths, false glosses, lights, and pretenses that
it cost so much; that such would have given them so much, etc.

2. When you deceive them in weight and measure. Prove. 20.10. Diverse weights
and diverse measures are both of them alike abomination to the Lord.

3. When you take advantage of the buyers weakness or necessities; some, when
an ignorant party comes to their shops, they set the Dice upon him, and make
him pay double, or more than a knowing man should; but this is against the
rule, 1 These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter.
So for his necessity, many sellers seeing men in streights, and that they must
have their Commodities, they set them such prizes as undoeth them, dealing with
them: so that according to Amos 8.4. They swallow up the needy, and make the
poor of the land to fail.

2. In withholding that is right and due to others, Jam. 5.4. Behold the hire
of the laborers which have reaped down the fields, which is of you kept back
by fraud, cries. The labourer is worthy of his hire, says Christ, Luke 10.7.
and it was quickly to be paid, Levit. 19.13. Now to deny it, withold it, to
detract from it, or to pay it in money not current, is oppression. Mal. 3.5. I
will be a swift witness against those that oppress the hireling in his wages,
the widows and the fatherless, and turn aside the stranger from his right.
If any withhold the portion of Orphans, Legacies given to the poor, the
estates and rights of Widows, they will lie under the censure of being
Oppressors.

3. In laying too heavy burdens and tasks upon others. The Egyptians
oppressed the Israelites, Exodus 3.7. They must make their tale of brick,
Gratius est nomen pietatis quam potestatis: etiam familiae magis patre quam
domini vocantur. Tertul.
and gather straw too; which made them cry more then they did before, Exodus 5.
And so many lay more upon their servants and Apprentices then they can well
perform: they must be up early, down late, fare hard, lie hard, work hard, and
be worn out before their time, if they had not been under such rigid Masters,
and Taskmasters; and if not so, to break away and run into dissolute and
desperate courses, and what is this but oppression in a high degree; whereas
the rule is, Col. 4.1. Operae cum modo exigendae sunt and valetudinis servorum
humane haheuda ratio. Grot. de jure belli, l. 3. c. 14.
Masters give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that
ye also have a Master in heaven.

Likewise the taxing and rating the poorer sort of people beyond their
proportion, for the easing of the richer sort, is great oppression. Isa. 10.1.
Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousnesse
which they have prescribed to turn aside the needy from judgment. Great and
rich men usually make the rates and taxes, and what they decree, prescribe,
though never so grievous to the poorer sort, must stand; but let them look to
it, there is a dreadful woe pronounced against them: and Amos 4.2. Hear this
word ye Kine of Bashan, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy: The
Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that the days shall come upon you that
he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hooks.

4. In perverting and delaying of justice and judgment, so that the Petitions
and causes of Widows, Orphans, and Poor people cannot be heard. Isa. 1.23.
Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the
fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. The
fatherless and Widows had no gifts, no bribes to give them, the rich had, and
by that means justice was perverted, and judgment delayed. Yea judgment was
turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock, Amos 6.12. And
this sin is reckoned amongst the mighty ones. Am. 5.12. I know the mighty
sins, they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor
in the gate from their right. Let the poor man and his cause be never so good
and just, rich and great men by their purses and their friends have in all
ages, and still, do oppress them in judgment, Jam. 2.6. When the wolf and
sheep were in contention together, the wolf confessed the sheep had a better
cause then he, but he had stronger teeth then they: so poor men, widows,
orphans, may have a better cause then rich and great men, but they have
stronger teeth then they, and therefore Zephaniah is not afraid to call such
evening, yea ravening wolves, Zeph. 3.3.

5. In imposing upon men's consciences those things are doubtful and disputable,
whither warrantable or no, yea of unlawful things, this is the greatest
oppression of all. When Doctrins, Worship, Disciplines are imposed upon men's
consciences, which cannot clearly be made out to them, it is height of
oppression, and the ground work of persecution. The Scribe and Pharisees taught
for Doctrines the commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9. They laid grievous
burdens on men's shoulders and hearts, Matthew. 23.4. So did Prelacie of late,
and oppressed men in their Courts for not observing their Ceremonies and
Will Worship: add not only so, but persecuted men, and drove them out of the
land; and this is an evil in many Families, where Husbands, Parents, Masters,
put and press those things upon their Wives, Children, and Servants, which in
conscience they cannot yield unto; or if they do, it is with doubting and
scrupulosity: and what is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. And the rule is, 1
Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye servants of men.

The evil of oppressing.
1. It Is an unnatural evil; no creatures do oppress those of their own kind;
take birds of prey, Eagles, Vultures, Hawks, do not prey upon those of their
own, but another kind. So Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Bears are favorable to those
of their own kind, and prey upon Forreiners, those of another kind; but men
most unnaturally prey upon one another: homo homini lupus, one man is a Wolf to
another. Ezekiel. 22.27. Her Princes are wolves, ravening the prey. And who were
the prey? widows and fatherless ones, Isa. 10.2. Lions have spared men, Dan.
6. Ravens fed men, 1 K. 17. and yet one man seeks to eat up, and devour
another.

2. It Is argument there is little or no fear of God in their hearts that do
oppress others. Levit. 25.17. Ye shall not oppress one another, but thou
shall fear thy God: Whereby is fully intimated, that if they oppress, they
do not fear God; if they fear God, they will not oppress; for by the fear
of the Lord men depart from evil, Prove. 16.6. When Amaleck fell upon the
Jews, and smote some of them passing through his Country, it is said, he
feared not God, Deuteronomy. 25.18. The Jewe's oppressing one another, is attributed
to their not fearing of God. Nehem. 5.9. Job's eschewing of evil was, because
he feared God, Job 1.1.

3. It Is against that great and common rule of equity, Matthew. 7.12. All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. The
like is in Luke 6.31. Now no man that is in his right mind, that has use of
reason, would have another to wrong and oppress himself in estate, name,
conscience; he should not do it unto others. Lactantius says, Radix and omne
fundamentum aequitatis est illud: vide ut ne facias ulli quod pati nolis; sed
alterius animum de tuo metieris. in Epitom: institut.
That is the root and whole foundation of equity, not to do to any, what he
would not suffer himself; and measure another spirit or mind by thine own.
Hierom calls this sentence of Christ's, all things whatsoever ye would, etc.
totius justiciae breviarium, and should always be written upon men's hearts. Ad
Celantiam.

4. It Is a sin greatly provokes God, has dreadful woes denounced against it,
and brings dreadful judgments upon those are guilty of it; see Mica, 2.12. Heb.
2.12. Zeph. 3.1. Jer. 22.13. Isa. 10.1, 2, 3. In those places such woes are
thundered out against oppressors, as would make even stony hearts to tremble:
what will ye do in the day of visitation? to whom will ye flee for help? God
will visit for this sin. Prove. 22.22, 23. Rob not the poor because he is
poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate: For the Lord will plead
their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. The Egyptians
opressed the Israelites, and did not God spoil the Egyptians? Exodus 12.36.
Rhehoboam would oppress his Subjects by laying heavy burdens upon them; and
God spoiled him of ten Tribes, 1 King. 12. And he threatens to be a swift
witness against those oppress the hireling in his ways, the widow and the
fathelesse, and turn aside the stranger from his right, Mal. 3.5. The meaning
is, God will punish them severely, and you may see what God will do, Exodus
22.21, 22, 23, 24. If thou afflict, vex, oppress the stranger, the widow, the
fatherless in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their
cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword: and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Of all people, strangers,
widows, fatherless ones should be pitied, countenanced, counseled,
comforted, relieved; for therein lies the fruit and power of true Religion, Jam
1.27. If those therefore be afflicteed in any wise, and do cry at all, God will
hear; his wrath will wax hot, consume you, and bring your wives and children
into their condition; therefore 1 These. 4.6. But has restored to the debtor
his pledges, etc.

Poor men being in streights, were wont to pawn their garmens, their tools,
and household stuff, unto their Creditors, for what they borrowed of them. Men
that had money and means were hard-hearted, and would not lend freely: and when
they had the poor and needies pledges, they would keep them. The Lord
therefore gave them laws thereabout, as Exodus 22.26. If thou at all take thy
neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver it unto him by that the sun
goes down. So Deuteronomy. 24.6.10, 11, 12, 13.17. They might not take the upper
millstone nor a widows garment for pledges: and what they did take, they were
faithfully and speedily to return. Job complains of the wicked, that they
took the widows Ox for a pledge, and the garments of the poor, Job 24.3.9.
It Is not unlawful to take a pledge, so it be not of present and necessary use:
but to make advantage of the poor, to have pledges double or treble the worth
of that men lend, and then to take forfeitures, or withold the pledges, is
cruelty toward man, and iniquity before God, who would have men to be merciful
as himself is merciful; to be helps, and not hinderers to those are in
affliction.

Has spoiled none by violence.
Heb. (...) raptum non rapuerit; has not taken away by force that which has
been so gotten by others. Nupere spoliare avellere.
The word (...) notes a violent taking away, and so it is expressed, Prove. 22.22.
Rob not the poor. Robbing is a violent taking from any: and so Levit. 19.13.
and Amos 3.10. violence and robbery are joined together. Wicked men are said to
drink the wine of violence, Prove. 4.13. that is, they spoil others, as ver.
16. They sleep not, except they cause some to fall: and what they get that
way, they live upon, they make merry therewith, drink wine in bowls, and that
is the wine of violence: so those phrases of eating violence, Prove. 13.2.
Storing up violence, Amos 3.10. are to be understood, they feed upon, and
furnish themselves with what they get by violence.

I spoke of violence in Chap. 7.11. Chap. 8.17. and therefore shall not insist
much on it, but tell you what David says, Psalm. 140.11. Evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him. Certain ruin abides the violent man, one
judgment of God or other will hunt him like a wild beast, till he be
overthrown; yea his own violent dealings shall come upon him and overwhelm him,
Psalm. 7.16.

Samuel could say, whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? whom
have I defrauded? or whom have I oppressed? 1 Samuel 12.3. It were well such
innocence could be found in men; but we have been full of plundering and
spoiling one another, yea many precious ones have been spoiled of all they had,
but the LORD will spoil the spoilers, Proverbs. 22.23.

Has given his bread to the hungry.
The word for hungry is from (...) exardere fame, and notes such as are pineht
with hunger, and have real need of relief: and by bread is here meant not
only what in a strict sense we call bread, but what ever is fit for man to
eat; as in Chapter 16.49. Giving bread to the hungry, imports not one or two acts,
but a constant and free relieving of them, as thou art able, and there is
occasion. Isa. 58.7. Its to deal the bread to the hungry, to bring the poor
are cast out to thine house, and when thou see the naked to cover him.

Has covered the naked with a garment.
That is, those have ragged, thin, poor clothing, so that their nakedness is
not hid, a man is to mind such, cover their nakedness; as Job says, Chap.
31.19. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering, if his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the
fleece of my sheep. Its not enough to give food, but there must be clothing
too, if need be, James 2.15, 16.

We should be charitable, feed the hungry, and cloth the naked; they are our
own flesh. Isa. 58.7. Hide not thy self from thine own flesh.

It was the sin of Sodom, not to strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

It was a damned Dives that would not relieve a poor Lazarus.

God feeds you with the finest of the wheat-flowre, clothes you with the
choicest clothes, silks, etc. yea, feeds you with Manna, flesh of his son,
clothes you with garments of salvation, with the righteousness of Christ.

It is the exercise of faith, Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for
thou shall find it after many days.

It makes a man to be of good report, Psalm. 112.9. He has given to the poor,
his righteousness endures for ever. Mark. 12.42. And there came a certain
poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which were remembered and recorded.

It Is Argument of a good man, Ps. 112.19. Blessed is the man fears God, he has
dispersed, etc.

It is feeding of Christ, Matthew. 25.35.40. In that ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

It is an honor to Religion, Jam. 1.27. Pure religion, and undefiled, before
God and the father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

It procures many a prayer and blessing, 2 Cor. 9.10. Now he that ministers
seed to the sower, both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed
sown, and increase the fruits of your unrighteousness.

Job 29.13. The blessing of him was ready to perish came upon me: and I caused
the widows heart to sing for joy.

2 Timothy 1.16. The Lord show mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain.

It Is maintaining and saving of life, Job 29.13.

It makes like unto God, Luke 6.36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
also is merciful.

There is Carentia mali, potentia sublevandi, actualis compassio in miseros:
all which are in God. Psalm. 146.7. he gives food to the hungry. It makes like
Christ, he fed the multitude, Matthew. 14.

It Is lending to the Lord, Prove. 19.17. He has pity on the poor, lends to
the Lord, and that which he has given, will he repay him again.

It Is pleasing and acceptable to God, Acts 10.

Heb. 13.16. To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

VERSE. 8. He that has not given forth upon usury, neither has taken any
increase, that has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, has executed true
judgment between man and man.


OUr Prophet is upon declaring who is a righteous man, sundry characters of
such an one he has laid down before, and here proceeds to add more: and the
first is, he meddles not with usury, he increases not his estate that way.
It Is much in practice among the sons of men, as if Scripture did rather
authorize, then prohibit it.

Upon usury.
Nesheck is from (...) to bite; yea to bite like a Serpent; it is a kin to (...)
a Serpent says Avenar. A Serpent's biting is little felt at first; but after
it enflames and ruins the man: so Usury is not much felt at the beginning, but
in time, eats up, and devoures a man's whole substance; or for that it makes a
man restless, sleeplesse, who is bitten with it, as the biting of a Serpent
does, or biting in that like a hungry Dog or Wolf, by biting and devouring
others, it feeds it self. Chrysostom. super illud, Math. 5. volenti mutuare, says,
the Usurers money is like the biting of the Aspe. A man bitten by the Asp has
a delightful sleepiness upon him, and dies sleeping, because poison sweetly
diffuseth it self through his whole body: so the man that takes money of the
Usurer, pleases himself, thinking it a kindness, and benefit unto him; but it
quickly eats up a great part, if not his whole estate. Vsura est venenum,
Polan. This kind of usury many are against, but other sorts of usury they allow
and practice. I shall therefore consider what Usury is, and then show you
whether the Scripture will warrant any usury.

What usury is.
It Is the taking of any thing above the principal, says Tostat.

A receiving more then was lent, Cajet.

Si plus quam dedisti expectas accipere faenerator es. Aug. in Psalm. 36.
These are too strict, excluding what ever any return freely by way of
thankfulness.

In usury 3. things are considerable: Lending, Gaining, Covenanting.

To lend money for gain, interposita pactione, that is usurie.

When men put out their money to receive more then the principal by virtue of
a Covenant, Contract or Compact, that makes them Usurers.

Visin says. Vsura (...) qu^^ ^^^^^ur solius mutuationis causa.
It is gain taken merely for the lending of a thing: Herein it is conceived lies
the formality of it, viz. the covenanting, agreeing, and contracting to have so
much for what is lent. This the word points at, Exodus 22.25. lo tesimun alau
nesbeck, thou shall not put usury upon him. The Sept. is, (...) and so Castal.
and Piscator, Vsuram ei ne imponito.
and our Translation is, thou shall not lay upon him usury.

Lucrum ex mutuo quaesitum vi ipsius mutui.
Amesius says it is gain sought after, aimed at from what is lent, because
it is lent, and he includes in the word quaesitum, not only real usury which is
contracted for, but mental usury which is intended.

Usury thus described I find no warrant for from the word of God, but much
against it: Look into these places, Exodus 22.35. Levit. 25.35, 36, 37. Deuteronomy.
23.19, 20. The great God of Heaven and Earth commands them not to be Usurers,
not to lend upon, or take usury.

The answer and evasion that some have and make here, is this; true, we must
not lend upon usury to the poor, who are mentioned in the two first places, and
employed in the 3d. but to the rich we may.

To take away this evasion,

1. Consider there be other places, where no mention of the poor is made, Psalm.
15.5. He that puts not out his money to usury. It Is spoken indefinitely;
they might not put it out to the poor, and who then were there to put it out
to, but the rich? so in Jer. 15.10. Ezekiel. 22.12. Usury is censured, and yet
there is no mention of the poor. Usury seemed a cursed thing.

2. Rich men were there brethren as well as the poor: and Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto
thy brother thou shall not lend upon usury. He might not lend to a rich foe,
only to a stranger.

3. What countenance, warrant, or encouragement do you find in holy writ for
lending moneys to rich and wealthy men, especially with expectation of gain,
Luke 6.34. If ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have you;
for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again. Wicked men, the
worst of all, who have no fear of God in them will do that; therefore says
Christ, lend, hoping for nothing again. Here is shown who should lend, and to
whom. Rich men are to lend, not to borrow; and to those the lending should be,
who are not able to maintain their charge, drive on their callings without
help; to these rich men should lend freely, and to others that are Beggars,
truly poor, they should give. Matthew. 5.42. Give to him that asks thee, and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away. It Is a duty for rich
men to lend, not to borrow: and because they let many Families sink these hard
times, which would do well enough, had they a little support from the rich, it
will stand upon their account one day.

This is the evil of rich men, because they see such a man decaying, therefore
they will not lend him: but because he is upon decaying, therefore they should
lend him that he may not utterly decay, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.

2d. Evasion men have is this: Usury when it is biting, has the Serpents sting
and teeth in it; prejudiceth, and does not profit, advantage a man, then it is
unlawful; but if a man be a gainer by it, it is not unwarrantable; and so they
distinguish between biting usury, and profiting usury.

Answ. Distinctions and arguments from Etymologies are insufficient and weak,
(...), a deceitful witness. Abshalom signifies a father of peace, or the
fathers peace; but he was a father of War, and his fathers trouble; lucus quia
minime lucet. As for Usury, the Scripture knows no such distinction, as biting,
and profiting usury; it is an humane invention to make way for the satisfaction
of men's covetous and greedy desires. Men think they are safe if they take usury
of the rich, not of the poor; but see how the Lord strangles and cuts off this
distinction by the next words in the Verse.

Neither has taken any increase.
He must not be a biting Usurer, which they grant, neither must he be an
increasing Usurer: this is forbidden by the same Authority that the other is:
The word is, (...) from (...) to multiply and increase, and is rendered by
Montan: Amplius, so Vatablus and Jerome; he is a just man that takes no more
then he lends. Some would have this word to be exegetical, and so think to
avoid the force of it. But though the wisdom of man be inventive to promote
it is own interests, yet it must not null the wisdom of God. Let us grant it
exegeticall, it is of more force against them; for the latter word must expound
the former, and so any increase is the meaning of usury; upon this account
then, he is an Usurer takes any increase.

But this likes not those plead for it: by increase they would have such
increase, as burdens, bites, oppresses, and consumes him that gives it.

This is forcing of the word Tarbith, which notes simply any increase or
multiplication; not biting, oppressing, undoing increase. As they therefore
stick to the word Nesheck, to make one sort of usury unlawful: so may we
stick to the word Tarbith, to make that other sort of usury unlawful, because
it is said, he that has not given forth to usury, neither has taken any
increase. The word notes increase of victuals as well as of money. Levit.
25.37. Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals
for increase.

There must not be increase of money or victuals; it is not meant a burdensome
increase of victuals, but no increase at all.

Some plead the lawfulness of it, from Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto a stranger thou
may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou may not lend upon usury.
Hence they conclude, that usury is not simply unlawful but to a brother.

Answ. God is above the law, and may authorize men to do such things as the
letter of the law is against: He bade Abraham sacrifice his son, the Jews to
rob the Egyptians. The law in Levit. 20.21. is against a man marrying his
brothers wife; yet in Deuteronomy. 25.5. The brother must raise up seed to the
brother; and 7. brethren had one woman, Matthew. 22.24, 25, 26. And so here, the
Lord might give way to the Jews to take usury, he is above the law.

2. Some answer it thus, and say, God permitted it unto them for the hardness
of their hearts, who would have taken of their brethren, if they had not had
liberty thus to have done: As they were permitted to give a bill of divorce to
their Wives, and send them away, so it was here. It was a permission, thou
may, etc. and permission is of evil, not, of good.

3. It was to By the word stranger, it is clear no other could be mea^t but
only those 7. nations of the Hittites, Amorites, Jebusites, etc. from whom God
commanded them to take their lives also -- and without all doubt, none of those
nations among whom they are at this present dispersed, and suffered to inhabit,
and do likewise receive all courteous usage from the Princes of the several
nations, especially among the Christians; seeing that to take usury would be a
crime, not only against the written law, but against that of nature also. Leo
Modeno his Hist. of the rites of the Jews. To take usury of strangers was not,
says Aquinas: secundum intentionem logis, sed ex quadam permissione, propter
pravitatem judaeorum, ad avaritiam; and ut magis pacifice se haberent ad
extraneos a quibus lucrabantur 1^ 2 ae q. 105. Artic. 3 ad 3. um.
strangers they might do it, and not to all strangers, but Canaanites only, who
were designed of God to destruction: so that these they might destroy with the
sword, they might devour with usury; so then, where men are not appointed to
death, and to be cut off by War, they may not exercise usury. Vbi jus belli ibi
jus usurae.

4. The distinction of strangers is now taken away, the partition wall is
broken down, and we are all brethren; a stranger that was become a Proselyte,
and embraced the Jewish Religion, they might not take usury of, he was a
brother, Levit. 25, 35, 36. They had all one father, Mal. 2.10. and so have we,
and are brethren: This made In principio legis a fratribus tantum foenus
tollitur; in propheta ab omnibus usura prohibetur; in Evangelio, virtutis
augmentum est praecipiente domino faeneramini his a quibus non speratis
accipere.
Jerome upon this place say, in the law, usury was taken off from brethren; In
the Prophets it is forbid to all; in the Gospel is yet more virtue and favor;
the Lord says, lend to them from whom ye may expect nothing.

It is the blindness of the Jews to think they may take usury of Christians,
when Christ has made of both, one, Ephesians. 2.14. And it is our sinful
covetousness to take usury one of another when we are brethren: and therefore
some affirm that in this place of Deuteronomy. that usury toward strangers is
neither commanded nor permitted; but the Scripture would have us acknowledge
all our neighbors and brethren; and that if we do exercise usury toward
any, we entreat them not as brethren or neighbors, but as enemies.

Some ground the lawfulness, and so their practice of it upon Matthew. 25. the
parable of the Talents, verse. 27. Ought thou not to have put my money to the
exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.
Hence they conclude, that Christ does not only allow, but justify usury.

Answ. 1. This is a parable, and solid arguments are seldom drawn from
parables. Theologia symbolica, non est argumentativa.

2. Christ here speaks not de justicia rei, as if he approved usurious
practices, whereby men of covetous minds do increase their estates; sed de
modo rei, the increase that came by such practices which he propounds to be
imitated in spiritual things: You see men of this world improve their moneys,
and so should you improve those gifts and graces which are concredited and
committed unto you: Christ here justifies usury no more then he justifies the
unjust Steward, Luke 16.8. where it is said, he commended the unjust Steward,
because he had done wisely. Why, what had he done? In one account he had
defrauded his Mr. of 50 measures of oil; in another account he cut him short
of 20. measures of wheat; yet Christ says he had done wisely; that is, wisely
for himself, though wickedly for his Mr. Christ's commendation of him did not
legitimate the action; if men's Stewards or Servants should do so now, and
alledg this instance, they would not hold them excusable, but have the law
against them. Christ says, that he will come as a Thief, Rev. 16.15. and that
the day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night, 1 These. 5.2. Does this
therefore countenance or justify the every?

You see then no footing for usury in the word of God; it seems to me to make
void 3. great rules which our Lord and Savior has given us in the Gospel.

The 1. is that, Matthew. 7.12. All things whatsoever you would that men should
do unto you, do ye even the same to them, for this is the law and the
Prophets. Now is there any man in streights, in necessities, that would not
borrow freely, rather then be tied to pay so much, not knowing whether he shall
gain any thing, or preserve the principal: and if any should deny it, I fear
their own consciences would condemn them for it. It Is true; through the
custom and practice of the times, men are willing to borrow upon such rates
and terms, because they cannot have moneys otherwise; but if men will lay
aside all respects of that kind, and look at the simple nature of the thing,
they cannot but confess they had rather have money freely then upon terms:
and if so, then they ought to do so to others, and not lay the burden of usury
upon them.

2. It Is against that great rule and command, Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping for
nothing again. The Greek is, (...) men should so lend as not to hope for, much
less covenant for any thing again. Any thing for the lending their principal
they may; for it is not said, give, but lend, not (...) but (...); and if you
should not have the principal again, it were not (...) but (...), not a
lending, but a giving; lend, hoping for the principal, but nothing for the
loan of it. Such lending is attributed to righteous and good men. Psalm 37.26.
He is ever merciful, and lends. And Psalm. 112.5. A good man shows favor,
and lends. But the usurer beneficentiam in maleficentiam pervertit, as
Muscul. in Psalm. 15.

3. It Is against that great rule and command, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation
be without covetousness. Should poor men be without covetousness who have
little, and should not rich men who have much? they usually are the Usurers,
and ^o most covetous. Usury is the invention and practice of covetousness, and
serves only to feed the appetite thereof. Covetousness is a grievous sin,
it is idolatry, as you may see, Coloss. 3.5. It makes the times perilous, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. It Is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. It makes a man unworthy
of Christian society, 1 Cor. 5.11. To be abhorred of God, Psalm. 10.3. and so to
be shut out of the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.5. And surely
such as the Mother is, such is the daughter. Psalm. 15.1. Lord, who shall abide
in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy hill? Verse. 5. That puts not
out his money to usury. Of which words Luther in his Comentary upon that Psalm
says, iste locus non indiget explication^ sed impletione. Many Counsels have
condemned it as unlawful. In the 1. Nicene it was condemned for a mortal sin,
Can. 17. The first Carthaginian determined it to be turpe lucum, cap 13. The
Lateran says, usury is not allowed to redeem Captives; and this reason is
given of it, si prohibetur pro alterius vita mentiri, multo magis usuras
accipere; so that it makes usury worse then lying. Council: Viennense decrees
him to be punished as an Heretic who says usury is no sin. The Eliberine
Council degraded Clergy men, and cast the people out of the Church who were
Usurers, Cap. 20. Not only Councels, but Fathers have been against it. Aug.
upon the 36. Psalm says, si plus quam dedisti expectas accipere, faenerator
es. And Bern. calls it, venenum patrimonij: inter praecepta famil: The very
heathen have censured and condemned it. Arist. in 1 Polit. c. 7. says,
usuraria acquisitio est maxim contra naturam, because it is barren, and not apt
to bring forth: And Cato makes usury equal to murder; illi faenerari idem
fuit quod hominem occidere; Tul. 2. Offic. cited by Aret. in problem. Lycurgus,
e tota Sparta usurarios expulit, Phocil, (...). Moll. in Psalm. 15.

Agis burnt all the Usurers tables at Athens; which made Agesilaus to say he
never saw a better or brighter light then that fire made, Alexan. ab Alexand:
lib. 1. Genesis Dier. c. 7. Plato would have usurers banished out of the
Commonwealth, l. 5. de legib.

Let men threfore take heed how they meddle with usury, seeing there is such a
cloud of Witnesses against it, and not trust to a distinction of man's brain,
making biting usury unlawful, and other usury lawful, left by this
distinction they get money in their coffers, and lose their souls at last.
For, as Alphonsus says, faenus est animae funus, such gain is the sepulcher
of the soul; and he must not sojourn in the Tabernacle of the Lord, that puts
his money to usury; and surely it is an ill trade that excludes a man from
heaven.

Money at first was invented for exchange of things uneasy to be transported,
not to beget money or a trade without labor; for the usurers trade is most
easy and gainful. The ancient Grecians and Romans forbade all usury above one
penny for 100. in the year; and if any took above that rate, he was condemned
to restore fourfold, and judged more vile then a Thief, who was condemned but
in double as much; afterward it was brought to a halfpenny a year among the
Romans, and not long after wholly taken away by the Gemut^^ian law; and if it
were brought to lower rates amongst us, or rather wholly taken away, it were an
honor to the Gospel, and to our Nation.

That has withdrawn his hand from iniquity.
Hebrew is, has turned away his hand: so the Sept. (...). Piscat. retraxerit.
The sense of the phrase is, that has abstained from do^ng evil, from unjust
and sinful acts; not only that keeps his hand from taking bribes, as Polan:
But from wronging any when it is in his power, and occasions are presented. If
men be so minded, they shall have variety of occasions to revenge themselves
upon their enemies, to crush the poor, to get the wealth and honor of the
world, yea strong temptations to things that are evil; but now when a man will
not give way to such temptations and occasions; he is said to withdraw, or
turn his hand from iniquity. When Judah said of Joseph, what profit is it if
we slay our brother and conceal his blood, let not our hand be upon him. Here
he kept his own, and his brothers hands from iniquity, Genesis 37.26, 27. Saul
commands his Footmen to kill the Priests, 1 Samuel 22.17. But they would not put
forth their hand to fall upon the Priests of the Lord, they withdrew their
hands from iniquity. Job professes his innocence in this kind, Chap. 31.21. If
I have lift up my hand against the fatherless when I saw my help in the gate,
then let mine arm fall from my shoulders. He had opportunities and
encouragement from others in place, to have wronged the fatherless; but he
would not do it, he withdrew his hand from iniquity. Joseph would not hearken
unto his Mistress: Daniel would not defile himself with the Kings portion,
Chap. 1.8. The 3. children would not bow to the Image, Chap. 3. They withdrew
their hands and hearts from iniquity: and so David, he kept himself from his
iniquity, Psalm. 18.23. from that was most stirring in him. Wicked men withdraw
not their hands from iniquity, but as Mic. 7.3. They do evil with both hands,
and that earnestly. Evil is their element, and doing evil is their trade; but
a righteous man withdraws his hand from iniquity, yea all iniquity; From all
unwarrantable actions, prescriptions, subscriptions.

Has executed true judgment between man and man.
Heb. is, the judgment of truth. Whether these words be referred to public
Magistrates, or private men chosen to end controversies between men at
variance, it matters not, both may be included; for whosoever do judge, or
execute judgment between man and man, they are to judge truly, and execute the
judgment of truth. Zach. 8.16. It Is written thus; execute the judgment of
peace and truth in the gates: there is a judgment of truth, or as the Hebrew
is, judge truth, see your judgment have nothing in it but truth; see it be
according to the word of truth, approved by the God of truth, and then it will
be judicium pacis, a judgment of peace, else it will breed more contention and
heartburnings. The Scripture speaks of perverting judgment, Pro. 17.23. Of
turning aside judgment, Isa. 10.2. But those are called to that work, should
neither for fear or favor, hatred or love, warp from the rule set of God: No
greatness, no relation, no gifts, no respects whatsoever should draw a man to
wrest, pervert, or turn aside judgment of truth or true judgment Deuteronomy. 16.18,
19. They shall judge the people with just judgment, thou shall not wrest
judgment; thou shall not respect persons, neither take a gift; for it blinds
the eyes of the wise, and perverts the words of the righteous; that which is
altogether just thou shall follow. God loves true, righteous, and just
judgment, and hates what is thereunto contrary. Deuteronomy. 27.19. Cursed be he that
perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow. His hatred is
so great, that he has laid a curse upon the perverters thereof.

VERSE. 9.
Has walked in my statutes, and has kept my judgments, to deal truly; he
is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord God.


We are coming toward an end of the description of a righteous man, one
thing or two remains.

Has walked in my statutes.
There be several expressions in the good word of God consonant unto this: As
walking with God, Genesis 6.9. Walking before God, Genesis 17.1. Walking after the
Lord, 2 Kings 23.3. Walking in the spirit, Gal. 5.25. After the spirit, Romans
8.1. Walking in the fear of the Lord, Acts 9.31. Nehem. 5.9.

Several equivalent unto it, as walking in the truth, Psalm. 86.11. Walking in
his ways, Deuteronomy. 28.9. Walking in the light of the Lord, Isa. 1.5. Walking
honestly as in the day, Romans 13. 13. Walking worthy of the Lord, 1 These. 2.12.
Walking after his commandments, 2 John v. 6. In the good way, Jer. 6.16.
Respecting all his commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Sticking to his testimonies,
verse. 3.

It Is opposed to other walkings and ways: as walking in the statutes of the
heathen, 2 K. 17.8. In the statutes of Israel, Ver. 19. Keeping the statutes of
Omri, Mic. 6.16. Walking in the ways of the Kings of Israel, 2 K. 8.18. In the
statutes of their father, Ezekiel. 20.18. In their own counsels, Psalm. 81.12. The
counsels of their evil hearts, Jer. 7.24. Walking after Baalim, Jer. 9.14.
After other gods, Chap. 16.11. Walking according to the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2.
According to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2. Walking after their own
lusts, 2 Pet. 3.3. In the imaginations of their own hearts, Jer. 13.10. After
our own devices, Chap. 18.12. Walking in pride, Dan. 4.37. Walking in lies,
Jer. 23.14. Walking in the ways of darkness, Pro. 2.13. John 11.10. Walking
in the vanity of mind, Ephesians. 4.17. In the ways of a man's heart, Eccles.
11.9. Walking after vanity, Jer. 2.5. After things do not profit, verse. 8.
Walking with slander, Jer. 6.28. Walking after customs, Acts 21.21. Walking
with vanity, Job 31.5.

Walking in Gods statutes implies several things.

1. Life. 2. Light. 3. Action, motion. 4. Progress. 5. Perseverance.
1. Life: a dead man cannot walk, he lies immovable; walking is from life,
Romans 6.4. Spiritual walking is from spiritual life, as natural walking is
from natural life. Hos. 14.9. The ways of the Lord are right, and the just
shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein. Men justified by
faith, they live, and they walk in Gods ways; not others, transgressors fall
in them; they cannot stand, much less walk in them: If men be not good
themselves, they cannot do good.

2. Light: men must know Gods statutes, else how can they walk in them; unknown
things are neither desired nor practiced. Matthew. 22.29. Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures. They wandered from Gods ways through ignorance, being
in the dark, they stumbled. Jer. 4.22. To do good they have no knowledge. An
ignorant man cannot walk in Gods ways; a servant can never do the will of his
Master, if he knows it not; nor a son the will of his Father, if he
understand it not. Prove. 14.8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his
way. A prudent man will examine his way, whether it be the way of God he walks
in, or the way of the world, flesh, corruption; if it be this last, he will not
walk in it, but walk out of it: he will walk into Gods way, and walk in his
statutes; when he discerns them once to be his, he dares not keep out of them.

3. Action, motion. A man that walks, neither stands nor sits still; he stands
not in contemplation, nor sits still in meditation; contents not himself with
reading or hearing, but is doing the will of God; walking and doing are the
same. 1 K. 11.38. If thou will walk in my ways, and do that is right in my
sight, to do my statutes and commandments: those that do and keep them, they
walk in them. This walking is observing his commandments, Neh. 1.5. Obeying
the voice of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13.4. It Is harkening unto God. Psalm 81.13.
Fulfilling the statutes and judgments of the Lord, 1 Chr. 22.13. Performing
his statutes, Psalm. 119.112.

4. Progress. A man that walks, goes on step by step, and presses on toward
that which is before him. He walks in the statutes of the Lord, goes forward,
his obedience is more and more. It Is said of wicked men, they proceed from
evil to evil, Jerem. 9.3. They walk on in their evil ways: and so do good
and just men, they go on from statute to statute, from truth to truth, from
grace to grace, Psalm. 84.7. They go from strength to strength, and from light
to light. Phil. 3.13. Paul forgot those things were behind, and reached forth
toward those things were before him; he took long strides toward heaven, and
walked fast that way, he forgate how much ground he had walked over, and
hastened to his journeys end. In Romans 4.12. they are said to walk in the steps
of Abraham's faith. Abraham walked in faith, and all believers since have
trodden in his steps.

5. Perseverance; that is employed here by walking, as appears by verse. 24. When
the righteous turns away from his righteousness, etc. Psalm. 119.112. I have
inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end. A man
that walks in Gods statutes must never stand still, nor turn back; God has no
pleasure in such, Heb. 10.38. However times prove, what ever troubles arise,
how ever men or divine providence acts, those are in Gods ways should proceed
and persevere. Psalm. 44.18, 19. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined from thy way: though thou have sore broken us in the place of
dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death. The word for dragon is (...)
and signifies both sea and landdragons, and refers to the Gentiles says Kimhi,
who were as cruel to them as Dragons; now notwithstanding they met with
Dragons, were stung with them, and brought unto the point of death, yet they
held on in Gods ways, neither hand nor foot declined or withdrew at all,
they knew it is the end crowns all antecedent acts. Mar. 24.13. He that shall
endure to the end, the same shall be saved. It Is continuance in well doing which
arrives at eternal life, Romans 2.7.

Has kept my judgments.
These words express the meaning of the former. Walking in Gods statutes, is
keeping of his judgments, Judge. 2.22. Of these words Statutes and Judgments
was spoken, Chap. 5.6. A word or two of keeping.

To keep here, is not meant of keeping Gods judgments, or laws from
perverting, having corrupt glosses and senses put upon them; as you would keep
clothes from moths, which do mar them; neither is it meant of keeping them
in memory, as the word is used, Luke 2.51. But to keep them, is to do and
perform them thoroughly, Psalm. 119.48.69. Deuteronomy. 23.23. Keeping and performing is
the same: so observing and keeping, Ps. 105.45. The Hebrew word (...) signifies
to keep, as Pagnine says, with care and diligence: And Prove. 4.23. it is
rendered so; Keep thy heart with all diligence, (...) with all care and
diligence, and so must the judgments, commands, and ways of God be kept. Deuteronomy.
6.17. You shall diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God. (...)

To deal truly.
Hebrew is, to do truth, (...) which Pradus says signifies not only veritatem
dictorum, quae mendacio opponitur, sed potissimum veritatem factorum, quae
repugnat vanitati and hypocrisi, quae sunt mendacia in factis: There be lies in
men's actions as well as in their words.

This expression of our Prophet to deal truly is consonant to that of Christ,
John 3.21. He that does truth. Veritas in factis est adaequatio operi, ad id
quod dictat spiritus domini, fides vel ratio.
Men do truth, when their actions are adequate or conformable to the word of
God. The Sept. have it, (...), to do the same things, referring to judgments
and statutes. The doing of them is doing of truth. Psalm. 119.142. Thy law is
truth. All things in the law of God; all his Statutes, Judgments, Commands,
Ways, are truth, and the doing of them is doing truth: and when a man deals
truly, without fraud, guile, deceit, hypocrisy, which is the thing here
intended, he does truth: You read in holy writ of dealing treacherously, Lam.
1.2. Subtly, Act. 7.19. Perversely, Psalm. 119.78. Unfaithfully, Psalm. 78.57.
Corruptly, Neh. 1.7. Deceitfully, Job 6.15. Falsely, Jer. 6.13. And unto all
these is dealing truly opposite: He does so, deals neither treacherously,
subtly, perversely, nor unfaithfully, corruptly, deceitfully or falsely.

Dealing truly is hard to find among the sons of men, great or small, Prophet
or Priest, Jer. 8.10. But where it is to be found, it is a jewel, I say a
jewel enriching the man with peace invaluable, and making him delightful unto
God, Prove. 12.22. They that deal truly are his delight. Hebrew is, those that
do truth, not those that speak truth only, but those whose lives and actions
hold out the truth, they are his delight, (...) it is from (...) voluntas,
favor, acceptatio. Men have their delights: one delights in a witty man,
another in a learned man, a third in a beautiful man, a fourth in a bountiful
man; but God delights in a man does truth, or deals truly.

He is just.
Heb. is (...) Something I spoke of a just man in the 5. verse. I shall add
something here.

There is a just man in appearance, Matthew. 23.28. the Pharisees did outwardly
appear righteous; there is a just man in opinion and conceit, Luke 18.9. There
were those trusted in themselves that they were righteous: There is a just man
in truth, and that either evangelically or legally.

1. Evangelically just, Heb. 12.23. Luke 14.14. Heb. 10.38. They are such as
are justified by faith in Christ.

2. Legally just, and such are they who do that is lawful and right, who live
honestly and harmlesly, walking in the ways of God, dealing justly with all
men; such an one was Paul before his conversion, Phil. 3.6. Touching the
righteousness in the law blameless. Such were Abner and Amasa, 1 K. 2.32. who
are said to be just or righteous: Of such Solomon speaks, Eccl. 7.15. There is
a just man that perishes in his justice or righteousness, and there is a
wicked man prolongs his life in his wickedness. Some are loose, and they are
spared in states: others are too strict, and are crushed by states.

Now here is meant by a just man, not one in appearance or opinion, but one in
truth; yet not evangelically, but legally: For,

1. Here is no mention of Christ, or any reference unto him by faith, both
which are requisite unto Evangelicall justice and righteousness.

2. A just man here is put in opposition to the soul that sins, verse. 4.
The soul that sins shall dye: that is, the soul that sins and does
contrary to the duties here mentioned, as appears from the beginning of the 10.
verse. to the end of the 13. He sins such sins shall dye, either a
metaphorical or violent death, be cast into captivity, or cut off by the sword
or some stroke of God; but he is free from those sins, he is just, he shall
not dye but live.

3. It Is meant of such a just man as may cease to be just, verse. 24. When the
righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does
according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? etc.
This must be the man is legally just, not Evangelically; for the man
Evangelically just cannot cease to be just, Ezekiel. 36.27. 1 John 3.9. Heb.
10.14. Chapter 8 12.

He shall surely live.
Heb. is, vivendo vivet, the Sept. (...), he shall live by living. Piscat.
Junius, omnino vivet, he shall altogether live, he shall have no deaths in his
life, no metaphorical or violent deaths. This phrase vita vivere, says
Pradus, est ad voluntatem, and cum jocunditate aevum traducere, to live
pleasantly and prosperously, his Fathers and Predecessors sins shall bring no
woe, no evils upon him: Non morietur propter peccata Manassis. Maldonate, he
shall reap the fruit of his righteousness. David gives us some light unto
this life, Psalm 34.12, 13, 14. What man is he that desires life and loves
days, that he may see good. By life and days, he means such a life and days
as have good in them, prosperity, peace, pleasure, comfort, and he shows how
to obtain them: Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
Depart from evil, and do good: This falls in with our Prophet, he does so
shall live a desirable life, and see good days: But if men sin, and their sins
be upon them, they pine away in them, they do not live, Ezekiel. 33.10. They live
not a comfortable life, they see no good days.

Obser. 1.
The Lord does not only in general approve of doing good and avoiding evil,
but particularly shows them what evils they should not do, and what good things
they should do. If a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right:
Here is the general; and then he descends to particulars: And has not eaten
upon the mountains, lift up his eyes to Idols: Neither defiled his neighbors
wife, nor oppressed or spoiled any by violence, nor given forth upon usury, nor
taken any increase; but has restored the pledge, given his bread to the
hungry, covered the naked with a garment, executed true judgment, and dealt
truly.

Here be negative and affirmative particulars; God would have his mind so fully
known, all pleas and objections so taken away, that none may have excuse, or
say, had we known what were acceptable to God, we would have done it:
Generals we have, but for Particulars we are at a loss. God takes away this
plea both here and elsewhere, and shows men in special, what he approves,
and what they should do. See Deuteronomy. 27.15. to the end of the Chap. There be 11.
particulars reckoned up together; and likewise as many in the 15. Psalm. in Mic.
6.8. Zech. 7.9, 10. Romans 12.9, 10, 11, 12, etc. You have sundry particulars
enumerated, and above 20. in the last place. The duties of Magistrates,
Subjects, Ministers, People, Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters,
Servants; of all relations, ages, sexes, conditions, are particularly laid down
in the word, and all are inexcusable, if they be ignorant or disobedient.

2. See here the way to have a good name, esteem with God, and a good report
from him; the man does the particulars mentioned, he is just, says God.

If a man do the duties of the first Table, which are employed in not eating
upon the mountains, nor lifting up eyes to idols, he is approved of God; and
if he do the duties of the second Table, which are employed in the other
particulars, he is approved of man, and so has a good report from heaven and
earth. God pronounces him just, and man must subscribe unto it: A good name is
a great mercy, Solomon tells you it is better then precious ointment, Eccles.
7.1. which pleases the senses, and profits the limbs; yea that it is to be
chosen rather then great riches, Prove. 22.1. Make a mountain of silver and
gold, a good name is more eligible then that; it is better to fill the world
with a good name, then to fill coffers and chambers with rich treasure. The
Grecians say it is better to hear well, then to heap up wealth. (...).
Many by carking and caring to grow rich, have wasted their bodies, and drowned
their souls in perdition: whereas a good report makes the bones fat, Pro.
15.30.

Take then the right way to get a good name; do what is here required, and so
shall you be counted just, and have a good report.

Agesilaus being asked how a man should come to have a good name, his answer
was, si loquatur quae sunt optima, and faciat quae sunt honestissima: to speak
the best things, and do the most honest.

Aristides by the light of nature did those things which caused him to be called
Aristides the just, an honorable and good name: And shall not we Christians,
who have beside the light of nature, divine light, do those things that may
cause God to honor us with this Title, he is just? If we do not this, heathens
and others will be witnesses against us at the last day; while we are here, an
ill savor will be round about us, and when we are gone, our names will rot,
but the memory of the just shall be blessed.

3. Hence note how to come unto it, as to live comfortably, he shall live, that
is, comfortably, sweetly; but who shall do so? the just man, he that does that
is lawful and right that walks in Gods statutes, that keeps his judgments,
and deals truly, he shall surely live; that is, prosperously and pleasantly:
so the word life signifies, Prove. 16.15. In the light of the Kings countenance
there is life; what life? felicity and prosperity. A man that is morally just
shall have much comfort, content, and sweetness in his life, Prove. 12.21.
There shall no evil happen to the just, but the wicked shall be filled with
mischief. No evil with a sting in it; no evil as shall suck or pluck away
the sweet of his life; but a wicked man shall have evils enough, he shall be
filled with fears, cares, sorrows, impatience, discontent, and with the guilt
of his sins, so as his life will be no life unto him. Deuteronomy. 28.66. Thy life
shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and shall
have none assurance of thy life.

This is spoken of those do not walk in Gods statutes, keep his judgments,
and do that is lawful and right, their lives are continual deaths, they have
no assurance of life which is the most desirable thing, and what comfort or
peace can they have in life. But as for the just who walk in his ways, they
live, and live comfortably, no evil befalls them; and no marvail they are
compassed about with favor as with a shield, Psalm. 5.12. The Lord upholds
them, Psalm. 37.17. They shall not be moved, Psalm. 55.22. They shall flourish as
a branch, Prove. 11.28. Their desire shall be granted, Prove. 10.24. The wicked
shall bow before them, Prove. 14.19. And the righteous shall see their fall,
Prove. 29.16. Enjoy their wealth, Prove. 13.22. The wealth of the sinner is laid
up for the just. If the just man fall into trouble he shall come out of it,
Prove. 12.13. Blessings are upon his head, Prove. 10.6. In his habitation, Pro.
3.33. His house shall stand, Prove. 12.7. Thus is he blessed in his life, and
has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32. If these blessings be to the just, labor
not only to be morally just, but evangelically also, for to such they do
especially belong.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12, 13.
If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that does the
like to any one of these things.

And does not any of these duties, but even has eaten upon the mountains, and
defiled his neighbors wife.

Has oppressed the poor and needy, has spoiled by violence, has not
restored the pledge, and has lift up his eyes to the idols, has commmtied
abomination.

Has given forth upon usury, and has taken increase: shall he then live? he
shall not live: he has done all these abominations, he shall surely dye, his
blood shall be upon him.


THe Prophet having freed the Lord from that aspersion laid upon him that the
fathers did eat sour grapes, and the childrens teeth were set on edge; they
sinned, and the children suffered for it, and that both in general, verse. 4.
and by particular instance of his dealing with a just man, v. 9. He comes in
these verses to another instance, which is the son of this just man. What if
he should have a lewd son, will the sons lewdness prejudice the fathers
righteousness, or the fathers righteousness advantage the sons lewdness?
Neither the one nor the other; the father shall not be damnified by the son,
nor the son benefited by the Father, but the one shall live in his
righteousness, and the other shall dye in his wickedness, and my justice shall
appear to all men.

Of the Fathers righteousness, and his living in it has bin spoken in the
former verses: now we are to come unto his sons wickedness.

Verse. 10. If he beget a son that is a Robber.
The Hebr. word for robber is (...) from paratz to break, and to break by
violence; to break through, or over, as water does in a flood, through and
over the banks: transire terminum, Pagnin. Montanus renders the word Robber
effractorem, a breaker: Robbers do break walls, windows, doors, laws, and all
bounds of justice to accomplish their sinful desires. The word is translated
Robber, Ezekiel. 7.22. (where something was spoken of it) Dan. 11.14. Jer. 7.11.
But in Psalm. 17.4. it is rendered destroyer. I have kept me from the paths of the
destroyer, or robber. Because, where robberies are committed, there is great
destroying, yea even of men's lives sometimes. The Sept. is, (...) a pestilent
son, one that is a plague to his Parents and Country; (...), Aquila. (...).
Symmachus, a sinner, a transgressor in a transcendent manner. Vul. latronem, a
Thief. Castal. perditum, a lost, forlorn o^^. Chald. impium, a wicked one. Qui
ferro facit viam.

A shedder of blood.
Hebrew is, (...) effudentem sanguinem, a man that spils the blood of another;
not that only draws blood, but draws and sheds blood, that death follows upon
it. So the phrase imports, Deuteronomy. 21.7. When a man's was found slain, the Elders
of the City next to him must wash their hands, and say, our hands have not
shed this blood, we have not murdered this man. So it signifies in Genesis 9.6.
Psalm. 79.10. 1 Samuel 25.32. Prove. 1.16. Genesis 37.22. This shedder of blood is a
murderer, (...) Number. 35.16, 17. And murder is a crying sin, Genesis 4.10. it
defaces Gods image, Genesis 9.6. it makes a land mourn, Hos. 4.2.3. It takes away
the life of a man, for which no recompense can be made, Job 2.4. A man's life
is better then all that ever the blood-shedder or all his friends can return,
it is a sin for which he must dye. Number. 35.31. They shall take no satisfaction
for the life of a murderer which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely
put to death.

The Jewish Doctors say; though the murderer could give all the riches in the
world, and though the avenger of blood were willing to free him, yet he must be
put to death, because the soul or life of the party murdered is not the
possession of the Avenger of blood, Vid. Ainsw. Genesis 6.9.
but the possession of the most holy God. It Is a sin that excludes men from the
Kingdom of heaven, Gal. 5.21. Revel. 22.15. Such God abhors, Ps. 5.6. If men
be bloody, God who is love, abhors them, and will cut short their days, Psalm.
55.23. They shall not live out half their days.

Of the 11, 12. and former part of the 13. verse. was spoken in the 6, 7, and 8.
verses; the words poor and needy were opened in the 16. Chapter the 49. verse. so
that there remains nothing to open but a little in the 13.

Verse. 13. Shall he then live? he shall not live.
He thinks to live, thrive, prosper in the world; but shall he live? what, such
a man live? no, he shall not live. The words are a question and an answer, and
connote or indigitate a vehemence of spirit in the speaker. The son may
flatter himself because his father is just, does that is lawful and right,
that it shall be well with him notwithstanding all his lewd and villainous
practices, that he shall live as happily as ever he did; what, live says the
Lord? shall he live? he shall not live.

This interrogation and answer is like that in Chapter 17.10. Shall it prosper?
shall it not utterly wither when the East Wind touches it? it shall wither.

He shall surely dye.
Hebrew is, moriendo morietur, he shall dye in or by dying. This manner of
speaking is frequent in the books of God, Genesis 20.7: 26.11. Exodus 21.12.15,
16, 17. Four times in that Chap. and as many in Numb. 35.16, 17, 18 21. Sept.
is (...), he shall dye by death. Pisc. Jun. Omnino afficietur morte, he shall
certainly dye, he shall not escape the jaws, teeth, and sting of death; the
famine, plague, sword, or some special hand of God shall be upon him, cut him
off: it is opposed to what we had in the 9. verse. he is just, he shall surely
live: and this man is unjust, and he shall surely dye; his comforts, hopes
shall cease, his ruin and destruction hastens.

His blood shall be upon him.
Heb. is, his bloods shall be in him: a substantive plural with a verb
singular: (...) the cause of his death shall be in himself, he shall answer
for all the blood he has shed, with his own blood; he has shed the blood of
others, and his blood shall be shed for it; the Chaldie is, reatus mortis ejus
in ipso erit, he shall be found guilty of his own death, just matter and
ground for his death shall be found in himself. Or thus, his blood shall be
against him, his bloody and cruel dealings shall come against hi^: the Hebrew
preposition or Beth signifies against, and upon: against, Genesis 16.12. (...) his
hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him. Here Beth is
against, and so it may be rendered here, his blood shall be against him: it
signifies also upon, Ezekiel. 33.4. His blood shall be (...) upon his own head;
and so it is in this place, his blood shall be upon him; he is the cause of his
own death, his sinful acts have brought death upon himself.

Observation 1.
That a just man may have a wicked son; if he beget a son that is a robber, a
shedder of blood, etc. he speaks of the just man who may have such a son. If we
search into the bowels of the Word, we shall find frequent examples hereof;
Jacob, had Simeon and Levi, who slew the Shechemites, troubled him and made him
to stink among the inhabitants of the land, Genesis 34.25, 26.30. and therefore he
called them instruments of cruelty, and laid a curse upon them at his death,
Genesis 49.5.7. Abraham had a scoffing Ishmael, Genesis 21.9. Isaac a profane Esau,
Genesis 25.32.34. Old Eli had sons who were sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 2.12. David
had his Abshalom, who shed the blood of his brother Ammon, 2 Samuel 13.28.
Solomon had his Rhehaboam, who proved tyrannical, 1 King. 12. Hezekiah,
Manasses, who filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, 2 King. 20.21:21.16. Josiah
his Jehoahaz who did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 K. 23.30.32. It is a
great affliction when a good man has a wicked son. Prove. 17.25. A foolish
son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him. If a
foolish son be so, what is that son that is a robber, a bloud-shedder, an
idolater, an oppressor? Just men have had such sons, and you must not think it
strange, if any of yours be such.

2. The righteousness of the Father neither priviledgeth, patronizeth, nor
protects a wicked child from the stroke of justice. If he, viz. the just man,
beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, etc. shall he live? he
shall not live. Though his Father be just, his righteousness great, yet it
does not reach to his son being guilty of such things; the Lord had said, verse.
4. The soul that sins it shall dye. The fathers righteousness cannot
expiate the sons sin: As the life of the child cannot answer for the sins of
the father, nor profit him at all upon that account, Mic. 6.7. So neither can
the righteousness of the father answer for the sin of the child, or
advantage it at all in that respect: What Solomon says of a wise man, Prove.
9.12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self; that I may say of a
righteous man, if thou be righteous, thou art righteous for thy self, and not
for another, no not for thy own child. David's righteousness did not
privilege Absalom; he sinned, and he suffered.

Qu. Is it not said, Prove. 11.21. The seed of the righteous shall be delivered?

Answ. 1. Not for the righteousness of the Father, that deserves nothing at
Gods hands, Job 22.3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
righteous? or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect?

2. It is for the promise and Covenant-sake which God has made, Genesis 17.7.
Psalm. 112.1, 2:89.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

3. It supposes continuance in the steps of their Fathers, else not; for mark
the whole verse. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished;
let them plot, act, use all means and ways themselves, their friends or
parties can make, yet they shall be punished, the just God will bring it about
one way or other; now if the seed of the righteous prove wicked, they must be
punished.

4. Outward calamities and affliction ^^l ^^^ke unto all; but God will deliver
the righteous and their seed out of the evil of them, Psalm. 34.19. but wicked
men are left to sink in them.

Let not children then presume upon the righteousness of their Parents, and
live loosely; if they fall into vicious and lewd courses, they may perish
notwithstanding their righteousness.

3. The sins here specified, howsoever they may seem to men, they are
abomination unto God: robbery, bloodshedding, idolatry, adultery, oppression,
violence, withholding the pledge, going in to a menstruous woman, which is
meant by committing abomination in the 12. verse. Usury and taking increase, he
has done all these abominations. The Lord calls them all abominations, things
to be abhorred, loathed, rejected, offensive to all the senses. One sin here
among the rest I desire may be taken notice of, and that is usury and increase;
he distinguishes them here from oppressing the needy and the poor in the 12.
verse. If it were therefore meant of biting usury, as many would have it, that
is comprehended in those words of oppressing the poor and needy, which is
abomination. Now besides that, he adds giving forth upon usury, and taking
increase, and this he calls an abomination.

Let men take heed how they meddle and please themselves with that which so
far displeases, yea provokes the Lord, that he brands it with the title of an
abomination: If in the judgment of the infinite and only wise God, it be
abominable, let not the groundless distinctions and vain pretenses of men
prevail with thee to judge it warranable or lawful.

4. Great and notorious sinners bring, hasten woes, judgments, deaths upon
themselves; shall he then live? he shall not live; he has done all these
abominations, he shall surely dye, either metaphorically, or some violent
death: God will turn such sinners prosperity into adversity, their light into
darkness, their comforts into crosses and curses. Jer. 9.13, 14, 15, 16. They
have forsaken my law, walked after the imaginations of their own hearts:
Therefore says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I will feed them,
even this people with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink. They
should have sad and bitter afflictions: and what then? I will scatter them also
among the heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known: and I will
send a sword after them till I have consumed them. To be fed with wormwood, and
drink gall, is a death; to be scattered among strangers is a death; to have a
sword pursuing is a death. Wicked ones have many deaths, they are dying and
pining away under threats, fears, strokes, or guilt continually: they may say
as it is, Ezekiel. 33.10. Our transgressions and our sins are upon us, we pine
away in them, how should we then live. The thought of their sins and ways
banished all sound comfort from their lives, and often such sinners are snatched
away, cut off by some sudden hand of God: and when it is so, it is most just,
their blood is upon their heads, nothing befalls them but what is due and
deserved; their sins call for death, and bring the evil upon them, see
Levit. 20.9.11, 12, 13, 16.27. 2 Samuel 1.16. where you may find that it was
their own sin brought death upon them.

VERSE. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Now lo if he beget a son that sees all his fathers sins which he has
done, and considers, and does not such like.

That has not eaten upon the mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the
idols of the house of Israel, has not defiled his neighbowrs wife.

Neither has oppressed any, has not withheld the pledge, neither has
spoiled by violence; but has given his bread to the hungry, and has covered
the the naked with a garment.

That has taken off his hand from the poor, that has not received usury nor
increase, has executed my judgments, has walked in my statutes, he shall not
dye for the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live.

As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by
violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo even he shall
dye in his iniquity.


THe Prophet, in these words, presents a third instance to free the Lord from
imputation of injustice; you stick not to affirm that he punishes the children
for the sins of the fathers; but behold here the error and wickedness of your
assertion: If a wicked Father, a Robber, a Bloud-shedder beget a son that does
not as he has done, God is so far from punishing him for those sins of his
Father, that he shall be spared and blessed, he shall not dye but live.

Three things are here commended unto us concerning this son of a wicked father.

1. His full observation of his Father's evil ways, in these words, That
sees all his fathers sins that he has done. 2. His effectual consideration
of them: And considers and does not such like. 3. His doing of the contrary,
which is employed in the several particulars mentioned in the 25, 16, 17.
verses.
That sees all his fathers sins.
Sin is not properly visible, it is not the object of the eye; we may see
sinful actions, but not the sin of those actions with the eye of the body:
the sight of the sinfulness refers to the eye of the mind, Jun. therefore
renders the words thus, qui animadvertat, he who marks, observes the sins of
his father, 1 Samuel 12.17. That ye may see your wickedness is great; that you
may take notice, observe it is so: in this sense it is used, Eccl.
5.8.13.18:6.1:10.5: Jer. 13.27:23.13. Job 11.11. Many children do as their
Fathers do, and never observe of what nature it is they do, whither good or
evil; yea, often Parents possess their children with arguments to justify
their ways, which are altogether unlawful.

All his fathers sins.
It Is impossible any son should see or observe all the sins of his father,
many are acted in secret, many abroad: our Prophet intends not that every
particular sin should be observed by him, but those are more obvious and expose
to judgments and death, such as he had mentioned before.

And considers.
The Hebrew word is (...) from (...) which signifies not simply to see, but
curiously to look into, to consider and intend a thing. The Sept. Vulgar, and
some other read it, and fears, and so derive it from (...) to fear; but
Montanus says, it is from (...) and so our Translation has it. I shall speak
to it therefore as it imports consideration, not fearing.

Consideration is a serious exercise of the understanding about things to be
done, or not to be done, furthering or impeding the execution of them as it
sees cause.

1. It Is an exercise of the understanding, mind, heart, these are at work in
consideration, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, or considered them. I
turned them over and over, as Sempsters do their needle work: I look upon all
the circumstances and aggravations of them; it is called a speaking or saying,
Hos. 7.2. They consider not in their hearts. Hebrew is, they say not to their
hearts. It Is called a communing with a man's own heart, Psalm. 77.6.

2. Serious; it is not a slight general thinking of a thing but a serious
settled minding of a thing, Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another, (...), it
notes the sincking down of a thing into our minds: it is the intention of the
mind upon a thing, magno studio, with great earnestness, Eccles. 9.1. I
considered in mine heart. Heb. is, I set to my heart. Consideration is a
setting the heart to a thing, or upon a thing, as a Be sits upon a flower, and
sets her strength to it to draw out the sweet in it.

3. It Is about things to be done, or not to be done. Contemplatio looks upon
things as the eye upon the object. Judicium, discerns things whether good or
bad, right or wrong, and there leaves them, having pronounced them so.
Meditation is a further inquisition into truth, or minding of truth, and comes
up nearest to consideration, which is in order to doing or not doing. Men
intend this and that, and often fall upon things rashly to their prejudice,
because they consider not; now consideration reflects upon things intended. The
two sons in the Gospel, one said, I will go, and went not; the other said, I
will not go, and went. The one's purpose was to go, the other's not to go:
but this last considering of his sinful purpose, intention, and resolution,
repented, and went, Matthew. 21. It Is taken up about doing, or not doing, as you
may see, Prove. 23.1, 2. 1 Samuel 25.17. Judge. 18.14.

4. Furthering or impeding the execution of them, as it is sees cause. Ps.
119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. David
considered his ways, and not finding them good, he ceased from walking any
longer in them: and seeing Gods ways the only good ways, he turned about, stepped
into, and walked in them. If upon consideration things be found good, the heart
affects them, and so proceeds to the doing of them. The virtuous wife
considered a field, and bought it, Prove. 31.16. But if things upon
consideration be found sinful, the heart disaffects them, and so keeps off,
see verse. 18. of this Chap. He considers, and turns away from all his
transgressions.

2. Wherein the strength of it lies.

1. In searching out the causes, effects, rising, progress, continuance, and
issue of a thing, Judge. 19.30. The Levites Concubine being cut in 12. pieces,
and sent into all the coasts of Israel; they saw it, and said, consider of it,
take advice, and speak: let us search out the cause and original of this
evil, what damage it has brought to the Jewish Religion, and may bring; what
the Levite can say, what will be the issue of this horrible fact.

2. In comparing things together, and so drawing up and out that which may be
most useful: when all things are laid together, weighed, scanned over again and
again; a man takes that is most necessary, seasonable, suitable and useful,
Eccl. 12.10. The preacher sought to find out acceptable words. He compared one
word with another, one truth with another; and then in the 13. v. Let us hear
the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God, etc. He had tried books,
creatures, all things: and then considering them, sums up, and draws out what
was most material.

3. In pressing to, and assisting the soul in acting: when consideration has
drawn up what is to be done, or not to be done, then it puts it upon the
conscience as sinful, if not followed, and directs in the execution. Many
things well contrived have miscarryed through want of consideration, which looks
to the congruency of particulars to the whole, Psalm. 64.9. All men shall fear,
and declare the work of God, for they shall wisely consider of his doings.

Consideration lays an injunction upon men's wills and consciences to be doing;
did men in these days wisely consider the Lords doings, they would fear and
declare the work of God.

3. The excellency of it.

1. It Is that God himself does, Prove. 24.12. Does not he that pondereth the
heart consider? When God intended to make man, he called a Council, Come, let
us make man after our Image, Genesis 1.26. The Lord considers, ponders, and weighs
things according to the language of Scripture, Exodus 33.13. Prove. 5.21. Deuteronomy.
32.26, 27. Hos. 11.8, 9.

2. It differenceth a man from bruits; they are led by sense, and cannot
distinguish whether an action ought to be done or not, this is man's privilege
and power. Reason does distinguish men from beasts, but the generality of men
do not use reason, they have souls for salt, their eyes, ears, tastes, their
senses are their guides. Jer. 10.14. Every man is brutish in his knowledge.
Men do not reflect upon their actions, and consider them; if they did, they
would not be so sensual, so sinful. Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and
the Ass his Masters Cribb: but Israel does not know, my people does not
consider.

3. It inables the understanding, compleats a man, makes him wise and
prudentiall. Prove. 17.27. He that has knowledge spares his words, and a man
of understanding is of an excellent spirit. He considers what advantage may be
made of words, and therefore is sparing in speaking, shows the more
understanding and excellency of spirit. Pro. 6.6. Consider her ways and be
wise.

If the considering of an Ants ways will make us wise, much more the
consideration of our own ways. Direct acts may enable and perfect others, but
reflect acts do enable and perfect a man's self. Consideration looks inward,
looks over the same thing again and again, it defecates the understanding of
man from those raw and imperfect notions and conceptions which arise at first,
and those impertinent ones interpose afterward. We say, second thoughts are
best, which implies that consideration, ripens and perfects the man and his
actions; as meat in the Pot, if suddenly pulled out, is raw, but if well
boiled, is freed from crude hamors, and so more wholesome.

4. It puts life into those principles and talents God has given a man; like a
Drum in an Army, when that beats, all stir and march; like a spring in a
watch, when that goes all the wheels go. Did men consider what graces and
gifts God has given them, they would not let them lie still and fallow, but
improve them. Isa. 64.7. None stirs up himself to take hold on thee. They
had talents, but did not employ them. Heb 10.24. Let us consider one another,
to provoke unto love, and to good works. Consideration will set others graces
on work, and much more a man's own.

A third thing here commended about this son of a wicked father, is his doing
the contrary: he worships God in his own way, he eats not upon the mountains,
he lifts not up his eyes to Idols; but he comes to Mount-Sion, and lifts up his
eyes to the God of heaven whom he serves; he is chaste and charitable, he wrongs
none, but does good to all according to his ability: he executes judgment, and
walks in Gods ways; and what ever his fathers sins have been, though crimson
and scarlet abominations, he shall not die for them, but he shall surely live.

Verse. 16. Has not with holden the pledge.
Hebr. is, has not pledged the pledge. Has not taken a pledge says Calvin,
Lavat. Jun. Montan. But Piscator says, the word for pledging does not signify
here to take or receive a pledge, but to deteine it being pledged, as appears
from the 7. verse. where the words are, has restored to the debtor his pledge,
and here it must be, not who has taken, but who has not withheld being
taken: so Vatab. pignus non retinet: and Weems, the repetition of the same word
signifies to take away the pledge, and to keep it. Now he who does not take
away, or withold, but restore the pledge, is just.

Observe. 1.
A good son may descend from a wicked Parent; a Father that is a robber, a
bloud-shedder, a son of Belial, a plague to City and Country, may have a son
that is free from his vices, a son that is just: as good parents may have ill
children, so ill parents may have good children. God may and does honor his
free grace, when, where, and upon whom he pleases. Manasses was transcendently
wicked, and his son Amon: so 2 Chronicles. 33.9.22, 23. yet out of their loins came
Josiah, verse. 25. who has this testimony; that he did that was right in the
sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father, and declined
neither to the right hand nor to the left, Chap. 34.2.

Hezekiah was very godly, did much in Reformation, restored the Passover,
walked in the steps of David, and did that was right in the sight of the Lord,
yet he came from as wicked a parent as the world then had, even from Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.27. Ahaz came from Abijam, who walked in the sins of his Father, 1 K.
15.3. Abraham descended from Idolatrous parents, Josh. 24.2. Some good thing
toward the God of Israel was found in a son of Jeroboam's, who made Israel to
sin, 1 K. 14.13.

Some untoward parents in our days have had good children, and such as have
much honored God. Now this is not from nature, or because they are born under
such and such planets, but because they are born of God, and made partakers of
the divine nature. If parents have gracious children, let them give the glory
thereof to God, whose grace has made them such: If they have ungracious ones,
let them beg hard of God for mercy and grace for them, who has abundance of
the spirit to bestow on whom he please, and has promised to those in Covenant
with him, to power out his spirit upon their seed, and his blessing upon their
offspring, Isa. 44.3.

2. It Is not always safe, warrantable, to imitate Parents, Ancestors,
Predecessors, and to tread in their steps; it may be dangerous, deadly, yea
damnable. If the son of the unjust man should follow his father in his ways, he
must dye for it; but if he see his ways, and does not such like, he shall
live. When the ways of Parents are idolatrous, superstitious, profane,
oppressive, contrary to, or not grounded upon the word of God, children are not
to conform unto them. There is one greater then they, and wiser then they, who
is the father of spirits, and has more authority over them then their Parents
after the flesh, him must they hearken unto, his counsels must they embrace,
his commands must they obey, his will must they do. The Lord commends the son
here that does contrary to his wicked father, 1 Pet. 1.18, Men are redeemed
from the vain conversation by tradition from their fathers. Fathers are vain,
have vain conversations, deliver those to their children, but children should
not receive their traditions, nor imitate their conversations; they are
redeemed from them, but they are apt to do it, Jer. 9.14:44.17. And it is often
complained of, and spoken against in Scripture, 2 King. 15.9: 23. Chapter 32. Neh.
13.18. Psalm. 78.57. Ezekiel. 20.24. and in other places. There is a full
prohibition against it, 2 Chronicles. 30.7. Be not ye like your fathers, and like
your brethren which trespassed against the Lord God of your fathers, who
therefore gave them up to desolation.

3. Consideration is a special means to keep men from sinning; if a son see
his fathers sins, and considers, and does not such like. There is a strong
inclination in men to sin, Example is powerful to draw out that inclination,
and especially the example of a Father; yet consideration has virtue in it to
stop that inclination, to take off from evil example, and to carry another way:
The Prodigal when he came to himself, that is, considered what he had done,
in what case he was, what might be had in his fathers house, he comes off from
his wicked ways, and returns to his Father, Luke 15.17. It is want of
consideration that men sin so as they do: had Noah, Lot, David, Peter,
others well considered, they would not have fallen into such sins as they did;
it is rashness, inconsiderateness that occasions and causes many sins. Matthew.
7.3. Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest
not the beam that is in thine own eye? Want of consideration makes men
censorious and hypocritical, it leads men into a multitude of sinful ways,
and keeps them there, Isa. 44.19. Hos. 7.1, 2. Ecces. 5.1. Whereas if men
would seriously consider, they would neither sin so frequently, nor continue in
sin, if overtaken with it. Ezekiel. 12.3. It may be they will consider though they
be a rebellious house. Here the Lord intimates, that if they would consider,
they would give over their sinful practices, and not persist in ways to
provoke God: They would see so much evil in their own ways, so much equity
in Gods ways, that they would leave the one, and embrace the other.

In the 28. verse. of this Chap. you may see the virtue and efficacy of
Consideration: Because he considers, and turns away from all his
transgressions. Nothing more advantages Sathan's kingdom then incogitancy and
inconsiderateness; and nothing does prejudice it more then the contrary.
Consideration puts a stop to men's sinful ways, and causes them to turn to
God, Psalm. 119.59. Therefore the Lord calls earnestly for it, Psalm. 50.22. Now
consider this ye that forget God. And Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that
they understood this, that they would consider their latter end.

4. Good children descending from wicked parents, are not to be branded with
their vices. If he beget a son does not such like: if the son do not tread in
the steps of his Father; he is just, he shall not suffer for his fathers sin,
I will not charge the guilt or shame of them upon him, he shall live
comfortably, and without imfamy. Children choose not their Parents, neither
could prevent their sin: if they cleave not to their ways, they shall not be
spotted with their vices.

The world deals otherwise, it is forward to pick up any thing, yea to seek
out matter from Parents and Predecessors to disgrace their posterity, though
they walk not in their sinful paths; this is not to be like unto God, but unto
the world, to lay the burden of the guilt upon the innocent.

From the 18. verse. observe, that covetous men are oppressors, yea oppressors
of those are near unto them: because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother
by violence. The Heb. is, he oppressed by oppression, and spoiled by spoiling,
and that his brother. The word (...) notes a brother of the same womb, a
kinsman, a brother in friendship, one near and dear to a man. He that is
covetous will contend fraudulently, oppress, as (...) signifies, yea spoil,
and wrest out of his hand by violence what he has, as (...) imports.
Covetousness is ounning and cruel, Nehem. 5 7. You exact usury every one of
his brother. Micah 7.2. They hunt every man his brother with a net. Amos 5.11.
They take burdens of wheat from the poor, they oppress and crush them. Chap.
4.1. They robbed the fatherless, and made widows their prey, Isa. 10.2. If
you would see the cunning and cruelty of covetous men, consult with these
Texts, Jer. 6.13. Jam. 5.4. Luke 19.8. Isa. 3.14, 15. Mica. 3.2, 3. Ezekiel. 22.7.
1 K. 21.15.

Covetous men little care from whom they pull, so they may get and feed their
covetous desires: many have undone their brethren, kindred, friends, fathers,
sons, by their cunning, cruel, covetous practices.

VERSE. 19, 20. Yet say ye, why? does not the son bear the iniquity of the
sather? when the son has done that is lawful and right, and has kept all
my statutes, and has done them, he shall surely live.

The soul that sins, it shall dye: the son shall not bear the iniquity
of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him, etc.


HEre begins the Jews replication, and Gods further vindication of himself
from what they accused him of, which extends to the end of the 24. verse.

The replication is in these words; why? does not the son bear the iniquity
of the father? Why do thou deny it? bring arguments against it? attempt to
persuade us otherwise? have we not experience of it in our selves? do not we
bear the iniquity of our fathers? The Heb. word for why is (...) which is used
when we desire to know the reason or cause of a thing, as Genesis 26.27.
Whereupon, or WHY come ye to me, seeing you hate me, said Isaac to Abimilech
and his men, let me know the cause of your coming: so here they would have a
reason, know the cause why the Lord spoke so, and justified his proceedings
with men and government in the world, that he wronged none, but rendered to all
according to their ways and works. It Is otherwise, we find and feel the
contrary; the iniquity of our forefathers is upon us their children, and
therefore we wonder how either thy self or Ezekiel, who pretends to be thy
Prophet, can assert such things; either that is not true which is said, or our
condition is worse then others; if thou dealest justly with others, yet
unjustly with us, we suffer for the ^^nnes of our Parents.

Bear the iniquity.
Iniquity here is put for the punishment due unto it, and so it is frequently
used in Scripture, Genesis 19.15. Lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the
City; that is, in the punishment which iniquity has brought upon it. So Psalm.
40.12: 31.11. Exodus 28.43. Numb. 14.34: 18.23. Isa. 53.11. Ezekiel. 44.10. Bearing
of iniquity in these places is put for bearing of punishment by a metonimie of
the efficient.

To this reply and charge God answers,

1. In general, in the rest of this 19. verse. and in the 20. If a son do
that is lawful and right, if he keep my statutes he shall live, he shall not
suffer (as you reproachfully and blasphemously object against me) for the sins
of his father, no, the soul that sins shall dye. If the father sin he shall
dye, if the son sin he shall dye, if neither of them sin, neither shall dye. He
is righteous, his righteousness shall be upon him; he is wicked, his
wickedness shall be upon him.

2. More particularly in the 21, 22, 23, and 24, verses.

There is nothing more to be opened in the 19. verse. Of doing that is lawful
and right, of keeping statutes, and living has been spoken.

Verse. 20. The soul that sins shall dye.
Of these words you heard largely out of the 4. verse. By soul is meant person;
by dying suffering of punishment, putting to death: so the words to dye do
signify, Deuteronomy. 17.12: 18.20: 24.7: 2 Samuel 12.5. 1 Samuel 14.39. The sense of the
words then is this; that person who commits sins worthy of death shall dye for
them, and not another.

The son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father.
If he persist not in his fathers steps he shall not suffer for his fathers
sins, that were against the law. Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to
death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the
fathers, every man shall be put to death for his own sin. Amaziah remembered
this law, and kept it, 2 Chr. 25.4. When he slew the fathers, he slew not the
children for the fathers sin. It was otherwise, when Joshuah put Achan's sons
to death for Achan's sins, Josh. 7.24. And when David delivered Readiness son's to
be put to death by the Gibeonites for the sin of their father, 1 Samuel 21.9. The
law then ties not God, he has a prerogative above his own laws given out to
us, they do and must tie us, and without special warrant, hint, and instinct,
we may not do contrary unto them; both Joshuah and David had special direction
for what they did, or else it was evident to them that they approved and
justified their fathers facts, and so became guilty of the same, and suffered
according to law.

The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him.
Look what the righteous has done, accordingly shall he have; as iniquity
before did note punishment, so righteousness here notes reward, he shall have
the fruit of his righteous acts. Isa. 48.18. Thy righteousness had been as the
waves of the Sea: That is, the fruit or reward of thy righteousness had been
great, and coming in daily: so the word righteousness is to be taken, Genesis
30.33. Jam. 3.18. Gal. 5.5.

Some from these words, and those in the 19. verse. Has kept all my statutes,
and done them, he shall surely live; do conclude that a man may keep the law,
and so by his own righteousness attain unto, if not merit life eternal.

But where is that man that ever yet did keep the law exactly, since Adam's
fall there is none: If Adam in innocence could not do it, how shall we think
men subject to sin and many infirmities can do it. Eccles. 7.20. There is not a
just man upon earth that does good, and sins not. Solomon had observed men, and
the best of men, the most just sinned and brake the law: Jam. 3.2. In many
things we offend all. 1 John 3.8. Paul durst not stick to his legal
righteousness, Phil. 3.9. he knew it was impossible for himself or any other
to keep the law. Romans 8.3. What the law could not do in that it was weak
through the flesh, God, etc. Gal. 3.21. If there had been a law which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law. The law
was weak and unprofitable, it made nothing perfect. Hebr. 7.18, 19. The law
neither justifies nor sanctifies, it neither quickens nor comforts. If men
think by legal righteousness to attain life eternal, they will fall short of
it as the Jews did, Romans 9.31, 32:10.3, 4. They think to earn eternal life,
but that is not earned, it is given, Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. The just live by
faith, and look for eternal life, not by Moses, but by Christ, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7.

Obser. 1.
Erroneous and corrupt opinions being entertained, are not easily got out of
the heads and hearts of men; these Jews had drunk in an hard opinion of God,
that he dealt unjustly with them, punishing them for their fathers sins; the
Lord by many arguments and instances clears up the justice and equity of his
proceedings with the sons of men, that he punished none without just cause, and
that it is for their own sin when he does it; he spends 18. verses to convince
them of the falsehood and evil of their tenet, to remove it out of them; but
they, notwithstanding all this, hold their opinion fast, and dispute it with
God: Yet say ye, why? does not the son bear the iniquity of the father? We
are of this mind and judgment, and so shall continue for ought thou have said.
Errors quickly root deep, take strong hold, and cannot easily be pulled up.

The Pharisees held corrupt opinions about workings, Matthew. 15.2. dispencing
with childrens obedience to parents, Mar. 7.11. about swearing, Matthew.
23.16.18. fasting and tithing, Luke 18.12. They held many corrupt opinions
touching the law, as in Matthew. 5. appears, and could Christ prevail with them
to get those opinions out of them? he brought the clearest light that ever
was, yet they loved their own darkness more then his light; yea they gate him
out of the world, before he could get these errors out of them.

The Sadduces denied the Resurrection, Matthew. 22.23. And notwithstanding Christ
took pains to convince them, and spoke to the astonishment of others, verse. 33.
yet their opinion abode with them, and they were of that mind after Christ was
gone to glory, even in Paul's days, Acts 23.8. Hymenaeus, Alexander, Philetus,
had rather be delivered up to Satan, then deliver up their corrupt and damnable
opinion, of saying the resurrection is past already, 2 Timothy 2.18. with 1 Timothy
1.20. The Apostles had taken up an opinion that Christ would be great in the
world, and advance them, from which opinion Christ had often been beating them
off, yet it abode with them till his ascension, Acts 1.6. There were those in
the Church of Pergamos who held corrupt doctrines, and the Angel of it could
not get them out, Rev. 2.14, 15. Take heed therefore what opinions you receive.
If in John's time there was need to try the spirits, because many false
Prophets were gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. much more had men now need
to try the spirits, because the world is full of false Prophets and false
spirits; and men are grown so artificial to deceive, that if it were possible
the very Elect should be deceived, and that finally. Let the Apostles counsel
take place, 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things: Take nothing upon trust for the
learning, holiness, worth of, or respect you have to any man; but prove all by
the word, see it have a sound bottoming there, and then it is good; hold it
fast, then it will do you good, let it not go.

2. That what punishments soever befall men, they have no just cause to
complain of God, though it be punishment unto death; for he has said, the
soul that sins shall dye, not another for it, not it for another sins; if
it were so, there were just cause of complaint; if the son should dye for the
father, or the father for the child, this were injustice, therefore the Lord
says here, The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall
the father bear the iniquity of the son, etc. God is most just, and cannot do
an act of injustice to any man; and if it be just what he does, why should man
mutter, think, or speak hardly of God, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore says Jerem. does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? who wrongs him? does
God? he has wronged God, and God does but right himself: If a man strike a
Lion, and the Lion bite him, has he cause to complain of the Lion or his own
folly in striking the Lion. Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of man perverteth his
way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord: But what cause has he to fret
against God, correcting and punishing him for his folly? men should accept of
the punishment of their iniquity, as it is Levit. 26.41. rather then complain,
when it is their own fault that they suffer; yea men have cause to be thankful
to God that he does punish them less then their iniquities deserve.

3. Then God has authority over souls to set them what laws he please, and
prescribe what punishments he thinks good; the soul that sins shall dye: be
persons great or small, honorable or base, wise or foolish, the Lord is above
them, has command over them, has set them their bounds; which if they
transgress, they shall suffer according as his wisdom shall appoint. Have
States that power to give laws to the people, and set what punishment they
judge fit for the breach of them, as confiscation of estate, imprisonment,
mutilation, wracking, pressing, decollation? and shall not God much more? verse.
4. he says, All souls are mine, the soul that sins shall dye. I have given
them all laws, and ordained punishments for the breach of those laws.

4. No man's sin shall go unpunished, men shall not sin, and go away without
suffering for it: the soul that sins shall dye, either a metaphorical death,
it shall meet with grievous afflictions or a violent death, be cut off by some
stroke of God, or an eternal death, which is worst of all. Prove. 11.21. Though
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished. What ever they think or
attempt, God will meet with them whoever they be. Job 9.4. Who has hardened
himself against him, and has prospered? Did ever any man sin and enjoy peace,
offend God, and have his blessing? No, God has made men know it is a sad and
dreadful thing to sin against him. Adam sinned, and God visited him for it; his
posterities sin, and they smart for it. In vain do men flatter themselves
that they may sin, and not suffer, they may do wickedly and escape: It cannot
be, God who is truth has said it, the soul that sins shall dye. God may defer
the stroke, but without repen^ance it must come. Romans 2.9. Tribulation and
anguish shall be upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and
also of the Gentile. The wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

5. Righteous men shall not loose the fruit of their righteous doings. The
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him. Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown
for the righteous. And Psalm. 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the
righteous. Prove. 11.18. The wicked works a deceitful work, but to him that
sows righteousness shall be a sure reward. Isa. 48.18. O that thou had
hearkened to my commandments, then had thy peace been as a river, and thy
righteousness as the waves of the sea.

VERSE. 21, 22, 23.
But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and
keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live, he shall not dye.

All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned
unto him, in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live.

Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye says the Lord God? and
not that he should turn from his ways and live?


IN these verses and the next, you have a more full and particular answer of
the Lords to the unjust replication of the Jews, and charge laid upon him in
the 19. verse. why? does not the son bear the iniquity of the father? No
says God, he that does right he shall live, and he that sins he shall dye.
There Is the general answer, and here comes the particular.

1. Concerning a wicked man, in the 21, 22, 23, verses.

2. Concerning a righteous man in the 24. verse.

Concerning the wicked man, here are two things required, and two things
promised; the things required are, 1. Turning from all his sins. 2. Keeping all
Gods statutes.


The things promised are, 1. Life. 2. Non-mentioning of his sins.


If the wicked will turn from his evil ways, repent him of what he has done,
and walk in the ways of God for the future, he is so far from suffering or
dying for his fathes sin, that he shall not suffer or dye for his own; he shall
live, and his sin not once be mentioned unto him: I am so far from punishing
him for another sin, that upon repentance I punish not a man for his own.

If the wicked will turn from.
The Vulg. is, si egerit paenitentiam, if he shall repent: the Heb. is, (...)
from (...) and notes turning from ill, and turning to God, which is repentance:
so it is used, Ezekiel. 14.6. Repent, the word is (...) turn ye, or repent; in
repentance there is turning: The French is, si le meschant se repent; if the
wicked repent.

This turning from evil is set out by sundry expressions: Isaiah calls it
washing, making clean, putting away the evil of men's doings, ceasing to do
evil, Chap. 1.16. Solomon styles it confessing and forsaking of sin, Pro.
28.13. David terms it departing from evil, Psalm. 34.14. Peter, eschewing of
evil, 1 Pet. 3.11. Daniels phrase is, breaking off from sin, Chapter 4.27. and
Christ's is, sin no more, Joh. 5.14.

These words, if the wicked will turn from all his sins, seem to import power
and freedom in man to repent and turn himself: This difficulty was spoken
unto Ezekiel. 14.6. upon those words, repent and turn your selves. Men may use
means, but those means will not produce repentance and turning without God: the
Jews used means, Jer. 7.10. yet could not turn themselves, Chap. 13.23.
Natural instruments have power to work of themselves, there is virtue in them
to bring forth such and such effects; but moral instruments of which sort the
word is, do not work so. The word is, In praecepto cognosce quid debeas habere;
in correptione cognosce tuo te vitio non habere in oratione cognosce unde
pojsis habere. August.
mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Nothing is done toward the conversion of
a sinner; therefore repentance is the gift and work of God, Acts 11.18: 5.31. 2 Timothy 2.25. Yet when we are called upon to repent, to turn, there is somewhat to
be considered, in Gods commands know what you ought to have, in his reproofs
consider it is through your own fault you have it not, in prayer see where and
whence you have it.

Verse. 22. They shall not be mentioned unto him.
Heb. (...) non memorabuntur, they shall not be remembered, in ejus damnum,
says Vatab. adversus eum, says Junius, contra eum, Calvin. His sins shall not
prejudice him, he shall not suffer or be punished for them: To remember sin
according to the Scripture sense is to punish. Psalm. 137.7. Remember O Lord the
children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, who said race it, race it; that is,
punish them; in the like sense you have it, Hos. 8.13. Now will he remember
their iniquity, and visit their sins: so Chapter 9.9. and not to remember, is to
pass by, forget, and not to punish. Isa. 64.9. Ps. 25.7. Remember not the sins
of my youth; let them not move thee to punish or be avenged on me for them; as
men when they remember injuries, seek to be avenged on those have done them.

In his righteousness that he has done he shall live.
His righteousness shall preserve him from metaphorical and violent death.
The Papists from these words pretend that a man is justified before God;
propter justiciam suam, for his own righteousness; but we know the Scripture
runs otherwise, Gal. 2.16. A man is not justified by the works of the law. And
all our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, Isa. 64.6. see Romans 3.24.28.
1 Cor. 4.9. Romans 5.19. 2 Cor. 5.21. Which places show that we are justified
not by our own works, our own righteousness, but by the righteousness of
another. Besides, it is not said here, for his righteousness, but in his
righteousness. Good works do not precede justification, and so merit it; but
follow the person justified, and declare his justification, they are the
pathway to life and glory.

Again, could a man forsake all sins, keep all Gods statutes, yet could he not
hereby be justified before God, because there must satisfaction be made to the
law, and to God for those sins now left, and that is not in man's power, Mic.
6.7. Psalm. 49.7.

Verse. 23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye.
Heb. is, (...) the radical word signifies to have pleasure in, to affect,
delight, to desire and will; therefore some render it, do I desire or will the
death of a sinner?

Nunquid volendo volam. Montan. (...). Sept. Nunquid voluntatis meae est. Vulg.
An ullo pacto delector Jun. Piscat. Pol.
Others, have I pleasure, or any pleasure? you charge me to punish the children
for the fathers sins, and think I take pleasure in the death of sinners, but I
neither do the one nor the other, I punish not you for your fathers sins, but
for your own: and when I do punish you for your own, I had rather you should
repent and live, then be cut off for them.

This seems contradictory to what is written, Prove. 1.26. I will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. And Ezekiel. 5.13. Thus shall mine
anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will
be comforted. If God have no pleasure in the death of sinners, how can these
Texts be verified? To clear this difficulty, know that it is not absolutely to
be taken, that God has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, unless you mean
it of the wicked who do repent; but respectively, thus, if they could turn
from their wicked ways, and keep his statutes, he should have more pleasure
in this, then in their death; but when they do not repent, he has pleasure in
their punishment, and death, as its an act of justice, and work of God, for God
has pleasure in all his works, the destruction, and ruin of Babylon is called
his pleasure. Isa. 48.14. He will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his Arm
shall be on the Chaldeans.

Some refer this to the antecedent will of God, and say so, He has no
pleasure in the death of a sinner. He wills it not, delights not in it, Si hoc
intelliga; de paena culpae vult eam, divina ita exigente justitia, sed non
direct nec per se sed iniquitate nostra supposita. Pintus in Locum. Voluntas
dei consequens semper impletur antecedent autem non semper Id. Deus
antecedenter vult omnes homines salvari, sed consequenter vuldt quossam damnari
secundum exigentiam suae justitiae. Neque tamen id quod antecedemer volumus,
simpliciter volumus sed secundum quid. Thomas Part. ja. q. 19. Art. 6.
but in regard of his consequent will he does.

Obser. 1.
Repentance is a turning, and a turning from sin; Verse. 30. Repent and turn.
Act. 3.19. Chap. 26.20. repenting, and turning to God, are put together. Sin
turns men from God, Jer. 32.33. They have turned unto me the back, and not the
face. Repentance is a turning of them again unto God, it turns them from
their sinful and wicked ways, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Jer. 26.3. from all sin, and
sinful ways, not some few, if the wicked will turn from all his sins; so
Verse. 30. Turn from all your transgressions; it turns men from their secret
sins, Psalm. 19.12. Isa. 55.7. If a man turns not from all, he turns from none
in truth, because that is the same reason why a man should turn from all, as
well as one; viz. the will and Command of God. This turning must be with the
whole heart, and therefore its from all sin. Deuteronomy. 30.10. Joel 2.12.

2. Its not enough to turn from all sin, but we must turn to all good. If the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do, etc. Negative righteousness is no righteousness, negative
holiness is insufficient holiness, 2 Kings 17.13. We must turn from the
Commands of sin, Satan, and the World, unto the Commands of God. We must turn
from Worldliness, unto Heavenly mindedness, from pride unto humility; from
censuring, to loving. It suffices not that the Tree bears no ill fruit, but it
must bring forth good fruit, else it is a barren Tree, and must down. The
Question will be hereafter, What good have you done? 1 Timothy 5.10, If she have
dilligently followed every good work. David fulfilled all the wills of God,
Psalm. 119.6. he had respect unto all his Commandments, and Christians must
observe all things Christ has commanded, Mat. 28.20.

3. The way to live comfortably, and prosperously is to be godly, He turns
from all his sins, and keeps all my Statutes, and does that is lawful and
right, he shall surely live. He shall live in living, others are dead in
living, they have no comfort in their lives. Pro. 4.4. Keep my Commandments,
and live, Isa. 55.3. Amos 5.4.6. Psalm. 34.12.14. It is man's sin which makes
times evil. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.

4. Note, that to penitent, obedient sinners, mercy is promised, All his
transgressions that he has committed shall not be mentioned unto him. Those
that turn from their wicked ways unto the Lord shall find mercy with him,
their sins shall be forgiven; let the sins be what they will for nature, never
so many for number, they shall all be blotted out, and not be mentioned. Mat.
12.31. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 31.12. It was made good in the Prodigal. Remission of
sins is promised to repentance. Acts 3.19. when a sinner has once repented,
God will mention his sins no more, and why should we remember or mention them?

5. If the sins of the penitent shall not be mentioned, then there is no
purgatory to punish them for the same hereafter. How is it true that God
remembers not, mentions not the sins of his Friends, of penitent, if he
punish them so sharply in Purgatory.

6. God has no delight in the death of sinners, if they suffer and perish, it
is of, and from themselves. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should
die? Verse. 31. Why will ye dye O House of Israel? I like it not that men will
ruin themselves, I had rather they would consider their ways, turn their
Feet into my testimonies, and live. Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy help. Destruction is of man, Salvation is of the Lord.

VERSE. 24.
But when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commiteth
iniquity, and does according to all the Abominations that the wicked man does,
shall he live? All his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned:
in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned,
in them shall he dye.


HAving laid down the case of a wicked man, repenting him of, and turning him
from his sins, and so cleared the proceedings of God, that such an one finds
mercy, and suffers not for his own sin, much less for his Fathers, he comes
here to the use of a righteous man, who if he turn from his righteousness,
and fall to wicked courses, his former righteousness shall not advantage him,
but he shall be dealt with according to his present sin. The sin of the wicked
repenting shall not hinder him from mercy, and eternal life; and the
righteousness of the righteous sinning, shall not keep him from justice, and
eternal death. Old sins shall not burden a returning sinner, and old
righteousness will not help a revolting Saint.

Of a righteous man, his turning from his righteousness, and commiting
iniquity, has been largly spoken of, Chap. 3.20. where the first part of this
Verse is word for word; yet because this Verse is much controverted, and
insisted upon by the Patrons of Apostasy and falling away; I shall touch upon
it.

Who the righteous or just man here spoken of is, may be gathered from the
opposition to the wicked man, the one is really wicked, and the other is really
righteous; that is, with a legal, or moral righteousness. He has not eaten
upon the Mountains, lift up his eyes to Idols, defiled his Neighbors wife,
oppressed the poor and needy, but given his bread to the hungry, cloatqed the
naked, taken no Usury nor increase, that has executed judgment, and walked in
Gods Statutes, such a one is righteous, and the righteous man in the Text.

That here is meant a moral, legal righteousness, appears from those words
in the 4. and 20. Verses, where it is said, The soul that sins it shall die,
if this did refer to the Gospel, and righteousness thereof, and not to the
Law, and legal righteousness, no man could be saved, because all men sin, but
notwithstanding their sinning, those are righteous with the righteousness of
the Gospel, they shall not dye, but be saved: it must therefore be understood
of a legal, civil, moral righteousness.

Gerhard brings this Verse to prove, that a man by his sins may, Excutere fidem
and spiritum sanctum. loco. Theol: T. 4. De bonis operibus. Bellarmin brings
it, Tom. 4. l. 5. de great: and lib. arb. c. 29. to prove that a man may, Exuere
cor novum: And Lib. 3. de justif: c. 14. he makes use of this Verse to show
that faith may be lost. Quid clarius? quomodo quaeso avertitur justus a
justitia si fide sola justificatur, and fides semel concepta extingui non
potest.

The Arminians also say, hence it is so evident that every one may see it,
Hominem justum posse totaliter and finaliter deficere, Ames: in antisynod. de
perseu. Sanct. c. 2.

For Answer unto these, know,

1. It Is said when the righteous man does turn away, he shall be so dealt
with, as if he had never been righteous. It Is a caution to prevent a righteous
man's falling, rather then an implication that he will, or shall turn from his
righteousness.

2. The Prophet speaks here of a righteous man considered in himself, not in
relation to God, or Christ, and so he may turn from his righteousness, as
Angels, and Adam did.

3. The scope of the Chapter is, not to prove falling away from grace, but to
clear the Lords justice, and that in two things.

1. That he does not punish one man for the sin of another, if he be unguilty
thereof: A guiltless Son shall not suffer for the sins of a guilty Father,
Verse. 4.20.

2. That he is not partial in his dealings, either with the wicked, or
righteous, he punishes wicked men if they sin, he spares them if they repent:
and as for righteous men, he blesses, prospers them, because they walk in his
Statutes, keep his judgments, and deal truly; but if they forsake their
righteousness, and fall to sinful courses, he will punish them as he does
wicked men: so that here is not any thing spoken of grace, or faith, whereby
men are united to Christ, justified, sanctified, and evidenced to be in
Covenant with God, through Christ; but what is here said, is spoken in a legal
way, namely to vindicate God from what unjustly they cast upon him, Viz. That
they suffered for the sins of others. Jer. 31.29, 30, 31. In those days they
shall say no more, the Fathers have eaten a sour grape, etc. but every one
shall die for his own iniquity. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel. God is now put upon better
terms with the house of Israel, then he was at that time. If they sinned, they
should die, if they did well, they should live, this was the Covenant of works;
but God promised to make a Covenant of grace with them, which they should not
break as they had done the former, Ver. 32. for he will put his fear into
their hearts, that they should not depart from him. Jer. 31.40. and his Spirit,
which should cause them to walk in his Statutes, to keep his judgments, and to
do them, Ezekiel. 36.27. And Christ tells his Disciples, that he would send the
Comforter that he might abide with them for ever, that he might dwell with
them, and be in them. John 14.16, 17. And John says, He that is borne of God
does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because
he is borne of God. 1 Epist. 3.9. If he cannot sin, then surely not so sin as
to shake off faith, thrust out the Spirit, totally and finally to fall away.
This last place troubles all those who hold that opinion of falling away.
Bellarmin says, Variae sune hujus loci, qui etiam est difficillimus,
expositiones.
that this place is the hardest of all to answer. Ambrose refers it to the
State of glory, in his Commentary upon Isaiah. Bernard, by seed understands
Gratiam praedestinationis, and says, the predestinate cannot sin so as to
harm them, seeing their sins are forgiven, and to work for their good. Others
expound it, cannot sin, ought not to sin, Those are borne of God ought not to
sin. But that is nothing to purpose, those are borne of God ought not to sin.
If sin ought to be, it were not sin. Aug. Tract. 5. in Epist. Johannis expounds
it of deadly sins; and Bellarm. likes this Exposition, and acknowledges that
he is borne of God, Non peccat, nec peccare potest lethaliter dum perseverat
filius dei; the Text says, He neither does sin, nor can sin, because he is
borne of God. Therefore he shall continue to be the Son of God, and so never
fall into those sins will unchild him, uninherit him, unjustifie, and unsave
him. Some that say, saving faith may be lost, do make three degrees of saving
faith.

The first, and highest degree is, the attainment of the life, and Divine
nature of Christ into our souls, after which attainment we live still by faith
carrying us out after the nourishment of this new life, and nature begotten in
us, which are the Heavenly satisfactions of God, and Christ; from this faith
it is acknowledged impossible to fall away.

A second, or middle degree of saving faith, is such a belief of Christ's
fulness, life, and Divine communications, as bring us not only to fall in
love with Christ, and those communications in him, of life, and Divine things,
but also causes us to leave all things in our desires, and affections, wholly
to depend on God, and to wait with earnestnes, longing, and patience, for the
giving in of Christ, his life, and Divine communications; and though such a
degree of faith, does not likely fall away, yet it is possible it may, Heb.
10.35. Cast not away your confidence, which intitates they might do it.

A third, and the lowest degree of true saving faith, is that which believes
the satisfaction, and fulness of Christ to be for us, and so affects us
therewith, that it carries us out after Christ, for himself, and for the things
believed to be in him, causing us to do, and forsake much for him, yet brings
us not to willing, and actual forsaking of all we have, for him. Luke 14.33.
This is true faith, and will make us partakers of Christ if continued. In Heb.
3.14. from this faith it is affirmed, that we may fall for ever. John 8.31.32.
Collos. 1.23. there is mention of true, saving faith, for it would save them if
continued in, and this manner of Speech shows, they might not continue, and so
loose what they had.

Answ. 1. I find not Salvation put upon the strength, but truth of faith, not
upon the highest degrees, but any degree of faith. John 3.16. Mark 16.16. 1
Pet. 2.6. 1 John 5.1. Acts 10.43.13.39.16.31. It Is not said in these or other
places, if you have such a degree of faith, you shall be justified, saved; but
simply, beleiving is required, the lowest degree of true faith will do it,
Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. The Theife upon the Cross had not attained to such high degrees of
faith, he by one act, and that of a weak faith was justified, and saved. Luke
23.42, 43.

2. The power of God is in the weakest faith, as well as in the strongest. 1
Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith, unto Salvation. It Is
not through strong faith, or such a degree of faith, but only, through faith;
the power of God begets faith in the soul, Ephesians. 1.19. It keeps it alive
there, how weak soever it be, and it keeps it unto Salvation; that we may be
saved by faith, he saves faith in us, he will not let faith perish, that we may
not perish: Gods power must fail, if true faith in the lowest degree fail.
But, John 10.29.

3. If men may fall from true, saving faith, being in its infancy, what hinders
but they may fall from it, being grown up, and come to man's estate? Gradus non
variat naturam, death which seizes upon infants, seizes also upon men; water
which extinguisheth a spark, will extinguish also a great fire. The sense, and
operations of faith men may be without, but the substance of it abides; all the
fiery darts of the Devil, cannot pierce the shield of faith. Ephesians. 6.18. All
the strength, malice, and opposition of the World, cannot overcome a little
true faith. 1 John 5.4. One borne of God, though but newborn, a very babe, he
overcomes the World, he is borne, not of corruptible, but incorruptible seed. 1
Pet. 1.23. He has an anointing abides in him. 1 John 2.27. His faith has
made him a Son of God. Gal 3.26. And Sons abide in the House for ever. John
8.35. Yea, he that beleives has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation. John 5.24. God puts his fear into his heart, and he shall not
depart from him. Jer. 32.40. His Spirit being in the heart of a true beleiver,
causes him to Walk in Gods Statutes, to keep his judgments, and do them, he
shall be confirmed to the end. 1 Cor. 1.8. So that by these Texts it appears,
that where true, saving faith, is, it will abide, not be extinct, but will live
for ever.

Be it granted therefore, that in the places mentioned, John 8.31, 32. Collos.
1.23. A true saving faith is meant, then the words, if ye continue, do not,
import they should not continue. If, is not Vox dubitationis, but Cautionis,
not a word of doubting, and disparagement, but of caution, and encouragement,
so it is taken, 2 Pet. 1.10. If you do these things you shall never fall away.
This and the like places are encouragements to stir them up unto perseverance,
and do show, that none have true saving faith, are intrinsically, and really
in Christ, but those do continue in the word and faith, to the end.

Suppose they do continue and not fall from their faith, yet does not this
word, If, note a possibility, that they may fall from their faith? Conditional
suppositions are of things impossible, as well as of possibles. Gal. 1.8. If
we, or an Angel from Heaven, etc. Matthew. 24.24. If it were possible they
should seduce the very Elect. But they cannot be seduced, and those that have
true faith cannot fall away finally. Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. John 2.
Epist. Verse. 2. The truth dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever. And
Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord are, or shall be as Mount Sion, which
cannot be removed, but abides for ever, Mount Sion was a great, and firm
Mountain, which could neither move it self, nor be removed by others,
whatever rains, floods, winds, Earthquakes there were, yet Mount Sion stood
immovable; and those trust in God, are, and shall be, like Mount Sion for ever.
They are not like a ship floating up on the Water, a Tent pitched upon the
Earth, an house built upon the Sand, which may be sunk, pulled up, or blown
down, but like a mighty Mountain that stands fast, and is immovable for ever,
it is not the freedom of their wills can do it, Psalm. 48.14. For God will be
their guide unto death; it is not the strength of corruption can do it, for
their Faith purifieth their hearts. Act. 15.9. 1 Pet. 1.22. It Is not the World
can do it, 1 John 5.4. nor all the power and policy of Satan. Matthew. 16.18.

And commits iniquity.
These words were opened in Chap. 3. Verse. 20. where they were somewhat largely
insisted upon, something is now to be given in about them. This phrase to
commit iniquity is equivalent to and the same with that in the Gospel. viz. To
Commit sin, 1 John 3.8. John 8.34. All men sin, but all do not commit sin. 1
John 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin. Sins of infirmity they
have, they sin, Contra animi sententiam and propositum, against the
inclination, and tendency of the Divine nature in them. Ex improviso and
occasionaliter, but they do not commit iniquity. They that do^ so, Studio
peccandi tenentur, there is study, counsel, meditation, purpose, resolution in
their sinning. John 8.34. Whosoever commits sin is the Servant of sin. And
what it is to commit sin, he shows, Verse. 40. Ye seek to kill me. Your
studies, counsels, meditations, purposes, resolutions, endeavors, are upon
that: So Jer. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit iniquity. When the bent of
the heart, and head is that way, studying, plotting, and endeavoring to
accomplish some evil thing, then iniquity is committed, as here in our
Prophet, The man is turned from righteousness, and turned to iniquity. The
bent and operations of his heart, and head are that way. Such men by the voice
of the Spirit, are said to be given to sinning; as Isa. 47.8. Thou that art
given to pleasures. Jer. 6.13. Every one is given to coveteousnesse. Their
Counsels, thoughts, desires, spirits, are taken up about, and work after
their pleasures, and coveteousnesse. The Lord Christ calls these (...), Matthew.
7.23. And Luke 13.27. (...), workers of iniquity; that is the trade they
profess, and are skillfull in. Samuel calls them, Doers of evil. 2 Samuel 3.39.
Isaiah, Evil doers, Chap. 9.17. Solomon, Wicked doers. Pro. 17.4. They do
what the wicked man does, and as he does.

According to all the abominations that the wicked man does.
Of Abominations has been spoken formerly; I pass therefore to the following
words.

All his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned.
The Hebrew is, All his righteousnesses, it is Plural. Whatever good works, or
righteous acts he has done, they shall not be mentioned, or remembered.

From these words some gather, that a man pardoned, and justified, may fall
into those sins, which do cancel his pardon, and reduce him to an unjustified
condition, and revive the guilt of his former sins.

This place does not speak of a man pardoned, and justified by faith in
Christ, for such a man, though he may, and sometimes does fall into foul sins:
yet they never prevail so far as to reverse pardon, and reduce to a state of
non-justification. Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast
down, for the Lord upholdeth with his hand. He speaks of a good man pardoned,
justified, he may fall, but how far? from pardon, from justification? No, then
he should utterly fall, be cast down beneath Gods hand, but the Text says, He
shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth with his hand. Or as
Montanus renders the words, The Lord upholdeth his hands, and he will not let
him sink into such a condition, if it were so, then sin should have dominion
over him, but Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: And Chap. 8.2.
Justified ones are freed from the Law of sin, and death; and Verse. 30. the
predestined, called, justified, and glorified ones, are so linked together,
that there is no breaking that chain; if they do sin, they have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is a propitiation for our
sins. 1 John 2.1, 2.

Further, know that grace and great sins may stand together, though grace
consist not with the dominion, strength, and power of sin, yet flesh and Spirit
will be together while we live. David's great sins did not destroy, and
ann^hilate his grace, Psalm. 51.11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me: This
Psalm was made when Nathan came to him, told him of his sins; and then, even
then he had the Spirit of God abiding in him, else he could not have made that
Psalm, nor would have prayed in that manner; so those places in 1 Kings
11.4.6. Acts 13.22. do testify as much. Peter sinned greatly, yet did not he
sin away his faith; his sin, and aggravations of it, you have Matthew. 26.70, 72,
74. he denied that he knew Christ, did it with an Oath, with swearing and
cursing; this was dreadful, yet notwithstanding such sins, his faith abode
with him. Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Christ's
Prayer was heard, therefore his faith could not fail; if it failed totally, as
men affirm that hold falling away, then Christ's Prayer was not heard, which is
contrary to John 11.42. I know thou hear me always, and he deceived Peter,
telling him his faith should not fail. That faith is in thee shall not fail,
not totally, for that which fails totally, fails finallly, there is an end of
that, and it must be a new faith, not the same, if there be faith given in
after a total failing: Peter's faith therefore did neither fail totally nor
finally, but did consist with those great sins, and shakings of his. Whatever
then the sins of the justified, pardoned ones be, though in their own nature
such as are Devoratoria salutis and vastantia conscientiam; Aug. Tertull.
yet they do not bring them to an unpardoned and unjustified condition; nor
do they revive the guilt of former sins with God; with us they may, but not
with him; for whom God pardons, he pardons absolutely, not conditionally: he so
pardons sin as he will not remember it again. Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins: See Jer. 31.34. Mic. 7.18, 19. Heb. 8.12.

In his trespass.
Hebrew is, (...) In his prevarication. (...) signifies a transgression
voluntary and against Conscience, with contempt, and contumacy, says Kirker.
And it differs from (...) which is to Err, to miss of the mark, to turn
aside, and chiefly notes, those sins come from ignorance, and infirmity of the
flesh, which are more easily cured: but the trespass here, is, of a man turned
from his righteousness unto wickedness, and so, Moribus Commutatis
insanabiliter Peccat, sins irremediably; for it follows.

In them shall he die.
That is, In the guilt of them he shall die; as Christ told the Jews, John
8.21.24. in the guilt of their unbelief they should die, or, for them he shall
die: so diverse Expositors read the words; and by death, is not meant only a
temporal, but an eternal death also.

Observe. 1.
There is a righteousness which men may turn from; when a righteous man
turns from his righteousness. There is an opinionative righteousness, Luke
18.9, and Matthew. 23.28. Many think themselves righteous, and appear so to
others; there is also a duty, a moral or legal righteousness, such as Paul
had, Phil. 3.6. and from these righteousnesses men may, and do turn daily:
Many attain to a duty-righteousnesse under the Gospel, but yet fall off
again, as you may see, Matthew. 13.20, 21, 22. 1 Timothy 5.15. John 6.66. 2 Pet.
2.2. 1 Timothy 4.1. Take heed therefore of trusting in, or to any righteousness
of your own. Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. It Is Christ's righteousness only which will let you in thither: lay
aside your own righteousness, and labor for that, as Paul did, Phil. 3.8, 9.
and if any fall away, let it not offend, and stumble you, knowing it is from
their own righteousness not Christ's. 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but
they were not of us, for if they had been of us they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us. Aust. in John 10. says, Multos esse lupos intus and multas
oves for as.

2. It Is not sufficient to begin well unless we proceed: fair beginnings
without progress come to nothing. If a righteous man turn from his
righteousness. If he do not go on with perseverance it will not advantage
him, it is not acceptable with God or men, Paulisper bonos nos esse and postea
improbos fieri. Joash while Jehoiadah lived, did well, that was his glory; But
when he was dead, he fell to commit iniquity, that was his shame. Paul blames
the Galathians, Chap. 3.3, 4. who were near the Tropickes. Are ye so foolish?
having begun in the Spirit, are ye made perfect by the flesh. Have ye suffered
so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain? it argues great foolishness,
and will be accompanied with great loss, if you do go off from your hopeful
beginnings; when men withdraw, fall off, it is argument they were never sound.
2. Epist. John. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ, has not God; he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father and the Son. If men forsake the Ordinances and Gospel, whatever
they think of themselves, they have neither Father, nor Son. Peter thunders
against such as fall off from their former Professions. 2 Epist. 2.20, 21, 22.
Let it not be said of any here, They did run well, as it is, Gal. 5.7. But let
us go on, run with patience, the race is set before us. Heb. 12.1. And so run
that we may obtain. 1 Cor. 9.24. Consider the arguments lie here in the Text,
to keep you from falling off, and encourage you to persevere in God.

1. If you do turn back you will fall into iniquity; you will commit
iniquity, the frame, bent, and set of the heart, will be that way; the
thoughts, studies, counsels, motions, endeavors, will be toward, and in
iniquity, you will be an evil doer, a worker of iniquity.

2. He lies obvious to all manner of sin; what will not the man do that turns
from his holy Profession? He is liable to do according to all the abominations
that the wicked man does: if there be any man more wicked then other, that does
abominable things, such will that man do; and it may be, not some one, or two
abominations, but all the abominations of the wicked.

3. What ever good he has formerly done, shall be all forgotten; if he have
done good to the Church and Saints, to the State in a military, consultatory,
navigatory, or contributary way, if he have done much good to his Family, or
friends, it shall be all laid aside, buried in the dark, and not once be
mentioned unto him; what if he have built an Hospital, Free-Schoole, redeemed
Captives, maintained many Lectures, releived thousands of Poor, done more good
then 100. of others? yet if he turn from his good, he was doing; God turns
also, and will never mind it more.

4. He shall die, and that eternally, in his Apostasy, and the guilt, not of
one sin, but all his sins shall be upon him.

VERSE. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
Yet ye say the way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now oh house of Israel,
is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal?

When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and dies in them; for his iniquity that he has done shall he dye.

Again, when the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has
committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul
alive.

Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions that he
has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

Yet says the house of Israel, the way of the Lord is not equal. Oh house of
Israel are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?


THe Jews had complained of the Lords hard dealing with them in the 2. verse.
To which unjust complaint he makes a large answer to the 19 verse. where they
reply upon God the same thing still; to which reply he returns a sufficient
defense thoroughly satisfactory to any unprejudiced, and that is in the 6.
verses last opened: but they not taking satisfaction from what the Lord gave in
by the Prophet here, they come again to charge him.

In these verses you have,

1. Their charge. The way of the Lord is not equal.

2. Gods answer to this charge, where 1. Attention is called for, hear now O
house of Israel. 2. An interrogation made; is not my way, etc. 3. A retortion
of the accusation upon themselves. 4. The probation of the equity of his ways
in the 26, 27, 28. 5. A repetition of the charge, interrogation and
recrimination, verse. 29.


For the words, something to the opening of them must be spoken.

The way of the Lord is not equal.
The Heb. word for not equal is, (...) which Montan. renders non dirigetur.
The Sept. puts it actively, (...), non dirigit; The way of the Lord shall not
be direct; we look not upon it as so, but as crooked: or it does not direct us,
but lead us to think hardly of him; his way is such as would make any sort of
men judge that he deals unjustly. Aecolampad turns it thus, non est parata via
domini, the way of the Lord is not prepared, there is no art or industry in it;
non rectificata, it is not rectified, it is a wrong way that he goes in.
Castal. has it, negatis constare rationem domini, they deny that the way of
the Lord consists, has any reason or equity in it. There is no good coherency
between him and what he does. The French is, la voye du seigneur n'est point a'
droit; that is, the way of the Lord has no right in it: but the most
Expositors have it as it is here, the way of the Lord is not equal. The Hebrew
verb (...) signifies to ponder, weigh, frame artificially; secundum numerum and
mensuram certam, 1 Samuel 2.3. By him actions are weighed. Avenar. interprets the
words thus; artificiose fabricata sunt opera, his works have much
artificiousnesse in them, they are curiously wrought: so the word is to be
taken in Job 28.25. and in Psalm. 75.4. where it is said, I bear up the pillars
thereof. (...) which Montanus renders thus, direxi aequilibrio columnas ejus; I
have evenly ordered, framed, and set the pillars thereof, one is not higher,
lesser, or lower then the other: and Avenar. Ego fabricavi columnas ejus, I
have numero and pondere, framed the pillars thereof. And he expounds the word
in this Chap. artificiose parare, and makes the sense this, that the way of the
Lord is artificiously prepared.

The charge here that Gods way is not equal, amounts to this; that his way is
not well weighed, artificially framed, and exactly done, but irregular,
crooked, and sinful: so M^nster has the words, non eque libratur, it is not
equally carried.

way.
Heb. (...) The work, action, dealing, judgments and proceedings of God with
them: not ratio, as Castalio puts it, unless it be taken thus; there is no
reason in that God does, or he has no reason for what he does.

Is not my way equal?
It Is an interrogation which is more then a plain or naked affirmation: had the
Lord said my way is equal, what ever you think or say, however you carry your
selves, it had not had such weight, efficacy and strength in it, as now the
words contain; is not my way equal? what not my ways? do you doubt or
question the same? If there be not equity in my way, there is none in any way;
all ways are rough, crooked, perverse to my ways, they are weighed exactly,
wrought artificially, and done upon such mature, rational, wise, and strong
grounds, that neither you nor any have cause to quarrel, and say my ways are
not equal, they are equal, yea equity it self.

There be some things which men catch at to make the ways of God seem
unequal, especially these.

1. His punishments. 2. His choices. 3. His distribution of things to men. 4.
Disappointments. 5. His rewards.
1. For his punishments; great was the complaint and charge here in this Chap.
that God did punish them for their fathers sins, to which calumny sufficient
has been spoken: That of Adam's sin, and all his posterity to suffer for it,
sticks much with some; that millions should perish upon that account, makes the
way of God seem unequal. But upon due consideration it will appear otherwise;
for Adam being a public person, represented all mankind: and God covenanted
with him, that if he stood and kept that image of God in which he was created,
that then his posterity should be like him, and happy with himself: but if he
fell that they should suffer in him, and with him, and what unequalnesse was
here? Adam was the root of all men, had all in his loins, and as all lost the
image of God in him falling, Romans 5.12.16, 17, 18, 19. So all should have had
the image of God in him standing.

2. For his choises; God seems to respect persons, because he deals unequally
with men that are equal, all men are fallen in Adam, equally guilty; yet some
of these God chooses to life, others he leaves and passes by, all are his
creatures, and he deals not alike with them. Besides, he chooses the foolish,
the weak, the base and despised, and sets by the wise, mighty and noble, 1 Cor.
1.26, 27, 28. what equity therefore in his ways? Yea often times he takes great
notorious sinners, and those are less sinful are rejected.

To set all straight here, consider what it is to accept or respect persons. It
is to look at men upon external grounds, some outward qualities, and thereupon
to do for them, as riches, honor, birth, breeding, power, kindred, family,
beauty, strength, condition of life, learning, wisdom, parts, policy, etc.

Now the Lord does not look at any external adjuncts or ornaments in his
Elections and Choices of men: nothing in the creature or from the creature
moves him, it is his own good pleasure and will sets him a work to choose any,
2 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 1.5.11. Romans 9.18.

Besides this, know God is not bound to deal equally with men, being equally
miserable, for then he must destroy all, or save all, and so have the glory of
justice alone, or mercy, alone, and not the glory of both, then he should not
have made Christ sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. But have punished Adam and all those
sinned in him; and what then had become of the world? hell had been full, and
heaven empty. And for his choice of any out of those are equal in sin, or of
greater sinners, what does this show but the freedom of his grace, and his
sovereignty over the creatures, to do with them as he pleases, Romans 9.21.
Shall that privilege be denied to God which is given to the Potter, and Gods
way seem more unequal in his dealing with men, then the potters is with the
clay? And whereas God does take the weak, base, foolish and despised things of
the world, it is argument that he does not respect persons; he takes those have
nothing in them to move him: Should he take the wise, mighty, noble, rich and
learned, then there would be some bottom for charging God with acceptance of
persons; but examine the Scriptures, and they quit the Lord abundantly from it,
Deuteronomy. 10.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Job 34.19. 2 Samuel 14.14. Acts 10.34. Romans 2.11.
Gal. 2.6. Ephesians. 6.9. Coloss. 3.25. 1 Pet. 1.17. In all these places the Lord
is freed from regarding, respecting, or accepting of persons.

3. For his distribution of things, the Lord, is accounted to deal unequally;
why, say men of this humor, have many so much, and others so little, or
nothing at all? some have Manors, Lordships, Counties, Kingdoms, when others
have neither house nor land; some have five Talents, others one; some are wise,
and others idiots; yea that which shows the way of the Lord to be unequal, is,
wicked men have great estates, high places, they ride, and the righteous go on
foot being poor and low.

For answ. to this, know, that the Lord is a free agent, and may give what he
pleases, when, where, and in what proportion seems good to himself, and to his
infinite wisdom. Men blame not providence, that some trees are stronger,
taller, bigger then others: If the Vine, Olive, and Fig Tree be lower then
Cedars and Oaks, they are more fruitful, and yield pleasanter fruit. Is the
Merchant blameable if he fraught one ship with Coals, another with Corn, one
with skins, another with silks, one with boards, another with the richest
wines? Surely no; and may not the Lord put into these earthen Vessels of men
what he will, and as much as he will? If he make women the weaker vessels, deny
beards to them, which he has given to men, is he unequal in such
dispensations? what if wicked men have much? it is but thick clay, Hab. 2.6.
Meat that perishes, John 6.27. Unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.9. The lust of the
flesh, eyes, and pride of life, 1 John 2.16. Vanity and vexation of spirit,
Eccles. 1.14. And that which will not profit in an evil day, Prove. 11.4.
Better things then these are given to the righteous, Peace of Christ and God,
which passes understanding, John 14.27. Phil. 4.7. Joy unspeakable and
glorious. 1 Pet. 1.8. Precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. The Spirit of power, love,
and of a sound mind. 2 Timothy 1.7. The great and precious Promises, yea all
things pertaining to life and godliness. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Therefore though they
be low in a Worldly sense, yet they are lifted up in a spiritual sense, and so
highly exalted, that the world is not worthy of them. Heb. 11.38.

4. His disappointing of men and means which are likeliest to attain unto those
ends are aimed at. Eccles. 9.11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle
to the strong, neither bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding,
nor favor to men of skill. To whom should these be, if not to such? when men
use honest means, and with all their might, they are disappointed and
discouraged. If the race be to the slow, the battle to the weak, bread to the
foolish, riches and favor to the ignorant and unskilful; what equity is there
in Gods ways, and why should we having talents use them, or using them be
disappointed?

This Object. seems to strike deep, yet wounds not the honor of the Lord, and
equity of his ways. For,

1. Gods ways are not unequal, because we cannot see the reason of them, we
are poor pur-blind creatures, and know little: The Lords understanding is
infinite, Psalm. 147.5. There is no searching of it, Isa. 40.28. His judgments
are a great deep, Psalm. 36.6. There is no fathoming of them, his ways are past
finding out, Romans 11.33. It Is not safe therefore, because we see not the
equity of them, to conclude they are unequal.

2. God disappoints men of abilities using lawful and direct means to attain
their ends propounded, because they trust in the means, idolize them, looking
at God in the second place, or not at all; acquaint your selves with these
places, and you will find the reality of it, that men are apt to confide in
their own abilities, to trust in an arm of flesh, to applaud their own
preparations, and expect much from them. Isa. 31.1, 2, 3. Jer. 9.23. Psalm.
20.7.49.6. Jer. 7.4. Ezekiel. 16.15. Amos 6.1. Hos. 10.13. If God disappoint them
for their own sin, of their expectation, what inequality is therein Gods ways?
the wages of sin is death, death of designs and undertakings, as well as of
men the undertakers.

3. Let it be granted, that men use their abilities and means conducing to
their ends propounded, the right way, without confidence in the same, in
subordination unto God, yet may the Lord disappoint men's purposes,
contrivances, aims and ends, and that without sin; for the Lord is above all
second causes, his providence rules and runs through all, and does give check
when, where, and how it pleases to all creature motions; and God will have men
to fee, that without concurrence of his providence and assistance nothing can
be done; it is not humane dispositions, counsels, preparations, operations, use
of any medicines that can produce any effect without God. Lam. 3.37. Who is he
that says, and it comes to pass when the Lord commands it not? Let
Princes, Potentates, and Powers, consult of, attempt what they will, if the
Lord have not commanded the thing, if he do not cooperate with them in doing
the thing, it proves abortive. 1 K. 12.21, 22, 23. 2 Chronicles. 25.6, 7. Isa.
37.33, 34 36. 2 K. 7.5, 6, 7. Isa. 19.3. Job 5.12. Isa. 8.9, 10. The sum of
all which is that in Psalm. 33.10. He makes the devices of the people of none
effect. If men have that power to stop and frustrate great undertakings at Sea
and Land, shall it be denied to the great God of Heaven and Earth? God should
not be omnipotent, nor reign in the Kingdoms of the Earth, if men could carry
on their designs, and attain their ends without him.

4. Events and successes of things are hidden in the hand of God, men must
therefore improve their talents, use all lawful means for accomplishing those
things are good in the sight of God, and wait upon the Lord for discovery of
his mind and good pleasure therein. It argues an ill spirit to say we shall be
disappointed, and therefore we will sit still; how know we what shall be the
issue of any undertaking? If one enterprise fail, another may take; if one
arrow hit not the mark, a 2d or 3d may: If we hide our talents in napkins, we
shall be found ill servants, and the command is, what ever thy hand finds to
do, do it with thy might, Eccl. 9.10. Men must not be idle, but active, and
active to they utmost.: For, there is a season to every thing, and a time to
every purpose, Chap. 3.1. What that season and time will prove, no man knows,
you must venture therefore. Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening withold not thy hand, for thou know not whither shall prosper
either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.

5. If there be disappointments, God may make them as advantageous to thee as
enjoyments, or recompense it in another undertaking. Amaziah hired 100000.
mighty men of valor out of Israel for 100. talents of silver, God sends a
Prophet, who bids him dismiss them all; this disappointment troubled him, what
shall we do for the 100. talents? the Prophet answered him, the Lord is able
to give thee much more then this, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. So God is able to make up any
disappointment, and more too: what unequity or iniquity then is in his way?

5. The last thing propounded making Gods ways to seem unequal, is his
rewarding men unproportionably to what they do or suffer. Matthew. 20.12. These
last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us who
have borne the burden and heat of the day. We have been eleven or twelve
hours in thy Vineyard, we have wrought hard, the work has lain heavy upon our
hands, we have endured the heat and scorching of the sun, done ten times as
much as those came in but an hour since; and what justice, what equity is it
that they should be equal with us in the pay, that were so unequal in the
labor?

To quit the Lord, let us consider only what the parable affords us, and
therein is plentiful matter to justify him from wronging those that here did
murmr and complain, For

1. Those were hired earliest in the morning, and so were longest in the
Vineyard, and at the work, the Lord agreed with them for a penny a day, verse.
2. which he paid them, verse. 10. and therefore did them no wrong, verse. 13.

2. Those were hired at the 3.6. and 9th hours, verse. 3. and 5. the Lord
promised them what ever was right and equal, verse. 9. (...) What ever they had
then, it was just; and where justice is, there is no ground of complaint: so
for the eleventh hour, men they had the same promise, Verse. 8. Go ye into
the Vineyard, and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive. How is Gods
dealing with them unequal and wrong, when he gave them that which was equal
and right?

3. If the last did not deserve the penny, yet God might give them the penny,
and so he did, Verse. 14. I will give unto this last, even as unto thee. God may
give what reward he pleases unto those do him the least and latest service,
equalize them with the first, and those do most, and that without partiality;
for it is lawful for him to do what he will with his own, v. 15.

Are not your ways unequal?
You observe, complain of my ways, charge them to be unequal; but your ways,
if examined, will be found the unequal and unjust ways, the charge you lay
upon me will light upon your selves: The Vulg. reads it, non magis viae
vestrae pravae sunt? you say my ways are not right, but rather are not your
ways wicked and corrupt? Surely they are, you are blind, prejudiced, and
cannot judge aright of me and my ways; but I am God, light and no darkness, I
know you and your ways, and do assert them to be unequal. You have forsaken
me, Isa. 1.4. even me the fountain of living waters, and hewed you out
Cisternes, even broken Cisternes that can hold no water. Jer. 2.13. You have
filled the Temple with Idols, and the Land with violence. Ezekiel. 8. You have
devised mischief, and given wicked counsel. Ezekiel. 11.2. Driven out the
brethren, Verse. 15. You have scoffed at my Prophets and prophesies, Chap.
12.22. You have hearkened to lying Prophets and Prophetesses who have dawbed
with untempered mortar. Sadded the hearts of the righteous, and strengthened the
hands of the wicked. Chap. 13.10.22. You have set up Idols in your hearts. Chapter
14.3. You have justified Sodom and Samaria in all their wickedness, and done
more abominably then they, Chap. 16.46, 47. You have broken Covenant with
Nebuchadnezar, King of Babylon, and revolted from him, and sent to Egypt for
help, Chap. 17.15. And now consider, are not your ways unequal? yea most
unequal: had you any cause to charge me? have not I just cause to charge you?

Of the 26, 27, 28. verses has been spoken before in the 24.21. and 14. verses
of this Chap. Only those words in the 27. we shall speak a little unto, namely

He shall save his soul alive.
The Heb. is, (...) ipse animam suam vivificabit, he shall quicken his own
soul: the Sept. have it (...), he has preserved, or shall preserve his own
soul: Vatabl. ipse animam suam vivam servabit, he shall keep his soul alive.
French is, iceluy viuifiera son ame, he shall make alive his own soul.

This expression appears contradictory to what is recorded in Psalm. 22.29.
where it is said, none can keep alive his own soul; the Hebr. is venaphsho lo
chijah, he shall not quicken or make alive his own soul.

1. We must search out the meaning of the Hebrew word, and

2. See how to reconcile the places.

1. For the word vivificare, or vivificare animam, does not note always
bringing to, or begetting life in the soul being dead; for how can that is
dead act and produce life in it self; quickening from death either natural or
spiritual, is from the Lord, John 5.21. Ephesians. 2.5. Sometimes it notes sparing
of a man's life, 1 K. 20.31. Peradventure he will save thy life, it is spoken of
Benhadad, being in the hands of Ahab; the Hebr. is (...) peradventure he will
quicken thy soul. Benhadad was alive, but in danger of death; the meaning
therefore is, that if they tried the King of Israel, he might free him from
death, spare his life, and that was the quickening of his soul; in this sense
it is used, Genesis 19.19. Sometimes preserving of life. 2 Kings 7.4. Say the
lepers, Let us go to the Syrians, if they save us alive we shall live: The
Heb. is, if they quicken us. If they will give us to eat and drink our lives
will be preserved, and so the word signifies, Genesis 6.19. Chap. 47.25. Sometimes
it notes putting into a former cond^tion, as Neh. 4.2. Will they revive the
stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burnt? That is, will they
restore the Stones burnt to ashes, and set them in the wall as formerly.
Sometimes to comfort, Ezekiel. 13.18, 19. So the false Prophets are said to
quicken, or save souls that came unto them, they by their fained, and fair
words, did beget hopes in them of good things, and good days. The sense we are
to take it in here, is the first and second, He shall quicken his soul, and
make it alive: that is, save it from death, and destruction, which wicked men
are subject unto, they do that wickedness which shortens their days, Job
36.6. He preserves not the life of the wicked. The Original is, he shall not
quicken the wicked, Lo jechaieh rashang, He shall not deliver him from the
death and judgment he has brought upon himself; he shall die for his sin,
but when a man ceases from wickedness, he shall free his soul from death, and
that this is the meaning, is clear from the words in the 26. Verse. Viz. For
his iniquity that he has done shall he die. A righteous man, turning from his
righteousness, and sinning, shall die; shall be cut off, a wicked man turning
from his wickedness, he shall save his life, and preserve it in a comfortable
condition, he shall surely live. For the place in the Psalmist you may
understand it of a natural death; so no man can keep alive his own soul,
that is, himself; or thus, he speaks of Christ in the Verse, the rich shall
worship him, and the poor shall bow before him, and as it follows, None can
keep alive his own soul, that is, without him, without Christ, John 15.5.
Without him none can free his soul from wrath, and eternal death; and if any
will stretch Ezekiells words so far, that he shall save his soul alive from
wrath to come, and the second death, he must take in Christ, it is not man's own
acting will do it.

The 29. Verse is a repetition of the 25.; which is not in vain, but, 1. Sets
out the impiety, and impudence of those charged Gods ways to be unequal. 2.
How ill God took it at their hands. 3. It tends to a further clearing of God.
And, 4. A fuller conviction of the Chargers that they were guilty; all which I
shall pass by, and come unto some few Observations.


Obser. 1.
Men are apt to question, quarrel, and carp at God, and the ways of God. They
say the way of the Lord is not equdll. Sometimes men charge his ways to be
grievous, and burdensome. John 6.60. This is a hard saying, who can bear it.
Amos 7.10. The Land is not able to bear all his words. Sometimes to be
dangerous. Prove. 26.13. The sloathfull man says there is a Lion in the
streets. If I walk in Gods ways, I shall meet with reproaches, persecutions,
temptations, and tempters, and these be all Lions. Sometimes to be
unprofitable. Mal. 3.14. Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of Hosts: So, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted
and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul and thou take no
knowledge? all our labor is in vain, there is no benefit in his ways.
Sometimes to be lying, and false, Ezekiel. 12.22. The days are prolonged, and
every Vision fails, 2 Pet. 13.4. Where is the promise of his coming?
Sometimes to be heretical, Acts 24.13. and here they are said to be unequal,
and not only do men charge Gods ways, but himself also; they blush not to
speak it out, that, God sees not, that he has forsaken the Earth, Ezekiel.
8.12: 9.9. Some in these days affirm, that God is the Author of sin, that
it is injustice in him to punish the souls of the wicked in Hell, while their
bodies lie at rest in the Grave: That God does as much hurt as good, take one
time with another. O the corruption, pride, impudency, arrogance of men, that
dare sit in judgment upon God and his ways, charge and sentence him and them
so unjustly? And that which is to be lamented, good men sometimes have gone too
far this way. See, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.73.13, 14. Jer. 20.12. Job. 10.3. Let us
take heed of this wretched disposition, humble your selves for failings this
way, and learn not to judge of God and his ways, by our Fancies, and shallow
Capacities; though we cannot see the reason of his proceedings let us adore
him, and justify them, for,

2. Gods ways are just and straight whatever men's thoughts are of them, Are
not my ways equal? His ways are full of equity; those seem grievous are
pleasant, Prove. 3.17. those are thought dangerous are safe, Prove. 1.33. Who so
hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.
Those said to be unprofitable are very profitable, Psalm. 119.56. This I had
because I kept thy precepts. Psalm. 19.11, In keeping of them is great reward.
Those are reckoned falls, and heretical, are most true, Psalm. 119.160. Thy word
is true from the beginning, Ezekiel. 12.23. The days are at hand, and the effect
of every Vision. Rev. 15.3. Just and true are thy ways, O thou King of Saints.
God is a God that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. That cannot deal unjustly, that cannot
pervert his ways; and therefore he makes challenge to the Sons of men to prove
it if they can; to produce one instance of that kind, if they can. Mic. 6.3.
What have I done unto thee? And wherein have I wronged thee? testify against
me. Let your Kings, Nobles, Princes, Prophets, Priests, People, their wise men
and ancient ones come forth, and testify against me if they can. I have been
amongst you ever since I brought you out of Egypt, now almost a thousand
years, and if there be any unjust Act done by me, if I have walked in any
un-equall way, let me hear of it, spare me not? So Jer. 2.5. What iniquity
have your Fathers found in me? God put them to it, to make it out if there were
any, but none could be found out. It did stand for a truth in David's days, it
does stand now, and must stand for ever. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works. Psalm. 145.17.

3. When we have a controversy with any, we should not reproach them, be in
passion, give them hard language, but gentle, sweet, loving compellations,
Hear now O house of Israel, what a loving term was this, what entreaty was
here from the great wronged, and provoked God? Mic. 6.2.3. The Lord has a
controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel. But how does he
plead? Not in fury, in an upbraiding, r^viling way, but in a loving manner, O
my people, what have I done, etc. Men when they are charged unjustly, and have
controversies with others, they forget God, and themselves: they are full of
passion, bitterness, reproaching, exasperating, and dangerous expressions;
they think they may take liberty to speak and vindicate themselves; true, but
not in an unjust way, you must not speak evil of any man. Tit. 3.2. you must
not brawle, you must be gentle, showing all meekness to all men. Thus did
Christ to a Reprobate, Matthew. 22.12. thus did Michael to the Devil, Jude 4.

4. When men are once prejudiced against God and his ways, it is hard to
unprejudice them. When corrupt opinions are once gotten into the head or heart,
they root, take such hold, as it is a great difficulty to get them out again.
These Jews said they suffered greatly for the sin of their fathers; that his
ways therefore were not equal, the Lord spends this Chapter upon them to free
them from that prejudice, to extirpate that mis-conceit they had of him and his
ways, and to set himself right in their thoughts; but yet ye say, verse. 19.
Yet ye say, verse. 25. Yet says the house of Israel, the way of the Lord it
not equal, verse. 29. The strong arguments the Lord brought did not prevail
with them.

No marvail then that Ministers cannot prevail; people hold fast errors, lies,
delusions, and will not let them go. Many wonder that Learned men should not
convince those are un-learned, and weak, and take them off from their
Opinions: But see here, they stood it out against God. Men are very tenacious
of erroneous, and false tenets, and being by them prejudiced against God, his
truth, and ways, they will not let them go, they will rather die in, then
depart from them. Ahab is prejudiced against Micaiah, and in him against God.
He Prophesies no good, but evil concerning me. He Is a man I hate, 1 Kings
22.8. Jehoshaphat, though a good man, and great King, he could not take him,
off from this prejudice he had against God, and the Prophet, but he persisted
therein to his death.

One Rabbi Akibba being imprisoned amongst the Gentiles, another Rabbi brought
him as much water as served to quench his thirst, and wash his hands; the
keeper of the Prison one day powered out half of it. Akibba seeing not enough
water, said to the other Rabbi, give me that to wash my hands, to which he
replied, there is not enough to quench your thirst. Akibba answers, Quisquis
manibus illotis cibum capit, is mortis reus est, it will be better for me to
die for thirst, then to despise the tradition of my Elders. Buxdorf. Synag. Ind.

The Jews are so strongly possessed with untoward Opinions, that no reason, no
time will keep them off from them; they still think that neither Elias, nor
Messiah are come, but look for them daily, and that God deals unkindly with
them that he does not send them; they hold that their Messiah shall not come in
such a clandestine way as the Christians Messiah did. He shall have a glorious
Kingdom here on Earth, many Wives, and leave Children to reign after he is
dead and gone. The Papists retain their Opinions about images,
transubstantiation, Christ's descent to Hell, Purgatory, etc. notwithstanding
all the Protestants Disqutes, and writings to the contrary, they will die in
their Errors rather then leave them to embrace truth.

5. Men faulty themselves, are forward to fault others, even those are most
innocent; these Jews whose ways were most unequal, they spy faults in God,
as they conceive, and say his ways are unequal. Jonas who run away from God,
yet he was wroth with God for sparing Niniveh, and destroying the Gourd, he
thought the Lord did ill in both, Jon. 4. and so with men, those are most
guilty, and obnoxious, they are usually censuring, accusing, disgracing,
condemning. Ahab who had sold himself to do wickedly, set up Idols, and done
more abominably then others, yet he sets upon Elijah and accuss him to be the
troubler of Israel, 1 K. 18.17. The Scribes and Pharisees who were very wicked
and notorious Hopocrites, were most forward to charge Christ.

VERSE. 30, 31, 32. Therefore I will judge you O House of Israel, every one
acccording to his ways, says the Lord God; repent, and turn your selves from
all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed, and
make you a new heart and a new Spirit, for why will ye dye O House of Israel?

For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God,
wherefore turn your selves and live ye.


IN these three Verses we have the second general part of the Chapter; which
is an Exhortation to Repentance.

The Particulars contained in the words; are,

1. A conclusion drawn up from the former Expostulation. Verse. 30. Therefore I
will judge you, etc.

2. The Exhortation it self; which is variously set down, and under diverse
expressions.

1. Repent and turn your selves from all your, etc. 2. Castaway from you all
your transgressions. 3. Make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit. 4. Turn your
selves.
3. The Reasons hereof, which are three. The 1. Is from the benefit of so
doing. So iniquity shall not be your ruin. Verse. 30. Ye shall live. Verse. 32.
2. Is from the danger if they do it not. Verse. 31. Why will ye die. 3. Is
from the Disposition of the Lord. He has no pleasure in the death of a sinner.


Verse. 30. Therefore will I judge you O House of Israel, every one according to
his ways.
You have charged my ways not to be equal, that I have wronged you, and
herein you have condemned me, and justified your selves, but I find mine own
ways equal, and straight, your ways un-equall, and crooked. Therefore will I
judge you, even every one of you according to his ways. I will recompense upon
you your deserts, and make you experimentally to see and say, that my ways are
equal, that you suffer for your own sins and not the sins of others. The
Hebrew is, Therefore every one according to his ways I will judge you, That
is, I will to judge you, as I will judge every one of you, not in general, but
man by man. Of judging men according to their ways has formerly been spoken,
Chapter 7.3.8.27. Only take this, that whatever thoughts men have of Gods ways
and their own, the Lord will judge righteously, and make it appear to the
World, and to the Consciences of those that mis-judged him, that his ways are
equal, and himself just in his proceedings with them, and in the Government
of the World; he will stop the mouth of iniquity it self, and overcome in
judgment.

Repent and turn your selves.
The Hebrew is, (...) Convert and make to be converted. Sept. is, (...) Return
you, and turn from. The Vulg. is, Convertimini and agite paenitentiam, Convert
and repent. Calv. Convertimini and redire vos facite, Turn, and make your
selves to turn. Piscat. Revertimini and avertite. Revertite and avertite
Castal. Redite and vos revocate, Return and call back your selves. Fre.
Return and repent. Of these words was spoken, Chap. 14.6. where the same words
are, repent and turn your selves.

Your selves.
Is not in the Original, some instead thereof have Others; repent and turn
others: so the word Hashivu is, Make to convert, whither themselves or others.
When men are once returned from their wicked ways, they will labor to bring
others out of them, they will use what means they can to make others partake of
their grace and mercy, especially those they have been instruments to draw to
sin.

This turning themselves is called in 1 K. 8.47. and 2 Chr. 6.37. Bethinking
themselves. Veheshivu el libbam, If they shall return to their heart, or,
bring back to their heart. When men go from God and his ways, they are
inconsiderate, without heart and understanding. Prove. 11.12. He is desolate of
heart. but when they repent and turn to him they come to themselves. Luke
15.17. then they have hearts, then they understand.

Sometimes repenting and turning is given to man, as here, and in sundry other
places: sometimes unto God, as Acts 3.26. 2 Timothy 2.25. Jer. 31.18. sometimes to
the instrument, or Medium God uses, as Acts 26.18.19.26. Luke 1.17. which is
done to provoke man to use those Talents and abilities God has given him to
further his own good, as also to beget a due esteem of, and respect to those
God imployes in such a work, and especially to cause men to look unto God, who
works both the will and the deed. Phil. 2.13.

So iniquity shall not be your ruin.
The Hebrew for Ruin is (...) which is a scandal, an offense, that which
causes a man to stumble, to fall. (...) is an Axe, or Hatchet, from (...) to
weaken and cause to fall. Scandalls are Axes, Hatchets, which do weaken men,
and cause them to fall. Sept. is, (...) For a torment. Calv. In laqueum, For a
Gin, Snare, Haltar, Cast. has it, Detrimento, so your sin shall be to you for
loss. Of this word was spoken, Chap. 3.20.14.3.

Verse. 31. Cast away from you all your Transgressions.
You hug, and hold them fast, but cast them away. (...) Proijcite, cast off,
cast out, cast away. (...) Abijcite, Fling away, rid your selves of them. The
Fr. Jetterz arriere de vous. Throw behind you all your prevarications, that
they may never be in view more. This casting away of sin does import more then
cessation from sin, or caution of sin, men may cease from sin, take heed of
sin, and yet keep much sin in their Bosoms; you may mind such expressions as
these in the Book of God, as hideing, and keeping of sin, Job 20.12, 13.
Cleaving unto sin, 2 Kings 3.3. Taking hold of sin, 1 Kings 9.9. Holding it
fast. Jer. 8.5. Setting up sin in the heart. Ezekiel. 14.3. Gathering iniquity to
it self, Psalm. 41.6. Regarding of it, Psalm. 66.18. Setting the heart upon it,
Hos. 4.8. or lifting up the soul unto it, as the Hebrew sounds. Now casting
away of transgressions is contrary to all these, he does so, lifts not up his
heart to, sets it not upon sin, regards it not, gathers it not, nor sets it up,
he holds it not fast, cleaves not to it, keeps it not, nor takes any hold of
it, but to throw it out, to cast it away. Answerable unto which is what you
have in Heb. 12.1. (...) Lay aside every burden, all filthiness, and
superfluity of naughtiness, James 1.21. And that in 2 Timothy 2.21. Purging a
man's self: Likewise what ye have, Ephesians. 4.22. Put off the old man, and
Matthew. 7.5. Cast out the beam out of thine own eye. It is to lay aside, purge
out, and put off, and cast forth all sin. There be three things employed in
casting away sin.

1. Solutio continui, a dissolving of that union is between sin and the soul.
Men and their sins are strongly united together, they love to oppress, Hos.
12.7. They love Flagons of wine. Chap. 3.1. And it is hard to divide between
the Drunkard and his drunkenness. Prove. 23.35. They love pleasures more then
God. 2 Timothy 3.4. You may sooner pluck men from God, then from their sins:
Christ tells you that men's lusts are their Eyes, Hands, Feet, Matthew. 18.8, 9.
Paul calls them Members. Col. 3.5. as members have union with the body, so men's
lust and sins have union with them. Now when sin comes to be cast away, there
must be a breach of this union, until that be, there can be no separation of
sin from us: Therefore the Lord calls upon men to Rend their hearts, Joel 2.13
To break up their fallow ground, and not to sow among thorns. Jer. 4.3. there
must be a breach and separation between the Earth, and thorns, before thorns
can be cast away.

2. Detestatio soluti, when the League is broken between a man and his Whores,
he loathes her, and so when the union between sin and a man's heart is broken, he
loathes, and abhors his sins, and himself for them, Ezekiel. 36.31. They loathed
themselves for their iniquities, much more then did they loath their
iniquities, Psalm. 119.163. I hate and abhor lying. He saw matter of
detestation, and abhorrency in it.

3. Ejectio detestati, casting out, and away that is loathed and detested, Isa.
30.21, 22, When their ears heard the word, This is the way walk in it, And so
were taken off from false ways, then they should cast away the coverings, and
Ornaments of their Idols, as a menstrous cloth, and say, get thee hence; they
should look upon them as loathsome things, and cast them away: Men castaway
things that are either, 1. Unprofitable and useless. 2. Hurtful and
dangerous. 3. Loathsome and grievous.


Sin is all these.

1. It Is unprofitable and useless: See Jer. 12.13.16.19. Prove. 5.10: 10.2.
Wickedness has its treasures, but they are unprofitable. Ephesians. 5.11. Works of
darkness are unfruitful; the forbidden Tree yields no good fruit. Romans 6.21.
What fruit had ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed. It is not of God,
it has no good in it. Romans 7.18.

2. Hurtful, and dangerous,; Idolatry hurts, Jer. 7.6. Murder hurts, Genesis
4.23. Wantonness and uncleanness wounds, Prove. 7.26: 5.7. Coveteousnesse
hurts, Eccles. 5.13. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. It pierces men through, it drowns them in
destruction, and perdition; lying, fearfullnesse, unbelief hurt. Rev. 21.8.
Nothing harms like unto sin, no poison, no Weapon can pain, torment the body,
as sin does the, Conscience. A wounded Spirit who can bear, Pro. 18.14. It Is
more bitter then death. Eccles. 7.26.

3. It Is loathsome and grievous, it is likned to mire, and dirt. Isa. 57.20. to
Vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. is filth, and filthiness. Isa. 4.4. 2 Cor. 7.1. it is
corruption, pollution, 2 Pet. 1.4. Chapter 2.20. It Is abomination. Pro. 15.26. it is
rebellion, and grievous revolting, Prove. 17.11. Jer. 6.28. it is a detestable
thing. Ezekiel. 11.21. Men's righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. What
then are their sins, they are the quintessence of filthiness, exceeding
filthinesses.

Make you a new heart and a new Spirit.
These words are made use of by the Remonstrants to prove that the Lord in
conversion of a sinner, does not use such efficacy of grace, Qua posita homo
non potest non converti: as also to show, Ames. in Anti. Synodal: de great: c.
2. Lib, 6. c. 10. de gratia and libero Arb.
that men not converted have Internam gratiam absolute sufficientem ad
conversionem; vel parem illi qua alij convertuntur. Bellarmin brings these
words to prove the freedom of will in man.

These words do not favor or countenance such Opinions so far as is thought,
if rightly understood. It Is a rule in Theology, that active Verbs are given to
those things which do not properly and by immediate influx, do that which the
Verbs do signify: Glassius in Philologia. 3. p. 290.
Sed certa tantum ratione concurrunt: And this is frequent in the business of
man's Salvation, where that is attributed to man, which is peculiar to God, and
he instanceth in this place, Make you a new heart, and a new Spirit. This,
says he, is the work of God alone, who by his saving word creates a new heart
and a new Spirit in men, and in other Scriptures you shall find it given to the
Lord. Psalm. 51.10. Jer. 31.33. Chap. 32.39. Ezekiel. 36.26. Chap. 11.19. Where was
spoken of a new Spirit, and somewhat about man's liberty and power. God said to
Moses, Exodus 14.16. Lift up thy rod, stretch out thy hand over the Sea, and
divide it. Had Moses power to divide the Sea? No, but because there was a
certain concurrence of Moses using the Rod according to direction, therefore
it is attributed to Moses, which was the work of God alone. Verse. 21. it is given
to God, for when Moses stretched out his hand, it is said, The Lord caused the
Sea to go back. So making a new heart and a new Spirit is given to man because
of that concurrence of man in using the means appointed of the Lord, but when
the new heart and spirit are wrought, they are the work of the Lord, as
appears, Phil. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.10. Thus we are to understand all those places
which put so much upon a man, as to believe, 1 John 3.2. to repent, Acts 2.38.
to put off the old man, to be renewed in the Spirit of your minds, to put on
the new men. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. to cleanse our selves from all pollution of
flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. to lay hold upon eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.12. to
be filled wi h the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.18. In these and the like places is n thing
given to the power of man, if rightly understood, but man is commanded to apply
himself to those means by which God works faith, repentance, holiness,
Salvation, and conveys the Spirit.

These words then do not hinder, but that the Lord may, and does work
efficaciously in the conversion of a Sinner. God bids men use means, wait upon
him, and he will work powerfully in them by his grace, and spirit, and that the
Lord does work powerfully, see Ephesians. 1.19. Col. 2.12, 13. Deuteronomy. 30.6. John
6.37.

For man's having internal sufficient grace to conversion, it is strange
divinity, it argues a man is converted, and yet unconverted; if a man have
grace he is converted, but you must know that Arminians make reason,
understanding, to be grace, and the first grace, but, John 3.6. That is borne
of the flesh is flesh. And take the excellency of the flesh, even the wisdom
of it. Romans 8.7. It Is emnity to God, it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither can be. If men have power and grace sufficient to convert themselves,
to make them new hearts, and new Spirits, why should it be as impossible for
men accustomed to do evil, to do good, as for an Egyptian to change his
skin, or a Leopard his spots, Jer. 13.23. why is it not easy? What is hard to
him has power and will? Why cannot he subject to the Law of God? why cannot he
add a Cubite to his stature, Luke 12.25. surely reason is not grace. The
Athenians who had reason mocked at Christ, and the Resurrection. Acts 17.18.32.
which if gracious they would not have done. All men have reason but all have
not grace. Many wise men after the flesh are called or chosen, 1 Cor. 1.26. Had
men power in themselves they would boast, Quisquid n^bis precipitur adeo ad
illud faciendum sufficientem potentiam habemus.
that men may not boast; it is of God. Verse. 29, 30. It is of grace, not of our
selves, our strength, reason, abilities, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.

The ground that Papists, Arminians, and others, go upon, is, that Commands
suppose power in men to do what is Commanded.

This ground is too weak to build their structure upon. For what man ever
since Adams fall had power to keep the Law exactly, yet the Law consists of
Commands, had men been able to have done it, the Law would have saved them.
Romans 8.3. What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending, etc. Gal. 3.21. If there had been a Law given which could have
given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law. Why could not
the Law give life because man had not power, strength to keep it; God may
Command that which men have not power to do.

1. To break the strength of man's confidence; Men through apprehension of
their abilities stand much upon doing, and think they can perform much: What
shall I do to be saved? God may Command that now which is beyond man's
strength, that so he may know his own weakness.

2. To cause us to sue to him for help to do what is commanded. When
Nebuchadnezzar Commanded the wise men to tell him his Dream, which was
impossible, Daniel sought to God for the discovery of the thing, and obtained
it. Dan. 2.17, 18, 19. God Commands what we cannot do, that we may know what
to ask; if any thing be hard, impossible, let us not stick in our selves, but
run to God, says Leo, Qui ideo dat praeceptum ut excitet desiderium and
praestet auxilium. Aug. Ep. 24. Da quod ibes and jube quod velis.

3. The Lord may do it because he can give what he Commands, Ezekiel. 11.4. God
bids Ezekiel Prophecy, he could not do it unless God gave him the Spirit of
Prophecy, therefore in the next Verse it is said, The Spirit of the Lord fell
upon him. Christ says to Lazarus; Come forth, John 11.43. he had no power to
do it, but he Commanded, accompanied his word with power: And John 5.25. The
hour is coming, and now is, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live.

The meaning then of these words, Make you a new heart, and a new Spirit, is,
be not negligent and wanting to your selves, but use the means appointed of
God, give diligence to obtain a change of your hearts and Spirits, to get
Repentance, and bring forth fruit worthy thereof. Castal. has it, Comparate
vobis, Get ye a new heart and a new Spirit.

For why will ye die.
Heb. is, And why will ye die. In the former, these and the subsequent words,
God speaks after the manner of men, as a Father does to his untoward Children,
or as a Minister to a perishing people.

Verse. 32. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies.
The Hebrew here is (...) which Montanus renders Mortui; so diverse Expositors
have it, Non delector morte morientis. Of these words was spoken, Verse. 23. I
shall give you some few Observations, and so end this Chapter.

Obser. 1.
That repentance is profitable to man, and pleasing to God, repent and turn,
so iniquity shall not be your ruin, why will you die? I have no pleasure in
your death, but I have pleasure in your repentance and life. When man has
undone himself, repentance is his setting up again; it is safe landing after
Shipwreck: the Prodigal repenting and turning, did advantage himself, and
please his Father, Luke 15.18, 19, 20, 21. Except ye repent ye shall all
perish. says Christ, Luke 13.3.5. Repentance preserves from destruction, and
has that good in it. See Acts 2.38. Chapter 3.19. Rev. 2.5.16. 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
Acts 11.18. And that it greatly pleases God. The Parable of the lost sheep
shows, Luke 15.7. There is more joy in Heaven for the repentance of one
sinner, then for the righteousness of 99. just persons. Sacrifices under the
Law were pleasing to God; a repentant broken heart is instead of all
Sacrifices, Psalm. 51.17. God will not, he cannot despise it, he will look to
it, Isa. 66.2. he will dwell in it, Isa. 57.15.

2. Sin is of a ruining nature, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Sin in it
self is destructive, what is said of time, it is Edax rerum, a consumer of all
things, is verified of sin, nay, more then time could do, sin has done: time
could never have ruined Angels, sin did it, sin threw them out of Heaven, Adam
out of Paradise, sin ruined the Old World, Genesis 6.5.7. it ruined Sodom, and
Gomorrah, Genesis 19.13. The cry of their sins was great, and therefore the
Angels destroyed it. Wars are ruining and desolating things, so is the plague,
and famine; but sin brings them all, Ezekiel. 14.13.17.19. and is more ruinating
then they all. Sin ruins the name, Prove. 6.33. it ruins the Conscience and
comforts of it, Psalm. 32.3.51.8. It ruins the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 Timothy 5.6.
These things, the name, Conscience, comforts, soul, sword, famine, plague,
cannot reach; they may, and do often ruin our outward comforts, our flesh, our
lives, but further they go not, sin ruins both these and the other. Sin is
wonderful Malignant, and proves destructive to them that deal with it.
Gideons Ephod was a snare to him and to his House, Lemokesh, it ruined him, and
his, Judge. 8.27. it was their sin which laid wast the Commonwealth of Israel,
which brought the slaughtering Angels, Ezekiel. 9. and kindled the fire in the
Temple, and City, and laid all wast.

3. That man who in truth comes unto God, must come off from all sin, he must
not stick in any. Repent and turn from all your transgressions. Cast away all
your transgressions, you must not like any, but loath all, not keep any, but
cast out all; if you cast out a thousand, and retain but one, it is no sound
coming to God, no true repentance, or turning. Herod turned from many evils,
but would not turn from his Herodias, Mark 6.18, 19, 20. and all his turning
was nothing. Judas his life was fair as the other Apostles, no visible sin
appeared, only he had a covetous heart within, and because that golden Devil
was not cast out, he was cast into Hell; his Apostleship, Preaching, working of
Miracles, hearing of Christ conversing with him did him no good. Let men go as
far as they will in repentance, turning from, and casting off of sin, if it be
not from all, it is from none; for if any one sin be kept and lived in, the
Union between sin and the soul is not dissolved, and so there is no true
hatred, no real ejection of sin. If a man did hate sin, and cast it out
because it is sin, he would do so by all sin, because there is the same reason
for all as for one, and for one, as for all. Let us look narrowly to it, that
we do not harbor, nor spare any sin in our bosoms. Saul spared Agag, and the
Witch of Endor, whom he should have destroyed, and they were his ruin.

4. That for the encouragement of men to use the means, and wait upon God in
them, he honors them with the doing of that which is his prerogative and
peculiar work. Make you a new heart, and a new Spirit, turn your selves. These
be acts which none but the Lord can do. A new heart, a new Spirit is, Opus
divinae gratiae. because there is Aliquis ab homine Conatus, therefore he is
said to do that, Quod precipue divinae gratiae virtus operatur: Sanct. in
Locum. This is very fair for a Jesuit, but the Apostle goes further, Phil.
2.13. The will and the deed are of the Lord. Let us be encouraged therefore to
be dilligent in the use of all means, and that constantly; there may be a new
heart, and a new Spirit given in from God, his mighty power put forth to work
these, and yet be attributed to us, that we have made our selves new hearts,
and new spirits.

5. The Lord would not have men run on in sinful courses, and dye, but turn
and live; he has not pleasure in their perishing, but in their living, why
will you die, etc. In this Question secretly is locked up an Answer to all they
could Object: as

1. We bear the iniquity of our Fathers who sinned greatly, and therefore we
must die. No, you shall not die upon that account. Verse. 20. The Son shall
not bear the iniquity of the Father.

2. Our sins are great and grievous, what then? Why will you die? Come, let us
reason together, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as
Snow, though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.

3. We have nothing to bring if we come to thee, what then? Why will you die?
If you have no money, yet I have mercy, and mercy enough, a Sea of mercy, a
Heaven of mercy, a World of mercy, Come buy without money, Isa. 55.1. I am a
God of mercy, delight to show mercy.

4. But thou bidst us repent, turn, cast away all our sins. make us new
hearts, etc. we cannot do these things. What then? If you will but look unto
me I can give you what is Commanded, it is my way of dealing with sinners, I can
give you repentance, power to cast out all your sins, I can give you a new
heart, a new Spirit, why will, etc. Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be saved all
the ends of, etc.

5. Thou have forsaken us, and left us to our own lusts, but now I sue unto
you, call upon you, tender life unto you, hold out my hand, and desirous to
take you in, why will ye dye O House of Israel.

6. Thou have threatened our destruction by the Prophets, and thy threats must
take place, thou will make good thy word, take pleasure in fulfilling it, and
destroying us. What if my threats be out, so they were against Niniveh, they
repented of their sins, I repented of my threats, I do not take pleasure in
executing of judgments, nor in your death, and why will you die.

7. We are Jews, have apostatized from our profession, from what the Prophets
taught us, we have lived long in such a way, it is too late now to think of
turning. No not so, turn and live yet there is mercy.

Ezekiel, CHAP. 19.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the Princes of Israel

And say, what is thy mother? A lioness, she lay down among lions, she
nourished her whelps among young lions.

And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and it learned
to catch the prey, it devoured men.

The nations also heard of him, he was taken in their pit, and they brought
him with chains unto the land of Egypt.

Now when she saw she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she took
another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.

And he went up and down among the lions, and became a young lion, and learned
to catch the prey, and devoured men.

And he knew their desolate Palaces, and he laid wast their Cities, and the
land was desolate, and the fullness thereof by the noise of his roaring.

Then the Nations set against him on every side, from the Provinces, and spread
their net over him: he was taken in their pit.

And they put him in ward in chains and brought him to the King of Babylon,
they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the
mountains of Israel.


THIS Chapter is a Chapter of Lamentation.

1. For the Princes of Israel. 2. For Jerusalem or the Kingdom of Judah.
The lamentation for the Princes of Israel is set out under the parable or
similitude of a lions whelps, from the 1. verse. to the 10. The lamentation for
Jerusalem is from the 10. verse. unto the end of the Chap. held out under the
resemblance of a Vine.

As for the 1. part, the lamentation for the Princes of Israel, we may consider
therein, 1. The lamentation commanded in the 1. verse. 2. The mother of the
whelps, or the Lioness, and what she did, verse. 2.3. 3. The advance of the
Whelps, their carriage, ruin, and punishment, in the 3. 4. and rest of the
verses.


1. Take thou up a lamentation.
The Lord here speaks to the Prophet to put himself into a mourning posture,
and to bewail the conditions of the Kings of Israel: The word for lamentation
is (...) the same that Jeremie uses in the Title of his book called the
Lamentions, of which was spoken Chap. 2.10.

The Princes of Israel.
These were Jehoahaz, Jehoiachim, Jehoiakin, and Zedekiah, who were Kings of
Judah, as appears, 2 K. 23.31.34. Chap. 24.8.18. They are called the Princes of
Israel, because that is a comprehensive term, and included Judah in it, which
these were Kings of, and not of Samaria, for the ten Tribes and their Kings
were captivated before.

V. 2. What is thy mother?
Because it is not said what is your mother; some think, he means the Prophets
mother; but it is said, thy mother in reference to each Prince. Jehoahaz, what
is thy mother? Jehoiakim, what is thy mother? and so of Jehoiachin and
Zedekiah, by mother here is meant Jerusalem and the Kingdom of Judah. Great
Cities and Kingdoms are in a metaphorical sense called Mothers, they bring forth
Kings, they elect, crown, and set them up to rule.

A Lioness.
Jerusalem is likened unto a Lioness in several re-respects.

1. A Lion or Lioness is a noble and Kingly creature, and so was Jerusalem a
noble and Royal City. The Ensign of the Tribe of Judah was a Lion. Old Jacob,
Genesis 49.9. said, Judah is a Lions whelp, that Tribe was the royal Tribe, and
the chief City in it was Jerusalem.

2. A Lioness is strong, Judge. 14.18. what is stronger then a lion, Prove.
30.30. Jerusalem was a strong City, Psalm. 31.21.125.2.

3. A Lioness is venterous and bold, Prove. 28.1. 2 Samuel 17.10. So Jerusalem was
a bold daring City, the people of it were impudent and provoking. Isa. 3.8:
65.31. Ezekiel. 3.7. provoked him to his face.

4. The Lioness is cruel and bloody, Psa. 7.2. Isa. 38.13. So Jerusalem was
an oppressing City, Zeph. 3.1.3. A bloody City, Ezekiel. 24.6.

5. Libidinous, mingles with the Leopard and Hyaena, so Jerusalem mingled her
self with other Nations, Ezekiel. 16.26.28. She was not humane, but Lionish in
her manners; no piety, justice, humanity were in her; she was brutish.

She lay among lions.
By Lions here are meant the Nations, or Kings of the Nations round about, who
were profane, barbarous, and cruel; and Jerusalem was like unto them, and
therefore it is said to lie down among Lions, as one Lion does among others
without fear: The Gentiles made no conscience of sin, but did what ever they
liked or lusted after: and Jerusalem had cast off the worship and ways of God,
following their own wills and lusts.

She nourished her whelps.
Heb. is, she multiplied whelps, in a little time she had many Princes which
were to succeed in the Kingdom. These whelps were Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim,
Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah, whom he calls whelps.

1. Because they were young when they began to reign, 2 King. 23.31.36: Chap.
24.8.18. One was but 18. another 21. A third 23. And the Eldest was but 25.
when he came to the Throne.

2. Because they were little in comparison of former Kings: David and Solomon
were great Lions in respect of them, the Kingdom then flourished, but now it
was declining; they reigned long, these but a little while.

3. Whelps because of their disposition and propensity to do like Lions and
Lyonesses: There is the same nature in the whelps as is in the damns: If the
Lion be fierce, cruel, Kephir is a lion a^ctus aetate, grown up to strength,
(...) hungry, desirous of prey feiner then any other, Ps. 34.10.

Gur is catulus, a whelp, hanging upon the dam and cannot run out.

Arieh or ari, a lion come to his full strength, cujus oculi semper intentae ad
pridam.

Levia a liones and lavi, an old lion, hearty and strong, though not so swift,
yet more subtle.

Laish, an old lion that cannot hunt or get prey.


the whelps will be so.

Among young Lions.
Heb. in the midst of young Lions: (...) is a young lion that begins to prey:
leunculi sunt principes, says Vatabl: whether we take them for the Princes of
the Nations, or the Princes and Nobles of Jerusalem (for there were Princes who
were not of the Royal Family, 2 K. 24.12. 2 Chronicles. 24.17.) they were brought
up after their manners and fashions.

Verse. 3. And she brought up one of her whelps.
The Heb. is, she made one of her whelps to come up, that is, to come up into
the Throne, and to be King. This was Jehoahaz, whom after the death of Josiah,
the people took and made King in his Fathers stead in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.1.
2 K. 23.30. Jerusalem and the people of the land joined together to make him
King. Jehoahaz was the whelp of this Lioness.

It became a young Lion.
Being made King, he reigned like a Lion, yea a young Lion: He was
tyrannical, and Tyrants are compared to Lions, and you may see a true picture
of them in the Lion.

1. Their faces are stern, and voices terrible: fremitu and rugitu conturbant
omnia, Amos 3.8. The lion has roared, who will not fear? It Is said of the
Gaditane Soldies they had faces like the faces of Lions, 1 Chronicles. 12.8.
terrible. Such are Tyrants, their countenances and voices trouble and disturb
much. When they send out their Edicts, Proclamations, Commands, which are their
voices, and have the Effigies of their grim Countenances within them, how do
they shake Cities, Kingdoms, Nations: when Ahashuerosh decree was given forth
for the destruction of the Jews, it is said, the City Sh^shan was perplexed,
Esth. 3.15. so all the Provinces where the sound of it was. Tyrants roar like
Lions, they strike terror into all. Prove. 19.12. The Kings wrath, etc. 20.2.
The fear of a King is as the roaring of a lion.

2. As they are roaring, so ravening, they are greedy of their prey, Psalm.
17.12. Like a lion that is greedy of his prey. See Psalm. 22.13. Lam. 3.10.
Psalm. 104.21. They roar after their prey, and are hardly satisfied. Job 38.39.
Will thou fill the appetite of the young lion? Principes atque urbes qui leones
alunt coguntur magnos sumpius in eos facere. Lavat. in Job 1.
So wicked Rulers and tyrannical Princes are ravenous and greedy of the prey.
What a strong appetite had Ahab to Naboth's Vineyard; he was sick, and refuses
to eat, if he have not that morsel to feed upon, 1 K. 21.2.4. When the Jews
would have a King, the Lord told them what a ravenous creature he would be, 1 Samuel 8.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. It Is said of Saul their first King, that he
did flee upon the spoil, Chap. 15.19. What a vast appetite had the King of
Babylon, who enlarged his desire as hell and death, and could not be satisfied,
but gathered unto him all nations, and heaped unto him all people, Hab. 2.5.
That Princes are greedy of their prey, see Zeph. 3.3. Ezekiel. 22.27. Mica. 3.11.
Caligula his impositions, tributes, and new devised exactions were innumerable,
Herb. 129.

3. They are vigilant and subtle, lying in wait to get their prey. They sleep
little, and when they sleep it is apertis oculis, with open eyes, they mind
their prey much, and are cunning to catch it. Psalm. 17.12. The young lion lurks
in secret places. He hides himself, and when the prey comes near he suddenly
surprises the same. Our Prophet says here of the young whelp, it learned to
catch the prey, it learned the cunning of the old Lions.

Basil says, they use to lie down flat upon their bellies, Somnum simulare and
nihil se movere quemadmodum feles faciunt insidiantes aviculis. Vt abjecto
prorsus animo consistent and praeda ei fiant.
to counterfeit sleep, not to stir, and to do as Cats when they catch birds.
Another cunning device the Lions have is, when the prey is too swift for them,
and so likely to save it self by flight, they roar grievously, which so
affrightens the creatures flying from them, that their spirits faint, are
forced to stand still and become a prey: he also hides his claws, and covers
his steps with dust by his tail, that he may not be discovered.

So tyrannical Princes are watchful and cunning to catch their prey. Saul had
many stratagems and devices to catch David. What a cunning plot had Jezabel to
catch Naboth; the policies of Tyrants are infinite to catch the people and
make a prey of them.

4. They are proud and stately, they go alone, nunquam leo pascitur cum
leoena, they eat not with the Lionesles, much less with other creatures; they
will not stoop to, or turn away for any, Prove. 30.3. They do what they list:
such are Tyrants, you may see the pride and arrogance of Nebuchadnezar, Dan.
4.30. The Prince of Tire said he was a God, and sat in the seat of God, Ezekiel.
28.2. Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, Exodus 5.2. said Pharaoh.

Alexander would be accounted and worshipped as the son of Jupiter Hammon:
Caliglula, Domitian, Heliogabalus, Omnia ar^itratu suo feruntur.
would be worshipped as gods.

5. They are cruel, bloody, devouring creatures, Nah. 2.12. The Lion did tear
in pieces, and strangled for his Lionesses, they have terrible claws, sharp
teeth, and are mighty to crush, and break all the bones. The Devil is called a
devouring lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. because he destroys as Lions do. 2 K. 17.6. The
lions slew them. Such are tyrannical Princes. Prove. 28.15. As a roaring Lion
and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked ruler among the poor people. Like as Lions
and Bears in a Forest do catch, crush, and devour the Sheep, Lambs, Kids,
Conies, and what ever they find preyable, so wicked Rulers deal with the
people. Mic. 3.1, 2, 3. The Princes of Israel pluck off the skin and flesh of
Gods people from their bones, brake and chopped them in pieces as for the pot;
when they kill men they think it lawful, Quum occidunt servos saos, imputant
esse, non crimen Salvian de Gubern. dei, l. 4.
not sinful. Our Prophet tells you that this Lion Jehoahaz devoured men, he
learned to catch the prey and devoured men.

Histories tell us of Cannibal men eaters; such are tyrannical Governors, they
feed upon men. Athaliah devoured all the royal seed at a meal, 2 Chronicles. 22.
Jezabel eat up Naboth at a fast, 1 King. 21. What a multitude of children did
Herod devour at once in Bethleem, Matthew. 2.16. What tearing, flesh-eating,
bone-breaking was there, when that roaring cruel Lion Manasses filled Jerusalem
with innocent blood, 2 King. 21.16. What Lions were in the time of the ten
Persecutions: Christiani ad leones.

6. It Is dangerous to meddle with Lions, Numb. 24.9. He lay down as a Lion,
as a great Lion, who shall stir him up.

Lions if offended and provoked, are revengefull. Aelian tells of a Bear that
came into a Lions den, and bit the whelps she found there; the Lion
returning, the Bear to shift for her self, got up into an high tree, the
Lioness watched at the foot of the tree: the Lion ranged abroad in the woods,
and meets with a man that had an Axe, and used to fell trees; this man the Lion
brings to the denn, showed him the wounded whelps, directs him to the tree
where the Bear was, which he cut down. The Bear being torn in pieces, the
man was safely dismissed. In the hunting or taking of Lions, the Lion observes
who wounds him, and on him if possible he will be revenged. Leonina societas
est periculosa.
Such are tyrannical men, it is ill meddling with them; if they be roused, or
any of theirs wronged a little, they will remember and revenge.

Verse. 4. The Nations also heard of him.
After the death of Josiah by Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt, Jehoahaz was by
the Jews set up King; but the Egyptians thought themselves wronged, that they
had no hand in disposing that Kingdom, and placing a King over it, which it is
probable the Jews apprehended, in that they passed by Eliakim who was Elder,
and set up Jehoahaz who was younger, as is evident, if you compare the 31.
verse. of the 23. Chap. Kings 2. with verse. 36. They judged this doubtless of a
more warlike and Lion-like spirit, and so fitter to encounter the Egyptians, if
they should assault them, which is conceived they did, for he reigned but 3.
months, and then was taken.

He was taken in their pit.
The word for pit is shachath, which signifies a net or a pit, and is from
shacheth, to corrupt or kill, because pits and nets are to take creatures, and
so tend to their killing and corruption. One way of taking Lions was to observe
their haunts, and in that way they used to dig a round pit, leaving a pillar of
earth in the midst of it, upon which they tied a Lamb, covering the pit with
boughs, the hungry lamb bleating in the evening, invites the Lion to supper,
who hastening thereunto, falls into the pit, and so is taken. Ezekiel. alluding
hereunto, says, Jehoahaz was taken in their pit. Some think he was taken by a
wyle, that Pharaoh sent for him, under pretense of friendship and kindness;
and then when he had him in his power, kept him. Others, that there was a
bloody battle between Jehoahaz and Pharaoh, in which, though he was taken, yet
not without great loss to the Egyptians: Therefore the Vulgar render these
words, non absque vulneribus sui ceperunt eum; they took him, but not without
wounds.

They brought him with chains, etc.
The Heb, is Bachachim, with hooks: chains are hooky things linckt together;
the word chains here, in 2 King. 23.33. is bands, Pharaoh Necho put him in
bands, he was carried bound to Egypt.

Obser. 1.
It Is matter to be lamented, when Princes are wicked, tyrannical, and ruin
themselves and the people they are set over. Take up a lamentation for the
Prince of Israel: so Ezekiel. 32.2. Take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of
Egypt, and say unto him, thou art like a young lion of the Nations, and thou
art as a whale in the Seas, etc. When Princes, Rulers, are roaring and ravening
Lions; when they are cunning and cruel, and take such courses as tend to the
ruin of themselves and others, it is a great and just ground for lamentation.
Solomon says, there is a time to mourn, Eccles. 3.4. And if any be a fit time
to mourn, it is when it goes ill with the Church of God; with the State, when
Rulers are Lions, and do like Lions. We mourn when some Personal or Family
evil is upon us, but public evils are neglected. Evil Rulers, evil
Princes, evil Magistrates, are public evils, like so many Lions and wild
beasts: where such are, there is an house of mourning, and let the living lay
it to heart. I fear we have Lions among us, for whom we may justly take up a
lamentation.

2. That those Princes do oppress their people, and ruin their Kingdoms, are
ungrateful and unnatural, for their People and Kingdoms are their Mothers:
what is thy mother? Jerusalem, Judaea is thy mother; it is the people chooses
them, and so brings them forth, sets them up. 2 King. 23.30. The people of the
land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him King
in his Fathers stead: How wickedly did he therefore to become a Lion to this
people who advanced him; if he were unnatural, who ripped up the bowels of his
own Mother, so likewise is he that rips and rends the bowels of that Kingdom
begat him. Princes should entreat them well who have given them their Princely
being; They have their milk and maintenance from them, and it is height of
ingratitude to wrong or ruin them.

3. Such as the people be, usually such are the Rulers, the Princes: If the
Mother be a Lioness, the Whelps will be Lions; if the Lioness be audacious,
bloody, libidinous, idolatrous, the Lions will be such. Jerusalem was very
wicked, and her Princes likewise, the Princes were like the people. Hos. 8.4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me. The people set up Jehoahaz, and he was a
Lion, he did wickedly, 2 King. 23.32.

4. Great is the efficacy of evil example, it prevails more then good
example. Jehoahaz had a godly parent, Josiah by name, of whom it is said, that
there was no King like him before or after him, that turned to the Lord with
all his soul, heart and might according to all the law of Moses, 2 King.
23.25. Not the good education nor good example he had from and by his Father,
did sufficiently antidote him against the poison and power of evil example; he
was brought up among lions, and learnt of them to catch the prey. They were
wicked, covetous, proud, fierce, subtle, cruel, revengefull, and their manners
he took up, conformed unto. Wickedness is easily learned, men are so apt to it
that they need no rods, ferulaes to put them on. Parents cannot propagate
piety; if that could have been, Josiah would have had sons as eminent for
holiness, as they were for impiety; gracious parents have graceless children,
let none be troubled thereat as a thing strange, it was so with Josiah. If you
be godly, and would have your children so, take heed of being ill examples your
selves, or letting them be amongst those who give ill examplee; for tinder is
not apter to take fire, wax, the impression of the seal, paper the ink, then
youth is to receive the impressions of wickedness.

5. After good Princes and great Reformers, Divine Providence orders it so,
that wretched wicked Kings, enemies to all good are set up. Josiah was a most
godly King, and more thoroughly reforming, then ^ver Judah had any before; yet
after him comes a Lion, a wicked Jehoahaz. When people are unthankful for good
Princes and Rulers, when they murmur against Reformation, have a secret enmity,
open bitterness against godliness, and those are godly; it is just with God to
set Lions over them, to be terrible unto them, to eat up their estates and
them.

6. When wicked men come to places of eminency, they vent their corruptions lay
hid before, they make progress in wickedness, nothing restrains them. When
this whelp, Jehoahaz come to the Throne, he beam a young Lion, a Lion rampant,
he could catch the prey, and devour men. We often think that the whelps of great
Ones are well natured, well educated, very hopeful, will prove admirable
instruments of Gods glory and public good; but we deceive our selves: when
they come to public and high places, their lyonish natures do appear, and
they grow worse and worse; they perfect wickedness, nothing prevails to keep
them in, but they must play the Lions, flay the skins, suck the blood, eat the
flesh, and crack the bones. There was as great hope of Josiah's sons, as ever
of any, yet you see how they proved. Nero at first for five years carried
himself well, like a lamb; but he was a Lion, and his lyonish disposition
showed it self to the full. You are godly, and have hopeful issue, promise not
too much unto your selves of them: great expectations disappointed, cause great
vexations.

7. That Princes pervert the end for which they were ordained of God, and set
up by men: God appointed not Magistrates, be they Princes or others, to lurk
for the prey, to devour men, but to preserve men: They should be Shepherds,
not Lions, nursing Fathers; not Canniballs, they should govern them according
to divine rule, They should be in utilitatem, not diminutionem subditorum.
Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. not after Prerogative, a devouring beast which eats up
men's estates, honors, lives, they should do Justice, not obstruct or pervert
it: But where be those Princes that answer the end of their institution, that
lurk not for prey, that devour not men? In Micah's days the heads of the
house of Jacob, and the Princes of the house of Israel abhord judgment, and
perverted all equity; they built up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity, and for their sins and sakes was Sion plouwed as a field, and
Jerusalem made heaps. Take heed you are Governors of Families, that you
pervert not that institution; Ne sis leo in domo tua, be not bitter to your
Wives, beat not Servants for your fantasies, oppress not any are under you,
Ecclesiasticus 4.30.

8. The evil doings of Princes fly abroad; if they play the Lions, roar,
raven, tear, oppress, the Nation will hear of it. When Jehoahaz became a Lion,
caught the prey, devoured men, the Nations also heard of him: not only his
own Nation knew it, but the Nations round about. Princes, great persons stand
high, their voices are heard, and actions seen far: Let them whisper in
secret, plot mischief in their closets, out they come: Cabbinet-letters,
Counsels, Designs, Treasons, come abroad and spread far. Their projects how
cryphically soever carried, are observed, divulged, and fill the Nations with
the noise thereof. Princes generally are so wicked, that they do male audire in
omni gente. Chronicles and Nations are filled with the reports thereof; if they
will do infamous things, they cannot be concealed.

9. When Princes prove Lions, God stirs up some to hunt and take those Lions.
The Nations hearing that Jehoahaz caught the prey, and devoured men, they
bethought and bestir'd themselves, dug a pit, hunted this Lion into it, and
took him.

When Zimri had gotten the Crown, he did rend and tear like a Lion; but
presently God stirred the people to set up Omri to be King, who hunted that
Lion into a fiery pit, 1 K. 16. Saul played the Lion in his reign, and at last
he was hunted, slain, and taken by the Philistims, 1 Samuel 31. Jehoram became a
young Lion, preyed upon his brethren, devoured them, 2 Chronicles. 21.4. And the
Lord stirred up the spirit of the Philistims and Arabians against him, who came
and spoiled him and his, Verse. 16.17.

Manasses was a ramping and roaring Lion, he brake the bones of many, and sucked
much blood, and he was taken in the pit of the Assyrians, 2 Chr. 33.

When the Rulers and Potentates of the earth oppress and tyrannize over the
people, God in his wise providence sets some a work to catch and crush them,
Amos 3.10.11. One way or other their strength is brought down, and they suffer
for their oppressions, and are cut off by violent and untimely deaths. Tyberius
was poisoned or smothered by his own Nephew; Caligula slain by his own guard;
Vitrellius was overthrown in battle, taken prisoner, and drawn with an halter
about his neck along the streets half naked; and after many outrages done unto
him, he was killed and cast into Tyber. Fitz-Herbert.

Leander, Tyrant of Cyrena, was taken alive, and being sewed into a leathern
bagg, was cast into the Sea. Thirty Tyrants were slain in one day at Athens by
Theramenes, Thrasibulus, and Archippus, who did it with 70. men.

10. Princes who by covetousness and cruelty spoil others of their estates
and liberties, through the just judgment of God, come themselves to be deprived
of their estates and liberties. Jehoahaz he caught the prey, and himself was
caught and made a prey; he devoured men, and himself was devoured; he fettered,
chained others, and himself was put in chains; he lost his Kingdom and Liberty;
Pharaoh took him, bound him, carried him to Egypt: This was he whom Jeremie
calls Shallum, Chap. 22.11, 12. and says he should return no more, but dye in
his captivity. It was a great evil, a sad judgment to be taken and carried
out of his own Land, and to dye in a profane land amongst Egyptians,
therefore it is said, verse. 10. Weep soar for him that goes away, for he
shall return no more, nor see his native Country. Such judgments do Princes
bring upon themselves; to satisfy some base and bloody lusts, they hazrid all,
yea often do lose their Kingdoms, liberties and lives, whereas they might be
happy if they would keep within their bounds, yea live and die comfortably in
their own Lands: but when they dealt injuriously with others, hook, fetter, and
spoil them, God meets with them, Amos 1.2. Those oppressed the poor, and
crushed the needy, God would take them with hooks, and their posterity with
fish-hooks; he would pull them out of their estates, power, greatness, as
fishes out of the water.

Verse. 5. Now when she saw she had waited, and her hope was lost.
When Jerusalem the Lioness had expected the return of Jehoahaz from Egypt,
and saw it was in vain, that there there was no hope of it.

The Hebr. runs thus; and she saw, because she hoped, her hope had perished.
The Sept. for her hope was lost, (...) substantiam, subsistentiam, for
titudinem certitudinem and fundamentum stabile cui aliquid nititur significare
solet ap id sacros and prophanos authors. Prad. and he interprets Heb. 11.1.
firma persuasio little quae sperantur in futurum, etc. vid. p. 238. c. 2. l c.
(...), her substance perished, or was lost: she thought the Prince (and so
usually do States) was a strong and substantial foundation to build upon; but
the was deceived, and her hope failed her. The Fr. is, when she saw, que son
attente estoit assoiblie and perdue, when she saw her expectation was weakened
and lost.

Then she took another of her whelps.
What whelp this was is controverted amongst Expositors, and how to hit the
white is the work. Some make this whelp to be Zedekiah, but there is least
reason for that, because hereby both Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin are passed over,
who were both Kings before Zedekiah, this whelp therefore must be one of them.
The Protestant Expositors do make it to be Jehoiakim, called also Eliachim and
Joachim, and so do some others; but the difficulty is, if meant of them, how
that is true which is in the 9. verse. They brought him to the K. of Babylon,
they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the
mountains of Israel. Whereas Jehoiakim came back again if he were in Babylon,
and his voice was heard. If it be meant of Jehoiachin, there is also this great
difficulty, how he reigning but 3. months, could lay wast their Cities, and
make the Land desolate as it is, v. 7. being but 8. years of age, as it is 2 Chronicles. 36.9. or at most but 18. as it is 2 King. 24.8. To let pass Jehoiachin,
and to come to Jehoiakim, whom we may take to be the man represented by the
whelp here: the difficulty shall be answered when we come to the 9. verse.

She took another of her whelps, and made him a young Lion
That is, she set him up to be King: But this seems cross to what you have, 2 Chronicles. 36.4. 2 K. 23.34. where it is said, that Pharaoh King of Egypt made
Eliakim King over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. If
Pharaoh therefore made him King, how is it said here, that she, viz. Jerusalem,
made him a young Lion; that is, exalted him to Kingly dignity? The answer is,
that Pharaoh did it not, vi and armis, but by the joint consent of the people,
Jerusalem's concurrence was in this work. The Prophet says, she made him a
young Lion. You may find it frequent in the Historical books, that the people
did elect and set up their Kings. 2 Chronicles. 36.1. The people made Jehoahaz King.
1 K. 21.24. The people made Josiah King: They made Omri King, 1 K. 16.16. They
made Jeroboam King, 1 K. 12.20. They made David King, 1 Chronicles. 12.38. They made
Saul King, 1 Samuel 11.15. They made Jephthah head, Judge. 11.11. God himself when
he commended a King unto them, would have their consent and concurrence in it,
Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. There is an essential and fundamental right in the people,
to choose and set up then who are to rule over them; therefore they are called
(...), 1 Pet. 2.13. The ordinance of man, or a humane creation.

Verse. 6. He went up and down among the Lions.
Being advanced to Princely state, here his carriage is set out, he conversed
with Lions, that is, with wicked men who had Lyonish dispositions, who were
stern, covetous, crafty and cruel: the King of Egypt, the King of Babylon, the
Princes about him in the bordering Countries, they were Lions, and he went up
and down amongst them. Their Counsels he took, their manners, fashions, customs
he learned, their steps he trod in, etc.

Became a young Lion.
That is, had the nature, properties and qualities of a young Lion, of which
you heard before.

Learned to catch the prey.
Heb. is, to prey the prey; the word Tekeph is that which wild beasts hunting,
do get and feed upon, from (...) to catch and tear with the teeth, and is
applied here unto Kings who are metaphorical Lions; and what ever they can
get, catch, tear and rend from others, that is their prey, that they feed
upon. Sept. is, (...), to snatch away the prey. Fr. de gripper la proye. Ps.
76.4. There is mention of mountains of prey, which are the kingdoms of this
world. They are like mountains where wild beasts are which prey upon what is
thereon, or thereabouts; and so Kingdoms have wild beasts in them, which prey
upon those are in their Kingdoms.

Devour men.
Sept. (...), eat men. This young Lion fed upon men, the Heb. is man, in the
singular number; but has the force of a plural, and so is rendered.

This devouring of men was by taking away their estates, liberties, limbs,
lives. Jehoiakim was very covetous and very cruel. Jer. 20.17. speaking of him
he says, Thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for
to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it. His
eyes and heart were set upon nothing else but catching the prey, and devouring
of men. 2 King. 23.35. He exacted silver and gold of the people of the land.
Pharaoh that Egyptian Lion commanded him to tax the Land; he yields to
Pharaoh, taxes and exacts upon the people. It Is not improbable that he was
perfidious, bloody and cruel toward the Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites, who
infested him, 2 K. 24.2. and Interpreters say he slew the Prophets.

Verse. 7. And he knew their desolate palaces.
Hebr. is variedah almenothau, Forsterus in lexico annotat hanc vocem almenoth,
pro armenoth which is palatia, and the Chaldie has it, armenotaf.
which Montanus renders cognovit viduas ejus, he knew their widows. Vatab.
cognovit viduas illorum: so the French. The Hebr. ud Almenoth is so translated,
Psalm. 68.5. A father of the fatherless, and a judge of widows is God. So it
should be, the word is almanoth, widows; but in Isa. 13.22. It Is used for
desolate palaces: and wild beasts of the Islands shall be in their desolate
houses, bealmenothaf: If we take the word for widows, and so the old
Translation has it; the sense is, that Jehoiachim defiled the Widows, whose
chastity he ought to have preserved; he wronged them greatly by devouring
their Husbands, and defiling their bodies. Or thus; when their Husbands were
put to death, and estates unjustly taken away, the widows came petitioning for
relief; whereupon he knew them; but was so hard hearted, as that he was not
moved with their tears, cries, requests or complaints. If we take it for
desolate palaces, as it is here, the interpretation is, that have deprived the
palaces of their Husbands, their owners and Inhabitants, and made them widows,
he did confiscate them to his own treasury, he challenged them to be his:
having unjustly devoured the men, he thought he might justly devour their
palaces: he knew their palaces and took possession of them.

He laid wast their Cities.
He made their Cities to be wast, desolate, or dried up, as the word imports;
as the sun dries up ponds, brooks, or some diversion draws away the water, that
they are void, empty: so did this K. by his taxes and impositions draw away
their estates, and dry up trading: or he did those things which caused their
Cities to be laid wast: he provoked God and men against himself and them by
his tyranny and cruelty, he caused many to fall, many to fly, and forsake their
habitation, so that the Land was desolate, and the fullness thereof.

By the noise of his roaring.
Heb. by the voice of his roaring. Shaog is to roar as Lions do, yea it is
proper to Lions, but is metaphorically given to men, as here. The roaring of
Lions is very terrible. Prove. 19.12. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a
lion. When the Lion roares, it troubles all the beasts of the Forest and
mountains: and when Kings in their wrath roar and send out their commands,
edicts, etc. they trouble and make desolate Families, Cities, Lands.

Verse. 8. The nations set against him on every side.
His wickedness and tyranny was such, as that all the Nations were provoked
against him, and contributed their help to take this young Lion. The Original
is dederunt super eum gentes, the nations gave upon him: they gave their
judgments upon him, that he was not fit to range, ramp and roar any longer.
Vulgar reads it convenerunt, they came together, took counsel, resolved to
hunt and take this wild beast.

From the Provinces.
Mimmedinoth medinah is a Province, from (...) judicare, jus dicere quasi
jurisdictio, where power and authority were exercised and bounded. What
Provinces these were you may see 2 King. 24.2. The Chaldeans, Syrians,
Moabites, Ammonites. These all called upon, and called out one another to hunt
this Lion, and to take him.

And spread their net over him.
Heb. for nett is (...) which is either from jarash, to possess, because a net
holds in possession what it catches; or from (...) to make poor, because a
net deprives of liberty, and often of life. These hunters prepared a net strong
enough to hold this Lion, and they spread it out for him.

He was taken in their pit.
Of these words were spoken, verse. 4.

Verse. 9. And they put him in ward.
Heb. Bassugar, in claustrum, the put him into safe custody, into some prison,
they shut him up that he might not escape, and be as a lion among the people
any more: they put chains upon him, an iron collar, or about his neck a chain,
and brought him to the King of Babylon. They did not carry him into Babylon
some think; for 2 Chr. 36.6. Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon came up against him,
and bound him in chains or fetters to carry him to Babylon; but that he did carry
him thither, or send him back, having rebel'd against him, 2 King. 24.1. does
not appear, neither is probable. That which makes most for this opinion, is
what you have in Jer. 22.19. He shall be buried with the burial of an ass,
drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem: These words induce some to
believe, that either he went not to Babylon: or if he did, that he returned,
that Jeremies prophecy might be made good: and if that were so, how is it true
here, that his voice may be heard no more upon the mountains of Israel.

To clear this doubt and difficulty, it is most probable that Jehoiakim was
carried to Babylon; for that in 2 Chr. 36.6. of Nebuchad. coming up against
him, is to be understood of his Forces, rather then his person: And in the 2 K.
24.2. it is said, bands of the Chaldees, not Neubch. himself. Our Prophet also
says, they brought him to the K. of Babylon. And whereas some affirm he dyed by
the way, (being led in a disgraceful manner, like a wild beast, with an iron
collar about his neck, and a chain fastened thereunto) how suits it with what is
recorded; they brought him to the King of Babylon, they brought him into holds;
that was says Pisc. into the City of Babylon, which was full of strong holds:
and being there shut up till his death, his voice was no more heard on the
mountains of Israel.

For that in Jeremie, it is a mistake to conceive the Prophet meant that
Jehoiachim should dye in Jerusalem, be drawn up and down the streets thereof,
and be cast out at the gates thereof; the words are, he shall be cast forth
beyond the gates of Jerusalem, that is, beyond the bounds and limits belong to
Jerusalem. Non in sepulchro patrum sed in aliena regione. Prad. vid. p. 240.
col. 2. l. 14.
Dying, or being slain in Babylon, he was cast out and judged unworthy of
Buryal, his carcass lay like an Asses, to be meat for the beasts of the earth,
and fowls of heaven, to be subject to all wind and weather. Jer. 36.30. His
dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the
frost.

Though two whelps only be here spoken of, yet I make no doubt but that the
other two also, Jehoiachin and Zedekiah be intended, who were caught and
carried away; that their voices might no more be heard on the mountains of
Israel.

Obser. 1.
The hopes of the wicked are not long lived, they are soon dashed and
disappointed: when she saw she had waited, and her hope was lost. She promised
much to her self, expected much from Egypt, and from Jehoahaz; but all was in
vain, no relief came thence. Prove. 11.7. The hope of unjust men perishes, and
that easily and speedily, Job 8.14. It Is liken'd to a Spiders webb or house, a
little thing, a besome sweeps away the house and Inhabitant together, and that
in a moment; such is the hope of wicked men, it is suddenly and easily ruined.
Had not they great hopes that were before Dublin, did they not think to take it
and triumph in it: but I may say of them as Ambrose did of wicked men, they
came, they went, they stood still, they vanished: Venerunt, abierunt,
adstiterunt, evanuerunt, l. 3. Epist.
God has cut down their hopes, and many of them, the spider and her web are
gone together: they may say, the Lord has destroyed us on every side, and our
hope has he removed like a tree, Job 19.10. There is a difference b^tween the
hopes of the righteous and those of the wicked. Prove. 10.28. The hope of the
righteous shall be gladness, but the expectation of the wicked shall perish.

2. Corrupt States are so affected with, and addicted to their Princes, that
they will set them up, have them rule over them, though it be to their own
ruin, and ruin of the State also. Jerusalem the Lioness sets up another of
her whelps, and makes it a young lion. She put this whelp into the royal
seat, and stirred him up to do Lyon-like, such things as did undo himself and
Jerusalem also: She learned nothing by the loss of her former whelp, but
proceeds in her old way, and would have Lions Tyrants to be over her, she being
a Lioness very corrupt and wicked, couples with that Egyptian Lion Pharaoh,
and brings forth, advances a Lion like themselves.

The overmuch love of States, of Mothers to their children, is the undoing of
them; they set them up who tear out their own bowels. When an Astrologer told
Agrippina that Nero her son should be Emperor, but withal that he should
kill his own mother; what said she, even like a fond and foolish woman, modo
impetet occidat, so he may reign, I care not, though he be my ruin. The men of
Shechem made Abimilech King; but he proved not only a bramble, to scratch them,
but a fierce and fiery Lion to consume them.

Mothers had need consider the temper of their sons, and how they advance them:
and States whom they set over them, lost they become Lions unto them.

3. Such as men live amongst and converse with all, such they prove; he went up
and down among the lions, and became a lion: those Lions he conversed with,
talked of enriching themselves, by laying taxes, rates and burdens upon the
people, by taking them out of the way who should oppose, of making themselves
great, of having their wills, and ruling by prerogative, and these things and
such like were soon learnt by this whelp. When Nebuchadnezar was among beasts
he became brutish, and did as they did. Plutarch reports of a woman brought to
a Serpentine and poisonous nature, by feeding on Serpents ordinarily; and those
converse with a generation of vipers, In vita Alex. Mag.
will prove viperous; those converse with Lions will prove lionish. Ill company
is the Dalila that bewitches, defiles, undoes many in their estates, names,
bodies and souls; men that have infectious diseases you will not come near, you
love your bodies, your lives. Wicked company have infectious vices, come not
near them, neither your selves nor your children, love your souls and theirs
too. If you suffer your children to be among lions, among wicked ones, they will
learn their manners; and those will not leave ill company, it is a thousand to
one they will lose their souls. Be choice of your company, it is the making or
marring of young ones: many are choice in their diet, in their apparel, choice
in every thing they buy, yet have no care of company: will you not admit a
foul dish to come to your Table, and will you admit foul and vicious ones to
be your companions, we should touch no unclean thing; ill company is pitch,
it is poison: David knew it, therefore said, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, Psalm. 6. And I am a companion of all them that fear thee, Psalm.
119.63.

4. They converse with wicked ones do not only become wicked, but many times
they prove eminently wicked, they are skilful in wickedness, they exceed their
teachers. Jehoiachim by his converse with Lions, became not only a Lion to
catch the prey, but such an one as devoured men, defiled widows, made desolate
Palaces, laid wast Cities, and the land also. He tyrannized so, that he went
beyond other Tyrants; he was artifex sceleris, and profited above others in his
way, and came to a perfection of iniquity. It Is incident to man's nature to
outstrip one the other, if not in good, yet especially in evil: It Is said of
this Jehoiachim, 2 King. 23.37. He did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that his fathers had done. Take any, or all his
Predecessors, he did evil according to all they did.

5. Tyranny is hateful unto Heathens: Then the Nations set against him on
every side. Jehoiachim was such a roaring Lion, that the Heathens could not
endure him; he spoiled their Palaces, Cities, Land, so with his tyrannical
proceedings, that he became hateful to all round about him. Doubtless the
Princes of the Nations were tyrannous themselves: Yet this man being a Prince
of Israel, exceeded so in his tyrannical practices, that he incurred the
displeasure and hatred of them all. Tyranny is contrary to humanity. Tyrants
cease to be men, and become beasts, therefore here are called Lions, and are
ranked amongst wild, savage creatures, which none can endure. When there be
wild beasts in a land, all are against them, and often there is a mutual
agreement and concurrence of all sorts to destroy them, being destructive to
the public. So was i^ here; the Nations agreed to hunt and take this Lion,
which roared, preyd, spoiled, and did so much mischief.

6. God has times, means, ways to catch Lions, to deal with covetous,
cruel, and bloody men. Then the Nations set against him on every side. When
Jehoiakim made desolate the Palaces, wasted the Cities and Land, became a
terror to all; then the Lord stirred up the Nations, they were his not, his
pit, his instruments he used to take this Lion withal. When wicked men,
tyrannical spirits are at their height, have filled a land with confusion,
oppression, desolation and bloody doings, through their roarings and tearings,
then the Lord appears, roars like a Lion against them, and sets his Agents on
work to catch those roaring and ramping Lions; he wants not means to take them,
he is richly stored and provided that way; he has the Nations at command and
can call them forth, set them on to hunt Lions when he please. Jerem. 51.27,
28, 29. Blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her
(that is, Babylon and her Princes who were great Tyrants) Call together against
her the Kingdoms of Arrarat, Minni and Ashchenaz, appoint a Captain against
her, cause her horses to come up as the rough Caterpillars, prepare against her
the nations, with the King of the Medes, the Captains thereof, etc.

Nebuchadnezar was a crafty, cruel, and bloody Lion, and so were the whelps
that came of him and after him, but the Lord had a time and means to catch
those Lions and Whelps Jer. 50.9. I will raise and cause to come up against
Babylon an assembly of great nations from the North Country. Great lions must
have great nets, great pits, great doings to take them, God would bring an
Assembly of great nations.

7. Tyrannical Princes are not of long continuance; usually they are short
lived, either they lose their power, or their power and lives both. Jehoiakim
roared and played the Lion eleven years, and then he was taken in the pit of the
Nations, and lost his power. So Jehoahaz before him, he tyrannized 3. months,
and then was taken. In 2 King. 15. you may read of four Lions which roared, but
their roaring quickly hastened their ruin. Zechariah lioniz'd it 6. months,
Shallum one month, Fekahiah two years, and Pekah 20. years, and then they were
cut off. When Potentates oppress, tyrannize, their ruin is at hand. God has
said, bloody men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. and he
makes it good. He cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings
of the earth, Psalm. 76.12. Stories will tell you what quick dispatch has been
made of Tyrants.

8. Eminent wickedness brings eminent judgments; both Jehoahaz and Jehoiakim
exceeded in wickedness, and their judgments were answerable, they were
chained, carried into strange lands, put into strong holds. Abimelech murdered
70. of his brethren, that he might get to the Throne: but a woman cast a piece
of a millstone upon his head, brake his skull, and manifested the just hand of
God upon him, Judge. 9.5.53.56. Jezebel and Ahab were eminently wicked, and Gods
hand was upon them both, in an eminent manner, 1 K. 22. 2 K. 9.

Richard the 3d. obtained the Crown by the murder of his Nephews: and having
tyrannized two years, 2 months, and one day, he was slain in a Battle at
Bosworth Field, his naked body was laid upon an horse like a hogg or calf, his
head, arms hanging on the one side, and his legs on the other; and being all
besprinkled with mire and blood; he was brought into Leicester, Speed.
where for two days he lay naked and unburyed; after, his body was buried, but
without solemnity, and the stone chest wherein his body lay is since made a
drinking trough for horses at a common Inn.

9. God takes away wicked and tyrannical Princes, that it may be well with his
people, that Sion may have the benefit of it. Jehoiakim was taken, chained,
carried to Babylon, put in strong holds, and why? that his voice should no more
be heard upon the mountains of Israel. That the people of God might not be
terrified with his roarings, nor torn with his teeth, but might enjoy freedom
and safety. It Is a greas mercy when Lions are not in a land, nor other hurtful
wild beasts; where such are, there is no dwelling or sleeping in safety; but
God for the good of his, destroys or drives out the wild beasts. Ezekiel. 34.25. I
will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land, and they shall dwell
safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. Isa. 35.9. No lion shall be
there.

In the primitive days were many Lions, and they roared terribly upon the
mountains of Israel; they scattered, toar, and devoured the Flocks of the Lord
which were feeding upon those mountains, but the Lord hunted those Lions into
pits, and took them away for his Flocks sake.

Senacherib with a great Army comes up to the gates of Jerusalem, roars upon
the mountains about it, fills all with fear, but the Lord sends a destroying
Angel that slew his Army, and caused that Lion to fly, that his voice might
be heard no more upon the mountains.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters, she was
fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.

And she had strong rods for the Scepters of them that bear rule, and her
stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her height
with the multitude of her branches.

But she was plucked up in fury: she was cast down to the ground, and the
East wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and withered, the
fire consumed them.

And now she is planted in the wilderness in a dry and thirsty ground.

And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches which has devoured her fruit,
so that she has no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule: this is a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation.


IN these Verses is laid down the second general part of the Chap. viz. the
lamentation for Jerusalem, or the kingdom of Judah under the parebolicall
representation of a Vine. We may here consider, 1. The state of this vine as it
was in Jehoiaahins, and and especially in Zedekiah's days, v. 10, 11. 2. The
misery befell it, v. 12.14. 3. The transplantation of it, v. 13.


The words must be opened, and then the Observations shall be given in.

Thy mother.
That is, Jerusalem, or the Kingdom of Judah, which was the mother of Princes.
Thy Mother, O Iehoiachin: he had spoken before to Iehoahaz and Iehoiachim as
whelps of this Mother under the notion of a Lioness, now he comes to speak of
Iehoiachin and Zedekiah, as branches of this Mother, under the notion of a vine.

Is like a Vine.
Frequently does the spirit of God resemble Israel and Judah to a Vine, as Isa.
27.2:5.2:3.14. Psalm. 80.8.14.17. Jerusalem or the Kingdom of Judah is likened
to a Vine.

1. Ob praestantiam, for the excellency or choisenesse of it. Vines are noble,
choice, and excellent plants; so this Kingdom was a noble vine, Jer. 2.21. A
choice vine, Isa. 5.2. And Psalm 78.67, 68. He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph,
and chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of Judah.

2. Ob extensionem, the Vine spreads and extends it self far. Psalm. 80.9, 10,
11. The Jewish vine filled the land, and covered the hills, it extended far.
This is one thing chiefly intended here; for after Iehoiakim and Iehoahaz, two
roaring Lions, which laid all wast, were taken and carried to Egypt and
Babylon. In the days of Zedekiah this Vine did flourish and spread. Ezekiel.
17.6. It grew and became a spreading vine, etc. It grew in wealth, in power, in
glory.

3. Ob fertilitatem, Vines are fruitful things, no tree, no plant like them.
Psalm. 128.3. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine. Vines are fruitful in
branches, in leaves, in clusters. This Kingdom had Princes and Nobles, and
Zedekiah diverse sons, 2 King. 25.7.

In thy blood.
These words are variously rendered by those touch or treat upon them. The Sept.
is, (...), as the flower of a pomgranate or peach. Thy mother is ruddy and
comely, as the flowers of those trees are; but the Heb. bears not this sense.
Which Jun. renders in quietate tua. Pisc. in silentio tuo. Forsterus, in
similitudine, tua, they derive the word (...) from (...) quiescere, silere,
similem esse. So Pagnine, Shindler, Avenarius and Buxtorphius in verbo (...) so
Montanus in margin.
The words are (...); if we take the word for quiet and silence, the sense is
this; the Kingdom flourished and prospered like a Vine. While Iehoiachin and
Zedekinh were quiet, and did not roar and ravin as their Predecessors did.
Vines torn, cut down in time of War, do grow again and flourish in times of
Peace. If we read the word, in thy likeness, or in the likeness of thee: the
meaning may be, thou O Zedekiah art a King, but low and mean in comparison of
other Kings that were before, as Asa and Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, and
thy Mother is like unto thee. Jerusalem and Judah flourish not as in former
days, but are low and little, according to that in Ezekiel. 17.6. It grew and
became a spreading vine of low stature. He speaks there of Zedekiah and the
Kingdom in his days.

But seeing the words are in our Translation in thy blood, and the Original
bears it so, it is fit ^o enquire what sense the words so taken may bear. Thou
came of Kings, Princes, In ortu tuo, and in semine tuo Aecolampad. In stirpe
regia. Vatab.
and Nobles, they were thy Progenitors, and in production of them, Jerusalem
thy mother is like a vine in thy blood.

It Is usual by blood to note the stock, race, and house that men come of: or
thy mother is like a vine in thy blood: that is in thy seed and issue; thou
have a numerous issue, and this renders thy mother like a Vine, a generous
Vine, bringing forth noble plants. Some think by blood is meant succus, robur,
and then the sense may be this, thy mother is like a vine upheld by thy
influence and strength. Thou and thy sons support this feeble Kingdom.

Planted by the waters.
In hot Countries they were careful to plant their trees and vines where they
might not want water. Hebraei in simulentia tua. Sanguinis enim copia vires
rebur ad auget. Aecolampad.
Canaan was an hilly Country, yet full of water. Deuteronomy. 8.7. It was a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills,
and their Vines planted by the waters could not want moisture, though the heat
was great there. Nebuchadnezar planted Zedekiah among the poor; he carried away
with Iehoiachin he Princes, Nobles, and chief of the Land, 2 King. 24.14.
where it is said, none remained save the poorest sort, and those were the waters
this Vine was planted amongst and by, Chap. 17.5.8. They are called great
waters, and here many waters.

She was fruitful.
After the great wast, spoil, made in the Palaces, Cities, and land by the
tyranny of those two Lions Iehoahaz and Iehoikim. This metaphorical Vine did
flourish and become fruitful. In the 17. Chap. verse. 8. it is said, it was
planted in a good soil, and by great waters, that it might bring forth
branches, that it might bear fruit: and here it is said, she was fruitful and
full of branches: She brought forth such as had been carried away; those
branches were plucked off, grew again. Smiths, Crafts-men, Soldiers, mighty men
of valor, Nobles, Princes, Counselors and such like: the Palaces were
frequented; the Cities rebuilt, the Land tilled, the Vines dressed.

By reason of many waters.
By waters here we may well understand the mercies and blessings of God upon
this Kingdom; for as God himself is a fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13.
so his blessings, mercies are called waters, Isa. 27.3. Speaking of his
Vineyard, he says, he will water it every moment, he will continually bless it
and afford it what may do it good. Isa. 57.11 Hos. 14.5. Or if we will
understand it of the poor Jews who came out of the waters of Judah, Isa.
48.1. and are called waters, Eccl. 11.1. It was by virtue of Gods blessing upon
their labors, God watered them; they watered the Kingdom, so that it became as
a flourishing and fruitful Vine.

Verse. 11. And she had strong rodds for the Scepters of them that bare rule.
(...) Vulg. virgae solidae. Jun. Scipiones robusti. Pisc. rami robusti. Lavat.
virgae fortes.
Heb. is, rods of strength: so the Sept. a rod of strength. Others, sound,
strong rods, boughs, or branches. It Is said of this Jewish Vine, Ps. 80.10.
that the boughs thereof were like goodly Cedars. The meaning is, there were in
the Kingdom of Israel men of great worth and eminency in David's days. Now it
had rods of strength, and such rods as were fit to make Scepters of.

How this suits with what we had in the 15. Chap. is considerable, where it was
said, that the Vine-tree yields not wood fit for any work, no not to make a
pin of it to hang any vessel thereupon. And here it is said, the vine had
strong rods for Scepters. There he speaks of the material Vine, here of a
metaphorical Vine: There was shown Gods rejection of them, and what the Vine
was in Gods account, here what this Vine was fit for in man's account. This
Kingdom thought every son of Zedehiah, which were the rods of strength,
being Ex regio stirpe, fit and meet to sway Scepters, rule Kingdoms, but the
Lord thought not so.

We may by strong rods understand not only the royal branches, but also the
Nobles, Judges, Counselors, and men of might, who were of use and great
service to those did bear rule, and fit to be Rulers under those did bear the
Scepter.

Her stature was exalted among the thick branches.
Heb. her stature was lifted up above among the perplexities, contortions; that
is, the thick branches. This Kingdom, though greatly battered and broken, yet
like a Vine grew up again to a greatness and height: the people were
increased much, and the royal Family was exalted high. Zedekiah, though he
were a wicked King, yet both he and his were magnified by the people; they were
the top-branches of the Vine. In all States there be some more eminent then
others.

And she appeard in her height with the multitude of her branches.
She flourished, spread, multiplied, grew so great and high, that her height
and greatness appeared to others. It was evident that God had done much for
this Kingdom, etc. Thus through the multitude of her branches, and greatness
of her power, wealth and honor, she became proud, despised others, and so
appeared in her height. The words thus taken, correspond with what you have in
Chap. 16.15. That did trust in thine own beauty. He speaks of Jerusalem
under the notion of a woman, she being grown into a Kingdom, become great,
rich, renowned, she waxed proud, and trusted in her own beauty.

Observe. 1.
That States and Kingdoms broken to pieces, ruined in times of War and trouble,
do flourish again in times of quiet and silence: When roaring lions are taken
away, and men of peaceable and quiet spirits succeed, then the Vine grows, then
the land prospers, then breaches are repaired, then wastes are built up, etc.
Tyranny, oppression, wars pull down, root up, destroy, 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. But
when there is peace and rest, it is otherwise. Chap. 14.6, 7. They built and
prospered: and why? they had rest on every side. In storms and fights Ships
suffer much in their sails, masts, tacklings, often they are greatly broken;
but when the storms and fights are over, then all things are mended and made up
again. So when State-storms are over, all things begin to grow up again, that
were broken or trodden down. Peace after War is like Spring after a sharp
Winter, which revives, causes growth and greenesse: yet know that States
ruined by tyranny of Princes, by Wars, do not suddenly recover themselves,
or attain to their former greatness and splendour: though Jerusalem became a
Vine after the roaring and spoil of Iehoiakim, yet she was a vine of a low
stature: Thy mother is a vine in thy like nesse. Thou art low, and thy Mother
is low.

2. It Is through the mercy, goodness, and blessing of God that wasted Kingdoms
do become as Vines, and flourish again. Thy mother is like a Vine fruitful and
full of branches by reason of many waters. God watered the Kingdom with
blessings; he gave peace, he gave the poor strength to labor, he rained upon
them, and gave sapp to the Vine, that she was fruitful. When God lays wast
his Vineyard, then he commands the clouds that thy rain no rain upon it, Isa.
5.6. But when he causes it to flourish, then he calls forth the rain, he
moistens the spirits of men of all sorts, to contribute their help, thoughts,
counsels for the good of a Kingdom, he stirs up the spirits of men to be doing
for the public, he gives people planted by him many waters, many blessings.
We have been rent, torn, wasted, God is beginning to make us as a Vine
fruitful and full of branches, let us take heed we abuse not our mercies lost
God dry up the waters, and so we wither and utterly be laid wast.

3. When mercies are multiplied, men are apt to abuse them, and swel with the
enjoyment of them; this metaphorical Vine the Kingdom of Judah had strong
rods, her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her
height with the multitude of her branches. She grew up again to an height,
greatness; she had a multitude of branches, variety of mercies, and these
swelled her so, that she became proud, insolent, and despised others. Prosperity
is a dangerous thing, and has hazarded many. Isa. 47.6, 7. the Babylonian
Kingdom was so rich, great, populous, plentiful, that it was called the Lady of
kingdoms, and she her self said, I shall be a Lady for ever. She prided her
self in her prosperity: so spiritual Babylon. Rev. 18.7. I sit a Queen and am
no widow, and shall see no sorrow. She had abundance of blessings and
delicacies, verse. 3. but she glorified her self, not the Lord. When Amaziah
had smitten the Edomites, and prospered in his undertakings against them; his
heart was lifted up, and that unto boasting, as Joash told him, 2 Chronicles. 25.19.

After Hezekiah had received many mercies, his heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles.
32.23, 24, 25. Rehoboam when he was strengthened in the Kingdom, forsook the
law of the Lord, and all Israel with him, here was a sad effect of prosperity,
2 Chronicles. 12.1. This people were seldom the better for mercies and blessings
bestowed upon them. Jer. 22.21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou
said, I will not hear; this has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou
obeyedst not my voice. The Heb. is, in thy prosperities; for she had many times
of prosperity, and in none of them did she hearken, but grew so wicked, that
the daughters of the Philistims were ashamed of her lewdness, Samaria and
Sodom less sinful, Ezekiel. 16.27.47. She had forgotten the caution the Lord
gave her in the days of her infancy, Deuteronomy. 8.11, 12, 13, 14. Beware that thou
forget not the Lord thy God, lest when thou art full, thy herds, flocks,
silver, gold, and all thou have be multiplied. Then thine heart be lifted up,
etc.

Verse. 12. But she was plucked up in fury.
Here he shows the miserable event of this vine; it was not broken, pruned,
cut down, but plucked up. The Hebr. word signifies to eradicate or pluck up by
the roots, (...) de arboribus proprie de aliis metaphorice.
as trees and Plants are pulled out of the earth, roots and all, and it is
metaphorically applied to other things, as Jer. 1.10. I have set thee over
Nations and Kingdoms to root out; that is, to prophecy the extirpation of
them.

In fury.
Not in mercy, with a gentle hand, as sometimes the owner or Vine-dresser
does, but in fury. When a Vine has been planted in a good soil, watered, and
long waited upon, with expectation of fruit, and yields nothing but leaves,
suddenly, and in great displeasure the Mr. of the Vineyard comes, lays hands
upon it, puts forth all his strength, and pulls it out of the earth, and says,
it shall never cumber the ground longer.

She was cast down to the ground.
Vines are weak things, and have fulcimina to support and uphold them, and
when they are gone they fall to the ground. The Lord would no longer uphold
this Vine, this Kingdom of Judah, he would withdraw all supporting props it
had; pull it up, and cast it down, as a man does a dry or barren plant; when he
has pulled it up, he throws it away in anger. God would bring down the exalted
statu^e of this Vine to a low condition.

The East Wind dried up her fruit.
(...). Sept.
Of this East Wind was spoken, Chap. 17.10. East-winds are very prejudicial to
Corn, Fruit and Plants, especially to Vines: when East-winds blow much upon
them, they are barren, and often dried up. These winds are venti urentes,
scorching and consuming; therefore great afflictions are called East winds, Isa.
27.8. This Eastern wind was Nebuchadnezar with his Forces, Habakkuk mentions
him and his Army under this notion of an Eastern wind. Chap. 1.9. They shall
come all for violence, their faces shall suppe up as the East wind. This wind
has a sucking virtue in it; the water, the moisture of the earth, the juice of
trees and plants are supped up by it, so that it leaves things dry and
withered: so should the Chaldeans suck up and devour all the pleas^nt things of
this Kingdom, all the fruit of this Vine from the highest branch to the lowest.

Her strong rods were broken and withered.
Montanus reads the words thus, they are broken and withered, and leaves the
other words to be joined with what follows, thus, the rod of her strength the
fire has consumed it; and so Lavater. But others read the words as you have
them: and which way soever you read them, there is no considerable difference
therein. The Hebr. is in the singular number, which frequently in the holy
language is put for the plural. The rods of strength on this Vine were not only
Zedekiah's sons, but all the principal young men who were full of blood and
spirits, as the chief branches in a Vine are full of juice. Yea all that had
places of power and trust, and were supporting, strength to this Vine, did
Nebuchadnezar by his Forces pluck away, break in pieces, and made to wither.
Break off the strongest part of a Vine, the strongest rod upon it, and throw it
aside, it quickly dryes up: so these being pulled from their places, stripped of
their wealth (...) power, withered.

The fire consumed them.
When the branches, the strong rods of a Vine are plucked off and withered,
they are fit for the fire, and that consumes them; these strong rods and
branches the fire consumed. This fire was the fire of Gods wrath; the coals
which the man clothed in linen scattered over the City, Chap. 10.2. Jerusalem
with all the precious and pleasant things in it was burnt with fire, 2 King.
25.9. By the Babylonish Army the Walls were broken down, the Land laid wast,
and all considerable things and persons carried away. Thus was this Jewish Vine
which had been planted by Gods hand in a good ground, plucked up again by him
in fury.

Verse. 13. And now she is planted in the Wilderness.
This Wilderness was Babylon, which was a fruitful, pleasant, and well
watered Country: the City and Land were the glory of Kingdoms, Isa. 13.19. It
had variety of Rivers, Psalm. 137.1. By the rivers of Babylon there we sat
down. Some write of it, that it yields 200. yea in the fertilest parts of it
300. fold increase: The Author of the manners and customs of all Nations.
That it abounds with Dates, whereof they make honey and wine. Now if this were
the nature of the Country, how is it here called a wilderness? It Is so called
not in respect of it self, but in reference to the Jews, who being Captives
therein, were as in a Wilderness.

In a Wilderness.
1. A man is destitute of all comforts. 2. Exposed to many dangers.
So were the Jews in Babylon.

1. They were destitute of comforts, they came naked into Babylon, where they
were amongst a people of a barbarous and unknown tongue, that knew nothing of
God, there they had no form of a Church or State; they had no alimentum^^tale,
but were as dry bones, Ezekiel. 37.11. There they were Captives: Babylon was a
prison unto them, and Prisons of what kind soever are not pleasing. Prisoners
endure much hunger and thirst, and doubtless so did the Jews in Babylon.
Though there were plenty, yet they had little enough, and therefore it was a
dry and thirsty land to them.

2. They were exposed to many dangers, being amongst them that mocked and hated
them. The Babylonians were bitter and hastly, terrible and dreadful, Habak.
1.6, 7. They were like wild beasts in the Wilderness, and sought, upon all
occasions to make a prey of the poor captived Jews. They got the three Children
into the fiery Furnace, Daniel into the Lions Den, and Haman attempted the
total ruin of them.

She is planted.
Before in the 12. verse. it is said, the fire consumed them: what is consumed in
the fire is burnt to ashes, and how then can that be planted? He does not say
the whole Vine was burnt, but her strong rods were broken off and burnt; some
were burnt and consumed by Famine, some by the Plague, some by the Sword. 2 Chronicles. 36.17. The King of the Chaldees slew their young men with the sword, but
they that escaped the sword he carried away to Babylon, where they were
servants to him and his sons, verse. 20.

If it should be granted that the whole Vine was dried up, withered and burnt
to ashes, yet these words may bear a good and sound sense, viz. Thus they may
be understood of Jehoiachin and those that were with him in Babylon at that
time when they were spoken; for the words run in the present tense, she is
planted, not she shall be planted; for Zedekiah and those escaped the sword
were carried after this Prophecy to Babylon.

Verse. 14. And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches.
What this rod was, and the fire that went out of it, is fit to enquire. I will
not say that Ishmael was the rod, and the fire went out of it; the destruction
of Gedaliah, whom the King of Babylon had left Governor over the Land, and
this Ishmael flew, 2 King. 25.25. Jer. 41.1, 2, 3. with many others. But rather
conceive Zedekiah to be this rod, who being of the Royal family, was a
principal rod of this Vine, and the fire which went out of this rod was his
rebellion against the King of Babylon, who had set him up upon the Throne of
Judah; for this act of his stirred up Nebuchadnezar to come and lay all wast, 2
King. 24.20: Chap. 25.1, 2, 3. to the 11. 2 Chronicles. 36.13.17. Jer. 52.3, 4. So
that Zedekiah was ignis and causa excidij, he did that which brought fire and
destruction upon this Vine.

Which has devoured her fruit.
The fire caused by him did devour the young men; maidens, old men, the vessels
of the Sanctuary, the treasure of the Lords house, and the treasure of the King
and Princes, 2 Chronicles. 36.17, 18, 19.

So that she has no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule.
The meaning is, that this Vine was so ruined, that there was none left to
bear rule. Zedekiah's sons were slain, and the Princes of Judah, Jer. 52.10.
Yet not all, for it is said, 2 King. 25.25. That Ishmael was of the seed Royal,
or of the Kingdom: And Jer. 41.1. That the Princes of the King, even ten
men. That is, those Princes of Nobles who had escaped, joined with Ishmael in
the murdering of Gedaliah; but these and others which had some small power
were glad to fly, some to the Ammonites, some to Egypt for fear, as appears
in that 4. of Jer. and 2 King. 25:26. None of them were able to raise up the
Kingdom again, now the Kingly power was taken from them, and expired in
Zedekiah. His daughters were left in the custody of Gedaliah; but it was not
for women to sit upon the Throne of Judah. The Kings and Kingdom of Judah were
swallowed up in the Babylonish Captivity; for after they had no Kings, but
Governors, Haggai 2.21. And Paul called their State not a Kingdom, but the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. So that in this sense also, she was
planted in a wilderness in a dry and thirsty land: She had not virtue, power,
strength, to bring forth any rods for Kingly government.

The Scepter seemed now to be departed from Judah, there being no strong rod to
be a Scepter to rule: Now there was no King in Israel, nor any more to be.
True, it seemed so, but it was not so; for though Zedekiah and his seed were
cut off, yet the Lord had an eye to his promise, remembered the Covenant with
David, Psalm. 89.34, 35, 36. and showed his faithfulness, for he thought upon
Jehoiachin or Jechonias, from whom as a dry root sprouted Salathiel and
Zorobabel, who brought them out of Babylon, and was Ruler over this people, and
so in him, his, and the High Priests after him, was the power of the Scepter
continued till Christ came.

The promise was not that there should be Kings always of the Tribe of Judah,
but that ruling power should be in that Tribe of one kind or other, which was
made good.

This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.
This Prophecy is matter of mourning to me at present, to hear and speak of
such sad things coming upon Judah and Jerusalem is a lamentation, and when
they shall be accomplished they will be for a lamentation, to posterity they
will lament for the Princes of Israel, for Jerusalem, for the Temple, and for
this Vine plucked up by the roots.

Obser. 1.
God lays wast, destroys flourishing and potent Kingdoms when they provoke
him by their sinful and grievous courses. This Kingdom of Judah did flourish
like a Vine, had many branches, strong rods, much wealth and power, but it
trespassed grievously, Ezekiel. 14.13. and here God plucks it up in fury, he
spares neither branches, body, nor roots. The quiet, happiness, and
flourishing condition of earthly Kingdoms is not perpetual, God has ways to
weaken them, to ruin and root them up: by the Egyptians he lopped this Vine,
and by the Babylonians he pulled it up, see 2 King. 25.11. Jer. 52.15. God had
threatened often before to pluck up and root them out, if they provoked him by
their disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28.25.48.63. 1 King. 14.15. 2 Chr. 7.20. I will pluck
them up by the roots out of the land which I have given them. I will pluck up
even this whole land, Jer. 45.4. God made good his word, he plucked them up;
though the house of Israel had been his Vineyard, and the men of Judah his
pleasant plant. Isa. 5.7. If Nations would flourish like Vines, and continue in
a flourishing condition, they must not provoke the Lord to fury, but bring
forth fruit answerable to mercies given in, answerable to the soil they are
planted in, the waters they are planted by, the digging, dunging, pruning,
hedging, and shining upon they have had; if not, but bring forth sour grapes,
Injustice, Oppression, Profaneness, hear what is said, Psalm. 107.34. He turns
a fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them thot dwell
therein, yea he drives out Princes for their wickedness. Ezekiel. 31.11. And men
cannot be established thereby. Prove. 12.4. It Is righteousness exalts a nation.
Prove. 14.34. But sin is a reproach to any people. And though they may prosper
a while, be like Vines, yet God plucks them up at last, and that in fury.

2. When God is in his fury, yet he shows some mercy: Although he plucked up
this Vine, threw her down to the ground, dried up her fruit by an East Wind,
brake of her strong rods, consumed them in the fire, yet something of this Vine
he spared and planted in the Wilderness, the body and some branches of it were
carried to Babylon, and set there, which was mercy. God might have burnt them
all in his fury and fire of his indignation: but in wrath he remembers mercy.
Though he let out much wrath, much fury, yet he lets out some mercy. When
Pharaoh pillaged this Vine, plucked off the principal branch, yet some mercy
was shown, Jehoiakim was planted in his room: when Nebuchadnezar took him away,
Jehoiachin was set up, which was mercy; and when both Jehoiachin and Zedekiah
were plucked away, yet here was mercy, some were planted in Babylon. The Lord
let not out all his wrath at any time against them, but as Isaiah says, he
left them a remnant, and made them not as Sodom and Gomorrha, Chap. 1.9. Gods
wrath and fury have appeared toward our English Vine; and though he have
plucked up many branches and rods of strength, yet has he not plucked us up
in wrath and fury, he has shown us rich, great, extraordinary mercy, let us
bring forth better fruit henceforward, lest he put forth his hand and pluck us
up by the roots.

3 Those are planted amongst wicked and ungodly people, they are in no better
condition then men in a Wilderness: What though the place be pleasant, well
watered, fruitful, and abounding with outward bless ngs, yet it is no better
then a Wilderness to them have lived in Canaan.

When these Jews were planted in Babylon, which was a Garden, a Land of
Rivers, of delightful things, it was locus incultus unto them, like an Heath
and Wilderness, things were not suitable to their spirits, they were destitute
of true Comforts, they had no Temple, no Sacrifice; they were exposed to great
and many dangers, and lived amongst wild Beast: Canaan was the land of the
living. There the living God did manifest himself, there were the living
Oracles, the living waters, and the living people, all Lands else were Heaths
and Wildernesses; they had dead and dumb gods, dead worship, dead waters, and
were full of dead and dry bones. Such was Babylon, affording no spiritual and
living sap to nourish this Vine. The Jews could not sing the Lords song there,
Psalm. 137.4.

When people plant themselves among wicked and profane ones, they plant
themselves in Babylon, in a Wilderness.

4. When men are planted in a good soil, and bring not forth good fruit, it is
just with God to remove them from the means they enjoy.

This Vine was planted in a good soil, Ezekiel. 17.8. By many waters, Verse. 10.
of this Chapter: but she brought not forth good fruit, therefore God plucked
her up, deprived her of those mercies and means she formerly enjoyed, and
planted her in a dry and thirsty land. Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou servedst
not the Lord with joyfulnesse and gladness of heart for the abundance of all
things. Therefore shall thou serve thine Enemies which the Lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, in thirst, in nakedness, and in want of all things.

This it may be they had forgotten, being given out in Moses days; but Jeremie
often minded them of it who lived amongst them, even when they were removed, see
Chap. 15.4:29.18:34.17. God had brought this Vine formerly out of Egypt, and
planted it in Canaan, where it took deep root, Psalm. 80.8, 9. For it enjoyed
many mercies: but because it degenerated, and was like the plant of a strange
Vine unto God, Jer. 2.21. Therefore he removed it from the pleasant land to
the Wilderness, he carried it out of his Orchard or Garden, and set it in the
Forest.

5. The wasting and ruin of Kingdoms is from themselves: The cause is
intrinsicall; A fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which has devoured
her fruit.

It was not Nebuchadnezar, but Zedekiah that kindled the fire; he was a rod
of this Vines branches, he did the mischief by his rebellion, he brought the
Eastern wind which dried up the fruit of this Vine, broke off her strong
rods, and burnt them in the fire. Jehoiachim was a rod of this Vines
branches, he likewise rebel'd, 2 King. 24.1. And so fire came out of this rod
to destroy the Vine; for presently bands of Chaldees, bands of Syrians, bands
of Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon came against Judah to destroy
it, verse. 2.

Manasses was a rod of this Vine, and out of him went fire to wast it, he
plucked off, and consumed many branches of it, 2 King. 21.16. And he caused
the Lord to bring in the Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria to spoil
it more, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. Yea his sins had the greatest influence into the
consumption of this Vine, Jerem. 15.4. 2 King. 24.3.

The desolation of Kingdoms usually have been by their own Kings and Rulers,
by those they have brought forth and set up. Their follies, cruelties,
treacheries, have fired and consumed their Kingdoms. It was Hoshea's
conspiracy that ruined the Kingdom of Israel, 2 King. 17.4, 5, 6.

6. When a lawful form of Government is abused by Governors growing
Tyrannical and unfaithful: God may set by, yea destroy such Governors and
their Posterity, and change the government. Fire has gone out of a rodd of her
branches, which has devoured her fruit, so that she has no strong rodd to be
a Scepter to rule.

Zedekiah was Tyrannical and Perfidious, and here GOD excludes him and his
Family from all Kingly power and ruling, and changed the government.

The LORD is not tied to any men, any family, any way of government; but whom
he please he may pull down, and what form of government he will, he may set
up.

He brings Princes to nothing, he makes Judges of the earth as vanity.

Yea, they shall not be planted, yea, they shall not be sown, yea, their stock
shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they
shall wither, and the whirle-winde shall take them away as stubble, Isa. 40.23,
24.

The Table containing and directing unto the principal things in the precedent
Expositions.
A.
Abominations. PEople may be guilty of, and not know it, 76. What sins are
called abominations, 518. Account. We must give an account of our talents, 468.
Adultery. How punished by Jews and Heathens, 247, 248. God punishes it
severely, 249. The evil of it, 476, 477, 478. 479. Punishment appointed for
it, 480. Affliction a whetstone to prayer, 45. resembled to fire in 5 things
61. It Is a time of Gods manifesting love 126. minding our misery. Useful
against sin 232. they discover 339. in them men look to the arm of flesh
430. they are east winds 612. All put for the greatest part 427 Amorites,
whence, and what 82. Anger, what 256. how given to God, Ibid. Anointing with
oil, what 145, 146, 147. Apostacy a grievous sin 207. Arguments against it
551, 552. Apparel costly not unlawful 165, 166. Ends of apparel, ibid. When
persons sin about it 168, 169. Aram and Aramites 336, 337.
B.
Badger, 154, 155. Barrenness reproachful 124. Beast: Noisome beasts 41.
Beauty. Wherein the beauty of the Israelitish state was 180. The Jews had
beautifying mercies, 187. when it becomes abominable 226, 227. Beggar. All
beggars not to be given unto 304. Beginning. From low beginnings God raises to
greatness 116. Believing. We are backward to believe 140. Birth, moves not
God 103. Blessings outward given promis^ucus^y to good and bad 311, 312 they
pusse men up 334. Blood, what it sets out 98. properties of it in reference to
man's corrupt nature, ibid. and 99. 143. God lets men lie in their Hood as long
as he please 100. Blood shedding grievous 248, 249, 514. Bracelets, 159.
Bread, how used in Scripture 275. 249. Breast. Why the breasts are so placed
114. Fashioning of breasts argue fitness for marriage 115. Brochmanes, what
they do with their children 96. Byssus, what 156, 157.
C.
Canaan, what it signifies, and sometimes notes 388, 389. Canaanites, whence
and what 81. Captivity, what meant by bringing back the captivity of Sodom and
Samaria 329, 330. Cedar sets forth a thriving condition 387. God crops, lops
off Cedars 394. it excels other trees 438. Christ the goodly Cedar 442.
Censuring of others to be great sinners, not safe 324. Shameful to judge
others, being guilty our selves, ibid. and 325. Chain, when first used 160.
Charity, want of it a great evil 297. 302. We should be charitable, and why
491, 492. Children. We are their children whose ways we follow 83. Ill
children of good parents 84, 85. how said to be the Lords 214. of sacrificing
them 215. usually tread in the steps of parents 265 their children we are whom
we^ imitate 265. of their suffering for their fathers sins 456, 457. Good ones
may come from ill parents 525. if good, not to be branded with the vices of
their parents 527, 528. Chock the Hebrew word, what it signifies 227. Christ
descended from the highest 441. The beginnings of Christ were low 442. He is
the goodly Cedar in the Church, ibid. What fruit this Cedar yields 443. All
shall come under this Cedar 443. There is safety under Christ 444. his loins
446. Church. The best and most famous may degenerate 208. An whorish idolatrous
Church may bring forth children to God 219. A virgin Church may become a
strumpet 241. Churches their children whom they imitate 265 it is enlarged under
Christ 365. who have an evil eye at it 393. Cities called mothers 228. Their
children whose manners they follow 265. What great Cities are, such are the
lesser 271. they are guilty of great sins 312. Clothing, when abused 168, 169
etc. Why we should not be proud of it 174. Comeliness what ever it be, is
from God 194, 195. Comfort propounded after threatenings 441. Commands argue not
power and free will in man 14. 574, 575. God may command what man has not
power to do 575. Company, such as that is, such men are 600. Often those converse
with wicked ones, prove worse then their companions 601. Condescension of God
to sinners 140. what it should produce in us 141. Condition. God observes men
in what condition they are 101. In desperate conditions the Lord shows mercy
107. From low conditions he raises to greatness 148. 396. Seldom content
with our conditions 403. we should be mindful of our primitive condi^
Confederation, whether lawful with idolaters 232. Confidence. We are apt to
confide in flesh 430. 558. Consideration of our misery, and Gods mercy a
special help against sin 222. What it is 521. It differs from contemplation,
judgment, and meditation, ib. and 522. wherein the strength of it lies 522.
the excellency of it 523. it is a special means to keep men from sinning 526.
Content. Seldom content with any condition 403. Controversy. In controversies
with any, no reproachings to be used 565. Converts ashamed of former ways 364.
Corruption so strong as it violates the strongest obligations 346. Covenant,
what, and how differs from testament 132, etc. That at mount-Sinai was a
covenant of mercy 134. What mercies by virtue of the covenant 137, 138, 139.
Of breaking the covenant, and what sins do it 343, 344. Set out by several
expressions, ibid. Covenants tie strong 345. Breaking of covenant is a
despising of God 347. He will punish breach of covenant 349. Of the everlasting
covenant 354. God mindful of his covenant 355, 356. For the covenants sake we
have mercies 357. Of renewing and bettering the covenant 357. Knowledge of God
in the covenant of grace keeps from murmuring 374. Forced covenant whether it
binds 416, 417. Breaking covenant ruins Kingdoms 420. it is worst in Princes
421. Covetousness, the evil of it 297. 500. it is cunning and cruel 528.
Crown, what it signifies 163. Curse, it is a consuming thing 350 Cutting off,
what it means 21.
D.
Daniel, of what years when carried into Babylon 44. Daughters of Philistims
228. Death. Of moral or spiritual 101, 102. The four capital deaths of the
Jews 247, 248. Who hasten death 518. Deceive. How the Lord is said to deceive
a Prophet 25. Degeneraters loose their esteem 64. God minds them of his
dealings, and their former conditition 110. Desire. What desire of meat and
drink is lawful, and what not 276. Despisings are as thorns 337. What brings
despising 340. Destruction, men bring it upon themselves 9. Disappointments
558. and why, ibid. Discontent puts upon unwarrantable practices 404. Hinders
porspering in the condition we are set in 405. Disgrace is heavy 327.
Dispositions, None in man to mercy 103. Domitian would be called God 274.
Doubling of a word notes intention 109, ^10. Diet, the best allowed of God to
his 182. Cautions about eating and drinking 83. when done to the glory of God
186.
E.
Eagle careful of her young ones 129. Properties of the Eagle 383, 384. An
emblem of greatness 393. Eating and drinking, with rules thereabouts 183,
184, 185, 186. Elders of Israel 2. Election: God may choose whom he pleases
462. England, what it was once 117. Errors once received, not easily got out
532. 566. Equity of Gods ways 555, 556, 557, 558, 559, 560. Example ill, more
prevalent then good 589. Expectation. God prevents and exceeds the same 396.
Wicked disappointed of theirs 430. Events declare the truth of threatenings and
folly of men 434. Not known what what they will be 559. Eye, lifting it up,
what it notes 475.
F.
Face. What to set the face against a man 20. For what sins God sets his face
against men 23. when his face is against a people he will follow them with
judgments till they be consumed 77. Outsides of things called faces 93. Faith.
Several degrees of it, and whither the weakest may fail 544, 545, etc. Fame
against mercy 195. often dangerous 206. Fare. Dainty fare allowable 182. Faulty
ones forward to fault others 567. Feathers, what meant thereby 385. their
diverse colors, what 386. Fidelity the foundation of justice 420. Fire, the
properties of it 61, 62. Of passing through the fire 216, 217. Flower 176.
Forgetfulness opens the door to sin 223. it provokes God 260. what it is 352.
Forgiveness. God forgives fully 150. Those are forgiven are separated, taught,
beautified, 151. Fornication: What it is to fornicate 147. Of spiritual
fornication 198. Forts. What sorts of old they used 425. Fruitless ones are
for destruction 65. The evil of fruitlesness 66, 67, 68, 69. Fruitfulness,
motives to it 70, 71, 72. Fury, what 256. how attributed to God, ibid.
G.
Gentiles, Their coming in as it was of favor, so certain 365. wrought upon
by the Gospel 368. Girdles and girding 157. Glutton, who is so in the Rabbis
sense 185. When men do gluttonize 277, 278. The evil thereof 278, etc. God
may set up, throw down whom he will 464. He will judge and plead the cause of
his, end their controversies 466. He may employ whom he will, and in what
ways he will 467. He is no respecter of persons 558. Those would have a
gracious answer from God must come with hearts free from Idols 12. when men
leave God, they fall to Idols 22. Such as men are coming God, such they shall
find him 22. Deals impartially with men 23. Those set their hearts upon Idols,
God sets his face against them 23. He is free in his actings 103. He looks
after sinners mind not him 107. Has not need of any 108. He is real in
showing mercy 109. Waits and watches to do good 125. Has done much for us 70.
He gives variety of blessings 175. looks for answerable returns 202. Those
dishonor God shall be dishonored 264. He discovers hidden things 339. How
said to remember 352, 353. Mindful of his covenant 355. He is to be pacified
376. Just in his dispensations 466. Free in his choice 462. in his gifts 463.
Godly. All they do is debt 105. Go, what to go after God 37. Gold plentiful
among Jews 165 Gospel. When any receive it, they have a new relation put upon
them 366, 367. Government, when abused, God may set by the Governors and their
posterity, and change the government 620. Grace, it is not hereditary 115. it is
free 105. nothing can hinder the work of free grace 106 All is free about man
from the beginning to the end 106. It makes men to remember their ways, and
turn from them 362 it and great sins may stand together 549. Grapes. Sour
grapes, the meaning thereof, 451. The evil of that proverb, the fathers have
eaten sour grapes, etc. 452. Greatness often unexpected 396. All earthly
greatness unstable 398. Great ones fall into the hands of enemies 429. Gifts.
God may give what gifts he pleases unto men 465.
H.
Hand. Stretching it out, what 27. What giving the hand imports 426. What it is
to withdraw the hand from iniquity ^^^ Heart. Idolatry, vid. Idolatry, heart
must be free when we come to God 12. Hire 239. Hittites, whence and what 82.
Holy things abused God disowns 367. Honey, what it notes 179. Honor. In it men
forget God 259. Men are raised to it beyond expectation 396. Hope, wicked and
frustrate 430. Their hope is not long lived 599 Horses, plenty of them in
Egypt 416. Hypocrisy escapes not Gods eye 9, 10. Hypocrites may expect wrath
rather then mercy 10.
I.
Japonians, what they do with female children 92. Idleness. When one is said
to be idle 287. The evil of idleness ibid. and 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, etc.
Idols, What to set them up in the heart 6, 7. What putting them before their
faces notes 7. loathsome stinking 475. Why called Idols of the house of Israel,
ib. Idolatry once gotten in, hardly hardly gotten out 8. Heart-idolatry God
observes 8. It brings destruction 9. A grievous sin 11. Leaving GOD leads to
idolatry 22. Idolaters put on a face of holiness 22. Idolatry wherein likened
to whoredom 198, 199, 200. Idolaters are expensive in maintaining their
worship 212. Idolatrous places hateful to God 252. Idolothites, eating thereof
notes communion with Idols 474. Jealousy 246. What it is 256. How given to
God, ibid. Jerusalem in her primitive state dead 10. Whether her sins being
greater then Sodomes and Samaria's, she had greater punishments 319, 320, 321.
Wherein like a Lioness 582. Jewels 160. Jews, Their great increase 112. poor
116. Jewish state honorable, renowned, and whence so 190, 191, 192, 193. it
became whorish 293. Ignorant cannot do Gods will 505. Images religiously used
is idolatry 211. Imperious: Who are so 235, 236. Imperiousness argues
weakness 236. Indians, What they do with their children, if not useful 96.
Ingratitude provokes, and causes God to upbraid 203, 204. It causes God to
take away his mercys 253. ingratitude to instruments of our good is evil 428.
Infant in the womb, how it lies and is nourished 88. Of cutting the navell 87,
88. Of the washing it 89. Salting 90. liberi exposititij 42. Iniquity. What to
commit it 547. Intention. Good intentions will not justify men's actions 220.
Judging. God judges otherwise of men then they do of themselves 83. Judgments.
When they will be exemplary 23. By judgments on the wicked, God intends good
to his 35. He has variety of judgments 48. Author of them whatever they be,
ibid. In the soarest judgments is some mercy shown 54. Comforts his against the
scandal of his judgments 55. is just in them ibid. Equity of them shall be
known 56. Likened to fire in several things 61, 62. God brings one after
another when h^e intends ruin 254. By great judgments God^ causes people to
cease from sin 255. When executed, God is at rest 257. God has cause for his
judgments 312. Ought to be observed 314. 335. Not easily believed 427 Just.
What a just man is 472. Of the legal and evangelicall just man 508. He may
have a wicked son 516. Justify: What notes declaring to be just 317. Man is
not justified by his own righteousness 537, 538. Justice. Gods justice seen in
making those instruments of our punishment with whom we have sinned 246. In
what kind men sin, in that kind God often punishes ib. when justice is executed,
judgment cease 258. God will deal justly with sinners 260. as they have done
348 God punishes in the place of sinning 410. It upholds Kingdoms 420. God is
just in his government of the world 460.
K.
Keep, What it imports 506. Kindness forgotten provokes 260. Undeserved
kindness works much 363. Kings like Eagles, and wherein 383, 384. None so
high, but the Lord can abase them 394. They may lose their Kingdoms, yet not
all mercy 395. Their condition unstable 398. Them and their greatness God
takes special notice of 401. Not all alike 402. Evil ones come after the good
589. Kingdom. Jewish state a Kingdom 181. it is the Lord forms people into
Kingdoms, and gives them Kingly power 189. He does with Kingdoms what he
pleases ibid. Honor of the Jewish Kingdom 190. Greatest Kingdoms are brought
down by God 394, 395. Disposing of subdued Kingdoms difficult, and requires
caution 397. The glory and strength of it once broken, is not easily recovered
398. it is easy with God to destroy strong Kingdoms 409. God knows how low to
imbase Kindgdomes 420. What upholds them, ibid. howsoever God can raise them
446. Broken ones reflourish in times of quiet and peace 609. that is of mercy
610. Potent Kingdoms destroyed for their wickedness 617. The ruin of
Kingdoms is from themselves 619. Knowledge. Of spiritual knowledge, and how it
differs from other knowledge 369, 370. it is a Covenant-mercy 371. God would
have us knowing in particular 509, 510.
L.
Land. Sins of the Inhabitants bring desolation upon it 73, 74 Law, The
honor of the Jews 116. What laws God pleases he may impose 461, 524. The law
is weak, it cannot justify or sanctify 532. League. Whether a Nation may
enter into a league with those of a false Religion 232, 233. Lebanon, whence so
named 386. Lewdness, what 258. 337. Life. There be several lives, and each
from God 102. at Gods dispose, to lengthen and shorten 469. Necessary to motion
504. How to live happily 511. 540. Linen of fine Linen 156. Looking Gods
looking upon, what it imports 119. Love, the time of love what time it was 120,
121. Gods love the foundation and fountain of all our good 129. Lioness, her
properties 582. Of Lions 583, 584, 585. How they took Lions 587. Lust, it is
unsatiable 230.
M.
Maidens; A reproach not to be married 124. When marriageable 128. Man, his
estate by nature is miserable, and wherein 93, 94, 95 96. Set out by blood 98,
99. Best originally in a state of death 101. No sort of men exempted from
grievous calamities 418. Apt to question and quarrel at Gods dealings 460.
Marriage honorable 124. There be three things in it 136. Mattaniah, what it
signifies 390. Means. God uses ill means for good ends 34. Natural and
moral 537. Why we should use means 578. Mercy, it is extended to men in
desperate conditions 107. It Is bestowed in a transient way occasionally 109.
Choice mercies should cause answerable returns 202. Multiplied, men are apt to
abuse them 610. We are apt to trust in, and be proud of mercies 205. Great
evil to abuse mercies 213. Cause God then to take them away 252. Hope of mercy
taken away to bring men to shame 332, 333. Of sparing mercy 354, 355. Mercies
come through the Covenant 357. Preventing mercy 396. Mercies multiplied, men
are apt to abuse them 610. Some mercy God shows when he is in fury 618.
Messalina a notorious harlot 231. Ministers they must deliver the mind of God,
be it pleasing or provoking 412. Molech. Of what made, how and what use 215.
Offering of children to this Idol whenc it came ibid. Evil thereof 218. Money,
For what use at first 501. Moses, whence he had his name 158. Motives. Many
things move men to show favor, etc. Nothing in the creature to move God 103,
104, etc. Mountain. Mount-Sion put for the Church 437. Murmuring. What keeps
from it 374. Murder. The evil of it 514.
N.
Nakedness, how taken 124. What Is the covering of it 125. 130. Name. The way
to get, and the worth of a good name 510. Nature. The work of it is Gods work
117. Natural excellencies are from him 118. Navell. The office of it 87. not
cutting of it what it means 88. Needy, who is so 296. Neighbor, who 476.
Nets. God has nets to catch perfidious men in 433. New-heart. How making a new
heart is to be understood 573. Noah, what it signifies 43. Nose-jewels 160.
O.
Oath. Hebrew words for oath, how they differ 342. Oaths are securing things
419. Arguments of humane weakness ib. God regards his Oath, though men do not
429. Oaths are divine things, and not to be slighted 432. Opinions. Ill ones
entertein'd, are hardly got out 532, 566. Oppression, wherein it lies 484, 485,
486. The evil of it 487, 488. Ornaments 113. Breasts are ornaments 114, 115.
They are from God 118. Oil abounded in Judea 145. What oil signifies 147,
180.
P.
Pacifying. God must be pacifyed 376. It Is great mercy to have him pacified
377. Parables: They may be used in preaching 62. The use of them 381. Pardon.
God pardons all sins 150. it is not reversed 548. Parents. All are not godly,
come of godly Parents 84. Children often tread in their steps 265. for their sins
children may suffer, though under another Covenant 457. The good may have
wicked children 516. 589. Parents goodness will not privilege wicked children
516. Parts prevail with men 104. Passing by one, how spoken of God 97. People.
Gods people apt to go astray 35. Would not return, if left to themselves 36.
should keep close to him 37. God has not need of any people 108. Gods people
are protected 129. God minds and provides for his from top to toe 175. His may
so sin, that their Enemies may be ashamed of them 229. Sin beyond belief
271. have mercies through the covenant 357. No evil can befall them 465. God
will hear their pleadings, right their wrongs 466. Such as they be usually are
the rulers 588. They elected and set up their Kings 594. Perfidiousnesse.
Perfidious men shall not prosper 408. it moves God to bring severe judgments
409. It Is worst in Princes 421. Examples of perfidiousnesse 422. God is
resolved to punish it 429. He has snares for them 433. Perjury very evil
429. Perseverance 506. not sufficient to begin well, we must go on 551.
Pestilence, the nature of it 41, 42 Pharaoh, what kind of name 425. Places,
where idolatry has been hateful 252. God punishes in the place where men
sin 410. Eminent places discover men's corruptions 589. Pledge, Not unlawful
to take a pledge 490. Plenty of all things is not in it self evil 276. it is
the parent of sin 310. Policy. Rodericks policy to secure himself, weakened
him 419. Poor, whereof, (...) and (...) 295, 296. Of hard-heartednes to the
poor what an evil it is 297, 298 299, etc. Whither we are to give to all poor
304. What rule or cautions to be observed about giving to the poor 305.
Prayers. We should desire the prayers of others 46, 47. Prejudice, Hard to
remove it 566. Preparations. None in man of himself 103. Pride, what 272. The
kinds and evil of it 272, 273. Princes. Heathen ones may come to much
greatness 393. They are Eagles, and have an ill eye at the Church ^93. when
deprived (...) ^^^^es, yet not of all m^^^^ ^^5. Tributary Princes re^^^ctive
at first to those they depend upon 397. Some greater then others 402. How they
may prosper 405. They may fall into, and dye in the hands of foreign Enemies
429. Wicked ones are matter of lamentation 587, etc. They are unnatural 588.
They pervert the end of their institution 590. Their ill doings will abroad
590. When they prove Lions, God sets some to hunt them 591. God serves them, as
they have served others 592. Wicked ones conitnue not long 602. God takes them
away for the good of his people 603. Privileges. Men are apt to glory and
confide in them 63. Progress in GODS ways 505. Promises minded and made good
by degrees 116. Promise of the branch often mentioned 441. Prophets. When the
true discover the false, advantages are sought against them 3. Many profess
love to them, but are false-hearted 4. Ordinary to come to the Prophets 19. God
will deal severely with false Prophets 29. False Prophets should not be
consulted with 31. They must deliver what is commanded them, however it be
taken 78. and why 79. Proselyte was of two sorts 19. Prosperity. Men are apt to
forget God in it 222. 259. makes proud 334. Protection. God protects his in a
special manner 129, 130. Proud. They are so mind not Gods dealing with others,
though like themselves 334. God will bring them down what ever they be 444,
445. Providence overrules, so as the wicked miss of their aims 430, 431. It
orders all things 461. God provides for all 463 Punishment. What chief
punishments the Jews had 247, 248. Difference of punishments 250. God may lay
what punishment he pleases upon the soul that sins 470. What punishment soever
befalls man, there is no cause to complain of God 533 Pyrrhus, why desirous of
Italy, Cicily. and Affricke 403.
Q.
Qualifications. Where none are, God shows mercy 105. See preparations.
R.
Rabbi Akibba tenacious of traditi ns 567. Ram. Qualities of Rams 414.
Relation. Those are in near relation to God may be hateful unto him 266. They
may become worse then others, then any 269. Those in relation to God are apt to
think God does much for their sakes 367. Religion. All profess it are not
sound 4. Making of things for religious uses unlawful 211. In false religion
men are cruel 220, 221. Remembering. What it is 352. How God is said to
remember 352, 353. What the word zacar imports 359. Remembering sin, what 537.
Whose sins shall not be remembered 540. Renown. Whence the Jewish state was
so renowned 191, 192. Renown a great mercy 195. often proves a snare 206.
Repentance. The Hebrew and Greek words for it opened 13. Why we are commanded
to repent, it being the gift of God 13, 14. Commands argue not power and free
will in man to repent 14, 15. What it is 15. It Is a continued act 16. Sinners
should stir up themselves to repent 17. True repentance, three effects of it
18. State-repentance seldom true 268. set out by several expressions 536.
It Is a turning from sin, and all sin unto God 539. is profitable for man
576. When true, it is turning from all sin 577. Reproach is burdensome 326,
327. What times are times of reproaching 340. what brings it ibid. Rewards
unequal make not God unequal 560. Richard the third his end 603. Riddle, what
it is 379. Righteous, vide just, he shall not loose the fruit of his
righteousness 535. What righteous man is meant 542. Whether he may fall away
542. ^ighteousnesse advantageth in evil times 51. There is such a
righteousness men may turn from 550. Rings, their use 161, 162.
S.
Salt. Of salting Infants, and why it was used 90. Samaria, whence so named
263. Elder sister 264. Her sins great, yet less then Jerusalems 315, 316.
Scandal. What the word imports 570. Scripture. Much of it was given out upon
sinful occasions 4. There be some things hard and obscure therein 380. Wisdom
of God seen in giving out Scripture 382. God would have us know his mind in the
hardest things 417. Septuagint, how it renders Aram, Mizraim, and Cush 337.
Serious, God is so in bestowing of mercy 109. Shame. Of bearing shame 318, 319.
Sin brings it 325. It Is burdensome 326. what causes it 364. Sheep, Four
properties of it 36. Shesh, what 156. Shod, what it imports 155. Sin. God
makes it a punishment 28. It Is burdensome 30, 31. It pollutes 38. It may be so
grievous as God will show no mercy 49. Wherein likened to blood 98, 99. God
forgives all sins 150. it brings reproachful names upon people 243. What is a
good help to prevent sin 222. Progress in sinful ways grievous to God 225.
It makes God set friends and lovers against us 245. Often it is punished in the
same kind 246. Some God eyes and brands above others 261. Old sins remembered
309. Sins not equal 322. Of comparing sins and sinners 323. Great sinners
forgetting their own sins, are apt to censure those are less sinful 324.
It brings shame 325. Sins may be such as cut off hope of mercy 332. Sin is
an evil provoking God 375. God notes the circumstances and aggravations of
them 431. Whether it be against the nature of God 459. Sin is deadly 470. Sin
not visible 520. it shall not go unpunished 534. What it is to commit sin
547. No sins reverse pardon 548. What it is to cast away sin 571, 572. it is
a ruining thing 576, 577. Sinners. Why they should stir up themselves to
turn unto God 17. Great ones find mercy 37. and 321. There is an
unwillingnesse in them to hear of their sins 77. Judge otherwise of themselves
th^n God does 83. They have their moreovers 217. Come to violate all bonds and
bounds 218. They may have outward blessings in abundance 311. In time grow
impudent 313. Sinners and Sufferers afford comfort to other sinners and
sufferers 333. Cover their wickedness 338. God delights in the death of
sinners as it is an act of justice, otherwise not 539, 540. Skirt. 121. What
spreading of the skirt over one means 122. Sodom. It was in a most fertile
place 275. the sad judgment upon it 308. Her judgment often mentioned 314.
Son, not to suffer for the Fathers sin 531. Sorrow godly, whence it arises
373. Soul put for the will, lust 228. put for person 453. Soul that sins
shall dye; the difficulties about those words and answers thereunto 455. to
459. Whether God may spare a soul that sins 459. S^ares. Their repentance is
seldom sound 268. They think it no great matter to be like others in
wickedness 269. They may rise to a great height 394. They set up Princes to
their own ruin 59^. Streights. In them men look for help from an arm of
flesh 481. Stumbling-blocke, what 7. Superstition, Men will be at great cast
to maintain 212. Suppositions conditional, are of things impossible as well as
possible 546. Swearing. What God swears by, and the manner of h^^ swearing
131. He swears to help our unbelief 140. Why he swears 270. Regards what
he swears 429.
T.
Tachash, what 155. Talents. God gives what talents he pleases 463. we should
be faithful in the use of them 468. Temple. The stateliness and honorable
title given it in Scripture 192. Tophet, what 215. Transgressions. Casting them
away, what it means 570. Trees. All sorts known to God 63. Forest trees better
then Orchard trees often ibid. and 64. Creat ones likened to trees 439. Of the
green tree and d^ye 440, 441. Low trees exalted 446. Trespassing, what it
notes 40. Tribe. That of Judah was a high Cedar 436. Trust. What we are apt to
trust in 205. Truth disaffective finds cold entertainment 412. What to do
truth 507. Turning to God, considerations to put men upon it 17. How to know
whether the soul be truly turned to God 18. Of turning 569, 570. Time of love,
when 120, 12^. God observes times to be gracious 125. There be special times
of Gods manifesting his love to his people, and what times those be 126. Times
of trouble, times of discovery 339. Tyrants are Lions, and wherein 583, 584,
etc. Ends of Tyrants 591, 592. God has times, means, ways to catch them 601.
They continue not long 602. Tyranny, it is hateful to Heathens 601.
V.
Vailes, and the use of them 158, 159. Villages. Towns called daughters 228.
Vine. Wherein the Jews were likened to a Vine 58. 605. Violence. Phraises
about eating and drinking violence, opened 490. What shall befall the violent
man ibid. Unfaithfulness with GOD, makes him expose to contempt 340.
Unfruitfulnesse deprives men of mercies and means 619. Unmercifull. The evil
of unmercifulness 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302. Usury. Of the word Nesheck
493. What it is 494. not lawful ibid. Whether we may lend to the rich upon
usury 494, 495. Profiting usury biting, no such distinction in Scripture 495,
496. No increase to be taken 496. Jews lending to strangers upon use answered
497. What rules it is against 499. Condemned by Counsels 500. it is abomination
518.

W.
Waiting. God waits to do good 125, 126. Walking in Gods statutes set out in
Scripture by several expressions 503. What it imports 504. Washing usual at
deaths and births 89. Of washing and washing away blood 142, 143. Those are the
Lords he washes 149. Waters note poor 390. the mercies of God 607. Ways.
Sinners shall have as their ways are 261. God observes all men's ways 268.
What ways note 360. To whom former ways are matter of shame 364. God leads men
in unwonted ways, 467, 468. Equity of Gods ways 554, 555. Men are apt to
charge GODS ways, and how 564. They are straight, what ever men's thoughts be
of them 565. What requisite to walk in Gods ways 504. Wealth. Whatever men
have it is of the Lords giving 162. Whore, what is her work 234, 235. Whoredom.
Of natural and spiritual whoredom 198. Evil thereof 199, 200. It enfeebles
the heart 235. Wicked fail of their hopes 430, 431. Wickedness, The end of it
woe 226. It Is a close and covert thing 338. It shall not always be hid 339.
Counselors to, and copartners in wickedness shall be punished 433, 434. When
they come to places of eminency they vent those corruptions lay hid 589.
Eminent wickedness brings eminent judgments 603. Wilderness, Two evils in it
614. Those live among the ungodly, live in a wilderness 618. Wills. To be
delivered up to the wills and lusts of men is sad 229. Wind. East Wind, 408.
the nature of it 612. Wing. See skirt, long-winged 385. Woman. Adulterous and
whorish woman 239, 240. Nation understood by women 254. Of the menstruous
cloth 481. men should not come near them at such times 482. Word. They will
not hear it for their consolation, shall hear it for their condemnation 244.
World. God governs it justly 460.
Z.
Zeal. The more zealous in some actions the worse 220. Zedekiah, what it
signifies 390.
A Table of the Scriptures occasionally opened, or briefly illustrated in the
foregoing work.
The first number directs to the Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to
the Page.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page. 2 ^ 459 3 ^ ^88 5 ^ ^^^ 10 25 ^8^ 11 04 191 12 02
191 13 13 307 15 09 and 10 133 15 16 082 16 12 516 19 15 530 19 24 and 25 308
20 16 123 22 03 157 24 65 158 27 15 167 27 46 083 32 20 373 32 28 170 33 05 118
35 04 162 39 06 210 41 42 167 49 09 190 49 22 071 Exodus. 2 09 112 2 10 158 19
04 123 19 06 147 20 08 359 23 20 135 25 04 156 28 02 181 30 30 144 32 01 and 2
212 32 25 326 33 04 171 Leviticus. 05 01 and 17 029 18 19 483 20 17 029 20 18
and 19 483 25 17 488 Numbers. 14 19 144 14 34 348 18 19 132 23 21 227 35 31 and
32 248 Deutronomie. 04 05 148 07 07 and 8 108 17 15 190 22 05 166 22 30 122 26
05 188 28 66 511 29 05 124 30 20 469 32 11 123 32 13 179 32 40 131 33 24 180
Joshuah. 02 06 156 20 03 453 Judges. 05 30 154 08 35 429 09 13 072 14 04 468 19
30 522 Ruth. 03 03 146 03 09 122 04 11 188 1 Samuel 02 29 310 14 44 342 24 04 122
2 Samuel 01 20 229 12 07 223 20 19 228 22 28 274 1 Kings. 03 14 468 05 11 179 07
26 145 08 47 570 14 08 037 20 31 562 22 22 026 2 Kings. 07 04 562 19 15 189 19
23 594 1 Chronicles. 29 ^ 189 29 ^ 426 2 Chronicles. 04 05 145 06 37 570 13 05 132 24 20
409 28 22 241 30 08 426 31 05 179 Ezra. 04 14 132 10 19 436 Nehemiah. 04 02 462
09 17 144 Esther. 02 12 146 Job. 01 22 37 02 03 055 08 14 599 09 04 534 12 18
395 24 14 301 29 06 180 30 18 167 31 12 200 31 12 479 31 21 502 31 26 474 33 20
183 36 06 563 39 30 383 Psalms. Psalm Verse. Page. 04 06 474 05 05 80 08 05 194
09 12 250 09 16 035 12 04 236 15 05 495 17 04 513 21 09 020 22 29 562 25 07 537
34 12 509 37 24 548 39 09 374 41 09 246 43 01 466 44 18 and 19 506 45 07 147 45
14 154 48 11 229 49 12 403 ^^ 15 046 51 11 549 51 14 031 53 01 080 66 18 012 68
05 595 75 04 554 76 01 187 76 02 188 76 04 595 78 38 144 373 90 Title. 049 91
11 292 104 15 147 184 105 22 228 105 43 147 106 10 120 106 13 and 21 222 106 28
474 106 36 009 106 37 219 119 91 461 119 59 521 522 119 119 035 119 176 035 123
001 475 123 004 169 125 001 546 132 018 164 137 007 537 140 011 490 145 017 461
Proverbs. Chap. Verse. Page. 02 17 198 03 33 299 04 13 49 06 06 288 06 11 291 06
33 478 07 10 168 10 15 205 11 07 599 11 12 570 11 21 517 12 21 511 12 22 507
Proverbs. 13 10 273 14 08 505 15 03 010 15 25 274 16 15 511 17 04 548 17 20 231
17 27 524 18 09 292 18 11 334 19 03 533 19 17 303 21 13 300 22 01 510 23 02 185
23 21 285 291 23 35 284 25 21 and 22 363 27 07 282 28 07 285 28 27 298 236 29
08 299 31 15 227 31 18 370 31 21 and 22 156 166 Ecclesiastes. 03 05 483 07 01
195 510 07 15 508 09 01 521 09 04 289 09 10 287 10 16 277 10 17 134 12 02 128
12 07 454 12 10 523 Canticles. 01 03 148 02 05 068 04 01 163 04 05 114 04 08
164 04 11 386 07 07 114 08 08 115 365 08 10 114 Isaiah. 01 2 and 3 204 01 10 84
01 18 37 01 23 486 03 4 464 03 18 163 03 21 160 03 22 173 04 5 123 05 3 66 05 5
68 05 7 473 05 12 and 13 282 05 20 077 05 24 216 08 8 122 08 10 409 22 14 373
25 6 180 26 9 35 27 3 607 31 5 122 33 22 461 40 15 349 40 26 474 42 15 464 44 9
199 46 6 200 46 13 188 48 18 531 52 15 372 54 13 372 55 7 150 56 12 284 57 3 84
57 5 200 57 7 240 58 1 79 58 7 299 59 2 17 61 10 163 164 62 12 108 63 17 26 64
9 537 65 1 107 108 66 3 10 Jeremiah. 2 2 128 2 11 230 2 13 22 2 18 232 2 31 201
3 5 317 3 12 20 4 10 28 5 7 257 7 12 335 7 26 30 7 31 215 9 5 547 10 7 471 13
18 164 14 11 50 15 9 233 17 1 6 19 4 12 20 7 26 20 16 308 23 22 79 23 32 31 24
9 21 31 19 364 31 28 126 31 32 395 33 8 150 34 18 133 46 16 383 50 16 383 50 33
and 34 466 50 38 200 51 25 and 26 332 Lamentations. 1 1 182 3 12 428 3 37 559 3
39 534 4 16 20 5 6 426 Ezekiel. 22 27 488 24 16 7 28 3 44 33 4 516 33 10 519 34
27 191 36 25 150 Daniel. 2 37 384 4 11 445 5 23 468 Hosea. 2 2 6 168 2 5 231 4
11 235 447 4 12 201 5 15 62 77 7 2 521 8 1 350 8 13 10 9 10 22 10 1 65 11 8 257
11 10 37 11 12 193 14 5 and 6 72 14 9 504 Joel. 2 12 16 2 14 109 Amos. 2 6 296
2 9 82 4 2 592 5 12 47 487 6 01 294 6 4 and 6 280 6 8 184 Obadiah. 6 7 132
Micah. 6 3 207 565 0 7 216 Habakkuk. 2 15 281 Zephaniah. 1 8 169 Zachariah. 8
16 502 11 1 387 11 2 394 13 4 174 14 21 389 Malachi. 2 5 480 2 14 479 Matthew.
5 22 30 5 42 495 6 11 210 7 03 527 7 12 488 489 8 22 102 10 28 454 12 45 30 15
11 276 15 20 38 20 3 287 20 6 293 25 12 560 25 19 468 25 25 and 26 293 25 27
498 Mark. 6 11 333 14 3 67 Luke. 1 25 124 6 34 495 6 38 301 303 6 35 499 7 37
038 13 7 293 14 1 210 14 13 184 15 17 15 16 8 498 16 9 297 16 13 297 22 32 549
22 53 465 22 61 364 John. 8 3 221 8 9 325 8 31 546 8 34 547 8 40 547 8 41 207 8
42 84 8 51 454 11 26 454 15 12 298 16 2 77 17 1 475 Acts. 13 10 84 17 28 464 20
35 303 26 18 16 Romans. 4 12 506 9 51 462 10 20 108 13 13 285 1 Cor. 6 12 283 6
13 and 15 477 6 18 477 1 Corin. 7 20 and 24 292 11 5 159 11 10 159 2 Corin. 4 6
370 8 9 295 12 7 273 Galatians. 2 9 426 5 10 29 5 21 283 285 Ephesians. 2 8 46
5 15 and 16 293 6 11 289 6 15 155 Philippians. 3 31 505 3 19 185 279 3 21 174
Colossians. 1 23 546 1 Thessalon. 4 14 454 5 7 186 5 14 289 5 21 533 2
Thessalonians. 2 11 011 3 10 291 3 11 287 289 1 Timothy. 2 9 168 2 10 169 2 12
237 4 10 464 5 6 289 6 22 297 Titus. 1 2 565 Hebrews. 3 12 22 4 2 135 4 24 521
10 29 150 10 38 207 13 4 249 13 5 500 James. 1 14 and 15 25 4 1 236 4 6 273 4 8
12 4 12 236 461 5 4 485 1 Peter. 1 5 545 1 18 526 3 3 168 170 3 7 237 3 12 20 4
3 199 227 5 05 171 2 Peter. 1 10 546 2 6 335 2 13 280 2 14 236 2 20 38 1 John.
2 4 371 3 9 543 547 3 17 298 5 16 47 2 John. 9 551 Jude. 7 308 12 69
Revelation. 1 5 150 6 2 164 12 1 367 16 5 and 6 221 17 16 246 21 9 367

Errata.
PAge 25. in marg. r. jephutteh. p. 33. r. (...) l. 26. p. 38. r. (...). p. 38.
l. 37. r. of, p. 43. l. 16. r. be the cause, p. 47 l. 7. r. practice, p. 55. l.
26. r. vindicate, p. 59 l. 19. r. 15. 2. p. 78. l. 35. r. their. p. 84. l. 26.
del. and. p. 87. l. 24. r. ton. p. 90. l. 12. r. (...). p. 91. l. 4. r. ni. p.
92. l. 4. r. her. p. 94. l. 25. r. put on, p. 95. l. 10. r. they were haters.
p. 97. l. 11. r. verses, p. 101. l. 8. Rev. 11.3. should be in the 6. l. after
sackcloath, or in the marg. against 1260. days, p. 113. l. last, colon at
opinion. p. 114 l. 13. r. shadaim naconu. p. 114. l. last but one r. Cant. 1.
p. 118. l. 15. r. is, p. 124. l 9, 10. and that they might, p. 125. l 4. r.
that hated them, p. 131. l. 26. r. your books, p. 144 l. 17. r. your. l. 20. r.
(...). p. 146. l. 20. r. (...), p. 156. l 15. r. (...) p. 157. l. 16. r partum.
p. 160. l. 2. r. (...) r. nezem. l. 4. from the end, p. 160. and l. 3.
Cartilage for carlilage, p. 168. l. 28. r. 1 Pet. 3. p. 169. l. 8. r.
contemptuous, p. 172. l. 1. r. your. p. 186. l. 10. r. special, p. 189. l. 17.
r. had. p. 191. l. 28. r. (...) p 194. l. 25. r. Ps. 8 5. p. 167. r. 197. p.
197. l. 3. r. (...) p. 199. r. 1 Pet. 4. bet. the end. p. 206. l. 8. Jer. 9. r.
7. p. 207. l. 15. r. the, p. 207. l. 25. Josh. 8 r. John p. 208. l. 16. r.
enjoying, p. 215 l. 12 r. mention, p 225 l. 2 r. head, p 239 r. merendo, p. 239
r. (...) p. 244. l. 31 r. partem. l. ult. for vei r. vas, in marg. r. infimum,
for tuabas, r. tua. p. 256 l. 16 r. toy, p. 257 l. 13 r. their, p. 263. l.
antepenult. r. (...) p. 285. ult. r. Byberius, p. 287 l. to r. (...), p. 291 l.
12. r. neither, in marg. r. seipsis, ib. p. 293 l. 4. r. Math. 20.6. p. 297 l.
28. r. it, p. 309 l. 24 add sins after Angels, p. 319 r. (...) p. 323 l. 33.
make the point after selves, and d. comma after notwithstanding. p. 324. l. 26.
r. poli^ies. p. 328 r. (...) p. 330. l. 23. r. of the people, p. 351 l. 26 r.
amongst, p. 304. l. 3. r. (...) p. 355. l. 36. d: yet, p. 365 l. 35 r. the
words note, p. 367 l. 9 r. Rev. 12.1. p. 372 l. 23 r. (...) p. 376 l. 4 r.
Sampson, p. 379 in marg. (...), p. 384 marg. r. (...) p. 386 l. 10 r. opened,
p. 388 l. 2 r. (...) ib. in marg. r. (...) p. 307 l. ^ r. poor, p. 398 l. 33 r.
lopt off p. 402. l. last, r. K. of Assyria, p. 415 l. 7 r. (...), p. 416 marg.
r. (...) p. 427 marg. judicabor, p. 435 l. 33. r. I shall, p. 457. l. 9. r.
their throne, p. 472. l. 35 r. approvable, p. 477. l. 30. r. dogs, p. 478 l. 15
r. man's name, p. 482 l. 5. r. a toro, p. 483 marg. r. amator ardentior Xistus,
p. 484 marg. opprimere, vim, fieri, p. 485 l. 32 r. your fields, p. 486 marg.
r. pa^res habenda, p. 487 l. 26. r. add, p. 490 l. 12 r. (...) p. 497. l. 25.
r. those. p. 498 l. 8 del. that, p. 499 l. 1 r. this, p. 501 l. 23 r. Gemutian,
p. 507 l. 6 r. (...) l. 16 r (...) p. 512. l. last. r. committed, p. 513. l.
33. r. (...) p: 520. ^20 r, 15. p. 524 l. 18 r. humors, p. 539 r. intelligas
antecedens, vult, quosdam, p. 544 r. sunt, l. 6 r. do, l. 34 and 35 r.
intimates, p. 550 l. 6 r. (...) l. 25. r. (...) p. 564 l. 35 r. our, p. 567 l.
8 r. Judaica, l. 20 r, dispu^es, p. 571 l. 10 r. but is said to, p: 574 l: 32
r. not many, in marg. r. a deo p. 575 l. 24 r. jubes, p. 579 l. 10 r. am
desirous, p. 581 l. 15 r. lamentations, p. 583 marg. r. fiercer intenti ad
praedam. p. 591 l. 8 r. cryptically, p. 592 l. 24 r. hazard, l. 29 r. Amos 4.
p. 593 l. 1. d. there, l. 4 r. (...), l. 9 r. affoiblie, p. 594 l. 19 r. (...),
l. last, r Tereph, p. 595 l. 30. r. vaisedah, l. 32 r. word, p. 596 l. 11 r.
has, p. 603 l. 29 r great, p. 608 l. 23 r regiae, p. 614 l. 18 r hasty, p. 615
l. 13. r. slew. In the Epistle, marg. r. captivitate p. 4. l. 12. r.
Seleucidan. p. 8. l. 25. r Cordillerae. In the Scripture Table, r. Exodus chap.
1. Lamentations, r. Chapter 4. verse. 16. page 20.

FINIS.

