VERA EFFIGIES IOANNIS GAMBLE PHILOMUSICI

This to the Graver owes; By his own hand, But read and Find a most Harmonious
Mind. T. Cross sculpsit I: S:



AIRS AND DIALOGUES (To be Sung to the THEORBO-LUTE Or BASS-VIOL.)

BY JOHN GAMBLE.

Horat. Od. 2. 10. -- Quondam cithara tacentem
Suscitat Musam, neque semper Arcum
Tendit Apollo.
LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for Humphry Mosley at the Princes-Arms In St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To the worthy of all Honor, THOMAS STANLEY, Esquire
SIR,
YOU have been a merciful Creditor in the trust of these inestimable Poems, so
long with me, a person inconsiderable; But I beseech you think I have been
sensible of the great obligation, and always thought it a less trespass to
break with all the world, then by the least forgetfulness of my duty, make an
unhappy forfeit of my self to your displeasure.

Sir, I have brought home your Principal, and though it be a thing beneath your
generous expectation, to look at profit, yet I thought it became my justice to
tender you a small interest, the endeavors of my poor Art, to wait upon it: I
acknowledge it a bold undertaking, to compose your Words (which are so pure
Harmony in themselves) into any other Music; But it was not in my ambition,
or hope to mend the least Accent or Emphasis which they received from your own
numerous Soul, but to essay, how near, a whole life spent in the study of
Musical Compositions, could imitate the flowing and natural Graces, which you
have created by your fancy.

I have only to say, If my zeal have not stained what you have excellently
made, I will not despair of your pardon; and if any thing herein (the wel-meant
tender of my service) may obtain your smile and permission, I shall be confirmed
in my thoughts that I may still write my self

SIR, The most humble and faithful of your Servants, John Gamble.

To the Noble, Few, Lovers of MUSIC.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE soft Relations and Sympathy that this Princess of all Arts has with the
Harmony of your Souls, had even imposed upon my Faith I had committed Rape
upon these Papers, which long ere this on their own Wings, had One by One,
hovered over, and dropped into your generous Breasts for Patronage, and
anticipated this my present Service and Devotion. But I forbad all single
Flights, and by degrees caged each Linnet up, till she had learned her Lesson,
and I completed the whole Consort, full and entire; which as it is, together
with the whole Aviarie, I most humbly Sacrifice to your Mercy and Delight.
Fourscore and six, a Jolly pleasant Band! all of one true Phoebean Strain, yet
each distinctly taught her several Grace, only to Court your various Ear and
Fancy.

My Lords and Gentlemen; I only wish you the same Kind, Genuine Joy in the
Hearing of these Seraphick Poems, as the most Noble Author had in the Writing,
the World in Reading, and my Self in the Composing of them; and then I Am
confident, Music will have wrought a greater Wonder, then to animate with
Sense Plants and Vegetables; that is, to surprise and take in Refined and
Abstracted Spirits, which is a holy Invasion upon Heaven.

But I detain you too long in the Porch with these Loud Instruments, the Soft
Quire waits you within; Please you vouchsafe your favorable Thoughts, whilst
I in all Humility submit my Self

My Lords and Gentl. Your most grateful Servant, John Gamble.

To his Friend THOMAS STANLEY, Esquire On his ODES Set and Published By Mr. JOHN
GAMBLE.
STANLEY the Darling of Apollo, you
That make at once both Verse and Music too;
So sweet a Master of so sweet a Muse,
Whom not to name with honor, were to abuse.
How your words flow! How sweetly do they Chyme,
When your pure Couplets do embrace in Ryme!
How quick, how lovely, and how full of Sense
Your Fancy is, and all that springs from thence!
Which Gamble has enliv'ned by his Art,
And breathed an Active Soul through every part:
And so deduced your Mind to us, that we
May feast our Ears and Souls with raritie.
How much to You, how much to Him we owe,
We can conceive, but cannot make you know;
Nor have we thanks proportioned to your worth,
You that did make, and He that set them forth,
In such a lively Dress too, We admire
What we cannot praise, what we cannot do, Desire;
And therefore turn our praises into prayers,
That You Will make more such Odes, He more such Airs.
Alexander Broom.
On my Friend Mr. JOHN GAMBLE His excellent Composition of the Songs and
Dialogues of THOMAS STANLEY, Esquire
MAN is Composed of Harmony, each Sense
Moves by a Sphericall Intelligence;
Such as have small Skill in Articulate Notes,
Yet, as their Ears do like, can give their Votes;
And by that Judgment I am ^ed (my Friend)
On thy Just Merits some few Lines to spend:
Here, thou have played the Cunning Chemist, fixed
Mercurial-Notes to Words, so aptly mixed,
So wedded to each Accent, Sense, and Feet;
They like two Bodies in one Center meet:
The Elements of Fire and Air here kiss,
Without Confusion, by Hypothesis,
Unto the Muses Lamp thou addest Oil,
By thy Elaborate-Skill, Ingenious Toil:
Plato by Numbers Mounted Heaven, and We
Have no less Ladder thus Inspired by Thee;
We that have Souls! no undigested Stuff,
Like the Dunghill-Cock that Struts after Sr -- Buff;
Let such embrace their Chaos, with it sink,
Discord to them's as good as Meat and Drink;
While We Three Regions 'bove Them sit, and Praise
Thy Concord in these Snarling-Dogged-daies.
Jo. Tatham.
To my Noble Kinsman THOMAS STANLEY, Esquire On his Lyrick Poems Composed by Mr.
JOHN GAMBLE.
I.
WHat means this stately TABLATVRE,
The Balance of thy streins?
Which seems in stead of sifting pure
TO extend and Rack thy veins:
Thy Odes first their own Harmony did break,
For Singing 'troth is but in Tune to speak.
II.
Nor thus thy Golden Feet and Wings
May it be thought false Harmony
TO Ascend to Heaven by Silver Strings,
This is Vrania's Heraldrie;
Thy Royal Poem now we may extol,
And truly, Lun^ blazoned upon Sol.
III.
As when Amphion first did Call
Each listening Stone from's Den,
And with the Lute did form the Wall,
But with his Words, the Men;
So in their twisted Numbers now you thus
Not only Stocks persuade, but Ravish us.
IV.
Thus do your Airs Echo over
The Notes and Anthemes of the Spheres,
And their whole Consort back restore,
As if Earth too would bless Heavens Ears:
But yet the Spoakes on which they scaled so High
Gamble has wisely laid of UT, RE, MI.
Richard Lovelace.
On the Excellent Poems of Tho. Stanley, Esquire Composed by Mr. JOHN GAMBLE.
VVRapt in like Numbers (could the hushed world but hear
The above abstracted Harmony) Such Words
The Octave Intelligence sings to his Sphere,
When all the Astonomers trembling Lines turn Chords.
Thus the Mean Quire of Movers roll in Tone
Their Crystal Tenor-Orbs to the Concent,
This Base the Gammut Heaven of the Moon
Echoes the G-Sol-Re-UT Firmament.
Like which the nobler Poesy consignes
Love Heat, and Beauty beams to Touch and Sight;
Now strung with Rapsodie, the Harmonious Lines
Have taught the Ear burn, and admire what is bright.
As if the King of Song had tuned his Rays,
Make Souls turn Kindred Numbers, and reply
Transport and Rapture, as the untoucht Chord plays,
Who moves the Diapason Sympathy.
And all the Muses Hover in each Air,
Air that they breath; Muses not yet concerned
In Poesy by that name (though Nine were there)
Not from the Poem, but the Music learned.
For when they were but Girls, could yet not spel
Their A-re Alphabet, they could talk Rhyme,
And Tales of Love, and right scanned Fancies tell,
Though not with Fingers, but with Feer kept Time.
Till they from untaught Strokes, and used to Twang
Over all the Fathers sleeping untuned Lyre,
Began to wonder what it was he Sang,
So by degrees Consorted into Quire.
Clio, Urania, had no name beside
The Godfather gave at the Fount Hippocrene
Muse, the addition of Maturer pride
Inured like State noise Princess and the Queen.
But since the god assents, both Artists treat
The Hills royal Parcener, thus She does choose
Both Favorites Consorts to the lawful Sheet,
Or^ as She Is Clio, the other as the Muse.
Jo. Redmayne.
To my much honored Cozen Mr. Stanley, Upon his Poems set by Mr. JOHN GAMBLE.
I.
ENough, Enough, of Orbs and Spheres,
Reach me a Trumpet or a Drum,
To sound sharp Synnets in your Ears,
And Beat a Deep Encomium.
II.
I know not the Eight Intelligence;
Those that do understand it, Pray
Let them step thither, and from thence
Speak what they all do Sing or Say:
III.
Nor what your Diapasons are,
Your Sympathies and Symphonies;
To me they seem as distant far
As whence they take their Infant rise.
IV.
But I Have a grateful Heart can ring
A peale of Ordnance to your praise,
And Volleys of small Plaudits bring
To Clowd a Crown about your Baies.
V.
Though Laurel is thought Thunder-free,
That Storms and Lightning Disallows,
Yet Caesar thorough Fire and Sea
Snatched her to twist his Conquering Brows.
VI.
And now me thinks like him you stand
IN the head of all the Poetts Host,
Whilst with your Words you do Command,
They silent do their Duty Boast.
VII.
Which done, the Army Echoes over
Like Gamble Ios One and all,
And in their various Notes implore
Long live our noble General.
Dudley Posthumus Lovelace.
On Mr. Gamble's Composing of Mr. Stanley's Incomparable ODES.
SUre when this Lyre was touched, fit Words
Did Dance in Order to the Chords;
And Lines in Harmony thus strung
Rise sprightly Cap'ring on the Tongue;
We that but read with hoarser Throats,
Do yet disturb them into Notes;
And who Repeats, unwitting Sings,
As Echoes rise from Jangled Strings:
So The^an Walls by Batt'ries soon
As Shaken, totter into Tune;
And Instruments that Scrued stand,
Sound, Struck by an unwilling Hand:
So a but peradventure Fall
Awakes the sleeping Harpsychall,
Which since the Artist ang'red last
Lay lulled in its own Music fast.
Here Is no disordring the fair Mind,
Unruly matter up to bind,
Until the too much forced Zones
Snapt, Knit in short Ellisions;
No Crowded words in Huddle meet,
That shuffle on un-even Feet,
And struggling labor in their Pains,
As if the Verse were paced in Chains.
The very Syllables as Clear
Passed (as their Airs now) through the Ear;
And He that made the Essence whole,
Cannot distinguish which is Soul,
Where one informs the other, They
So mix in their Vnbodyed Play.
Eldred Revet.
I. The Return.
^ BEauty whose soft Magnetic chains nor time not absence can untie, ^
Thy power the narrow bounds disdains of Nature or Philosophy; ^
That can by unconfined Laws, a motion, though at distance; cause. ^
II.
Drawn by the powerful Influence
Of thy bright eyes, I back return:
And since I no where can dispense
With flames which do in absence burn,
I rather choose 'twixt them to expire,
Then languish in a hidden fire.
III.
But if thou the insulting pride
Of vulgar beauties do despise,
Who by vain triumphs Deifide
Their votaries do sacrifice,
Then let those flames, whose magic charm
At distance scorched, aproch'd, but warm.
I. The Answer.
^ BEauty thy harsh imperious chains, as a scorned weight I here un-tie; ^
since thy proud Empire those disdains, of reason or Philosophy: ^
That would within Tyranick laws, confine the power of each free Cause. ^
II.
Forced by the powerful Influence
Of thy disdain, I back return;
Thus with those fl^mes I do dispense,
Which though they would not, light did burn,
And rather will through cold expire,
Then languish in a frozen fire.
III.
But whilst I the insulting pride
O^ thy vain beauty do despise,
Who gladly would be Deifide
By making me thy sacrifice*
May Love thy Heart, which is his Charm,
Approch'd, seemed cold; at distance, warm.
^ WHen, cruel Fair one, I am slain, by thy disdai^; and, as a Trophy of thy ^
scorn, to some old tomb am born; thy fetters must their power bequeath to ^
those of death; nor c^n thy flame immortal burn, like monumental fires within ^
an urn; Thus freed from thy proud Empire, I shall prove, there is ^
more liberty in Death then Love. ^
II.
And when forsaken Lovers come
To see my tomb,
Take heed thou mix not with the crowd,
And (^s a Victor) proud
To view the spoils thy beauty made
Press near my shade,
Lest thy too cruel breath or name
Should f^n my ashes back into a flame,
And thou, devoured by this revengeful fire,
His sacrifice, who died as thine, expire.
III.
But if cold Earth, or Marble must
Conceal my dust,
Whilst hid in some dark ruins, I
Dumb and forgotten lie,
The pride of all thy victory
Will sleep with me;
And they who should attest thy Glory,
Will, or forget, or not believe this story:
Then to increase thy Triumph, let me rest,
Since by ^ine Eye slain, buried in thy Breast.
^ CElinda, by what potent Art, or unresisted charm, do thou thine ear and ^
frozen heart against my passion arm; or by what hidden influence, of powers ^
in one combined, do thou rob love of either sense, made deaf as well as
blind. ^
II.
Sure thou as friends united have
Two distant Deities
And Scorn within thy Heart have placed
And Love within thine Eyes.
Or those soft Fetters of thy Hair
A bondage that disdains
All Liberty, does guard thy Ear
Free from all other chains.
III. The Close.
^ Then my Complaint, how can thou hear; or I this passion fly; since ^
thou imprisoned have thine ear, and not confined thine eye. ^
^ When I lie burning in thine eye, or freezing in thy breast, what Martyrs ^
in wished flames that die, are half so pleased or blessed? when thy soft accents
^
through mine ear, into my soul do fly; what Angel would not quit his ^
sphere, to hear such harmony? ^
II.
Or when the kiss thou gav'st me last
My soul stole in its breath,
What life would sooner be embraced
Then so desired a death?
When I commanded am by thee,
Or by thine eyes or hand;
What Monarch would not prouder be
To serve, then to command.
The Close.
^ III. Then think no freedom I desire, or would my fetters leave, since
Phoenix. ^
like I from this fire both life and youth receive. ^
^ FAvonius, the milder breath o'th Spring, when proudly bearing on his ^
softer wing, rich Odors, which from the Panchean Groves, he steals, as ^
by the Phoenix pyre he moves, pro^usely does his sweeter theft dispense ^
to the next Roses blushing innocence; but from the grateful flower a ^
richer sent he back receives then he unto it lent. ^
II.
Then laden with his odours richest store,
He to thy breath hasts, to which these are pore;
Which whilst he spor^ively to steal essa^es,
He like a wanton Lover 'bout thee plays.
And sometimes coo^ing thy soft cheek does lie,
And sometimes burning at thy flaming eye;
Drawn in at last by that breath we implore,
He back returns, far sweeter then before.
The Close.
^ And rich by being robbed, in Thee he ^inds, the burning sweets of ^
Pyres, the cool of Winds. ^
^ SO fair Aurora does her self discover, ashamed oth' aged bed of her cold
Lover, ^
in modest blushes, whilst the treacherous light betrays her early shame to the
^
worlds sight. Such a brigh^ color does the morning rose diffuse, when ^
she her soft self does disclose half drowned in dew, whilst on each leaf a
tear ^
of night does like a dissolved pearl appear. ^
II.
Yet 'twere in vain a color out to seek
To p^r^lell my Chariessa's Cheek,
Less are conferd with greater, and these seem
To blush like her, not she to blush like them,
But whence fair Soul this passion what pretense
Had guilt to stain thy spotless innocence;
Those only this feel who have guilty been,
Nor any blushes know but who know sin.
The Close.
^ Then blush no more, bl^sh no more, but let thy chaster flame that knows no ^
cause know no effects of shame. ^
^ ON this swelling bank once proud, of its burden Doris lay; here she smiled
and ^
did uncloud those bright Suns eclipse the day; here we sat, and with kind ^
Art she about me twined her Arms, clasp't in hers my hand and ^
heart fettered in those pleasing charms. ^
II.
Hear my Love and Joys she crowned,
Whilst the hours stood still before me,
With a killing glance did wound,
And a melting kiss restore me.
On the down of either breast,
Whilst with joy my soul retired,
My reclining head did rest,
Till her lips new life inspired.
The Close.
^ III. Thus renewing of these sights, does with grief and pleasure fill me,
and the ^
thought of these delights, both at once revive and kill me. ^
^ I Prithee let my heart alone, since now it is raised above thee; not all the ^
beauty thou do own again can make me love thee. He that was shipwrackt ^
once before by such a Sirens call, and yet neglects to shun the shore,
deserves ^
his second fall. ^
II.
Each flattering kiss, each tempting smile
Thou do in vain bestow,
Some other Lovers might begui^e
Who not thy falsehood know.
But I am proof against all art,
No vows shall ere persuade me
Twice to present a wounded heart
To her that has betrayed me.
The Close.
^ Could I again be brought to love thy form, though more di-vine, ^
I might thy scorn as justly move, as now thou suffer'st mine. ^
^ LOve what tytanick laws must they obey, who bow beneath thy uncontrolled ^
sway; or how unjust will that harsh Empire prove, forbids to hope, and ^
yet commands to love: Must all are to thy hell condemned sustain a ^
double torture of despair and pain; is it not enough vainly to hope and woo, ^
that thou should thus deny that vain hope too. ^
II.
It were some hope Ixion-like to fold
The empty air, or feed on thoughts that is cold*
But if thou to my passion this deny,
Thou may be starved to death as well as I.
For how can thy pale sickly flame burn clear,
When death and old despair inhabit here?
Then let thy dim heat warm, or else expire;
Dissolve this frost, or let that quench the fire.
The Close.
^ Thus let me not desire, or else possess; neither or both are equal hapiness.
^
^ DElay! Alas there cannot be to Love a greater tyranny: those cruel ^
beauties that have slain their Votaries by their disdain, or studied torments ^
sharp and witty, will be recorded for their pity, and after-ages be misled ^
to think them blind, when this is spread. ^
II.
Of deaths the speedyest is Despair,
Delays the slowest torments are:
Thy cruelty at once destoys
But expectation starves my joys:
Time and Delay, may bring me past
The power of Love to cure, at last;
And should thou wish to ease my pain,
Thy pity might be lent in vain.
The Close.
^ Or if thou have decreed that I must be beneath thy cruelty: Oh kill me ^
soon, thou will express more mercy even in showing less. ^
I.
^ Prithee trouble me no more; I will drink, be mad, and rore: Alcmae'on ^
and Orestes grew mad, when they their Mothers slew: but I no man having ^
killed am with hurtlesse fury filled; ^
II.
Hercules with madness struck;
Bent his Bow, his Quiver shook;
Ajax mad, did fiercely wield
Hectors Sword, and graspt his Shield:
I nor Spear nor Target have,
But this Cup (my weapon) wave:
The Close. III.
^ Crowned with roses, thus for more Wine I call, drink, dance, and rore. ^
I.
^ ROses (Loves delight) let us join to the red cheek'd God of Wine: Roses ^
crown us, while we laugh, and the juice of Autumn quaff: Roses of all ^
Flowers the King; Roses the fresh pride oth' spring: ^
II.
Joy of every Deity;
Love, when with the graces he
For the Ball himself disposes,
Crowns his golden hair with Roses.
Circling then with these our brow
We Will to Bacchus Temple go:
The Close. III.
^ There some willing Beauty lead, and a youthful measure tread. ^
I.
^ FOolish Lover go and seek for the Damask of the Rose, or the Lillies ^
white dispose, to adorn thy Mistress cheek; steal some star out of the ^
sky, rob the Phoenix, and the East of her wealthy sweets divest, to enrich her ^
breath or eye. ^
II.
We thy borrowed pride despise
For this wine to which we are
Votaries, is richer far
Then her che^ks, or breath, or eyes:
And should that coy fair one view
These diviner beauties, she
In these fl^mes would rival thee,
And be taught to love thee too.
III.
Come then break thy wanton chain,
That when this brisk wine has spread
On thy paler cheek a red,
Thou like us may love disdain:
Love, thy power must yield to wine;
And whilst thus our selves we arm,
Boldly we defy thy charm,
For these flames distinguish thine.
I.
^ DEar, back my wounded heart restore, and turn away thy powerful eyes; ^
Flatter my willing Soul no more, Love cannot hope what Fate denies; take ^
take away thy smiles and kisses; thy Love wounds deeper then disdain, ^
for he that sees the heaven he misses, sustains two hels of loss and pain. ^
II.
Should thou some others suit prefer,
I might return thy scorn to thee,
And learn Apostasy of her
Who taught me first Idolatry.
Or in thy unrelenting breast
Should I disdain or coyness move,
He by thy hate might be released,
Who now is prisoner to thy love.
III.
Since then unkind Fate will divorce
Those whom Affection long united,
Be thou as cruel as this force,
And I in death shall be delighted.
Thus whilst so many Suppliants woe
And beg, they may thy pity prove,
I only for thy scorn do sue,
It Is charity here not to love.
I.
^ SInce Fate commands me hence, and I must leave my soul with thee, and die ^
Dear, spare one sigh, or else let fall a tear to crown my Funeral, that I may ^
tell my grieved heart, Thou art unwilling we should part; and ^
Martyrs that embrace the fire shall with less joy then I expire. ^
II.
With this last ^iss I will bequeath
My soul transfused into thy breath;
Whose active heat shall gently slide
Into my breast, and there reside:
And may in spite of Fate thus blessed
Be in this death of heaven possessed:
Then prove but kind, and thou shall see
Love has more power then Destiny.
(17 Song.)
^ CHide, chide no more; Away, the fleeting daughters of the day; ^
nor with impatient thoughts outrun the lazy Sun, not think the hours do ^
^ move to slow del^y is kind, and we too soon shall find, that which we ^
seek, yet fear to find. ^
II.
The mystic dark decrees
Unfold not of the Destinies,
Nor boldly seek to antedate
The Laws of Fate:
Thy anxious search a while forbear,
Suppress thy have,
And know that time at last
Will crown thy hope, or fix thy fear.
(Song 18.)
^ FOol take up thy shaft again, if thy store thou profusely spend in vain; ^
who can furnish thee with more? Throw not then away thy darts, on ^
impenetrable hearts. ^
II.
Think not thy pale flame can warm
Into ^ears,
Or dissolve the snowy charm
Which her frozen bosom wears,
That exposed unmelted lies
To the bright suns of her eyes.
III.
But since thou thy power have lost,
Nor can fire
Kindle in that breast, whose frost
Does these flames in mine inspire,
Nor to thee but Her I Will s^e,
That disdains both me and you.
I.
^ THough when I loved thee thou were fair, thou art no longer so; those
glories ^
all the pride they wear unto opinion owe; Beauties, like stars in borrowed ^
luster shine, and 'twas my love that gave thee thine. ^
II.
The flames that dwelt within thine eye,
Do now, with mine, expire;
Thy brightest Graces fade and die
At once with my desire;
Loves fires thus mutual influence return,
Thine cease to shine, when mine to burn.
III.
Then (proud Celinda) hope no more
To be implored or wooed;
Since by thy scorn thou do restore
The wealth my love bestowed;
And thy despised Disdain too late shall find
That none are fair but who are kind.
Song 20.
^ WHen dearest Beauty thou shall pay thy fith and my vain hope away, to ^
^ some dull Soul that cannot prize or know the worth of that thou do bestow;
^
least with thy sighs and tears I might disturb thy unconfined delight; ^
to some dark shade I will retire and there forgot by all, expire. ^
II.
Thus whilst the diffierence thou shall prove,
Betwixt a feigned and real Love,
Whilst he, more h^ppy, but less true,
Shall^e^p those joyes^ did pursue,
And with those pleasures crowned be
By F^te, which love designed for me
Then thou perhaps thy self wilt find*
Cruel too ^ong, or too soon kind.
Song 21.
^ THink not pale Lover he who dies burnt in the flames of Celias eyes, ^
is unto Love a sacrifice. ^
II.
Or by the merit of this pain
Thou shall the crown of Martyrs gain
Those hopes are as thy passion vain.
III.
For when by death from these flames free
To greater thou condemned shall be,
And punished for Idolatry.
IV.
Since thou Loves Votary before,
Whilst she was kind do him no more
But in his shrine disdain adore.
V.
Nor will this fire the gods prepare
To punish scorn that Cruel fair
Thou now from flames exempted spare.
VI.
But as together both shall die,
Both burnt alike in flames shall lie,
She in thy heart, thou in her eye.
(22.)
^ TOrment of absence and delay, that thus afflicts my memory, Why ^
do thou kill me every day, yet will not give me leave to die: Why ^
do thou suffer me to live? All hope of life in life denying; or to my ^
patience tortures give, never to die, yet ever dying. ^
II.
To fair Narcissa's brighter eyes,
I was by Loves instruction guided,
A happiness I long did prize,
But now am from their light divided.
Favors and gifts my Suit obtained,
But envyous Fate would now destroy them;
Which if to lose I only gained,
What greater pain then to enjoy them.
Song 23.
I.
^ I Will not trust thy tempting graces, or thy deceitful charms; nor ^
prisoner be to thy embraces, or fettered in thy arms; no Celia, no, ^
not all thy art can wound or captivate my heart. ^
II.
I will not gaze upon thy Eyes,
Or wanton with thy Hair,
Lest those should burn me by surprise,
Or these my soul ensnare:
Nor with those smiling dangers play,
Or fool my liberty away.
III.
Since then my wary heart is free,
And unconfined as thine,
If thou would mine should captive be,
Thou must thine own re^igne,
And gratitude may thus move more
Then Love or Beauty could before.
I.
^ YOu that unto your Mistress eyes your hearts do sacrifice, and offer sighs
or ^
tears at Loves rich shrine, renounce with me the Idolatry, nor this infernal ^
power esteem divine. ^
II.
The Brand, the Quiver, and the Bow,
Which we did first bestow,
And he as tribute wears from every Lover,
I back again
From him have taken,
And the Impostor now unvailed discover.
III.
I can the feeble child disarm,
Unty his mystic charm,
De^est him of his Wings, and break his Arrow,
We will obey
No more his sway,
Nor live confined to laws or bounds so narrow.
IV.
And you bright Beauties that inspire
The boys pale torch with fire.
We safely now your subtle power despise,
And (unscorch'd) may
Like Atoms play,
And wanton in the sunshine of your eyes.
V.
Nor think hereafter by new arts
You can bewitch our hearts,
Or raise this Devil by your pleasing charm;
We will no more
His power implore,
Unless like Indians, that he do no harm.
I.
^ YOu earthly Souls that court a wanton flame, whose pale weak influence can ^
rise no higher then the humble name and narrow laws of Sense, learn by our ^
friendship to create an imaterial fire, whose brightness Angels may admire, ^
but cannot emulate. ^
II.
Sickness may fright the roses from her cheek,
Or make the Lillies fade,
But all the subtle ways that death does seek
Cannot my love invade:
Flames that are kindled by the eye,
Through time and age expire;
But ours that boast a reach far higher
Cannot decay, nor die.
III.
For when we must resign our vital breath,
Our Loves by Fate benighted,
We by this friendship shall survive in death,
Even in divorce united.
Weak Love through fortune or distrust
In time forgets to burn,
But this pursues us to the Urn,
And marries either's dust.
Song 26.
I.
^ SEE how this Violet which before hung sullenly her drooping head, ^
as angry at the ground that bore the purple treasure which she spread, dork ^
smilingly erected grow, transplanted to those hills of snow. ^
II.
And whilst the pillows of thy breast
Do her reclining head su^ain,
She swells with pride to be so blessed,
And does all others flowers disdain;
Yet weeps that dew which kissed her last,
To see her odo^rs so surpast.
III.
Poor flower, how far deceived thou were,
To think the ^rches of the morn,
Or all the sweets she can impart,
Could these or sweeten, or adorn,
Since thou from them do borrow sent,
And they to thee lend ornament.
Song 27.
I.
^ Why thy passion should it move, that I wished thy Beauty less? Fools ^
desire what is above power of nature to express, and to wish it had been ^
more, had been to outwish her store. ^
II.
If the flames within thine eye
Did not too great heat inspire,
Men might languish, yet not dye,
At thy less ungentle fire,
And might on thy weaker light
Gaze, and yet not lose their sight.
III.
Nor would thou less fair appear,
For detraction adds to thee;
If some parts less beauteous were,
Others would much fairer be:
N^r can any part we know
Best be styled, when all are so.
IV.
Thus this great excess of light
Which now dazels our weak eyes,
Would eclipsed, appear more bright,
And the only way to rise;
Or to be more fair then thee
Celia, is less fair ^o be.
Song 28.
I.
^ ASk the Empress of the night, how that hand which guides her sphere, ^
constant in unconstant light, taught the waves her yoke to bear: ^
And did thus by loving force curb or ^ame the rude Seas course. ^
II.
Ask the female Palm how she
First did woo her Husbands love;
And the Magnetic, ask how she
Does the obsequious Iron move:
Waters, Plants, and Stones know this,
That they love, not what Love is.
III.
Be not thou less kind then those,
Or from Love exempt alone;
Let us twine like amorous Trees,
And like Rivers melt in one;
Or if thou more cruel prove,
Learn of Steel and Stone ^o love.
Song 29.
I.
^ DEarurge no more the killing cause of our divorce; Love is not fettered ^
by such laws, nor bows to any force though thou deniest I should be thine, ^
yet say not thou deserve not to be mine. ^
II.
Oh rather frown away my breath
With thy disdain,
Or flatter me with smiles to death;
By joy or sorrow slain,
It Is less crime to be kill' by thee,
Then I thus cause of mine own death should be*
III.
Thy self of beauty to divest
And me of love,
Or from the worth of thine own breast
Thus to detract, would prove
In us a blindness, and in thee
At best a sacriligious modesty*
IV.
But ( Celia) if thou wile despise
What all admire,
Nor rate thy self at the just price
Of beauty or desire.
Yet meet thy flames, and thou shall see
(...) disparitie
Song 25.
I.
^ NOt that by this disdain I am released, and freed from thy tyrannick ^
chain, do I my self think blessed; nor that thy flame shall burn no more for ^
know, that I shall into ashes turn, before this fire does so. ^
II.
Nor yet that unconfined
I now may rove,
And with new beauties please my mind;
But that thou never did love:
For since thou have no part
F^lt of this flame,
I only from thy tyrant heart
Repulsed, not banished am.
III.
To loose what once was mine
Would grieve me more
Then those ^nconst^nt sweets of thine
Had pleased my soul before.
Now I have not lost the bliss
I never possessed;
And spite of Fate am blessed in this,
That I was never blessed.
Song 31.
I.
^ When deceitful Lovers lay at thy feet, their suppliant hearts and their ^
sn^res spread to betray thy best treasure with their arts, credit not their ^
flattering vows, Love such perjury allows. ^
II.
When they with their choycest wealth
Nature boasts of, have possessed thee;
When with flowers their verses stealth,
Stars to Jewels does divest thee:
Trust not to their borrowed store,
It Is but lent to make thee poor.
III.
When with Poems they invade thee,
Sigh thy praises, or disdain;
When they weep, and would persuade thee
That their flames beget that rain:
Let thy breast no bates let in,
Mercy's only here a sin.
IV.
Let no tears or offerings move thee,
At those cunning charms avoid,
For that wealth for which they love thee
They would ^light, if once enjoyed:
Guard thy unrelenting mind,
None are cruel, but the kind.
I.
^ HE whose active thoughts disdain to be captive to one foe, and would ^
break his single chain, or else more would undergo; Let him learn the ^
art of me, by new bondage to be free. ^
II.
What tyrannick Mistress dare
To one beauty love confine?
Who unbounded as the air
All may court but none decline:
Why should we the Heart deny
As many objects as the Eye?
III.
Wheresoever I turn or move
A new passion does detain me:
Those kind beauties that do love,
Or those proud ones that disdain me;
This frown melts, and that smile burns me;
This to tears, that ashes turns me.
IV.
Soft fresh Virgins not full blown,
With their youthful sweetness take me;
Sober Matrons that have known
Long since what these prove, awake me*
Here staid coldness I admire,
There the lively active fire.
V.
She that does by skill dispense
Every favor she bestows,
Or the harmless innocence
Which nor C^urt nor City knows,
Both alike my soul inflame,
That wild beauty, and this ^ame.
VI.
She that wisely can adorn
Nature with the wealth of Art,
Or whose rural sweets do scorn
Borrowed helps to take a heart,
The vain care of that is my pleasure,
Poverty of this my treasure.
VII.
Both the wanton and the coy
Me with equal pleasures move*
She whom I by force enjoy,
Or who forces me to love;
This because she will not confess,
That not hide her happiness,
VIII.
She whose loosly flowing hair,
Scattered like the beams of the Morn,
Playing with the sportive air,
Hides the sweets it does adorn,
Captive in that net restrains me,
In those golden fetters chains me.
IX.
Nor does she with power less bright
My divided heart invade,
Whose soft tresses spread like Night,
Over her shoulders a black shade;
For the starlight of her eyes
Brighter shines through those dark Skies.
X.
Black, or fair, or tall, or low,
I alike with all can sport;
The bold sprightly Thais woo,
Or the frozen vestall court;
Every beauty takes my mind,
Tied to all, to none confined,
Song 33.
I.
^ NO, I will sooner trust the wind, when falsely kind it courts the pregnant ^
Sails into a storm, and when the smiling waves persuade be willingly betrayed,
^
then thy deceitful Vows or Form. ^
II.
Go and beguile some easy heart
With thy vain art;
Thy smiles and kisses on those foo^s bestow,
Wh^ only see the Calms that sleep
On this smooth fl^tt'ring Deep,
But not the hidden dangers know.
III.
They that like me thy falsehood prove,
Will scorn thy Love.
Some may deceived at first adore thy Shrine,
But He that as thy sacrifice
Does willingly fall twice,
Dies his own Martyr, and not thine.
I.
^ SUch icy kisses Anchorites that live secluded from the world to dead sculs
give, ^
and these cold Maids on whom Love never spent his flame, nor know what ^
by desire is meant to their expiring fathers, such bequeath, snatching their ^
fleeting spirits in that breath, the timorous Priest does with such fear and ^
nice devotion touch the holy Sacrifice. ^
II.
Fie Chari^ssa, whence so changed of late,
As to become in love a reprobate?
Quit, quit this dullness, Fairest, and make known
A fl^me unto me, equal with my own:
Shake off this frost for shame, that dwells upon
Thy lip, or if it will not so be gone,
Let Us once more join our lip, and thou shall see
That by the flame of mine 'twill melted be.
I.
^ THat I might ever dream thus, that some power to my eternal sleep would ^
join this hour, so willingly deceived I might possess in seeming joys a ^eal ^
happiness: Death, I would gladly bow beneath thy charms, if thou could ^
bring my D^ris to my arms; that thus at last made happy I might prove in ^
life the hell, in death the heaven of love. ^
II.
Have not away so soon, mock not my joys
With the delusive sight, or empty noise
Of happiness; Oh do not dissipate
A pleasure thou so lately did create.
Shadows of life or death do such bliss give,
That it is an equal curse to wake or live;
Stay then kind sleep, be ever here confined;
Or if thou will away, leave her behind.
I.
^ ROses in breathing forth their sent, or stars their borrowed ornament; ^
Nymphs in the watery sphere that move, or Angels in their orbs above; ^
the winged chariot of the light, or the ^low silent wheels of night; ^
the shade which from the swifter Sun, does in a circular motion run; or ^
souls that their eternal Rest do keep, Make far less noise then Caelia's ^
Breath in sleep. ^
II.
But if the Angel which inspires
This subtle flame with active fires,
Should mould this breath to words, and those
Into a harmony dispose;
The music of this heavenly sphere
Would steal each soul out at the ear,
And into plants and stones infuse
A life that Cherubins would choose;
And with new powers invert the laws of Fate,
Kill those that live, and dead things animate*
I.
^ REbellious fools that scorn to bow beneath Loves easy sway, whose stubborn ^
wills no laws allow, disdaining to obey, mark but this wreath of hair and ^
you shall see, None that might wear such fetters would be free. ^
II.
I once could boast a soul like you
As unconfined as air;
But mine, which force could not subdue,
Was caught within this snare;
And (by my self betrayed) I for this gold,
A heart that many storms withstood, have sold.
III.
No longer now wise Art enq^ire
(With this vain search delighted)
How souls that humane breasts inspire
Are to their frames united;
Material chains such spirits well may bind,
When this soft braid can tie both Arm and Mind.
IV.
Now (Beauties) I defy your charm,
Ruled by more powerful Art,
This mystic wreath which crowns my Arm,
Defends my vanquished Heart;
And I, subdued by one more fair, shall be
Secured from Conquest by Captivity.
I.
^ YEt ere I go, disdainful Beauty thou shall be so wretched, as to know ^
what joys thou fling'st away with me. A Faith so bright as Time or Fortune ^
could not rust; so firm that Lovers might have read thy story in my dust. ^
And crowned thy name with Laurel verdant as thy Youth, whilst the shril ^
voice of F^me spread wide thy Beauty and my Truth. ^
II.
This thou have lost;
For all true Lovers, when they find
That my just aims were ^rost,
Will speak thee lighter then the wind.
And none will lay
Any oblation on thy shrine,
But such as would betray
Thy faith, to faiths as false as thine.
Yet if thou choose
On such thy freedom to bestow,
Affection may excuse,
For love from Sympathy does flow.
I.
^ CAst off for shame ungentle maid that misbecoming joy thou wear'st; ^
For in my Death (though long delayed) unwisely cruel thou appear'st. ^
Insult over Captives with disdain, thou can not triumph over the slain. ^
II.
No, I am now no longer thine,
Nor can thou take delight to see
Him whom thy love did once confine
Set, though by Death, at Liberty:
For if my fall a smile beget,
Thou gloriest in thy own defeat.
III.
Behold how thy unthrifty pride
Has murtherd him that did maintain it;
And wary Souls who never tried
Thy Tyrant Beauty, will disdain it:
But I am softer, and that me
Thou would not pity, pity thee.
I.
^ Were thou by all affections sought, and fairer then thou would be thought,
^
or had thine eyes as many Darts as thou believ'st they shoot at Hearts, ^
Yet if thy Love were paid to me, I would not offer mine to thee. ^
II.
I Would sooner court a Fevers heat,
Then her that owns a Flame as great;
She that my Love will entertain,
Must meet it with no less disdain.
For mutual fires themselves destroy,
And willing Kisses yield no Joy.
III.
I love thee not because alone
Thou can all Beauty call thine own,
Nor does my passion fuel seek,
In thy bright Eye, or softer Cheek:
Then Fairest if thou would know why
I love cause thou can deny.
I.
^ Deceived and undeceived to be at once I seek with equal care, wreched in ^
the discovery, happy if cozened still I were: yet certain ill of ill has ^
less then the mistrust of happiness. ^
II.
But if when I have reached my aim,
(That which I seek less worthy prove,)
Yet still my love remains the same,
The subject not deserving love;
I can no longer be excused
Now more in fault as less abused.
III.
Then let me flatter my desires,
And doubt what I might know too sure,
He that to cheat himself conspires,
From falshhood does his faith secure
In Love ^ncertain to believe
I am deceived, does undeceive.
IV.
For if my Life on Doubt depend,
And in distrust inconstant steer,
If I essay the strife to end
(When Ignorance were Wisdom here;)
All thy attempts how can I blame
To work my Death? I seek the same.
I.
^ MEn and Maids at time of year the ripe clusters jointly bear to the Press, ^
but in when thrown they by men are trod alone, who in B^cchus praises ^
join, squeeze the Grape, let out the wine: Oh with what delight they ^
spy the new must when tunn'd work high! ^
II.
Which if old men freely take,
Their gray heads and heels they shake;
And a young man if he find
Some fair Maid to sleep resigned,
In the shade, he straight goes to her,
Wakes, and roundly gi^s to woo her;
Whilst love slily stealing in
Tempts her to the pleasing sin.
III.
Yet she long resists his offers,
Nor will hear what ere he proffers;
Till perceiving that his prayer
Melts into regardless air;
Her, who seemingly restrains,
He by pleasing force constrains:
Wine does boldness thus dispense,
Teaching young men insolence.
I.
^ I Must no longer now admire the coldness which possessed thy snowy breast, ^
That can by other flames be set on fire; poor Love to harsh ^
disdain betrayed, is by ambition thus out-weigh'd. ^
II.
Had thou but known the vast extent
Of Constant Faith, how far
'Bove all that are
Born slaves to Wealth, or Honors vain assent;
No richer Treasure could thou find
Then hearts with mutual Chains combined.
III.
But Love is too despised a name,
And must not hope to rise
Above these ties.
Honor and Wealth outshine his paler Flame;
These unite Souls, whilst true desire
Unpitied dies in its own Fire.
IV.
Yet, cruel Fair one, I did aim
With no less justice too,
Than those that sue
For other hopes, and thy proud Fortunes claim,
Wealth honors, honors wealth approve,
But Beauty's only meant for Love.
I.
^ Love the ripe harvest of my toyls began to cherish with his smiles,
preparing ^
me to be indu'd with all the Joys I long persu'd; when my fresh hopes, ^
fair and full blown, death blasts ere I could ca'l my own. ^
II.
Malicious Death, why with rude force
Do thou my Fair from me divorce?
False life why in this loathen chain
Me from my Fair do thou detain:
In whom assistance shall I find,
Alike are Life and Death unkind.
III.
Pardon me Love, thy power outshines
And laughs at their infirm designs;
She is not wedded to atoombe,
Nor I to sorrow in her Room:
They what thou joynst' can never divide,
She lives in me, in her I died,
I.
^ SEe the Spring her self discloses, and the Graces gather roses: See how the
becalmed ^
Seas now their swelling waves appease; how the Duck swims ^
how the Crane come's from's Winter Home aganie see how Titan's Chearrful ^
Raye chaseth the dark Clouds a way, ^
II.
Now in their new robes of green
Are the Plough-mens labors seen;
Now the lusty teeming Earth
Springs each hour with a new birth;
Now the Olive blooms; the Vine
Now does with plump pendants shine,
And with leaves and blossoms now
Freshly bourgeons every bough.
Song 46.
^ NOw will I a Lover be, Love himself commanded me; full at first of ^
^ stubborn pride, to submit my soul denied, he his Quiver takes and B^w, ^
bids de^iance, forth we go; armed with spear and shield we meet, ^
on he charges, I retreat. ^
II.
Till perceiving in the ^ight
He had wasted every slight,
Into me, with fury hot,
Like a dart himself he shot,
And my cold heart melts my shield
Useless, no defense could yield;
For what boots an outward skreen
When (alas) the fights within?
Song 47.
^ DEar fold me once more in thine Arms; and let me know, before I go, ^
there is no bliss but in those charms, by thy fair self I swear, that
here ^
and only here I would for ever ever stay, but cruel Fate calls me away. ^
II.
How swiftly the light minutes slide
The hours that have
Away thus fast
By envyous flight my stay do chide:
Yet Dear, since I must go,
By this last kiss I vow
By all that sweetness which dwells with thee,
Time shall move slow, till next I see thee.
Song 48.
^ THine Eyes (bright Saint) disclose and thou shall find, Dreams have not ^
with illusive shows, deceived thy Mind, what sleep presented to thy view, ^
awake and thou shall find it true ^
II.
Those mortal Wounds I bear
From thee begin,
Which though they outward not appear,
Yet bleed within,
Loves ^lame like active lightening flies,
Wounding the Heart, but not the Eyes.
III.
But now I yield to die
Thy sacrifice,
Nor more in vain will hope to fly
From thy bright Eyes;
Their killing Power cannot be shunned
Open or closed alike they wound*
^ FAith it is not worth your pains and care, to seek to inspire a heart so pure
as ^
mine; some fools there be, hate liberty, whom wh more ease thou may confine. ^
II.
Alas! when with much charge thou have
Brought it at last
Beneath thy power to bow,
It will adore
Some twenty more,
And that perhaps you would not allow.
III.
No Cloris, I no more will prove
The curse of Love,
And now can bo^st a heart
Has learned of thee
Inconst^ncie,
And cozened women of their Art.
Song 50.
^ REach me here that full crowned Cup, and at once I Will drink it up; for my ^
overcharged Breast pants for drowth, with care oppressed; whilst a ^
Chaplet of cool Roses my distempered Brow incloses; Love I Will drench in ^
Wine; for these flames alone can his appease. ^
II.
I am sprung of humane seed,
For a lives short race decreed;
Though I know the way I Have gone,
That which is to come's unknown;
Busy thoughts do not disturb me;
What have you to do to curb me?
Come, some Wine and Music give;
Ere we dye, it is fit we live.
Song 51.
^ OH turn away those cruel Eyes, the stars of my undoing. Or death in ^
such a br^ght disguise may tempt a second wooing. ^
II.
Punish their blindly impious pride,
Who dare contemn thy glory;
It was my Fall that deifide
Thy name, and sealed thy story.
III.
Yet no new sufferings can prepare
A higher praise to crown thee;
Thou^h my first death proclaim thee Fair,
My second will unthrone thee.
IV.
Lover will doubt thou can entice
No other for thy fuel,
And if thou burn one Victime twice,
Both think thee poor and cruel.
^ NOw Love be praised! that cruel Fair, who my poor Heart restrain ^
under so many chains, has weaved a new one for it of her Hair. ^
II.
These threads of Amber used to play
With every Courtly wind,
And never were confined,
But in a thousand Curls aloud to str^y.
III.
Cruel each part of her is grown,
Nor less unkind then She
These fetters are to Me,
Which to restrain my Freedom, lose their own.
Song 53.
^ TO set my jealous soul at strife all things malicio sly agree, though ^
sleep of death the Im^ge be, dreams are the portraitures of life. ^
II.
I saw when last I closed my eyes,
Celinda stoopt to another will,
If specious apprehension kill,
What would the truth without disguise?
III.
The joys which I could call my own
Me thought this Rival did possess,
Like dreams is all my happiness;
Yet dreams themselves allow me none.
I.
^ VVRong me no more in thy complaint, blamed for inconstancy; I vowed ^
to adore the fairest Saint, nor changed whilst thou were she: but if another ^
thee outshine, the inconstancy is only Thine. ^
II.
To be by such
Blind Fools admired
Gives thee but small esteem,
By whom as much
Thou Would be desired
Did thou less beauteous seem:
Sure why they love they know not well,
Who why they should not cannot tell.
III.
Women are by
Themselves bettay'd,
And to their short joys cruel,
Who foolishly
Themselves persuade
Flames can ou^last their fuel:
None (though Platonic their pretense)
With Reason love unless by Sense.
IV.
And He, by whose
Command to Thee
I did my heart resign,
Now bids me choose
A Deity
Diviner far then thine:
No power from Love can Beauty sever;
IN me still Loves subject, thine was never.
V.
The fairest She
Whom none surpass
To love has only right,
And such to me
Thy Beauty was
Till one I found more bright:
But 'twere as impious to adore
Thee now, as not to have don't before.
VI.
Nor is it just
By rules of Love
Thou should deny to quit
A heart that must
Another prove
Even in thy right to it:
Must not thy Subjects Captives be
To her who triumphs over Thee?
VII.
Cease then in vain
To blot my name
With forged Apostasy,
Thine is that stain
Who dare to claim
What others ask of Thee:
Of Lovers they are only true
Who pay their hearts where they are due.
I.
^ MY sickly breath wastes in a double flame; whilst Love and Death to my poor ^
life lay claim; the feavour in whose heat I melt by her that causes it not
felt. ^
II.
Thou who alone
Can, yet wilt grant no ease;
Why slight'st thou one
To feed a new disease?
Unequal Fair, the heart is thine,
Ah! Why then should the pain be mine.
Song 55.
^ Alas! alas! thou turn'st in vain thy beauteous face away, which (like ^
young Sorcerers) raised a Pain above its power to lay. ^
II.
Love moves not as thou turn'st thy look,
But here does firmly rest;
He long ago thy Eyes forsook
To revel in my Breast.
III.
Thy Power on him why hop'st thou more
Then his on me should be,
The Claim thou lay'st to him is poor
To that he owns from Me.
IV.
His substance in my Heart excels,
His shadow in thy Sight;
Fire where it burns more truly dwells,
Then where it scatters light.
^ AS when some brook flies from it self away, the murmuring Crystal loosly ^
runs astray. And as about the verdant plane it winds, the meadows with a ^
silver ribbon binds, printing a kiss on every Flower she meets, loosing her ^
self, to fit them with new sweets. ^
II.
To scatter frost upon the Lillies Head,
And Scarlet on the Gilloflower to spread;
So melting sorrow, in the fair disgu^se
Of humid St^rs, flowed from bright Cloris Eyes,
Which watring every Flower her Cheek discloses,
Melt into Jesmines here there into Roses.
Song 51.
^ I Languish in a silent slame; for she to whom my vows incline does ^
own perfections so divine, That but to speak where to disclose her Name. ^
^ if I should say that she the store of Natures graces does comprize, the ^
Love and wonder of all Eyes, who will not guess the Beauty I adore? ^
II.
Or though I warily conceal
The Charms her looks and Soul possess;
Should her cruelty express,
And say she smiles at all the Pains we feel,
Among such suppliants as implore
Pity, distributing her Hate
Inex ^rable a^ their Fate:
Who will not guess the Beauty I adore?
Song 59.
^ NOt always give a melting Kiss, and Smiles with pleasing Whispers joined; ^
nor always extas^'d with bliss, about my Neck thy fair Arms wind. ^
II.
The wary Lover learns by measure
To circumscribe his greatest joy;
Lest, what well husbanded yields pleasure,
Might by the Repetition cloy.
III.
When thrice three Kisses I require,
Give me but two, withhold the other;
Such as cold Virgins to their Sire,
Or chaste Diana gives her Brother.
IV.
Then wantonly snatch back thy Lip.
And smoothly as sly fishes glide
Through water, giving me the slip,
Thy self in some dark corner hide.
V.
I Will follow Thee with eager haste,
And having caught (as Hawks their prey)
In my victorious Arm held fast
Panting for Breath, bear thee away.
VI.
Then thy soft Arms about me twined
Thou shall use all thy skill to ple^se me,
And offer all that was behind
The poor Seven Kisses to appease me.
VII.
How much mistaken will thou be!
For seven times seven shall thou pay,
Whilst in my Arms I fetter Thee,
Lest thou once more should get away.
VIII.
'Til I at last have made thee swear
By all thy Beauty and my Love,
That thou again the same severe
Revenge for the same Crime would prove.
Song 60.
^ WHilst our joys in wine we raise, youthful Bacchus we will praise: Bacchus ^
dancing did invent; Bacchus is on songs intent; Bacc^us teaches ^
Love to court, and his Mother how to sport; graceful confidence He ^
lends, he oppressive trouble ends. ^
II.
To the Bowl when we repair
Grief does vanish into air;
Drink we then, and drown all sorrow;
All our care not knows the morrow;
Life is dark, let us dance and play,
They that will be troubled may;
We our joys with wine will raise,
Youthful Bacchus we will praise.
Song 61.
^ It Is no Kiss my Fair bestows; Nectar it is whence new Life flows; all the ^
sweets which nimble Bees in their Ozier Treasuries with unequ^ll'd Art repose ^
in one kiss her lips disclose; these (if I should many take) soon would ^
me Immortal make. ^
II.
Raised to the divine Abodes,
And the B^nquets of the gods.
Be not then too lavish, Fair!
But this heavenly Treasure spare,
'Less thou'^t too Immortal be:
For without thy Company,
What to me were the Abodes,
Or the Banquets of the gods,
I.
^ AS in a thousand wanton Curls, the Vine does the loved Elm embrace; as ^
clasping Ivy round the Oak does twine to kiss his le^vy F^ce; so thou about ^
my Neck thy Arms shall fling, joining to mine thy Breast; so shall my ^
arms about thy fair Ne^k cling, my lips on thine impressed? ^
II.
Ceres n^r Bacchus, Care of Life nor Sleep
Shall force me to retire;
But we at once will on each others Lip
Our mutual Souls expire.
Then h^nd in hand down to the Elizian Plains
(Crossing the Stygian Lake)
We Will through those Fields where Spring eternal reigns
Our pleasing journey take.
IV.
There their fair Mistresses the Heroes lead,
And their old Loves repeat,
Singing or dancing in a flowery Mead
With Mirtles round beset.
Roses and Violets smile beneath a Skreen
Of ever verdant Bays;
And gentle Zephyr amorously between
Their leaves untroubled plays.
IV.
There constantly the pregnant Earth unplow'd
Her fruitful store supplies:
When We come thither, all the happy Crowd
From their green Thrones will rise.
There thou in place above Jove's numerous Train
Of Mistresses shall ^it;
Hers Hellen, Homer will not his disdain
For Thee, and Me to quit.
Song 63.
^ When I see the young men play, young me thinks I am as they, and my ^
aged thoughts laid by, to the dance, with joy I fly: Come a flowery chaplet ^
lend me, youth and mirthfull thoughts attend me. ^
II.
Age begone, we will dance among
Those that young are, and be young:
Bring some Wine Boy, fill about;
You shall see the old Man's stout;
Who can laugh and tipple too,
And be mad as well as you.
Song 64.
^ NOw with roses we are crowned, let ^ur mirth and cups go round, whilst a ^
^ Lass, whose hand a spear, branchd with Ivy twines does bear, with her white
feet ^
beats the ground to the Lutes harmonious sound, ^
II.
Played on by some Boy, whose choice
Skill is heightened by his voice:
Bright-hair'd Love, with his divine
Mother, and the god of Wine
Will flock hither, glad to see
Old men of their company.
Song 65.
^ ON this verdant Lotus laid, underneath the Myrtles shade, let us drink our ^
sorrows dead, whilst love plays the Ganimed. ^
II.
Life like a wheel runs round,
And ere long we underground
(Ta'n by death asunder) must
Molder in forgotten dust.
III.
Why then graves should we bedew,
Why the ground with odours strew?
Better whilst alive prepare
Flowers and unguents for our hair.
IV.
Come my Fair, and come away,
All our cares behind us lay;
That these pleasures we may know.
Ere we come to those below.
I.
^ I Yield, dear Enemy, nor know how to resist so fair a Foe; who would not ^
thy soft yoke sustain, or bow beneath thy easy chain, that with a bondage ^
blessed might be, which far transcends all liberty? But since I freely have
resigned ^
at first assault my willing mind, insult not over my captived heart ^
with too much tyranny and art, lest by thy scorn thou lose the prize, ^
gained by the power of thy bright eyes; and thou this conquest thus shall ^
prove, though got by beauty kept by love. ^
I.
^ DRaw near you Lovers that complain of Fortune or Disdain, and to ^
my ashes lend a tear; melt the hard marble with your groans, and soften ^
the relentless Stones. Whose cold embraces the sad Su^ject hide of ^
all Loves cruelties, and Beauties pride. No verse no Epicedium bring, ^
nor peaceful Requiem sing, to charm the terrors of my Hearse; no profane ^
Numbers must flow near the sacred silence that dwells here; vast griefs are ^
dumb; softly, oh softly mourn, lest you disturb the peace attends my Urn. ^
^ Yet strew upon my dismal Grave, such off^rings as you have, forsaken ^
Cypress and sad Ewe; for kinder flowers can take no Birth or growth from ^
such unhappy Earth, We^p only over my Dust, and say, Here lies ^
to Love and ^ate an equal Sacrifice. ^
Song 63.
^ I Go Dear Saint away, snatched from thy Arms, by far less pleasing charms, ^
Then those I did obey; but if hereafter thou shall know, that grief has ^
kissd me, come, and on my toomb, drop drop a tear or two; break with thy ^
^ sighs the silence of my sleep, and I shall smile in death to see thee weep; ^
thy tears may have the power to reinspire my ashes with new fire, or ^
change Thee to some flower, which planted 'twixt thy breasts shall ^
grow; veiled in this shape I will, dwell with Thee still, court, kiss, ^
enjoy thee too; securely we will contain all envyous force, and thus ^
united be by Deaths divorce. ^
Song 69.
^ THe lazy hours move slow, the minutes stay; old time with leaden ^
^ ^eet does go, and his light wings has cast away; the slow p^c'd ^
spheres above have sure released their guardians, and without help ^
move, whilst that the very Angels rest; the numbered sands that ^
slide through this small glass, and into minutes time divide, too slow each ^
other do displace; the tedious wheels of light no faster chime then that dull ^
shade which waits on night, for expectation out-runs time: How long ^
Lord must I stay? How long dwell here? Oh free me from this loathed ^
^ clay; Let me no more these fetters ware; with far more joy shall I resign ^
my breath; for to my grieved soul not to die is every minute a new death. ^
Song 70.
^ When on thy lip my soul I breath, which there meets thine, freed from ^
their fetters by this death our subtle Forms combine; thus without ^
bonds of sense they move, and like two Cherubins converse by love. ^
Spirits to chains of earth confined discourse by sense; but ours that are by ^
flames refined with those weak ties dispense; let such in words their ^
^ minds display, we in a kiss our mutual thoughts convey; but since my soul
from ^
me does fly, to thee retired, thou can not both retain; for I must be with ^
one inspired; then, Dearest, either justly mine restore, or in exchange let ^
me have thine. Yet if thou do return mine own, Oh take it again! ^
For it is this pleasing death alone gives ease unto my pain: Kill me once more ^
or I shall find thy pity then thy cruelty, less kind. ^
Song 71.
^ THe air which thy smooth voice does break, into my soul like ^
^ lightning flies, my life retires whilst thou do speak, and thy soft
breath ^
its room supplies. Lost in this pleasing Ecstasy, I join my trembling ^
lips to thine, and back receive that life from thee, which I so gladly did
resign. ^
Forbear, Platonic fools, to enquire, what numbers do the soul compose; ^
no harmony can life inspire, but that which from these accents flows. ^
Song 72.
^ DOris, I that could repel all those darts about thee dwell, and had wisely ^
learned to fear, 'cause I saw a foe so near; I that my deaf ear did ^
^ arm against thy voices powerful charm, and the lightning of thine eye ^
durst (by closing mine) defy, cannot this cold snow withstand from the ^
whiter of thy hand; thy deceit has thus done more then thy open ^
force before: for who could suspect or fear Treason in a face so clear; or the
^
hidden fires descry wrapped in this cold outside lie; flames might thus involved
in ^
ice, the deceived world sacrifice; Nature, ignorant of this strange
antiperistasis, ^
Would her falling frame admire, that by snow were set on fire. ^
^ CAst Chariessa, cast that glass away, nor in its Crystal face thine own
survay; ^
what can be free from Loves imperious laws, when painted shadows ^
real flames can cause? The fires may burn thee, from this mirror rise, by ^
the reflected beams of thine own eyes; and thus at last fallen with thy self in ^
Love, thou will, My Rival, thine one martyr prove; but if thou do desire ^
thy form to view, look in my heart, where love thy picture drew, ^
and then if pleased with thine own shape thou be, learn how to love thy ^
self by loving me. ^
^ NUmber the sands that do restrain and fetter the rebellious main, ^
count those pale fires that do dispense to us both light and influence, the ^
drops of the vast sea divide, these in themselves be multiplied; that all when
^
added into one, may by our kisses be outgone; by which when number ^
they surmount, we will teach Arithmetic to count. ^
Song 75.
^ THis silkworm (to long sleep retired) the early year has re-inspir'd, ^
who now to pay to thee prepares the tribute of her pleasing cares; and hastens
^
^ with industrious toil to make thy ornament her spoil; see with what pains
she ^
spins for thee the thread of her own destiny; then growing proud in Death, to
^
know that all her curious labors thou will, as in Triumph, deign ^o wear, ^
retires to her soft sepulcher Such dearest, is that hapless state to which I
am designed ^
by Fate, who by thee (willingly) or'ecome, work my own Fetters ^
and my Tomb. ^
Song 76.
^ PAle envyous sickness, hence no more possess our breast too cold before; ^
^ in vain alas thou do invade those beauties which can never fade; could ^
all thy malice but impair, on those sweets which crown her fair, or steal the ^
spirits from her eye, or kiss into a p^ler dye, the blooming roses of her* ^
cheek, our suffering hopes might justly seek redress from thee, and ^
tho^ might save thousands of lovers from the g^ave; but such assaults are ^
vain, for she is too divine to stoop to thee; blessed with a form as much to ^
high for any change but Destiny; which no attempt can violate, for ^
what is her beauty is our fate. ^
^ COme my Dear, whilst youth conspires with the warmth of our desires; ^
envyous time about thee watches, and some Grace each minute snatches: ^
Now a spirit, now a ray from thy eye he steals away, now he blasts some ^
blooming rose which upon thy fresh cheek grows; Gold now plunders in a ^
Hair; now the Rubies does impair of thy lips; and with sure have all thy ^
wealth will take at last; only that of which thou make use in time, from ^
time thou take. ^
^ When thou thy plyant arms do wreath about my neck, and gently brea^h ^
into my Breast that soft sweet air with which thy soul does mine repair; ^
when my faint life thou draw'st away, my life which scorching flames decay, ^
orecharg'd my panting bosom boyls, whose Feavour thy kind Art beguiles, ^
and with the Breath that did inspire does mildly fan my glowing fire, ^
Transported then I cry, above all other Deities is Love! Or if a Deity there ^
be greater then Love, it is only thee. ^
^ AS on Purple Carpets I charmed by wine in slumber lie, with a troop of ^
Maids (resorted there to play) me thought I sported: whose companions, ^
lovely boys, interrupt with rude noise: Yet I offer made to kiss them, ^
but of the sudden wake and miss them: Vexed to see them thus forsake me, ^
I to sleep again betake me. ^
Song 78.
^ With a whip of Lillies, Love swiftly me before him drove: on we courst it ^
through deep floods, hollow valleys, and rough woods, till a Snake that ^
^ lurking lay chanced to sting me by the way* now my soul was high to death, ^
ebbing flowing with my breath; when Love, fanning with his wings, back my ^
fleeting spirit brings; learn, says he, another day love without constraint
to obey. ^
Song 81.
^ When my sense in wine I steep, all my cares are lulled asleep; rich in ^
thought, I then despise Craesus, and his royalties: Whilst with Ivy ^
twines I wreath me, and sing all the world beneath me; others run to martial ^
^ fights, I to Bacchu's delights; Fill the cup then boy, for I drunk then ^
dead had rather lie. ^
Song 82.
^ VEx no more thyself and me with demure philosophy; hollow precepts, ^
only fit to amuse the busy wit; teach me brisk Lyeus rites; teach me Venus ^
blithe delights; Jove loves wa^er, give me wine; that my soul ere I resign ^
may this cure of sorrow have; there is no drinking in the grave. ^
^ OLd I am, yet can (I think) those that younger are out^drink; when I ^
dance no staff I take, but a well filled Bottle shake: He that does in war
delight, ^
come and with these arms let us fight; fill the cup, let loose a ^
flood of the rich Grapes luscious blood; old I am, and therefore ^
may, like Silenus drink and play. ^
Song 84.
^ A Kiss I begged, and thou did join thy lips to mine; Then, as afraid ^
snatched b^ck their treasure, and mocked my pleasure, again my Dearest, ^
for in this thou only gav'st desire, and not a kiss. ^
I.
^ FAir Rebel to thy self and Time, who laugh'st at all my tears, when ^
thou have lost thy youthful prime and age his Trophie rears, weighing thy ^
inconsiderate pride thou shall in vain accuse it, Why Beauty am I ^
now denied, or knew not then to use it? Then shall I wish ungentle Fair thou ^
in like flames may burn; Venus, if just will hear my prayer, and ^
I shall laugh my turn. ^
A Dialogue Between CHARIESSA and PHILOCHARIS.
^
Char. What if Night should betray us, and reveal to the light all the
pleasure ^ that we steal?

Phil. Fairest, we safely may this fear despise; How can she ^
see our actions who wants eyes?

Char. Each dimne star and the clearer ^
lights we know nights eyes are; they were blind that thought her so: ^

Phil. Those pale fires only burn to yield a light to our desires, and though ^

Char. blind, to give us sight. By this shade that surrounds us might ou^ ^
^ flame be betrayed, and the day disclose its name.

Phil. Dearest Fair, these dark ^
Witnesses we find silent are, Night is dumb as well as blind. ^
Chorus.
^ Then whilst these black shades conceal us, we will scorn the envyous morn, ^
Then whilst these black shades conceal us, we will scorn the ^
and the Sun that would reveal us; our flames shall thus ^
envyous mo^n; and the Sun that would reveal us; our flames shall thus ^ their
mutual light betray, and night with these joys crowned ou^shine the day ^
their mutual light betray, and night with these joys crowned ou^shine the day.

Dialogue II. Between PHILOCHARIS and CHARIESSA.
^
Phil. THat kiss which last thou gav'st me, stole my fainting Life away, yet ^
(though to thy Breast fled) my Soul still in mine own does stay. ^
Weak Nature no such power does know, Love only can these wonders show. ^

Char. And with the same warm breath did mine into thy bosom slide, ^
There dwell contracted unto thine, yet still with me ^eside; ^
I. Chorus.
^ Weak Nature no such power does know, such power does know; Love ^
Weak Nature no such power such power does know ^
^ only can these wonders, can these wonders show. ^
Love only can these wonders, can these wonders show. ^
II. Chorus, Voy^es 3.
^ Both souls thus in desire are one, and each is two in skill, doubled in
Intellect alone ^
Both souls thus in desire are one, and each is two in skill, doubled in
Intellect alone ^
Both souls thus in desire are one, and each is two in skill, doubled in
Intellect alone ^
united in the Will; weak Nature no such power does know, Love only ^
united in the Will; weak Nature no such power does know, Love only ^
united in the Will; weak Nature no such power does know, Love only ^
can these wonders show. ^
can these wonders show. ^
can these wonders show.

An Alphabetical Table of all the Airs contained in this BOOK.
A.
ASk the Empress of the Night 26 Alas! Alas! thou turn'st in vain 51 As when
some Brook 52 As in a thousand wanton curls 56, 57 As on Purple Carpets I 74 A
kiss I begged 77
B.
Beauty, whose soft magnetic chains 1 Beauty, thy harsh imperious chains 2
C.
Celinda, by what potent Art 4 Chide, Chide no more 16, 17 Cast off for shame,
ungentle Maid 38 Cast Chariessa, 78 Come my Dear, whilst youth conspires 72
D.
Delay! Alas! that cannot be 11 Dear, back my wounded heart restore 15 Dear,
urge no more 27 Deceived and undeceived to be 40 Dear, fold me once more in
thine arms 45 Draw near ye Lovers 60, 61 Doris, I that could repel 66, 67
F.
Favonius, the milder breath of the Spring 6 Foolish Lover, go and seek 14
Fool, take up thy shaft again 17 Faith it is not worth your pains and care 47
Fair Rebel to thy self unkind 78
H.
He whose active thoughts 30, 31
I.
I prithee let my heart alone 9 I will not trust thy tempting graces 21 I must
no longer now admire 42 I languish in a silent flame 52, 53 I yield, dear Enemy
59 I go, dear Saint away 61, 62
L.
Love, what Tyrannick laws 10 Love the ripe harvest of my toil 43
M.
Men and Maids at time of year 41 My sickly breath 51
N.
Not that by thy disdain 28 No, I will sooner trust the wind 32 Now will I a
Lover be 44, 45 Now Love be praised, that cruel Fair 49 Nor always give a
melting kiss 53, 54 Now with roses we are crowned 57, 58 Number the sands 69
O.
On this swelling Bank 8 Oh turn away those cruel eyes 49 On this verdant Lotus
laid 58 Old I am, yet can I think 77
P.
Prithee trouble me no more 12 Pale envyous sickness 70, 71
R.
Roses (Loves delight) 13 Roses in breathing forth their sent 35 Rebellious
Fools 36 Reach me here that full crowned cup 47, 48
S.
So fair Aurora 7 Since Fate commands me hence 16 See how this Violet 24 Such
Icy kisses 33 See the Spring her self discloses 44
T.
Though when I loved thee thou were fair 18 Think not pale Lover 19 Torment of
absence and delay 20 That I might ever dream 34 Thine eyes (bright Saint)
disclose 46 To set thy jealous soul at strife 49 It Is no kiss my Fair bestows
55 The lazy hours move slow 62, 63, 64 The air with thy smooth voice 65, 66
The silkworm (to long sleep) 69, 70 That kiss thou gav'st me last 81, 82
V.
Vex no more thy self and me 76
W.
When cruel Fair one 3 When I lie burning 5 When dearest beauty 18 Why thy
passion should it move 25 When deceitful Lovers lay 29 Were thou by all
affections 39 Wrong me no more in thy complaint 50 Whilst our joys in wine we
raise, 54, 55 When I see the young men play 57 When on thy lip my Soul I breath
64, 65 When thou thy plyant arm does wreath 73 With a whip of Lillies 74, 75
When my sense in wine I steep 75, 76 What if Night should betray us 79, 80
Y.
You that unto your Mistress eyes 23 You earthly souls 23 Yet ere I go,
Disdainful beauty 73

