SERMONS OF CHRIST HIS Last Discovery of Himself, Of The Spirit and Bride. The
Waters of Life. And, His free Invitation of Sinners to come and drink of them.
From Revel. 22.16, 17.

By WILLIAM GREENHILL, an unworthy Servant of the Lords.

He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul, Prove. 15.32.

The heart of the prudent gets knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeks
knowledge, Prove. 18.^5.

LONDON Printed by R. I. for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley.
1656.

TO ALL His Christian Friends, More especially To those, the Author of these
Sermons walks with, in the Fellowship of the Gospel, does he Dedicate the same.

TO THE READER.
THat these Sermons see the Light is more from the Auditors than the Author of
them. Some being affected in hearing were importunate to have them published,
urging they might be of use, not only to doubting Saints, and desponding
Christians, but also to those were dead in Sins and Trespasses. Hereupon after
some struglings in my spirit, I was willing to expose my self to Censure,
rather than to grieve my Friends by a denial, and withold those Truths by
which possibly some poor Soul or other might gain some little Spi^i^ual
advantage.

Reader, although these Sermons were taken by the Pen of a ready Writer, and
printed as they were taken, yet look not for that Spirit, Power, and Life, was
in them when Preached. The Press is a dead thing to the Pulpit. A Sermon from
thence is like Meat from the Fire, and Milk from the Breast; but when it is in
Ink and Paper, it is only cold Meat and Milk, it has lost its lively taste,
though it may nourish and become a standing Dish, to feed upon daily. There is
this benefit in Printing, that when the Preacher is absent, or dead, the thing
printed may be at hand and serviceable.

Reader, if thou look for high Notions, quaint Expressions, new Opinions,
strong Lines, enticing words of man's Wisdom, or any thing to please a fleshly
mind, I must say to thee, as Peter did to him in the Acts, Such silver and gold
have I none, but what I have I give unto thee, viz. plain and naked Truths,
according to the simplicity of Christ and the Gospel. Would thou know what
is to be had here? If thou be shaken in these staggering times, here thou may
see what a Root Christ is, bearing up all. If thou stumble at Christ's meanness
in the World, here thou shall understand of what Royal Descent he was. If thou
be in the dark, and know not the right way, here may thou behold Christ a
glorious Star to direct thee. If thou be dull and sad, here may thou hear
the sweet Voices of the Spirit and Bride to quicken and comfort thee. If thou
be thirsty, here is water, and Water of Life prepared for thee. If thou be
sinful, and so sinful as thou fear Christ will not save thee, here shall
thou find many clear demonstrations, how willing Christ is to save sinners. If
thou find not a willingness in thee to have Water of Life, here is discovered
how that willingness may be wrought in thee. If thou be secure and sleepy,
here are tidings of Christ's coming, of what concernment that is, and what
preparation thou art to make for it, which may help to awaken thee. In a word,
here thou have the last discovery the Lord Christ gave forth of himself, and of
his mi^d. He had often before discovered himself what he was, as to be the
Messiah, Joh. 4.25, 26. to be the Resurrection and the Life, Joh. 11.25. to be
the Bread of Life, Joh. 6.35. to be the Light of the World, Joh. 8.12. to be
the good Shepherd, Joh. 10.11. to be the true Vine, Joh. 15.1. to be the Way,
Truth, and Life, Joh. 14.6. to be Alpha and Omega, and here he says, I am the
Root and Offspring of David, etc. which being the last declaration of himself,
doubtless has something considerable in it, as will appear in the Work it self.

William Greenhil.
Stepney the fifth of the ninth Month. 1655.
TO His dearly beloved Brethren, and Fellow Members of that Body (the Church at
Stepney) of which Christ is the Head,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord, be
multiplied unto you.
Brethren:
YOu are here presented with that in Print which before you have heard Preached
unto you, but I hope the impression of it is not only in these Papers, but that
it is already in your hearts; It was a glorious commendation that Paul gave of
his Corinthians, 2 Epist. 3.2. Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, known
and read of all men, for as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the
Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit
of the living God, not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.

What is the end of our faithful Pastors Preaching, and of our Hearing, but
that we may be the Epistles of Christ?

You have here presented to your view some of the last words of Christ, wherein
you have a Declaration of what he is, the Root, and the Offspring of David,
David's root in regard of his Diety, and his Offspring in regard of his
Humanity; we have need to hear of these Truths again and again, especially in
such days of Apostasy, and falling away from the Faith as we live in, many
denying the Lord that bought them, by which we may see the Scripture
fulfilled, that says, In the latter days many shall depart from the Faith; and
in 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. the Apostle plainly speaks, that as there were false Prophets
of old, so there should be false Teachers that should creep in, who privily
should bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them; and
many should follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth
should be evil spoken of.

You have here likewise a sweet and blessed in vitation of the Lord Jesus to
poor thirsty Sinners, that they would come and take of the Water of Life
freely; O therefore let us not stand off, but come, although we have no money,
for little do we think what prejudice our So^uls do receive, because we go no
freelier to Jesus Christ, to receive of the things that he has purchased, and
is ready to give out unto us; you are called out of the World, even to the
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

You are the Members of Christ, 1 Corinthians. 6.15. ye are the Temples of the
holy Spirit, 2 Cor. 6.16. you stand in near relation to God and Christ, as
being his Friends, his Brethren, his Children, his Spouse; -- Ye are his
Portion, his Jewels, his peculiar Treasure, his Vineyard, his pleasant Plant,
his Glory, Isa. 4.5. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen Generation, a Roval
Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People.

It being thus, what flows from hence, or what does this call for at our hands?
but that we labor to show forth the Praises of him who has called us out of
darkness into his mavelous light. Therefore let us not walk after our own
lusts, but walk in the fear of God, as the Churches did, Acts 9.31. Ye are the
children of the light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. therefore let us walk in the light; ye
have a Spiritual life begotten in you, who once were dead, therefore let us
walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. let us walk in, and after the Spirit, Gal.
5.16. in good works. Ephesians. 2.10. in love, chap. 5.2. Circumspectly, verse. 15.
yea let us walk honestly toward them that are without, 1 These. 4.12. Let us
walk in the truth, 3 Ep. Joh. 4. let us walk in the steps of good men, Prove.
2.20. yea let us walk even as Christ himself walked, 1 John 2.6. And that me
may do so let us mind our rule, Gal. 6.16. and then we shall walk in some
measure worthy of our Vocation, Ephesians. 4.1. This will make much for the glory of
God and Christ here in the World; by it we shall adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior, Tit. 2.10. It will make much for the comfort and joy of him whom God
has set over us, that watches for our souls, Joh. 3.4. yea, your holy walking,
and godly conversation may be a means for the conversion of others, and
bringing them in to Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.12. and 3.1, 2. And by doing thus,
we shall not only maintain our Fellowship one with another, but with the
Father, and the Son, 1 Ep. Joh. chap. 1.

Beloved Brethren, I shall not need to put you on to the ready entertaining of
these choice Truths that are here delivered, they being already written in your
hearts, you cannot but receive them with joy; and in so doing you answer the
end and labors of him who is dear unto you, that preached them, and likewise
the end of him who did transcribe them.

Brethren farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

So prays your dear Brother who affectionately loves you, and is desirous to
serve you in the Lord. R. VV.

Errata.
Page 8. l. last, r. back, p. 19. l. 6. r. (...) p. 23. l. last but one, r.
behold, p. 62. l. 7. r. 14. p. 66. l. 6. r. the father, l. 12. r. in Zech. l.
20. r. is, p. 80. l. 13. after heads r. saying we shall befree, l, 20 dele have,
p 106. in marg. r. proprieties, l. last but one, r. velleitie. p. 107. l. 10.
r. complaintive p. 110: l. 2. r: no, l: 22: r: power, p. 1 11. l, 2: r. of that
is unknown, p: 112: l: 26, 27: r: and is not like the Publican, p. 115. l: 4,
and 5: r. all salvation is in him. p. 122. l. 25. r: lentile, p: 123. l: last,
r: bitter, p. 125: l: 25, make the Comma after the first it, p. 328: l. 28, r:
break, l: 31: r: required, p: 132, l: 8. r: are you hungry, p: 138: l: 25: r:
have forward, p. 140. l: 23. r: come, p: 144: l: 1: r: hints of joy, p: 157. l.
26: r: angry, p: 170: l: 2: ^: room, l: 28: r: will, p: 181: r: Ahashuerosh, p:
186. in marg: r. (...) p: 194: l: 22: r: here, p: 207. l. 4. r. you that are
barren, p: 211: l: 9: r: have, p: 220: l: 26: r: club, p. 323: l: 26 r.
acceptance, p. 239: l: 23. r: let us.

Christ the Root of all.
REV. 22.16. I am the Root, and the Offspring of David, etc.


CHrist having sent his Angel to testify several things unto the Churches,
Tells them what he is, I am the Root and the Offspring of David, the bright
and morning Star.

These words, I am the Root and the Offspring of David, are a Riddle, and a
seeming contradiction: For Christ to be the Root of David, and the Offspring
of David, seems very improbable and contradictory; much like that speech in the
22. of Matthew. latter end, where Christ said, The Lord said unto my Lord, If
David call him Lord, how is he then his Son? They could not tell what to make
of it; So its probable, when many read these words here, Christ is the Root of
David, and the Offspring of David too, they know not how to untie this knot,
and to reconcile this seeming contradiction; But if we plow with the Heifer of
the Lord, with his Spirit, we many easily resolve it.

Christ is the Root of David, as he is God, in his Divine nature; he is the
Offspring of David, as he is man: And in some sense Christ as he is man, may
be also the root of David; For Christ's Humane nature was as well in Jesse the
Father of David, as in David himself.

You see here, Christ is termed a Root, I am the root of David: Of that I shall
speak at this time, and it is not in vain, that the Scripture does set out
Christ by this expression (a Root) for there are sundry resemblances wherein
the Lord Christ is like unto a Root.

First, you know a Root is a thing hidden in the earth, Wherein the resemblance
lies between Christ and a Root.
secret, and not obvious to any eye; so the Lord Christ, take him especially in
his Divine nature, that is a hidden thing. As its said of God, He is the
invisible God, so of Christ's Divine nature, it is an invisible nature. The
Angels are not seen, souls are not seen, and God is not seen, and the Deity of
Christ was not seen: It was hid under flesh, under his humane nature. And
Christ's humane nature, Christ as man was a hidden thing? Joh. 1.10. He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. The world
did not know him to be the Messiah, to be the root of David: So in Joh. 16.3.
These things will they do unto you because they have not known the Father, nor
me; They have not known me; Christ was not known, but a hidden thing, a secret
thing, like a root in the earth; as he says of the Spirit in Joh. 14.17. Whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, the
world did not see the Spirit, nor know the Spirit; so the world did not see
Christ, nor know Christ -- why, Christ's humane nature, Christ as man, was
hidden under afflictions, under reproaches, under poverty and meanness, and
under scorn, and contempt, so that he was a root in the earth, he was a hidden
thing.

2 A Root has life in it, and the life is principally in the root of any
thing: so in the Lord Jesus, there is life, and life principally in him. Joh.
5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself, Christ has life in himself principally and eminently as the
Father had. Joh. 1.4. In him was light, and that light was the life of men. In
this Root was life, in Christ was life. 1 Cor. 15. he is said to be a quickening
Spirit, he has life in him, and quickens others. Joh. 14.6. he is The life, he
is life emphatically above all others, he is a Root, he has life principally
and eminently in him.

3 The Root (you know) bears up the tree, the branches, and the fruit of the
tree, the Root bears up all; Thou bear not the root, but the root bears
thee, Romans 11. So it is the Lord Jesus Christ, this Root, that bears up all.

Christ bears up the world, Christ bears up the Church, Christ bears up heaven,
he bears up all, Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the word of his power. The
Lord Jesus is the Root, I say, that bears and upholds all the whole Creation,
Sion it self, and Heaven it self, are upheld by this Root, the Lord Jesus
Christ, but especially the Church here in this world, especially Sion, and the
members of Sion, believing souls, Joh. 15. I am the Vine, that is, I am the
Root of the Vine, the Church is the Vine, and Christ is its Root, and he bears
up the whole Vine, and all the branches, and all the clusters upon the Vine,
he bears them up, he is the Root of the Vine, so that Christ is a Root that
bears up all, he did bear up David, his family, David and his Kingdom, he
bears up Sion, and all the children of Sion.

4 Lastly, the Root does convey life and sap, and nourishment unto the whole
body, to all the branches: so it is the Lord Jesus Christ that does convey sap
and life, and nourishment unto all his body; every branch in the Vine, receives
the virtue from the root of the Vine, and all have life from Christ, I am come
that ye may have life, Joh. 10. all life is from Christ, and all light is from
Christ, He is the morning star (which we may speak of afterward) and all
nourishment is from Christ, he is said to be the Head of the Church, and the
Head of the Church is the Root of the Church in the Scripture sense.

And from the Head is all influence of light, and of direction, and counsel,
and motion, and comfort, all is from the Head, all is from this Root.

From Christ is conveyed all, Without me ye can do nothing; unless ye be in
me, and have virtue from me, and derive all from me, you can do nothing.

Thus you see that Christ is a Root, the Root of David.

But there are some disparities, What disparities there are between Christ and
a Root.
or things wherein Christis not like a Root.

First, A Root, take it in the litteral sense, the roots of trees, and plants,
they are of a dying nature, decaying nature, and will grow rotten and consume
Job 14.8. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof
dye in the ground; the root of a tree waxes old, and will dye and perish, and
come to nothing: but Christ is not like a root in that sense, For Christ he
lives for ever, Heb. 7. This Root never dies, never decays, Christ the same
yesterday, the same to day, the same to morrow, and the same for ever; The Root
of Sion for ever, and the Root of David for ever.

Secondly, A root does bear but one tree, suffices one or two, or three bodies
at most; the root of a Corn, it may be will suffice for two or three, or half a
dosen stalks, it cannot suffice for all: But Christ is a Root that suffices for
all, for all Sion, for the whole world, for the Church, for Heaven: He is the
Root of David, the Root of Jesse, the Root of Abraham, of Isaac; He is the
Root of all the Prophets, and Apostles, of all believers, of all that have
spiritual life in them, he is the Root of them all, so that this Root is of
another nature than those roots.

Thirdly, Other roots are subject to the wills, and humors, and pleasures of
men, they can dig up the roots of things, they can burn the roots, and abuse
the roots, but Christ is not subject to the wills and humors of any, to be
spoiled, to be consumed. The Scribes and Pharisees, thought to root out this
Root when they put him to death, but when he was in the grave, he saw no
corruption, he laid down his life, and none took it from him without his leave;
And he rose again, Romans 1.4. and mightily declared himself to be the Son of
God, by the Spirit of holiness; he declared himself to be a Root that man has
not power over: -- So then you see for the opening of this word Root, these
things do clear it.

Object. But here is an Objection, You say Christ is the Root of David, and the
Root of all, Why had not Christ himself a Root, and was not he from a Root, and
how can he be the Root of all? Isa. 11.1. And there shall come forth a Rod out
of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his Roots; This is meant of
Christ, that Christ should come out of Jesse, and Jesse should be the Root of
Christ, and in the 10. v. it is said, In that day there shall be a Root of
Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the people; The same is said to be
the Root of Jesse, which is said to be the stem or branch of Jesse; -- How will
these things accord?

Ans. As I answered before, Jesse is the Root of Christ, according to his
humane nature, and Christ is the Root of Jesse, according to his Divine nature;
or if you will, Christ as Mediator was the Root of Jesse and of all the godly.
The words being opened, I shall give you this Observation, I am the Root of
David.

Observe. That the Lord Christ is the Root of Nature, the Root of Grace, and the
Root of Glory.

How will that appear? why he was the Root of David as a man, the Root of David
as a Saint, and the Root of David as glorified; David was now in heaven.

He was the root of David as a man, Psalm. Christ the root of Nature.
119.73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, O Lord, says David, I did
not make my self, and my Parents did not make me, But thy hands have made me,
and fashioned me; Thy hand has made me such a creature, thy hand did curiously
work me when I was in my mothers womb, that framed me, and molded me, that
ordered all my bones, and sinews and joints, and parts, and faculties, and the
like; Thy hand has made me, the work of nature was from him, He was the Root
of Nature.

And so likewise He was the Root of Grace, Christ the root of Grace and Glory.
and the Root of Glory, says David, Psalm. 110. The Lord said unto my Lord; Why
was Christ David's Lord? because he had given him Grace, and made him his
servant: Why his Lord? because he would give him Glory, The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou at my right hand: Christ was David's Lord because he gave him
Grace, and would give him Glory: Hence it is that he says in Psalm. 84.11.
Grace and Glory will he give, and no good thing will he withhold. Well, I have
grace, and I shall have more grace, and I have a humane glory, I am a King and
a Prophet, and shall have greater glory, I shall have glory in the highest
heavens; So that you see its true of David, Christ is the root of his Nature,
the root of his Grace, and the root of his Glory.

Now this will appear for the general, That he is the root of Nature, and
Grace, and Glory.

First, It will appear that Christ is the root of Nature, How it appears that
Christ is the root of Nature.
from the Creation and making of all things; He that makes all things must
needs be the Lord, and the Root, and the author and fountain of Nature, Heb.
1.2. By whom also he made the worlds, why the world was made by Christ, Christ's
right hand, Christ's arm was at work in the making of all the creatures; The
world was made by him, therefore he is the Lord of Nature that has made all.

Secondly, It appears he is the root of Nature, because he can blast nature at
his pleasure; what says Christ to the Fig Tree? Never fruit grow more upon
this tree, did it not presently wither away? Christ dried up all the moisture,
dried up the sap, dried up the very root of the tree; why he is the very Root,
and the Lord of Nature.

Thirdly, Farther, it appears, in regard that he has the command of all
Diseases, he cured and healed them; What Disease was there ever presented to
Christ that he could not cure? He cast out Devils, cured Leprosies, and all
manner of diseases, the woman that had spent all her estate with Physicians,
and could do no good; the man that lay at the Pool of Bethesday, and could not
be cured, yet Christ cures all Diseases; He is the root of Nature.

Fourthly, So likewise it appears from his raising of the dead; when men are
upon dissolution, and nature going downward, the breaths gone, the soul is
gone, the body putrified, it matters not says Christ to Martha, Thou shall see
the glory of God, thou shall see that I am the root of Nature, that I am the
root of all, that I can call both the soul, and breathe breath into him, and
raise him up; These are evidences that he is the Root and Lord of Nature.

Secondly, Christ he is the root of Grace, Christ the root of Grace.
all Grace is from him, Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, To preach it to the poor, he has
sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord: Is not here Grace in all these? Yes,
and all comes from Christ, He was anointed with the Spirit of the Lord to do
these things. And more fully in Joh. 1.14, 16, 17. The word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, full of Grace and Truth; but for whom was this Grace, and for
whom was the Truth? says John, And of his fullness have all we received, and
Grace for Grace; He had a fullness of Grace, he was the Author, the Root of
Grace, the Fountain of Grace, the God of Grace, and this Grace was to be
communicated, and derived unto others, Of his fullness have we all received
Grace for Grace: For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ. The Lord Christ is the root of Grace. Romans 5.20, 21. Where sin
abounded, Grace did much more abound, That as sin has reigned unto death, even
so might Grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ
our Lord: Sin abounded, I but Grace does superabound; how comes it to
superabound? by Jesus Christ our Lord: Grace must reign, as sin has reigned,
and it must reign by Christ, this Grace will send out so much Grace, that Grace
will reign, and out-reign sin, bring under sin; So then Christ he is the root
of Grace.

Lastly, Christ the roo^ of Glory.
Christ he is the root of Glory, there is none let into heaven but by Christ,
none made glorious, but by Christ, 1 Cor. 2.8. he is called the Lord of Glory,
They crucified the Lord of Glory.

The Lord of Glory, because he was a glorious Lord in himself; The Lord of
Glory, because he has all Glory to dispose of: The Lord of Glory, because he
advances whom he pleases to Glory, he will advance his Church unto Glory, all
believers unto Glory; So that you see now, Christ he is the root of Nature, the
root of Grace, and the root of Glory.

Now what remains, but that we should make some use of this point, and there
are several things which will be observable.

Use First, If Christ be the Root of Nature, of Grace, and Glory, then we may
all make use of that which David does upon this account, in Ps. 138.8. Thy
mercy, O Lord, indures for ever, forsake not the works of thine own hand; why,
may not every one say, Lord I am the work of thy hands, thou have made me a
creature, Thou art the root of my nature? Lord, do not forsake me, but Lord
make me gracious, as well as to have nature; be the root not only of a natural
life to me, but the root of a spriritual life unto me, and be the root of
Glory unto me; why thy hand has made me; Thou have made me a man, given me an
immortal soul, endued me with understanding, and some wisdom and knowledge,
Lord do not forsake me, leave me not to the Devil, to the world, to my self;
But Lord, seeing thy hand has made me a man, so Lord let it make me a new man;
as I have a Natural life, so let me have another life, a Spiritual life; so
every one when they are in straights and troubles, in darkness and afflictions,
and think they are left of God, and Christ, let them use this Argument in
Prayer, I am the work of thine hands, what will thou leave the work of thy own
hands? why men will not desert the work of their own hands, thou have not
deserted the Creation, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Night and day, Summer and
Winter; why Lord, I am the work of thine own hands, do not leave me, nor
forsake me.

2 Is Christ the root of Nature, of Grace, and of Glory? then whatsoever
difference you see in men as men, in men as Christians, what difference soever
you read of men in glory, it is all from the Lord Jesus Christ, it is from the
root. You know that one Tree is higher than another, it is from the root; that
one tree or branch is higher, or bigger than another, it is from the root of
the Tree; that the differences are in the branches, and arms, and boughs of
the tree, it is all from the root of the tree; so the differences that are
amongst men, it is from the root. Christ he gives unto one man great parts, to
another man lesser parts; he gives unto one man a strong judgment, a strong
memory, admirable Elocution, to another man he gives not the same, the
difference is in Christ, he is the root of Nature, and communicates what he
please. So likewise the talents of Grace, he gives to one man one talent, to
another man two talents, to another man five talents, the Lord is the root, and
he makes one higher than another; some men have choice Gifts, and Graces, some
one man has more than ten other men have; it may be another man is beneath him
in a degree or two, some are beneath a great deal; in Grace, some are Babes,
some Children, some Young Men, some old Disciples.

So in Glory, the twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve Thrones; in glory, some
are like the Sun, some like the Moon, some like the Stars; where is the
difference? the difference lies in the root, he communicates what he pleases,
both in Naturals, in Spirituals, and in Glory.

3 If Christ be the root, then let us not be high-minded, let none be lifted
up with whatsoever enjoyments they have; whatsoever gifts you have, whatsoever
Graces you have, what Glory soever you look for, be not lifted up, and the
reason is plain here, and so Romans 11.18. Boast not against the Branches; Why,
another man is a Branch as well as thou art, take man as man, he is a Branch in
the Tree of Nature, and will thou boast thy self against him? boast not of thy
wit, or beauty, or strength, or any Natural abilities thou have, for thou
bear not the root, but the root thee.

So, boast not of Spirituals, that you have so much faith, so much knowledge,
so much patience, humility, and love, do not boast of these things, Christ is
the root, and the root bears thee.

So, do not boast of what places you shall have in Heaven; the Sons of Zebedee,
they would be at the right hand, and at the left hand of Christ, when they
came into his Kingdom; they would have such and such places, but know, the root
bears thee, be therefore humble and lowly, what thou have thou have received,
why art thou lifted up then, as if thou had not received it? the root, the
Lord Christ will call you to an account one day of what you have received, and
how you have employed the same; therefore remember thou have all from the root,
and nothing of thine own.

4 If Christ be the Root that bears up all, be the root of Nature, Grace, and
Glory, then let us fear to offend and provoke him; if a man's life, habitation,
and maintenance depended upon some one man, would he not take heed how he
provoked that man? does not your All depend upon this root Christ, your Nature
depends upon him? in him you live, and move, and have your beings, -- your
habitations and maintenance depends upon him.

So for your Spiritual life, and Spiritual good, does it not depend upon this
Root? Is not he the Root of Life, of all Spiritual life, and comfort, and
blessings? Is not he the root from whom you receive all Grace, all truth, and
all comforts and good?

Do you not look through him to have your glory? why will you offend him now,
and sin against him? O what a root is this that bears up all Nature, that bears
up all Grace, and all Glory, and bears up all the Spiritual good of men and
women, the root that bears up Heaven, and Glory and all! take heed I say, of
trampling upon this root, of wronging Christ, of slighting Christ, of grieving
Christ, of displeasing him any way, if he withdraw influences of nature, dye
you must presently; -- if he withdraw influences of Grace, in darkness you
must sit presently; -- if he should withdraw Glory from you, where would you
be but without doors?

5 Again, If Christ be the root of Nature, Grace, and Glory, then let us make
it our business to serve and honor him; is it not the duty of a Child, coming
from the loins of his Parents, to serve them, and honor them? so it is the
duty of every man, seeing Christ is the root of every man, it is the duty of
every man to serve the Lord -- serve him with thine Eyes, serve him with thy
Tongue, serve him with thy Hand, serve him with thy Foot, serve him with thy
Understanding, serve him with thy Will, serve him with thine Affections, serve
him with the whole Man, for thou have all from him as a man, let all then
return to him; Waters that come from the Sea run back again to the Sea, and
seeing we all come from Christ, who is God, and the root of Nature, let us
then work in order, and serve him.

But much more you that are Spiritual; has Christ given you life, Spiritual
life, quickened you when you were dead in sins and trepspasses? Is Christ the
root of all your Spiritual good and welfare? will you not serve Christ? what,
will you be for the World, for Hell, and for Sin now? why Christ is your root,
are you then his Vine, and will not live to Christ? certainly we should serve
Christ, and honor Christ upon this account -- and we would do it if we did
well consider, why I have my life of Faith, and of Grace, and of comfort, and I
hope for Glory hereafter from Christ, and shall I not serve the Lord Jesus
Christ? I look for glory, therefore I will purify my self as he is pure;
Christ in you the hope of Glory, is he your root, and have you hope of Glory?
then purisie your selves as he is pure; yea serve Christ with pure hearts, and
pure affections, and pure conversations, live to the Lord Jesus, he is the root
of Nature, the root of Spiritual life, and the root of Glory.

6 Again, if Christ be the root of all, then here you may know what your
conditions are, what state you are in; tell me what root you are rooted upon,
what root do you grow on; do you grow upon the old Adam still, or are you
rooted upon Christ? If old Adam be your root, as he is the root of Mankind,
of corrupt man, if you grow upon that root, you are no more than when you came
into the World, your fruit is sour, your Grapes are wild Crapes, your Natures
are corrupt, you are enemies to God, you are upon the root of bitterness, a
root of death.

Nay, let me say, Are you upon Christ now, as he is God only, for Christ is the
root of Nature as he is God, if you be rooted upon Christ as he is God only,
as he has made you, if you be no more than this, you have marred your selves
since he made you, therefore make inquiry whether you be rooted upon Christ as
Mediator, as the root of David, as God-man, whether you have interest in Christ
upon that account, and if it be, your fruit is good fruit, fruit becoming the
Gospel, fruit worthy of Grace, and worthy of a man that is called, justified,
and sanctified; other fruit you bare, now you bear such fruit as Christ did;
those that are translated, and cut off from the old Adam, and ingrafted into
Christ, they bear other fruit than before; therefore inquire what root you are
upon, whether you are rooted into Christ, yea or no, that will yield a great
deal of comfort unto you, if it be so.

7 Further, If Christ be the Root of Nature, the Root of Grace, and the Root of
Glory, and of all, then this is great comfort unto every true Christian; why he
is planted in Christ, and he shall never dry nor wither away; in the 1 Psalm:
he speaks there of a Tree planted by the water side, that brings forth his
fruit in his season, his leaf also shall not wither -- why, he that is a true
Christian, that is intrinsically ingrafted into Christ, he is in such a root
that has life, water of life, and virtue, and is communicating continually
unto the branches: I am come (in the tenth of John) that you may have life, and
that ye may have it more abundantly: If thou be truly in Christ thou shall
have life, and have it more abundantly, thou art in a River of Water, thou art
in a root that has abundance of all Spiritual good, and Spiritual Blessings
for you, therefore look to it that you be in Christ, and then you shall have
virtue in him, your root shall never wither, it shall never decay.

8 If Christ be the Root of all, then be exhorted every one to get interest
in this Root, get interest in him, and then your natures will be sanctified,
get interest in him, and then you will have of all the fullness of Christ, and
you shall have of all his glory: Men and Women they labor to be rooted in the
World, to be rooted in Sin, O how are men rooted in sin, rooted in wicked
practices! how are they rooted in worldly things, and so entangled and fixed
that there is no getting of them off, or out from the World! what says the
Apostle, 2 Colos. 7. says he, rooted and built up in Christ. O be rooted,
says he, but where? in Christ; it is good to be rooted in Christ, O labor to
be rooted in him, rooted in the love of Christ, in the power of Christ, in the
Merits of Christ, in the Intercession of Christ; O labor to be rooted in
these, and then you will grow -- And the way to be rooted in these is double;
there are but two things that I shall name, and they are principal things --

The First is by Faith, and the Second by Love:

Get faith in Christ, that unites you to him, and the more faith, the more
rooted in him, and get further and further into Christ; labor for faith and
that will fix you, settle, and establish you in Christ; it is our want of faith
that makes us so off and on with God, and with Christ, and such poor Creatures
as we are; well, labor for faith, and that is a drawing Virtue, a drawing
Grace, it will draw from Christ whatsoever is to be had in him.

And then love the Lord Jesus; where there is love, how does it root a man in
the heart of a man or woman? so if you love the Lord Jesus more, you will be
rooted more in him, that is the way to be rooted in Christ, get faith, and get
love.

9 Lastly, If Christ be the root of Reason, the root of Grace, and Glory, the
root of all, then let us give the glory and praise of all to Jesus Christ, and
attribute nothing to our selves or others. We are wonderful apt, when we see a
Tree full of fruit, to attribute it to the Tree, O it is a very good Tree, you
look not to the root, you attribute nothing to that, whereas it is the root you
should attribute it to; so now we attribute this to our selves, our own
endeavors, labors, improvements, and diligence, but we look not at the Root,
we look not at Christ who is the Root of Nature; we look not at Christ who is
the Root of Grace; we look not at Christ who is the Root of Glory; and
therefore see the reason why we are so little in thankfulness, because we have
so little faith; But if we had more faith now to see the root, we should be
more thankful; the root is a hidden thing, Christ is in Heaven, and Christ's
Divine Nature was hidden, and because we see not Christ as God, see not Christ
as Mediator, look not at Christ as all in all, therefore we give not that glory
to him, but we look at second Causes, Means, Ordinances, Magistrates,
Parents, Friends, and the like; and so God and Christ lose their Glory, and
their Honor, but if you would look at the root, and say, O this comes from
Christ, this comes from God, this comes from the Mediator, from his Grace, yea
all comes from him, O then your hearts would be carried out to speak of, and to
glorify his name.

Well, look at Christ, for you have nothing but from him; therefore not to me,
nor to others, but unto thee alone O Lord be all the glory.

Christ's Royal Descent.
REV. 22.16. And the Off spring of David.


I Now proceed to the next words, The Offspring of David; The word for
Offspring is (...), and it signifies that from whence another thing comes, or
proceeds, Phil. 3.8. Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, or of
the offspring of Israel; Paul says, he was of the Israelites, he proceeded
and came from them, he was of that Race, of that Generation; and in Isa. 44.
verse. 3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and stouds upon dry
ground, I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring; upon those that are of thy Loins, and that descend from thee, that
is the meaning of the word Offspring, your Children are your Offspring, so
that the meaning here is, That the Lord Jesus Christ is of the Race of David.
In the Scriptures he is said to be the Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. he is said to
be the son of Abraham, Mar. 1. and the Offspring of David here; he is of the
Race of Mankind, of the Race of David, In Matthew. 1.1. The Book of the
Generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David; and Christ is very frequently in
the Gospel called, The Son of David. Matthew. 9.37. Thou Son of David have mercy
on us.

Now to open the words, yet a little further, a Question may here be,

Q. Why is Christ said to be the Offspring of David, rather than of any other?
when as in Matthew. 1. he is the Offspring of all there mentioned?

Ans. There be several Grounds or Reasons for it;

1 David was he that founded the Kingdom of Israel, there began the foundation
of the Kingdom of Israel; Saul was the first King, but Saul was given in wrath,
and rejected of God, and therefore it is not called the Kingdom of Saul, and
the reckoning is not from Saul, but it is called the Kingdom of David, and the
reckoning is from David; so that he was a most eminent, and a known person in
Israel, of great repute in Israel, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Ought ye not to know, That
the Lord God of Israel, gave the Kingdom over Israel to David our Father for
ever, even to him, and to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt? God gave the Kingdom
to David, and David was the most eminent King; and the Founder of the Kingdom
of Israel, therefore here David is rather mentioned; he is the Offspring of
David, the Founder of the Kingdom of Israel.

2 David was the most lively Type of Jesus Christ of any in the whole
Scripture, and therefore he is named the Offspring of David rather than any
others; David was beloved of God, so his name signifies; and David you know
slew the Bear, and the Lion, and reserved the Sheep, and the Lamb from them;
David killed Goliath and freed the whole Army of Israel from him, -- David was a
great Warrier and a great Conqueror, and got famous Victories; David brought
back the Ark of God -- David was a man endured great afflictions after he was
anointed King, for many years together, before he came to the Throne, and to
the Kingdom; David likewise was a Prophet, and Psalm. 22. is a Psalm wherein
David is set out fully to be a type of Christ all along that Psalm.

So Christ, he was the beloved of God, and Christ he delivered the Lambs from
the Bear and the Lion, Christ he slew Goliath, he led Captivity captive, the
Lord Christ obtained great Victories over the World, Sin; and Satan, and all
our Spiritual enemies; the Lord Christ brought back the Ark, the truths of God
that were in darkness, and hid, he brought immortality and Life to light again.

The Lord endured here in this World a great deal of misery before he came to
glory, and therefore he is said to be the Offspring of David rather than any
other.

3 But lastly, For answer to this, The Prophecy was that Messiah should be the
Son of David; God had promised David, That out of his loins Christ should come,
2 Samuel 7.15. But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from
Saul, whom I put away before thee: And thine House and thy Kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee, thy Throne shall be established for ever.
Mark, God promises him a Throne that should be established for ever, he must
have a seed then, and that God swears unto him concerning it, Psalm. 89.35, 36.
Once have I sworn by my holiness, That I will not lie unto David, his seed
shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me. This is spoken of
Christ the Seed; and the Scripture says, That of the seed of David Messiah
should come: Now though the promise were made to Abraham, that Christ should
come of his seed, and he is said to be the Son of Abraham, -- yet David is put
first, because the Promise was later made to David than to Abraham; therefore
the eyes of the Jews were upon that promise, rather than any other: Hence you
find that it was ordinary and common in their mouths, To look at Christ the Son
of David, Matthew. 15.22. A woman of Canaan came out of the same coast, and cried
unto him saying, have mercy upon me O Lord thou Son of David, and Matthew. 20.30.
And behold two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus
passed by, cried out saying, have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David; And
chap. 21.9. And the multitude that went before, and that followed after, cried,
saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; even all sorts looked at Messiah to be the
Son of David, and the Offspring of David; Hence is it that rather David is
named here than others.

Object. But if Christ be the Son of David, It may be said by way of Objection
from that in Isa. 53.8. And who shall declare his Generation? If Christ be the
Son of David, every one may declare his Generation therefore how do these two
Scriptures then correspond? Who shall declare his generation, says Isaiah? Now
Matthew and John tell his Generation, that he is the Son of David, and the
Offspring of David?

Answ. For answer, First of all know, That some Expositors, and not without
cause, do refer this in Isaiah to Christ's divine Nature and generation of God,
and who can declare his Ganeration? that is, who can declare how the Father
begot the Son, how Christ from all eternity should be a Son: let that man
arise, and set his gifts and graces a work to the uttermost as he can, and show
the Generation of Christ, his eternal generation; it is beyond the
comprehension of men or Angels, therefore I say some Expositors refer it to
that, and so, who can tell his Geneneration?

2 It may be referred to Christ's days and years that he was for to live and
continue, after his Incarnation, for he speaks in this Chapter of Christ as
man, and suffering, and says he, here in the verse, Who shall declare his
Generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living; Who shall declare
his Generation? That is, the continuance of his days and time; for they thought
that when he was cut off, there had been an end of his days; but there was not
an end of Christ's days, for though his humane nature were laid in the grave,
yet there was a root under that, the Divine Nature, and he was raised again,
and Christ he lives for ever. Heb. 7. and Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives and
was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore: -- Who shall declare his
Generation? Who shall declare the days and years that Christ now shall live, he
lives for ever, he lives for evermore; who shall declare his Generation?

Or Thirdly, And that which I conceive to be more full yet, Who shall declare
his Generation? that is, The offspring that shall come of him; for we say this
is the Generation of such a man, these are his posterity: Who shall declare his
Generation? that is, Who shall declare his seed, his children, those that shall
be his; for the Lord Christ he has a seed, Heb. 2.13. Behold I and the
children which thou have given me, Christ had children, he had an Off spring,
Isa. 9.6. he is called the Everlasting Father; because he has children,
children in all ages, and in all Generations; and Christ's Generation did exceed
declaring; who shall declare his Generation? Act. 21.20. Thou see, brother
how many thousands of Jews there are which believe: How many ten thousands, as
the word signifies in the original, many millions, and Rev. 7. There was sealed
out of every Tribe twelve thousand, an hundred forty and four thousand. -- And
in verse. 9. After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could
number of all nations, etc. So that the Lord Jesus Christ he has a Seed, he
has a Generation, a Posterity that cannot be numbered; a Generation that
cannot be declared how many they are; so that this hinders nothing, nor
contradicts what is delivered here, That he is the Offspring of David.

The words being thus opened, I shall draw forth some Conclusions from them.

Observe. The first Conclusion is this, That if Jesus Christ be the Offspring
of David, then Christ was and is true man; and this is, or ought to be an
Article of your Faith, To know the Lord Jesus Christ to be true man. You know
the Offspring of any thing is of the same nature of the thing from whence it
comes; The Off-set, or the Offspring of the tree, is of the same nature with
the tree; So now, if Christ be the offspring of David, he must be of the same
nature with David, else he could not be his Offspring: If David therefore were
a true man, had flesh and blood, and spirit, and bones, so must the Lord Jesus
Christ be of the same nature with him.

Some have denied Christ to be Man, as well as some have denied him to be God,
(and I may trouble you with the Authors, but I forbear that) I say, some have
denied him to be man, but he was the Offspring of David, and the Scripture is
plain enough for it, Joh. 1.14. The word was made flesh (Flesh) and dwelt among
us; And Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then, as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself took part of the same, he was flesh and blood as we are,
and therefore he is called man, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one Mediator between God
and man, the Man Christ Jesus. -- He was subject to the same infirmities that
we are, (I do not mean sinful infirmities, but natural infirmities) subject to
the same temptations: he was subject to hunger, and thirst, ^old, and heat, to
weariness, and sleep (and the like.) He was true Man, not a man imaginary or
notional, but a real true Man; Hence says Christ in Luke 24. when they said,
behold a Spirit, no says he, touch me, handle me, I have flesh, I have bones,
which is more than any spirit has. And it was necessary that Christ should be
true Man (not to trouble you with all the Arguments that might be given you
upon that account, but) upon these two grounds.

First, That he might have the right of redemption; Man was fallen, and man
needed a Redeemer, and had not Christ been man, he had not had the right of
Redemption, Lev. 25.25: If thy Brother be waxen poor, and has sold away some
of his possession, and if any of his Kin come to redeem it, then shall he
redeem that which his Brother has sold, etc. Well, we had lost our possession,
lost our selves, and now if we have any Brother that can come to redeem us, it
is his right, but we had none, and were not able to redeem our selves; we had
no friend, no brother that could do it for us, only Jesus Christ comes, and
becomes Man, takes flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, and so the right
of redemption belonged to him, and therefore he was man, that he might have the
right of Redemption.

Secondly, Christ must needs be true man, that so he might be capable of dying
for us, of conquering our enemies, of satisfying the Law and Justice, and
obtaining such mercies as we stood in need of; it was needful he should be
man, that so he might be capable of death, etc. Heb. 2.14. For as much then as
the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power
of death, that is, the Devil. Had not Christ been true Man he could not have
dyed, and had not he dyed, he could not have destroyed him that had the power
of Death, the Devil; but says he, He was partaker of flesh and blood, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death; that is, the
Devil. So that Christ must needs be true Man that he might dye, and destroy the
Devil, who had the power of death.

And he must needs be true Man and dye, that so he might satisfy the Law and
Justice of God. In the day that thou eatest thou shall dye the death; thou thy
self, or thy Surety for thee, now one of the same nature must dye. The Law
being broken by Man. Man must dye to satisfy the Law, and to satisfy Justice,
and man must dye to obtain remission of sin, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of
blood there is no remission. Had not Christ been true Man, and had blood in him
as we have, and that blood shed too, there had been no remission of sins, no
purchasing of an inheritance for us, as in verse. 12. Neither by the blood of
Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal Redemption for us; so that it was necessary Christ
should be of the Offspring of David, true Man, that he might destroy Death,
satisfy Law and Justice, and obtain Remission and eternal Redemption for us.

Use. Now this serves for our comfort, and for our comfort two ways.

First, That Christ being true Man is sensible of our miseries, of our
in^rmities, of our weaknesses, and of our temptations; had he not been Man, he
had not known what weakness means, what hunger and thirst means, what death and
temptations mean, but being true Man, the Offspring of David, he knew as well
as David, or any that were of the seed of David; he knew what infirmities and
weakness meant, Heb. 2.17. Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made
like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
and ver. 18. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted. The Lord Christ is sensible of our infirmities,
when therefore Saul did persecute the Church of God; says he, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? I am of their flesh, and of their blood, and of their
Nature, and I feel the blows that they have; This now is strong consolation to
us, that the Lord Jesus, the Offspring of David, sits in Heaven, and is
sensible of our temptations, of our weaknesses, and frailties.

2 It is matter of comfort to us in regard of this, That we may with boldness
and confidence now go to God having Christ who is of our Nature standing
between God and us, Heb. 4.15. We have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin; Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Do
you need Grace and Mercy? Do you need pardon of Sin, and Grace against
Corruption? then you may go with boldness to the Throne of Grace; why Christ is
at the Throne of Grace, Christ who is the Offspring of David, Christ who is of
your Nature, Christ who is sensible of your wants, he is there; go and tell the
Lord Jesus what Temptations you have, what Corruptions you have, what guilt you
find, what weaknesses you find in you; go and tell the Lord Jesus, and desire
him to commend it to the Father, and he will do it for you.

2 The next Conclusion here is, If Christ be of the Race of David, that the
Lord Jesus is no mean Person, but a very honorable Person, and well descended,
he is the Offspring of David, of David a Prophet, of David a King of Israel,
of David the beloved of God, of David, an eminent Person in Israel; Christ is
well born, and well descended, he is of the Blood Royal; Mat. 2. Where is he
that is born King of Israel, he descended from Kings, from the greatest that
the Scripture mentions. It was Solomon's honor to be the Son of David, and it
is the honor of Christ to be the Son of David; Behold, a greater than Solomon
is here -- And there be two expressions upon this very account which do help to
set out the Lord Christ, that he is a person honorable indeed.

The one is, That he is called the Branch; so in Isa. and Jerem. and Zach. he
is called the Branch, that is, the branch out of this Root, the branch of
David, an eminent and glorious branch, Jer. 33.15. In those days, and at that
time will I cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto David, and he
shall execute Judgment and Righteousness in the Land; David he is the Root,
out of that Root shall come the Offspring, Christ, the Branch of Righeousness,
the righteous Branch, or the Branch that acts and works Righteousness, that
executes Judgment and Justice, a Branch that yields the best Fruit that ever
the World had; a Branch of Righteousness, and such a Branch, as in Isa. 4.2. In
that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit
of the earth shall be excellent and comely. This is the Branch of David, and is
called, The Branch of the Lord, and this Branch shall be beautiful and
glorious, beautiful and glorious all the World over, and the fruit of the Earth
shall be excellent and comely: O here is a Branch of Righteousness, here is a
Branch out of a Root, the Lord Christ out of the Root of Jesse, the Root of
David, that shall yield fruit which shall be excellent all the World over.

The other expression is that in Ezeck. 24.29. where he is called, The Plant of
renown. This Branch, this Plant, this Offspring of David, is the Plant of
renown. There have been many renowned Plants in the World, Abraham was a
renowned Plant in his days, so Joshua, Moses, and the Prophets were renowned
Plants, and diverse of the Kings of Judah were renowned Plants also. But Christ
is the Plant of renown emphatically; this Plant has done renowned things
indeed, this is the Plant that is to be honored above all the Plants that
ever were in the World, he has done such things as never any did; this is he
that took away the sin of the world, Joh. 1.29. This is he that did break down
the partition wall between Jew and Gentile, and reconciled Jew and Gentile,
Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. This is he that laid the foundation of the Christian
Church, and built up that, Zech. 6.12. And speak unto him, saying, Behold, thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, behold the man whose name is the Branch,
and he shall grow up ou^ of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the
Lord: It is the Branch, the Branch, the Plant of renown, the Lord Jesus, the
Offspring of David, that shall build the Christian Church -- This is he that
brought in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.22. to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the Vision -- this is the Plant that yields such
fruit as this, as to send the Comforter, Joh. 16.7. this is he that did such
Works as never any did before him, Joh. 15.24. so that the Lord Christ he is no
mean person, he is the Offspring of David, the Branch of Righteousness, the
Plant of Renown.

Use. This serves in the first place to take off the offense and prejudice
which lies in the hearts of many against Christ in regard of his meaneness, in
regard of his poverty: in regard of his being accounted the Carpenters Son, a
Fellow, and a vulgar Person, and in that he was reckoned among Malefactors, and
put to an open shameful Death; many stumble at these things! the Jews stumble,
and the Turks stumble, and say, Our Savior was a poor contemptible man, and
the like; but this may take off all the prejudice and scandal that arises
thence, he was the Son of David, the Branch of renown, he that did such things
as never man did, Matthew. 11. says Christ, Blessed is he that is not offended
at me, why I am a poor Man, that have not two Coats, that have not a house to
hide my head in, that have not bread to eat (and the like) and blessed is he
that is not offended at me, that stumbles not at my meanness, nor at the
scandals and reproaches that are taken at me; O blessed is he that is not
offended at me, but can look through these, and can see me to be the Offspring
of David, the Plant of Renown, the Branch of Righteousness, that can see me to
be all in all.

2 This may serve to strengthen our faith; many did reject David, 1 Samuel 22.7.
Then Saul said unto his Servants that stood about him, here now ye Benjamites,
will the Son of Jesse give every one of you Fields and Vineyards? etc. he
rejects the Son of Jesse, that is, David himself, what has this poor fellow
such and such things to give you, he is but the Son of Jesse? So many reject
Jesus the Son of David, and say, Why what has this poor Jesus to give you, he
was but the Carpenters Son? but this serves to strengthen our faith, We know,
says Paul, in whom we have believed; we have believed in him who is the
Offspring of David, the Plant of renown, the Branch of renown, that took away
the sin of the World, that sends the Comforter, that can do greater things for
us than we can ask, or think; we believe in him who is an honorable Person,
descended from the best Blood that ever was, we believe in him.

3 This should serve to raise up our hearts to a higher esteem of the Lord
Jesus; Kings Sons are regarded and observed by all the people; the Lord Jesus
was a Kings Son, the Son of David, I, and the Son of God too, therefore we
should have high and honorable thoughts of the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you
that believe he is precious, precious in your thoughts, precious in your
desires; a believing Soul sees what an honorable Person Christ is, Carnal eyes
do not see, but Spiritual eyes do see this Offspring of David, they see what a
Plant he is, what a Branch he is -- And it should make men and women desirous
to come in to Christ, and close with Christ. Women desire honorable Matches,
and rich Matches, and shall not our Souls now close with Christ, who is the
best Match? the Offspring of David, the Heir of the World, the Heir of Heaven;
O therefore let your desires be toward Christ, and close with the Lord Jesus,
and honor him in your thoughts, and exalt him in your hearts, and lift him up
higher and higher every day: for there is none like unto him.

4 Lastly, This may serve to let us see, what service and subjection is due
unto Jesus Christ; he is the Offspring of David, he is the Root of David, he
is God, and he is true Man, and he is of the most eminent of men in the World,
therefore all service and subjection is due unto him, Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son
lest he b^e angry, and ye perish from the mid way. O kiss him, and subject
unto him, kiss him and serve him, kiss him and obey him, manifest your respects
unto him every way; the meaning here is, Kiss the Son, and serve him, serve him
with your Souls, with your Bodies, he has the right of Redemption, O therefore
serve him.

The next Conclusion to be drawn from these words is this, If Christ be the
Root and Offspring of David, then whatsoever the Scripture faith upon this
account, and consideration, must be made good; and there are two Scriptures
worthy your serious and best consideration --

The first is, in Jer. 23.5. Behold, the days come says the Lord, that I will
raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute Justice and Judgment in the earth. Hear what the Scripture says
of the Offspring of David, he shall be a King, and shall prosper, and he shall
execute Justice and Judgment in the earth. -- The other Scripture is in Luke
1.29. He shall be Great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the
Lord shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David. Whether ever Christ
yet had these Scriptures made good unto him is worth your serious
consideration; was Christ ever yet set upon the Throne of David, according to
these words? When Christ was here, it was in a state of Humiliation, he came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister unto others, and he did wash his
Disciples feet, he was in a state of humiliation; does it not remain then that
these Scriptures should be made good? It is true, Christ has a Throne in
Heaven, but that is not David's Throne, that is the Throne of God, but he shall
sit upon his Father David's Throne. And surely there is something in that, Rev.
19.11. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white Horse, and he that sat upon
him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and make
War, his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many Crowns, and
he had a name written that no man knew but himself, and he was clothed in a
vesture dipped in blood, and his name was called the Word of God; who was this
but Christ? And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him upon white Horses,
clothed in fine Linen, white and clean, and out of his mouth goes a sharp
Sword, that with it he should smite the Nations, and he shall rule them with a
rod of Iron, and he treads the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God, etc. Whether this be yet fulfilled take into your serious
consideration; and this conclusion, that Christ the Offspring of David must
reign, and sit upon the Throne or David, serves for two special things.

First For preparation. Secondly, For expectation.
First for Preparation, That people should prepare and sit themselves against
the coming of Christ, so Revel. 19.7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honor to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her
self ready. This was in Vision, now it must be made good in reality; let every
Soul prepare and make themselves ready for the coming of the Lord Jesus; you
know a Bride does trim and deck up her self, and put on her ornaments, and make
her self as lovely and amiable as possibly the can; so should every Soul purge
away sin, and deck up themselves with the Graces of Gods Spirit, and walk
righteously and holily, and unblamably, and so make themselves ready for Christ.

The Second is for Expectation, says Christ, I am the Root, and the Offspring
of David; and what follows in the next words? And the Spirit, and the Bride
says, come and let him that hears, say, come, etc. presently ther^ is an
expectation raised; Christ speaks these words to raise the expectations of all
that should live after this Book, to expect his coming, I am the root of Jesse,
the root of David, and the Offspring of David, I have upheld David, and he
has had a Kingdom, and I am his Son, and I must come, and I must sit upon his
Throne, and I must reign.

The next Conclusion is this, That the knowledge of Christ under these Notions,
or expressions here, is of great concernment. -- This is the last Declaration
that ever the Lord Jesus made of himself here in the world, and what says he?
I am the root, and the offspring of David; and so leaves it unto the World to
consider of. This is of great concernment to consider Christ under these
Notions -- now to make it out in two or three particulars --

1 Here is held out unto us the two Natures of Christ, his Godhead his Divine
Nature, and his Human Nature, the Divine Nature, I am the root of David, his
Human nature, The offspring of David, and withal a great Mystery; for mark, I
am the root of David, and the Offspring of David, and David lies between both:
So here, Christ's Human nature in the Offspring, the Divine nature in the root,
and Christ Mediator lies between both; for there must be a concurrence of
Divine and Human nature to impersonate Christ to be a Mediator; which here is
held out unto the World, in the last Declaration of the Lord Jesus Christ, I am
God, and I uphold you, I uphold David and his Kingdom, and I am the Offspring
of David, I am sensible of any thing is done to my Church and People, and I am
Mediator, and will mediate with my Father for vengeance on those shall wrong
them, and for assistance of all those he has given unto me.

2 Herein many Scriptures are fulfilled, I am the root and Offspring of David;
and so we may see the truth, reality, and certainty of Scripture, Joh. 4.7.
Has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the Seed of David, and out
of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? The Scripture has said it, and said
it often in those places I named, 2 Samuel 7. Psalm. 89. and 132.11. and in Acts
2.30. he seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ; now these
and many other places, Mat. 2.5. Mich. 5.2. All these places are fulfilled in
this word, I am the Off spring of David; Christ bears witness here to the end
of the world, that the Scriptures are fulfilled and made good, and that the
Scripture is certain and true, and you may build upon it, for in him all
Scriptures are fulfilled; therefore let none pull away the Scriptures from you,
let none add or diminish, but look to the Scriptures, build upon them, for I
am the Sum of them, and in me they are accomplished, I am the Offspring of
David.

3 The knowledge of Christ under this Notion is of great concernment, in that
here you may see in what near relation the Lord Christ stands in unto all
Saints, and unto all Believers, he is the Offspring of David, then he must
needs be a King, he must needs be brother to all the Seed of David; for as it
was said of Abraham being the Father of Christ, that he was the Father of all
the faithful; so is it employed of David, being the Father of Christ, he is the
Father of all the faithful; and David has a numerous seed, Jer, 33.22. As the
Host of Heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the Sea measured, so will
I multiply the seed of David my Servant. This has reference to what God
promised Abraham, That he would multiply his Seed as the sand of the Sea; David
has a numerous Seed, I do not mean his seed in the Flesh, but his seed in the
Spirit; godly Believers are the Seed of David, and so they are the Kindred of
Christ, and Christ is Brother to them all -- And will you see yet a more full
place? Hebr. 2.11, 12. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are
Sanctified are both of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, saying, I will declare thy name unto my Brethren, in the midst of the
Church will I sing praise unto thee; They are all of one, of one God, say some,
of one Abraham say others: and why not of one David? for this Scripture refers
to David in the next Verse, and both Christ was of David, and all that are
sanctified are the seed of David, for says he, I will declare thy name unto my
Brethren; now in Psalm. 22. wherein David was a type of them, verse. 22. I will
decleare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Congregation, so that
both Christ who sanctifies, and those who are sanctified, are of one, of one
God, of one Abraham, of one David, and of one Christ too, and Christ is their
Brother, and so there is a near relation between Christ and the seed of David,
so that every godly one may say, Christ is my Brother, and God is my Father;
and this is strong consolation to the hearts of men and women. We may have one
Conclusion more from the words, and that is this -- That the Lord does honor
the memory of the righteous, the righteous and godly are not forgotten of God,
but they are in honor with God, and Christ, I am the Offspring of David,
says he: Christ makes honorable mention here of David, so in Acts 13. there
David is brought in with honorable mention, so that you see fulfilled what is
written, Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance; David
is in everlasting remembrance, and so all righteous persons shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, and Prove. 10.6. The memory of the just is blessed, but
the name of the wicked shall rot. David's name here was blessed, Christ honors
it, I am the Offspring of David; and the name of the wicked rots, if they be
mentioned it is with disgrace; Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, his name
stinks; Judas Iscariot, Judas that betrayed Christ; so wicked men, though they
may set up their Monuments, and have their Tombs, as they are most forward
usually that way, their names stink, rot, and decay, but the name of the
righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Christ the Star.
REV. 22.16. And the bright and morning Star.


I Come now to these words. Christ tells you here that he is a bright and a
morning Star -- in Scripture he is called a Light, Joh. 1.5. a great Light,
Isa. 9.2. The light of the Gentiles, Isa. 42.6. A Star, Numb. 24.17. -- A Day
Star, 2 Pet. 1.19. and here, A bright and a morning Star --

The Spirit of God delights in this Metaphor, in setting out Christ by a Light,
and by a Star --

Some here by this bright and morning Star do understand the Divine Nature of
Christ, his Dei^^, which is bright, glorious, and shining, and so in Heb. 1.3.
that Nature is said to be the brightness of his Fathers glory, but the
Scripture seems rather to point at his Human Nature, than the Divine Nature,
for it is said, Numb. 24.17. A Star shall come forth of Jacob, noting his
Descent from Jacob the Patriarch, and so his Human Nature; and in Mat. 2.2, 9.
a Star appeared at the Incarnation and birth of Christ, which Star did not out,
that this was the Star that came out of Jacob; Christ now born, the Star did
insinuate unto us that Christ which was now born was the Star -- But we may
take in both Natures, his Divine and Human, and so here Christ himself does, I
am the root of David, as he was God; and the Offspring of David, as he was
Man; And I am the bright and morning Star, the bright Star as God, the morning
Star as Man, risen from Man.

I shall show you here, First, In what respect Christ is said to be the bright
and morning Star, the resemblances that lie upon that account -- I shall answer
an Objection, and a Question, and make Application.

For the First, The resemblance between Christ and the morning Star.
That Christ is compared to a bright and a morning Star.

First, because the Stars they are without darkness; Christ is never compared
to the Moon, because the Moon has spots; but he is compared to the Stars that
have no darkness, nor dimness in them; and Christ he had no darkness, no sin in
him, 1 John 1.5. In him was light, and there was no darkness; there was no sin
in Christ, no possibility of sinning in Christ; Adam in his Innocence had a
power to sin, and he did sin, but Christ had a power not to sin, and he cannot
sin; the Stars have a power to fall, but Christ has no power to fall, Christ
he is without sin, without guile, the Devil himself could not find the least
sin in him, any thing of his in him; now upon this account Christ is a bright
and a morning Star, without darkness, without sin.

Secondly, The Stars do sparkle and cast forth their beams, if you look wistly
upon them you may see how they sparkle, and send out their beams, whereby they
do dispel darkness; so Christ having hid in him all the treasures of Wisdom,
and Knowledge, he does sparkle and send out his beams of Light, whereby he does
dispel darkness, and herein he is like to the Stars; now Christ he sparkles and
expels darkness by his Doctrine -- by his Miracles -- and by his Conversation.

First in his Doctrine, the Lord Christ had the Spirit above measure, and was
full of Wisdom, full of Grace, full of Knowledge, and he gives out Divine
truths, sparkling truths, truths that are very glorious, he gave out the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4. Lest, says he, the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
the Gospel is glorious, and full of light, and it shines, why it is the Gospel
of Christ, and in 1 John 2.8. The darkness is past, and the true Light now
shines. Christ is the true Light, and he gave out the true Light, the Gospel;
and says he, the darkness is past; that is, dispelled and driven away, and the
true Light shines. Christ is a Star now upon this account, that he sparkles in
his Doctrine, and dispels darkness -- Christ does dispel the darkness of
ignorance, Matthew. 4.16. The people which sat in darkness saw a great light;
when Christ came they saw ^^en the darkness of ignorance, and now this Star
scattered the darkness, and they saw a great light -- He scatters the darkness
of wickedness, of malice, of corruption, and sin in the hearts of men and
women, and in their lives, Ephesians. 5.11. And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Here is light now
brought to scatter the darkness of wickedness, and of sin -- He scatters the
darkness of death, Luke 2.29. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace
according to thy Word, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, says old Simeon.
Now I fear no death, nor the darkness of death, Mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Christ he came, and he being the Salvation, and the Consolation of
Israel, the darkness of death was no darkness unto Simeon -- He scatters the
darkness of Afflictions, 2 Cor. 4. For our light afflictions which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things that are not
seen; when we look at Christ, and the glory of Christ, afflictions are no
afflictions unto us; so in 1 Cor. 5. for as the Sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our Consolation abounds by Christ, afflictions are no afflictions where
this Light comes, where this Star shines; so that Christ he gives in his
Doctrine, and expels darkness; Christ's Doctrine is a convincing Doctrine, He shall
convince men of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment -- so in Mat. 22. there
he convinced them, and stopped their mouths, Give unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods; and they were all amazed at
his Doctrine, and Wisdom -- Christ's light it was a distinguishing light, Joh. 3.
Verily, verily I say unto you, except a man be born again he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of heaven; so in Joh. 8. If Abraham were your Father, you would do
the works of Abraham, but you are of your Father the Devil, and his lusts you
will do. It is distinguishing Light -- His Doctrine is quickening and converting,
Joh. 6. The words that I speak are spirit, and life -- His Doctrine is a
comforting Doctrine, full of comfort and consolation; why, this Star does
sparkle in the Gospel, and there is abundance of glory and light therein; so
that Christ he is a Star upon that account.

So Secondly in his Miracles, how did this Star sparkle there, and fill the
world with glory and light there? Matthew. 4.23. Jesus went about all Galilee
teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and
healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the people, and
his same went throughout all Syria, and they brought unto him all sick people,
etc. His fame went throughout all Galilee, and Syria, and all the Countries
round about. And in Matthew. 15. the Woman of Canaan comes to him, and he healed
her daughter, and verse. 30, 31. Great multitudes came unto him, having with
them those that were Iame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them
down at Jesus feet, and he healed them, insomuch that the multitude wondered
when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk and
the blind to see, and they glorified the God of Israel. Here is the Lord
Christ now sparkling in his power and Miracles, and showed himself to be a
bright morning Star, to be God indeed.

Thirdly, Christ sparkles in his Conversation; O how did this morning Star
sparkle there!

1 In his Humility; how did he shine there? in the thirteenth of John, Christ
washes his Disciples feet, and wipes them, when he had done, Go (says he) and
do as I have done, I that am your Lord and Master, I have humbled my self to
set you down, and to wash your feet, and to wipe them with a towel, here is an
example of Humility for you, go and do as I have done.

2 In his Meekness, and Patience; O how patient was Christ when they wronged
him, and abused him every way? He was dumb as a sheep before the Shearer, and
opened not his mouth, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly.

3 He sparkled in his Self-denial; when they came to make him a King, he would
be no King, he refused Honor, and Greatness, and Glory; when they would have
trumpeted his Fame, he forbad them, and commanded them silence, and to say
nothing; when they would have him to have divided the Inheritance among the
Brethren, he would not, but denies himself, yea he denied his own greatness in
heaven.

4 So likewise in his Obedience; There he was a sparkling Star indeed, never
such obedience as the obedience of Christ, Phil. 3. He humbled himself to the
death of the Cross, he bare our infirmities, he bare our sins, he bare the
wrath of God, he was made an open shame and scorn; O never such Humility as was
in Christ, he humbled himself to obey things contrary to flesh and blood; who
would have obeyed as Christ obeyed? when he had power in his hand, and could
have commanded twelve Legions of Angels, yet he obeys unto death?

5 So Christ, he sparkles in his love to Mankind; was there ever such love as
Christ shows to the World? Gods Love is set out with a So he loved the world,
and so has Christ loved the world, so as to dye for it, Rev. 1.5. He has
loved us, and washed us in his own blood; Did ever any Mother love the Child
so, as to wash it in her own blood? Did there ever any Prince love his People
so, as to wash them in his own blood? But Christ has so loved us, as to shed
his blood, and to wash us in his own blood; he has so loved us as he has laid
down his life for us, and thought nothing too dear to part with, nothing too
hard to suffer on our account.

6 Christ likewise sparkled in his pity and compassion toward the people, when
they came to hear him; Christ was full of compassion, and would not let them go
away hungry lest they should faint by the way. Christ in the nineteenth of Luke
weeps over Jerusalem, Christ wept over sinners that would not weep for
themselves: Christ sparkled in all these, and in many other passages of his
life; and so you see that he is a Star indeed, in sparkling and letting out his
beams, and dispelling darkness.

Thirdly, The morning Star is the most eminent Star (one of them) in all the
Heavens, a chief Star; so Christ is the chiefest Star, the Star of the first
Magnitude; there is not a more glorious Star in the Heavens than the morning
Star, and not a more glorious one than Christ. In 2 Samuel 16.17. Princes and
great ones are called eminent Stars, or Lights, Thou shall go no more out with
us to Battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel; why David was a Star of
the greatest magnitude in all Israel -- and so Senacharib, or Nebuchadnezzar,
or both of them, they are said to be Lucifer, the Son of the morning, Isa.
14.12. that is, a chief Star, yet a falling star; but now Christ is a Star
which is most eminent, there is no star among the Sons of Men, no Man, no Angel
that is equal to Christ, but he is above them, he is of a higher magnitude,
Psalm. 45.2. He is fairer than the Children of men; he has more beauty, more
glory, more Majesty, more greatness than any of the Children of men, Rev. 1.5.
He is Prince of the Kings of the earth; take the Kings of the Earth that are
stars, and great stars, yet Christ is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, so
that upon this account he is a bright and a morning Star, he goes beyond all
the stars, and all the lights in the World, and all the Lights in Heaven.

Fourthly, Stars you know have their influences, and let down their influences
here upon the Creatures; In Job there is mention made of Pleiades, the seven
stars, and Oryon, and the rest that send down their influences, and the morning
star has its influences as well as other stars; so the Lord Christ, he is not
wanting this way, but lets out his influences; Christ is said to have the seven
Spirits, the seven Stars, and lets out all the Graces and virtues of his
Spirit, Of his fullness we receive grace for grace; and he sends the Comforter,
he is the head, and has influence into the whole body. This Star lets out
virtue into all the inferior Bodies that are belonging unto him, so that the
Lord Christ he is a bright morning Star upon this account.

Lastly, Christ is a bright and morning Star, especially in that the morning
Star brings notice of good tidings, that the day is at hand, when the morning
Star is up then the day is near; so Christ, he has brought good tidings that
the day is at hand, and that the night is past, Luke 2. At the Incarnation of
Christ the Angel said, Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people, for unto you is born this day in the City of
David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord. And what then? Verse. 14. Glory to
God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men. Now the night of
Gods anger was past, and the day of Gods favor was coming, he brought back the
Sun of Gods favor, and fatherly goodness, and love unto us; so in Luke 1.76,
77. Thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways, to give
knowledge of Salvation to his people by the remission of their sins, through
the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from on high has visited
us, to give light unto them which sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
to guide our feet into the way of peace. So that here is good tidings come, now
the day is at hand, and Christ has brought immortality and life again into the
world, 2 Timothy 1.10. which are now made manifest by the appearing of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel -- and especially the morning Star in
regard of the great day that is a coming, which some call the Day of Judgment,
and others call the Day of Restitution of all things, there is a great Day a
coming -- Christ is the bright morning Star, that does fore-run the great Day,
of which you hear in Zech. 14.9. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth,
in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one; this bright morning Star
is the forerunner of that day; in that day this bright morning Star shall be a
Sun, and verse. 20, 21. In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses,
holiness to the Lord, and the Pots in the Lords House shall be like the Bowls
before the Altar, yea every pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah, shall be holiness
to the Lord of Hosts, and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them,
and sees therein; and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the
house of the Lord of Hosts. There is a great day a coming wherein there shall
be no more the Canaanite in the House of the Lord, and Mal. 4. Behold, the day
comes that shall burn as an Oven, etc. but unto you that fear my name shall
the Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing in his wings. There is a day a
coming, a great day, which this Day Star is the forerunner of, 2 Pet. 3.
Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the
Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Element shall melt with
fervent heat. He is a bright morning Star in regard he goes before that day
which shall come. Thus you see upon what account, and in what sense Christ is
resembled to a bright morning Star.

Now an Objection we have to answer, which is this:

Obj. Are not Saints Stars, and Angels Stars, and Morning Stars too? Is this
any great matter in that Christ is called a Star, and a morning Star? In Genesis
37.9. Joseph in his Dream there says, I beheld the Sun, and the Moon, and the
eleaven Stars made obeisance unto me; that was his Brethren. And in Job 38 7.
When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy;
that is interpreted of the Angels who are called morning Stars, so that if
Saints be Stars, and Angels morning Stars, is it any such matter that Christ is
here called a bright and a morning Star? and it is said of John likewise, that
he was a burning and a shining light.

Anso. It is granted Saints are Stars, and Angels are Stars, and they may be
morning Stars too, and yet this does not at all disadvantage Christ's being here
a bright and morning Star; for,

1 These Stars, their light is Derivative, it is derived from Christ, and
derived from God, both what Angels have, and what the Saints have it is
borrowed; the Angels are the Creatures of God, and of Christ, they made the
Angels, and so they had their light whatsoever it is from them -- And the
Saints, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; they
have their light from the Lord, from Christ, and from God, so that this is no
disadvantage unto Christ, Christ's light it is essential unto him, it is no
derived light.

2 Their light is diminutive, a little light, it is Candle light, they do
understand little to what Christ does, In him are all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, in him is all the fullness of God; which is not so in any of
these; these Stars, the Brethren of Joseph, had but a little light, and Angels
have but little light to God, and Christ; What is the light of a Torch to the
light of the Sun? such is the light of these to the light of God, and Christ.

3 The light of these is dependent light; If God and Christ withdraw their
influences a little, how dark are they? Psalm. 103.20. The Angels stand
hearkening what God will say to them, they do not know what to do, but God must
give them out a word of command, and give them light, and they depend upon him
for light; and so all the Saints depend upon God and Christ for light, and if
God do but withdraw his influences, how dark are Saints and Angels; so that
you see the light of these is no way derogatory to the light of Christ, he is
a bright and a morning Star.

Quest. But now a Question here; If Christ be a bright and a morning Star, why
do so few follow the light of this Star, and so many follow Satan who is the
Prince of darkness, and Antichrist, who is darkness it self?

Ans. The only and great Answer to this, is, because men are darkness
themselves, and love darkness, Joh. 3.20. Every one that does evil hates the
light, neither comes to the light lesh his deeds should be reproved. And in
verse. 19. Men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil;
they love darkness, they hate light, and love darkness, if men hate light they
care not for the light of Christ, that is, convincing light, reproving light,
condemning light; now they hate the light, and they love darkness; and if the
Devil and Antichrist turn themselves into Angels of Light sometimes, yet that
light is but darkness, and they love that darkness, they love Delusions, love
Errors, love Heresies, and Lies, 2 These. 2.10. because men receive not the
truth with the love of it, therefore God sends them strong delusions, and gives
them up to believe the lies of Satan, and the lies of Antichrist, that pretend
light, but they are lies, and they are darkness: no marvel then that they
follow the Beast, and follow Satan, and follow the World, and run the contrary
way. Thus you see the Point opened.

1 If Christ be a bright and morning Star, Application
then surely it is evil, and their end will be fearful and dreadful that will
not follow after light, but go on in sin, and works of darkness; whereas the
very rising of this Star, and shining of this Star, was to dispel darkness, and
to show unto men the way they should walk in, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God
that brings Salvation has appeared to all men; this Star is risen, has
appeared to the whole World, full of grace; And to what end has it appeared?
To bring Salvation, and to teach men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Now if men will
not see this light, but will live ungodly, unrighteously, unjustly, wickedly;
If men will follow the courses of the World, then they refuse this light, and
what will be the issue of it? 2 Cor. 4.4. If our Gospel be hid (says he) it is
hid to them that are lost. If they will not see this light now that is so
bright, the Gospel is hid, and Christ is hid, and the Star is in a Cloud, and
the Devil has cast a mist before their eyes, and before their minds, and they
are lost and undone Creatures; and in Joh. 3.19. This is the Condemnation, this
will be the Condemnation, That light is come into the world, the morning Star
is up, the glorious Gospel is gotten out, but men love darkness rather than
light, they love Sin, they love Antichrist, they love Satan, they love their
Lusts; and is it not a grievous thing that this Star should shine among us
which the Jews have not? and we should be worse than Jews, that Heathens have
not and we should be worse than Heathens for Drunkenness, for Swearing, for
deceiving, and for defrauding one another, and for all manner of wickedness; O
this will be the Condemnation, It will be easier for Jews and Turks that have
not the Gospel, neither own it, han for Christians that have this light, this
bright morning Star shining among them, and walk not after it.

2 If Christ be a bright and a morning Star, then let us all look unto this
Star for light, for direction; It is not good to be in the dark, if you have
but a little light in the dark you account it a great matter; this World is
full of darkness, now let us look to this Star, and the light of this Star --
You that are Mariners, when you are at Sea, if you can see but a Star,
especially the Pole Star, you think it a great privilege, and know where you
are, and how to steer your course, and to avoid Sands, and Rocks, and dangers;
this World is a sea of trouble, a sea of sin, and of affliction and will you not
look to this Pole Star? If you will look to this Star, this bright and morning
Star, you will sail safely, you will avoid Shipwreck, you will avoid the losing
of your Souls, which is the greatest loss of all. O look to this Star to direct
you, and to guide you over the sea of this World, that you may go safely to the
Haven of Happiness, if you sail not by this Star you will never get to Heaven;
It is not sailing by your own Lusts, your own Wills, Humors, and fancies, and
to live as you please; If you will not live according to the light that he
has given you out, you are undone Creatures, look to it; we are all sailing
either down to Hell, or toward Heaven; well, let us take our directions from
this bright and morning Star, and we shall never sail the wrong way.

3 If Christ be the bright and morning Star, then he is worthy to be admired
and worthy to be magnified, who is a Star of the highest Magnitude, who is the
chiefest Star in Heaven; you stand looking sometimes upon a Star, and gazing
upon the Sun or Moon, and admire them for their glory, and beauty, and
sparkling, and the like; well, here is a Star for you to look upon and to
admire. The Heathens did so admire the Stars, that they did worship them for
Gods, and did sacrifice unto them; that you are not to do; but here is a star
for you to admire, to adore, and to sacrifice unto; I mean to offer praises
unto this bright and morning Star, even the Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord has
set him up that we should honor him as we honor the Father, to praise and
magnify him for the Light he has brought, for the great things he has
wrought for us; I herefore mind this Star, and admire this Star, he will come
to be admired in all his Saints hereafter, he should be admired now, Psalm.
145. praise him all ye Stars of Light, Are you Stars? and are you Stars of
Light? are you godly and gracious? praise him, even this Star, all you Stars of
Light; O bless God for Christ, and magnify Christ, and lift up the honor and
praise of Jesus Christ, for he is worthy, he is above all Princes and
Potentates, above all Angels, he is the bright and morning Star.

4 Is Christ the morning Star? then examine whether this Day Star (as Peter
calls him) be risen in your hearts, the Stars may be up in the Heavens, but
whether is this Star risen in your hearts? and for discovery of that, I shall
give you a few things whereby you may know whether this bright morning Star be
risen in your hearts.

1 You know the Light is a pleasant thing* Eccles. 11. to if Christ be risen
in your hearts, then the Light of Christ will be a pleasant thing to your
minds, to your souls: The Light is a thing that does greatly please and
rejoice; what delight then have you in this Star? what delight have you in the
Gospel? Is the Gospel, and the Light of it welcome to your hearts, pleasing to
your souls, glad tidings to you? the Word of God was to Job and to David as
meat, and their appointed food, as honey and the honey comb; more than thousands
of gold and silver. And the more bright the Light is, the more pleasing and
delightful; dim Light does not so much please as a clear Light; the shaddows,
and types, and ceremonies of the Law, they had some Light in them, but it was a
dim Light, but now all these shaddows and darkness has Christ taken away, and
the Light now appears clearly, is this welcome now to your hearts? can you say
as David did, Psalm. 119.140. Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves
it. O Lord thy Word is clear Light, there is no darkness in it, therefore does
thy Servant love it; do you love the Light? others hate the Light, because
their deeds are evil; but do you love the Light? is it welcome to you though
it do reprove you, and condemn your Light, and the more it condemns and
reproves, the more acceptable it is? O! this is an Argument the day Star is
risen in your hearts.

2 Where this Light is risen, there it does work a transformation, it
transforms all where this day Star does rise, Romans 12. And be not conformed to
the World, but be ye transformed by the renowing of your minds; why, what
Light is it that does transform us by the renewing of our minds? it is not the
light of Nature does it, nor the Light of any Creature: but it is the Light of
Life does it; and there is no Light of Life, but this Light that Christ brings,
Joh. 8.12. Christ speaks there that he is the Light of the World, and it is
called, the Light of Life; It is Light that will make you a New Creature, and
this begins in the mind, being transformed by the renewing of your mind, the
Mind will be altered, and the Will will be altered, and the whole Man will be
altered, and there will be an universal change wrought in the Man, 2 Cor. 3.
But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, We behold in the Gospel, that is the glass, This
bright morning Star arises in the Gospel, and we behold his glory and his
Light there; and what then? are changed into the same Image, even from glory to
glory, so that it is a transforming Light, you were darkness in your selves,
but now are you Light in the Lord; the Ephesians that were darkness were
changed into Light, into the very Light of the Lord; so that there is a
transforming of us, and a changing of us into the very Light of Christ, so that
we become Stars, and have that very Light, as Paul says, we have the mind of
Christ.

3 Where this bright and morning Star is risen, there will be love to all those
that have the same light in them, to all those that are Christ's, to all
believers, to all the godly, to all are brethren, there will be love unto them
all; see a place for this purpose, 1. Joh. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. The darkness is
past, and the true light now shines, he that says he is in the light, mark,
and hates his brother, is in darkness even until now. Why, many will say they
are in the light, and this Day Star is risen in them, He that says he is in
the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness, but he that loves his
brother abides in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him;
but he that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes. Is
Christ the Day Star risen in that man's heart who hates his Brother? No, he is
in darkness, and knows not what he does, nor whither he goes. Do you love a
godly man, do you love your brother, many cannot endure him that has light in
him, their ways are not as our ways, their lives are not as our lives, O then
light will convince, light does reprove, and light will reprove the unfruitful
works of darkness; well, if you have light in you, you will love the brethren.

I, the Brethren, but who are they? These are Hypocrites, and if they had
light, and Christ were in them, we should love them.

Well, will you know who is a Brother, turn to Matthew. 12. ult. For whosoever
shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my brother.
Whosoever will do the Will of God, the same is a Brother, a Brother to Christ,
and to all the Brethren of Christ; I go to my Father, and to your Father, and I
have called you brethren. That man that endeavors most to do the Will of God,
that man has light, and that man has life; when men swear, and lie, and
follow their lusts, and courses of the world, they are darkness, and walk in
darkness, but that man that walks most conformable to the rule of Gods Word, he
is light, he is a brother, but if you have not love, the Day Star is not risen
in your hearts.

4 Lastly, If this Day Star be risen in you, then you will follow the Lord
Christ, and the Light that he holds out unto you, and others you will not
follow; I say, you will follow Christ, he is Light, says Paul, Be ye
followers of me as I am of Christ, and my Sheep know my voice, and they follow
me, but they know not the voice of strangers, and will not follow them. Christ's
Sheep, those that have light, they will follow the light, they will follow the
Day Star; you know that when they were in the Wilderness they had a Pillar of
Fire went before them in the night, and they followed that; so now, Christ is
the Pillar of Fire, he is the Star that goes before them, and they will follow
that Star; the Wise men had a Star that went before them, and they followed
that Star, and that led them to Christ; but now we must not follow Stars, nor
follow Men, but follow Christ the Star; whom do you follow now? your own
wisdom, your own counsel, your own Iusts, the examples of men, and the like;
are these your Guides and Leaders? you are undone the^, you have not the
Day Star risen in your hearts, if it were, you would follow this Guide, which
is an infallible light, and an infallible Guide, therefore try your selves by
this.

5 If Christ be the bright and morning Star; then let us look, and wait for the
Day which this morning Star is a forerunner of, it will be a glorious and a
great Day, be it the Day of Judgment, as some do conceive, or the day of
Restitution of all things, as others conceive, yet that day will come, and it
will be a remarkable day, a glorious day, a day of burning, a day of fire, a
day to consume the wicked, a day to advance and raise the godly; and Paul does
beseech them, in 2 Thessalonians. (he lays the weight upon that very thing) chap. 2.
verse. 1. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by our gathering together unto him. O the coming of Christ is a very
weighty thing, when he shall come in the glory of his Father, and of the
Angels, to judge the World, or to deliver the World, it will be a great day, a
separating day; O therefore let us look for that day, and prepare for it; Oh,
the Saints at that day will have cause to lift up their heads, their Redemption
draws nigh -- It will be the day wherein Christ, as he says, in Mat. 26.29.
I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, until the day when I
drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom; It will be a day of rejoicing to
the Saints, but the wicked shall have a Cup of Vinegar to drink, or mingled Cup
with Wrath, and they must drink it all off to their undoing: well, seeing the
morning Star has appeared, and is up, and that day will come, O let us look
and prepare for it.

6 Lastly, If Christ be the bright morning Star; then we should be encouraged
here to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and not to be weary of his work, of his
way; and though we meet with difficulties and discouragements, yet to go on
and fight it out, and upon what ground, see in Revel. 2.26, 28. He that
overcomes, and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I give power over
the Nations, and I will give him the morning Star. He that goes on in my
service, and overcomes World, Devil, Corruption and Sin, says Christ, I will
give him the morning Star, I will make him glorious, I will fill him with joy
and comfort, I will give him my self, for I am the morning Star, he shall have
fruition of me, and possession of me; so that here is encouragement enough for
any to go on in godliness, in Christianity, in the ways of holiness, and to
oppose the enemies of Christ, why? he shall have Christ himself the morning
Star.

The Voice of the Spirit and Bride.
REV. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bridesay, Come.


THE Lord Christ having declared many things concerning himself, and his
enemies, and the state his Church should come unto, in this Book; here the
Spirit and the Bride say, Is it so? come, come; seeing there is such Prophesies
of thy self, come; seeing thine enemies shall meet with such things, come;
seeing thou will bring the Church to such a state, come: The Spirit and the
Bride say, Come -- To speak a little to the words -- Some by a Figure called
(...) where two words are put for one, do understand the words thus; And the
Spirit, and the Bride, that is, the Bride by the Spirit says, come; Or, the
Bride by instinct of the Spirit, says, come; or the Spiritual Bride, the Bride
sanctified by the Spirit says, come -- But you see they are put distinct, and
so some Expositors take them: The Spirit says, come; and the Bride says, come
-- The Spirit that spoke to the Churches, in the second and third of the
Revelation; Here what the Spirit says unto the Churches, that Spirit here
says, come.

And the Bride says, come; by Bride both the Church ^^^umphant and Militant
may be understood, those that are chosen, called, and faithful, Revel. 17.4.
those that had the name of their Fathers written in their forehead, Revel,
14.1. Those that had white Robes, and Palms in their hands, Revel. 7. Those
that made up the New Jerusalem that descended from Heaven, Revel. 21. Those who
did keep the Commandments of God, and do his Will, Revel. 22.14. Those that
were the several assembly of the first born, Heb. 12. these are the Bride. Now
the Church is called a Bride from the resemblances that it has with a Bride.

1 You know a Bride does forget, The re^emblance ^etween ^he Church and a
^^ride.
and forsake her own people, and her fathers house, Psalm. 45. Forget thine own
people, and thy fathers house; it is spoken there to the Bride; so the Church
forgets the World, and the customs and fashions of the World, her own people,
kindred, and relations, and forsakes them; Thus does the Church, Ephesians. 5.32.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to
his wife. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church; the Church must leave Father and Mother, leave outward relations, We
have forsaken all and followed thee, said the Disciples.

2 A Bride, you know is betrothed, and espoused unto a man, she gives up her
self unto a man; so the Church, 2 Cor. 11. For I have espoused you to one
Huthand, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Christ calls her
his Spouse in the Canticles, she is espoused unto Christ.

3 A Bride, she has her Ornaments and Jewels about her, she is trimmed, Isa.
61.10. so the Church has Ornaments and Jewels about her, she is trimmed and
decked with the Graces of the Spirit, with the righteousness of Christ. White
Linen (in the Revelation) is said to be the righteousness of Saints, the
Church has her Ornaments, her Jewels, and Graces, Canticles 4.9.

4 Lastly, The Bride you know expects Marriage of such a Person; so the Church
looks to be married unto Christ, she waits for the day, she is espoused
already, and waits for to be married unto the Lamb, Rev. 19. so then you see
upon what account the Church is called a Bride.

Now the Point to be handled is this.

Doct. That both the Spirit of God, and the whole Church are desirous of
Christ's coming.

And the Spirit and the Bride say, come.

To speak a little to the Spirit of God; the Spirit of God is said in Scripture
to intercede for us -- and the Spirit of God lusts against the flesh -- and
here the Spirit desires the coming of Christ; The Spirit says, come.

And the Spirit desires the coming of Christ, Why the Spirit desires the coming
of Christ.
because it having received from Christ all truth, and having given it out unto
Apostles, and unto John, and so to the Church, it would gladly have the Church
see the accomplishment of what is given out by the Spirit, which will not all
be done till the coming of Christ; all truth will not be accomplished,
Prophesies, or Promises will not be fulfilled till the coming of Christ, and
the Spirit having received of Christ, and given them out, the Spirit desires
the accomplishment of them, that the Church might see it.

2 The Spirrt desires Christ's coming, for the honor of Christ; it is said in 2
These. 1.10. Christ shall come to be admired, this shall be the honor of
Christ to be admired by the Church to be admired by the World, especially he
shall be admired of the Saints, and of those that do believe; and the more
admirable will Christ be when they shall see all Truths fulfilled, and made
good, that he gave out by his Spirit. It is said, Isa. 44.26. God is a God that
confirms the word of his Servant, and performs the counsel of his
Messengers; so Christ, he will confirm the word of his Spirit, and confirm the
word of his Messenger; the Spirit brought it from Christ to John, John gives it
out to the Church, and when Christ comes he will confirm the word, and make it
all good, and so both Christ shall be honored, the Spirit honored, and the
Instruments that gave out the word, be honored.

3 The Spirit desires the coming of Christ, that so it self may be no more
grieved, no more quenched. So 1 These. 5. Quench not the Spirit; in Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the Spirit, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. The
Spirit has sealed up men unto the day, that is, this day of Christ's coming
unto the day of redemption. Now says the Spirit come, come that I may be no
more grieved, I am grieved in the hearts of Saints daily, I am troubled by
them, they do many things that are contrary to my Nature, contrary to my
Holiness; the Spirit is a tender thing, and soon grieved, now says the Spirit,
Come, come; then when Christ comes, the Spirit shall no more be grieved, there
shall be a course taken with enemies.

Here then we may see that this is a matter of weight, and worthy of
consideration, the coming of Christ, for the very Spirit of Christ desires it.
But so much for that.

The whole Church also desires it, even the Church Triumphant desires it; I
might insist upon that first.

In Rev. 6.9, 10. The Church triumphant desires Christ's coming.
And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of them
that were slain for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they held; And
they cried with a loud voice, saying, how long, how long O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Here
is part of the Church Triumphant, crying, How long O Lord before thou come?

Souls have no Tongues, you must know, but here by crying is meant the desires
of the Soul, they desire Christ's day might come, and so their enemies might be
judged, and they might have their bodies united unto their souls, and be made
complete.

Quest. But it may be said, Do the Souls in Heaven, and the Church in Heaven
desire Christ may go out of Heaven, and come down to earth? that should seem
strange.

Ans. 1. Yes, The very Church in Heaven desires the day of Christ's coming, and
what if Christ do leave Heaven, and come down to earth, what hurt in that, for
they being in Heaven do see the face of the Father, and beholding the face of
the Father they have happiness enough there, as the Angels always behold the
face of my Father.

2 But secondly, when Christ comes they shall come with him, as you may see in
Jude 14. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints. Here is a
limited number put for an illimited, ten thousand, that is, with all his
Saints, so you have it in Ezekiel. 14.5. And the Lord my God shall come with all
the Saints with him; Christ shall come, and all the Saints shall come with him
when he comes; so in 1 These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose
again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him; they
shall come with Christ when he comes, so that the very Church Triumphant are
desirous of the coming of Christ. But so much for that.

We come now to that which is more chiefly our aim and scope, The Church
Militant desires the coming of Christ.
that is, the Church here in this World, the Bride here does desire the coming
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Bride says come, come Lord, you have it in the
twentieth Verse of this Chapter, He which testifies these things says, surely
I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. John desires the coming of
Christ in the person of the Church, Come Lord Jesus, and frequently in
Scripture th^s is spoken of; Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. The Church
looks for, and so desires the glorious appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ,
that which we look for, we desire; and so in 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and
hastening unto the coming of the day of God, 1 These. 1.10. And to wait for his
Son from Heaven. The Thessalonians (the Church there) waited for the coming of
Christ from Heaven; and Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence
also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. And many other places
there are, Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our selves also which have the
first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies, we look for
the coming of Christ.

Now what kind of desire is this of the Church, What kind of desue the Church
has for Christ's coming.
The Bride says, Come, the Bride desires the coming of Christ.

1 This desire of hers is a Spiritual desire, it is no Carnal desire; it is
such a desire as is in Christ himself toward the Church. Cant. 2 10. My
Beloved spoke, and said unto me, Spiritual.
Rise up my Love, my fair one, and come away; and so in the thirteenth Verse,
Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away; Christ's desire to the Church is a
Spiritual desire, Cant. 7.10. I am my Beloveds, and his devire is toward me.
Christ's desire is toward his Church, and it is a Spiritual desire -- so the
Churches is the same to him, Come my beloved, let us go forth into the fields,
come my beloved. As Christ calls his Church, so the Church calls him, Come my
Beloved; A Spiritual desire it is, a desire that the Spirit of God has
begotten in her, for the Spirit works gracious and holy desires in the hearts
of men and women, and those desires being put forth now toward Christ, they
have the denomination from the Spirit, they are Spiritual desires.

2 The desire of the Church it is an earnest desire, Earnestly.
a strong desire, 2 Cor. 5.2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven. Paul groaned earnestly, and
in Phil. 2. he says there, he desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
he desired the coming of Christ to dissolve him, that so he might be with
Christ, Romans 8.19. The earnest expectation of the Creature, it is called; and
Verse. 23. We groan within our selves -- It is such a desire as those have which
are sick for Love, Cant. 5. says the Church there, Tell him that I am sick of
Love; The Church is sick of Love for Jesus Christ, and earnestly desires his
coming -- such a desire as is in Women with Child, that miscarry if they have
not their desire -- such a desire as is in the captive to be delivered -- such
a desire as is in the sick for health -- such a desire as is in Women for their
Husbands that are beyond sea; an earnest desire.

3 It is a working desire, A working desire.
a desire that puts men and women upon doing, a desire that makes them work.
Here was a desire, and she falls a praying, Come, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; A desire that will make you active, not a sluggish lasie desire, as is
in too many, but a waking desire, 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and hastening unto
the coming of the day of God; where there is lo^king, there will be desire, and
where there is desire there will be acting, hastening to the coming.

4 It is a desire that is lasting, A lasting desire.
it is not a Humor, a Fit, a Fancy and away, but it is a desire that is
lasting, and continued. The Church has had this desire many hundred years, yea
thousands of years, 1 Pet. 1.13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be
sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ. It will make men and women hope to the end; where
there is desire of a thing, there is hope, and it will make them hope to the
end, when it lasts to the end, the desire lasts till Christ comes.

5 Lastly, It is a desire that is well bottomed, It is a well bottomed desire.
a desire that is well grounded, it is a desire that springs from a good
foundation, it is not from the Fancy of a man, or from a Notion, or from a
Conception, or Tradition, but it is a Desire that is well bottomed, well
grounded, and springs from a good Root -- It springs from Promises -- It
springs from Prayer -- It rises from Promises, Acts 1.11. This same Jesus which
is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have
seen him go into Heaven: Well, this Jesus that is gone now to Heaven, he shall
so come again. Here is a good Root, a Foundation, a Promise now for this
desire. Heb. 10. Yet a little time and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry. And in Revel. 22. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me;
here is a word for it -- There are many Promises in the Scripture to this
purpose, therefore Peter says in the place before mentioned, Notwithstanding
we, according to his promise, look for the new Heavens, and the new Earth. It
is a desire that is grounded upon a Promise, a Divine Promise, and not a Human
Promise; a Promise from Heaven, and not from Earth. --

It is grounded upon Prayer; in the Lords Prayer Christ has taught us to pray,
Thy Kingdom come; so that the desires of the Church you see of what nature they
are, they are Spiritual desires, they are earnest desires, they are working
desires, they are desires that are lasting, they are desires that are well
grounded.

Q. Why does the Church desire the coming of Christ?

A. Why the Church desires Christ's coming.
1. The Church desires the coming of Christ, that so the Lord Christ himself
may be perfected, and completed; Christ accounts himself imperfect in Heaven,
Ephesians. 1. ul. The Church is said to be the fullness of Christ, and till Christ
has all with him that the Father has given him, he is not complete -- The
Church desires Christ may have his fullness; Come Lord, and take all thine own;
Come Lord, and gather in all thy Saints; Come Lord, and enjoy all the Father
has given thee; it is, that Christ may have his fullness, be perfected, and
complete.

2 The Church desires Christ's coming, that so all the enemies of Christ may be
brought under, especially that those Grand enemies of Christ may be brought
down, as Antichrist, and Satan, those are the Grand enemies of Christ, 2 These.
2.8. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.
This is spoken of Antichrist, that wicked one, when Christ comes there shall be
a total destruction of Antichrist, and all that adhere to Antichrist; then
shall the Prophet and the Beast be taken, as in Revel. 19. I saw the Beast, and
the Kings of the earth, and their Armies gathered together, to make war with
him that sat on the Horse, and his Army, and the Beast was taken, and with him
the false Prophet that wrought Miracles before him, with which he deceived them
that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image,
etc. When Christ comes the Beast and the false Prophet will be taken, these are
Antichrist, they shall be taken and judged, and that enemy Satan also, as in
chap. 20. I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the Key of the
bottomless Pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the Dragon
that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand
years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal
upon him that he should not deceive the Nations any more, till the thousand
years should be fulfilled; then shall the enemies of Christ be brought under;
the Church says, Come, upon that account.

3 The Church says, Come, and desires his coming, that so it self might be
freed from all enemies within, and without, when Christ comes, this will be
made good. Revel. 21. There was new Jerusalem came down from Heaven; What then?
says he, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and
be their God, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain. When Christ comes, all enemies shall be taken away, all
Persecutions, all Afflictions, all Temptations, yea all Corruptions within,
Romans 7.24. Who shall deliver me from this body of death? I thank God through
Jesus Christ; when Christ comes I shall be delivered from this body of death,
so that Christ's coming is desired of the Church, that she may be freed from all
enemies without, and that there might be no sinning, nor grieving of the
Spirit, that there might be no tears, no sorrow, no crying, no pain, but
freedom from all, inwardly, and outwardly.

4 And lastly, The Church desires the coming of Christ, that she may enjoy all
the good things that are to be had by his coming -- That she may have the
choice refreshing that is spoken of in Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord. Christ shall come, and there will be
times of refreshing, times of choice refreshing, such refreshings shall Souls
have as they never had -- That they may have the glorious liberty mentioned,
Romans 8.21. Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God; then
shall the children of God have liberty, and glorious liberty, never had they
such liberty as then they shall have -- Then they shall likewise be partakers
of great honor, that Christ will bestow upon them, Rev. 2.17. He that
overcomes, says he, I will give to eat of the hidden Manna, and I will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written; He shall have a title
of Honor -- And a new Seat shall he have, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his Throne. Christ will honor the Church then, and set her
upon a Throne, exalt every member thereof, give them a new name, a new seat;
great honor shall they have, insomuch that it is said in Isa. 62. Thou shall
be as a crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand
of thy God. They shall be honored as Kings and Queens; He has made us Kings
and Priests unto God, and we shall be honored as Kings and Priests when Christ
comes -- Then shall they have nearer conjunction with Christ, and more
communion with him then ever, Rev. 19.7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give
honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come. The marriage of the Lamb
is come; Then shall be the marriage, now it is a Bride, but then shall be the
Marriage, then shall we rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his
Wife has made her self ready. There will be more intimate and sweet
communion; then will Christ let out his loves to the Soul indeed -- Then will
he lead his Spouse, his Bride, his Wife into the Marriage Chamber, into the
Wine-seller; then shall there be Apples of comfort, and Flaggons of Wine, then
the spiced wine will be brought forth, there will be more near conjunction,
and sweet communion with Christ then ever.

And lastly, then shall the Church be made like to Christ indeed, 1 John 3.2.
When he shall appear we shall be like him; we shall then be transformed into
the image of Christ fully, so that the Bride, the Church, desires the coming of
Christ upon these grounds.

Use. To make some use of this point.

1 Does the Church desire the coming of Christ? then this is a reproof to those
Christians that do not mind Christ, nor desire Christ, nor look after Christ
at all; many Christians they never desire the coming of Christ, but they desire
other things, people have their desires carried otherwise; The Mariner, he
desires a fit Wind to carry him to his Port; the Husbandman, he desires the
Harvest, that that would come; and so the Lawyer desires the Term, that that
would come; and the Woman desires her Husband would return, that is abroad; and
the Beggar desires a good Alms; but where is a soul desires the coming of
Christ? who says, Come Lord, come quickly, come away? it is an argument that
you have little or no grace in you, it is an Argument you are no friends to
Christ, but rather enemies to Christ, when you do not mind Christ, and his
coming, and desire his coming; look into Mat. 24.48. to the end, And if that
evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall
begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the
Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he looks not for him, and in an
hour that he is not ware of, and shall ^ut him asunder, and appoint him his
portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth;
mark. A wicked Servant that defers the coming of Christ, and a wicked Servant
that minds not the coming of Christ at all: so that this is a just reproof to
the most, they mind not, they think not of the coming of the Lord Christ, they
desire it not.

Does the Church desire the coming of Christ? then this informs us that Christ
is desirable, yea very desirable, I say, very desirable -- Christ is desired by
the Spirit to come -- Christ is desired by the Church Triumphant to come --
Christ is desired by the Church Militant here in this world to come: Christ is
very desirable; what is there more desirable than Christ? Hag. 2.7. he is
called there, The desire of Nations; where there is but one Saint in a Nation,
Christ is desired there, wheresoever there be any godly ones, any that are
endued with the Spirit of God, they desire Christ, he is the desire of Nations,
all the Nations in the World, if they have any godly in them, they desire
Christ, Cant. 5.10. He is said to be white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten
thousand, and altogether lovely; who should be more desired than Christ?
Christ looks upon his Church as lovely, and desirable, and he says, Come away,
come away my beloved, come over the Mountains, and come away, and have
communion with me; and Christ is far more lovely than the Church, far more
glorious and beautiful -- Christ is the bright morning Star, and is not that
desirable? -- Christ is the Sun of Righteousness, that comes with healing in
his wings, and is not be desirable? -- Christ is the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and is not he desirable? Pro. 13.15. Wisdom is to be desired above all
things, says he, and is not Christ the Fountain of all Wisdom? In him are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. and is not he desirable?
Christ is the Bridegroom, and is not he desirable? such a Bridegroom as never
was in the world before, nor will be afterward; no marvel then the Church
says, Come, come, come; he is desirable.

3 If the Church do desire Christ, then here is matter of comfort for the
Church, matter of comfort for every believing soul that does desire Christ,
comfort upon sundry considerations --

1 The soul that does so desire Christ as you have heard, that desires Christ
Spiritually, that desires Christ earnestly -- that has a waking desire after
Christ, a lasting desire, a desire that springs from promises, this is an
Argument now unto thee of the truth of grace; such desires come from the Spirit
of God, they are not from Nature, from the flesh and blood; flesh and blood
does not desire the coming of Christ, but it is from a principle of Grace, from
a Fountain within, from something conformable to Christ, and this is an
argument of comfort; many are troubled, they know not whether they have Grace
or no; but do thou so desire the coming of Christ? it is an argument of the
truth of grace in thy heart.

2 It is an Argument of a blessed condition, Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are those
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; blessed are they, in the Judgment
of the Lord Jesus Christ himself thou art a blessed Creature; Do thou hunger
and thirst after righteousness? To hunger and thirst, is to have earnest strong
desires after righteousness, and if so, thou art blessed; Now, is not Christ
righteousness? Look into Jer. 23.5, 6. says the Lord, Behold, the days come,
that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice in the earth; in his days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name
whereby he shall be called, the Lord our righteousness. Well, do thou hunger
and thirst now after righteousness, after Christ and his righteousness? Do
thou see thine own righteousness, as spotted, filthy, loathsome, and throw it
away, and hunger and thirst after the righteousness of Christ? what he has
purchased and procured by his Death, Sufferings, and Merits for poor sinners,
thou art a blessed Creature that do desire Christ.

3 Thou shall be satisfied, for ere long Christ will come, Yet a little while,
Heb. 10. and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Behold I come
quickly, and my reward is with me; I am a coming, I am a coming says Christ;
and he will satisfy the souls of those that do desire him. Revel. 7.15.
Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night, etc.
and verse. 16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall
the Sun light on them, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is the midst of the
Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters,
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. They shall be fed, and be
filled, and shall not hunger and thirst any more, and it is not long -- For
that might be obj^cted, We have desired, and we have waited long; why it is
not long, Christ is a coming, the things that now we see do prognosticate as
much unto us -- When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?
Where is any faithfulness in men? no faith to be found in men -- And does not
the Devil rage now, and throw out puddle waters, Blasphemies, Errors, and
Heresies? -- And are not all Nations perplexed at this time, and know not what
to do, and which way to turn them? -- And is there not a spirit of Prayer
abroad for the coming of Jesus Christ, more than has been in former days? And
if it be so, these are Arguments that Christ's coming is nearer at hand then
you are aware of, therefore here is comfort to the Saints and servants of
Christ; Christ will come, and then they shall be satisfied that have desired,
and waited for his coming.

4 If it be so, that the Church desires the coming of Christ, then let me
entreat you all to examine your selves, whether you do so desire the coming of
Christ, yea or no? and if you would know it, I shall commend two or three
things to you, beyond what I have laid down --

1 That Soul that desires the coming of Christ as the Bride here does, lives
not in any known sin, that Soul that lives in any known sin, that Soul cannot,
that Soul does not, that Soul dares not desire the coming of Christ; I will
give you one place of Scripture for it, 2 These. 1.8 When the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. If a man be ignorant, and knows not God, and his duty, and if a
man do know God, and his duty, and disobey the Gospel, dares that man now
desire the coming of Christ, that shall come in flames of fire to render
vengeance? Does the Murderer desire the coming of the Judge? Does any guilty
man desire the coming of him that will bring him forth, and punish him for his
guilt? therefore the Soul that desires the coming of Christ, is a Soul that
lives in no known Sin, he is neither ignorant of God. Gospel, nor duty, nor
disobedent to God, Christ, or Gospel.

2 If you do desire the coming of Christ in truth, and according to those
desires before mentioned, you will make some preparation for the coming of
Christ; as you see the Bride, that says Come; she prepares for his coming,
Revel. 19.7. And his Wife has made her self ready; she prepared for his
coming. And so in the Gospel, Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready also, for the
Son of Man comes at an hour when ye think not. And the wise Virgins they made
ready, in Matthew. 25. says he there, And while the foolish Virgins went to buy
oil, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the
Marriage, and the door was shut. Now, what do you do toward Christ's coming? do
you purge out your Corruptions? Do you mortify your Lusts? Do you renounce the
World, and the vanities thereof? Do you trim and deck your selves with all
Graces? if you do, it is an argument you desire Christ, and your desires are
right.

3 Lastly, Those that desire the coming of Christ in truth and sincerity, they
are glad when there are any appearances of the coming of Christ: any signs,
any tokens of the coming of Christ, Luke 21.25. And there shall be signs in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth distress of Nations,
with perplexity, the Sea and the waves roaring, men's hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth; and
then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a Cloud, with power and great
glory, and when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. When there is any appearance of
Christ's coming, the Saints are glad, and those are gracious, are glad. Is
Christ a coming? now they lift up their heads, we shall be freed from all our
enemies without, and within; Christ shall be complete; now all the wicked,
Satan, and Antichrist shall be judged, now we shall have that refreshing
that never was before, now we shall enjoy the glorious liberty that we have
waited for, and looked for, now we shall be freed from sin, now we shall have
have more intimate communion with him, now we shall be made like unto him; this
is that that makes the heart rejoice at the apprehension of his coming,
therefore examine your selves whether you have such desires of his coming, as
here the Bride had.

5 The last use of the point is this; An exhortation to us to desire the coming
of Christ, and to say with the Bride here, Come Lord, come; the Spirit says,
come, the Bride says, come, either we are not endued with the Spirit of God,
or we are not the Bride of Christ, if we will not say, Come. Besides these,
consider

1 It is an argument of love to Christ to desire his coming, 2 Timothy 4.8. To all
them that love his appearing. If we do not desire his coming, it argues little
love to Christ; A woman that does not desire the coming of her Husband, has
little love to her Husband.

2 It will be a Marriage day to the Soul, the day of his coming, Revel. 19.7,
9. and Christ will rejoice over his then as a man does over his Bride, Isa.
62.5. therefore seeing the Spirit of God desires it, and the Bride desires it,
let us also desire Christ's coming, manifest our love to Christ, and long for
the marriage day.

Quest. But may some say, What shall we do to have such desires begotten in us?

Ans. 1. Consider your own sinfulness; What we should do to have desires after
Christ's coming begotten in us.
are we not all Sinners, full of sin and corruption? Paul, in Romans 7. when he
considered the Sin that was in him, how carnal he was, how he was carried away
Captive, how the sin in his members did war against the Law of his mind,
what a wretched creature he was, he longed for Christ; Who shall deliver me? I
thank God through Jesus Christ; well, Christ is a coming, ere long he will be
here, and then I shall be delivered.

2 Consider the evils and confusions that are in fellow servants, the Devil
deceives the Nations, Antichrist tyrannizeth, great ones oppress one another,
much of Babylon is yet in S^on, all her foundations, and state foundations, are
out of course, and what should the righteous, and all do, but long for the
coming of Christ to set all in order? the serious consideration hereof would
quicken our desires that way.

3 Consider the great good you shall have by Christ's coming; it will be a time
of refreshing, it will be a time of liberty, a time of glory, a time of making
you like unto Jesus Christ; it will be a time of the greatest good to the
Church that ever was.

4 Read this Book much of the Revelations, that will beget such desires in you,
then Antichrist shall go down, then the enemies of the Lord Christ shall be
under, then shall it be well with them that fear the Lord.

I shall now come to the next words, And let him that hears say, Come.

Of Christ his coming.
REV. 22.17. And let him that hears say. Come.


SEeing the Spirit says, Come, and the Bride says, Come, let him that hears
what the Bride says, and hears what the Spirit says, let him be of the same
mind, and fall in with the Bride, and the Spirit, and say, Come.

The words in the Greek are, The hearing man, let the hearing man say, come;
some refer this to the succeeding Ages after the Church that now was, the
Posterity that should be after that time; let all the Ages, and all the Saints
that shall be hereafter, let them be of the same mind with the Bride, and the
Spirit, and say, Come, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

But more properly it takes in all, Let him that hears, Let the hearing man,
let any man that has an ear to hear these things, let him say, Come; let all
sorts of men that read this Book, and hear the voice of the Spirit, and of the
Bride, say Come, come Lord.

Quest, But a Question here may be moved, upon what account is it the duty of a
wicked man to desire the coming of Christ? or whether may awicked man desire
the coming of Christ?

Ans. Though a wicked man can never cordially desire the coming of Christ, yet
it is the duty of every wicked man, of all men in the world, and upon this
account,

1 As they are the Creatures of God; all men are Gods Creatures, and being Gods
Creatures, it is their duty to desire Gods Will, being revealed, for to be
fulfilled, therefore all wicked men taking notice that this is Gods Will
revealed, that Christ must come, it is their duty to desire the fulfilling of
Gods Will, and not their own will. Hence is it that they pray often, Thy
Kingdom come, thy will be done; though they know not what they pray.

2 As they are the Servants of God, and have talents committed unto them; every
one that is the servant of another, and has something committed to his trust,
it is his duty to desire the coming of his Lord and Master, the coming of him
to whom he must give his account; there is not a man in this World but has
some talent or other given unto him; some interpret that place in John, He is
the Light of every man that comes into the world, to be meant of that
understanding and reason every man has; every one therefore having his
understanding and reason from Christ, should desire his coming.

3 It is the duty of all men to desire that God should be glorified; now God
will be glorified therein, and upon that account it is their duty to desire
the coming of Christ. In Isa. 66. they say there, Let God be glorified, Joh.
16. They shall cast you out of their Synagogues, and hate you, and kill you for
my name sake, and think they do God good service: Wicked men know it is their
duty to glorify God, and they go about it though they do it the wrong way; but
now this being for Gods glory, and revealed, it is the duty of all men to
desire the coming of Christ.

But I shall come to those Observations the words will afford.

Obs. 1. That the coming of Christ is a thing made known, and ought to be made
known, Let him that hears say, Come; How shall they hear? unless this be
known, and made known, it cannot be heard, nor desired; there is hardly any
thing in all the Gospel so much made known as the coming of Christ is, Christ
himself does frequently speak of it, Joh. 14. I go away, but I will come again;
I will see you again, says Christ, Joh. 21.22, 23. If I will that he tarry
till I come, what is that to thee? so v. 23. If I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee? Till I come, I mean to come again; And in Revel.
2.25. That which ye have already, hold fast till I come, says Christ to the
Church of Thyatira; Christ himself speaks often of his coming, so the Angels have
proclaimed and made known the coming of Christ, Acts 1.11. This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into heaven. So Peter, he has proclaimed the coming of
Christ, Acts 3.20. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached
unto you: God shall send Jesus Christ again, and he shall come; and he
vindicates the coming of Christ, which was questioned, 2 Pet. 3.4. some said
there, Where is the promise of his coming? Peter vindicates this, Looking for,
and hastening unto the coming of the day of God -- And Paul he is not silent in
this business, but he speaks frequently of the coming of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints; and chap. 2. verse. 1. We
beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; and verse. 8. Whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming. So in 2 Timoth. 4. I charge you therefore before God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing. And in Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed love, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, and in Heb. 9.
ult. and chap. 10.16, 17. he speaks of it -- James also mentions it -- And it
is observable, there is not one Writer in all the New Testament, but speaks of
the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, Jam. 5.8. Be ye also patient, stablish
your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh -- Peter also speaks of
it, I told you before -- So i^ Jude 14. Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints -- and John he mentions it frequently, six times in
this Chapter my text is in does he speak of it -- And will you have Matthew,
and Mark, and Luke to give their testimony? see in Matthew. 24.27. For as the
Lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West, so shall also the
coming of the Son of Man be -- Mark likewise speaks of it, chap. 8.38. When he
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels; and Luke 10.13. he
calls his ten Servants, and delivers them ten pound, and says unto them,
Occupy till I come; so that it is very observable, that all the Apostles, and
all that write the Epistles, do speak of the coming of the Lord Jesus.

Now, why is this coming of Christ insisted upon so much, and made known so
much, and so often repeated?

1 Because we are hard to believe it; men are hardly induced and persuaded to
believe the coming of the Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 3.4. say they, Where is the
promise of his coming, do not all things abide as they did from the beginning?
They could not believe Christ's coming, and it is a hard thing to persuade men
and settle men in this, the coming of the Lord Jesus again.

2 If men be persuaded to this, yet they are wonderful apt to forget his
coming, and to put the evil day far of, Matthew. 24.48. The evil servant says
in his heart, my Lord delays his coming, he will not come in my days; so the
wise, and foolish Virgins grew secure; the wise slumbered, and the foolish
slept, and so forgot the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; we are apt, I say, to
forget, and to put it off.

3 This is so often mentioned and insisted upon, that so we may prepare for it,
Matthew. 24.44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye think
not of, the Son of Man comes. The Son of Man comes, and he will come suddenly
when men and women do not think of it; therefore it is to be made known, that
people may be ready, and prepared for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.

4 Lastly, This is made known, and so much insisted upon in the New Testament,
because it is a ground for Patience, and to bear up the spirits of men and
women against the Cross, against afflictions, against reproaches, against
discouragements, and all the hard measures they meet withal here in the World,
Heb. 10.36.37. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the Will
of God, ye might receive the Promise; they had endured the spoiling of their
goods, and great afflictions, and says he, ye have need of Patience, For yet
a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; here is a
ground for their patience, Christ will come; and so in Jam. 5.7. Be patient
therefore brethren unto the coming of the Lord, behold the Husbandman waits
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it; be ye also
patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws near. This
will bear up the heart against all discouragement, these afflictions,
reproaches, temptations, will have an end when Christ comes; so that upon these
accounts it is so much spoken of, and to be made known.

Application.
1 This serves for reproof -- First, of those that cannot endure to bear of the
coming of Christ, that had rather hear of any thing than the coming of Christ;
why is Christ's coming spoken of so by himself, by all the Apostles, and
Evangelists? Does the Spirit say, come, and the Bride say, come, and shall not
we endure to hear of the coming of Christ? It argues abundance of guilt,
abundance of wickedness, and profaneness, abundance of ignorance in the heart,
that cannot endure to hear of the coming of Christ.

2 It reproves those, and shows how inexcusable they will be, that the coming
of Christ is so made known, and yet they do not prepare for the coming of
Christ; Do you read the Gospel? do you read the Epistles? do you read this Book
of the Revelation, and do not you meet with the coming of Christ every where?
And what, will you not prepare for it? Christ will say, What, did you not know
that I would come again? did not I tell you? Did not all my Servants tell you
of it? Did not Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter, Angels, did not they
tell you of my coming? Why did you not prepare for it? You have gotten Lamps,
but where is your Oil? You make profession, and you bear my name, why have you
not prepared for my coming? Men will be inexcusable, like the man that had not
on the Wedding Garment, Friend, how came thou in here? his mouth was stopped;
so you will be inexcusable, and your mouths will be stopped, that do not
prepare for the coming of the Lord Jesus.

3 Let us consider it is our duty to prepare for the coming of Christ, it is
made known in the Word, and it is made known to you this day; O prepare for the
coming of Christ, Mat. 24 44. Be ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye
think not, the Son of Man comes; be ready --

What is this preparation we should make for Christ's coming? -- there are three
or four things to be done.

1 See that you cast off every thing that hinders your going out to Christ, and
meeting of Christ, Heb. 12.1, 2. Wherefore, seeing we are compassed about with
so great a cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that
does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith. Well, lay
aside every weight, and every burden, every Sin that does so beset you, and
bows you down, cloggs and hinders you from going out to meet Christ, from
running the race that is set before you, cast off all things which cumber and
burden you, all your lusts and corruptions, all base thoughts and practices,
all sinful ends and aims that you have; lay aside every burden.

2 See that you do adorn and beautify your selves with all Graces, you know
the Bride, Revel. 10. did trim up her self, and make her self ready, put on her
best apparel, put on Christ, put on all Graces. When you expect some special
Friend to come to your Houses, you make preparation for him, you will not only
have the house swept, but you will have the windows and tables rubbed, you will
have your floores strown, you will wash and perfume your selves, and be in a
decent, a comely posture, and habit; the Lord Jesus Christ will come, and he is
a coming daily, you must therefore make ready for him, and prepare your hearts,
your consciences, your will, your affections, and understandings, the outward
man, the body, all must be fitted for Christ.

3 You should put forth your desires, as here the Bride does, and the Spirit
does, O come Lord, come Lord; the Soul that does heartily desire the coming of
Christ, is well prepared for his coming.

4 Lastly, you must wait daily for the coming of Christ; Job waited all his
appointed time for the coming of his Redeemer. And Luke 12.35, 36. Let your
loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto
men that wait for their Lord when he will return. This is the preparation that
you are to make, especially see that you have faith in Christ, as Paul says in
the Philippians, I labor to win Christ, and to be found in Christ, not having
mine own righteousness; so you should have faith in Christ, and say, In the
Lord Christ have I righteousness and strength, I have none in my self, but all
is in him.

Obs. 2. The Second Observation is, That the coming of Christ is a thing to be
hearkened unto, Let him that hears, say come; Every man does not hearken unto
the coming of Christ, he hears of it, it may be, but he does not hearken unto
it; it is one thing to hear it, another thing to hearken unto it; Let him that
hears say, Come; To hear is ordinary, but to hearken is rare, and so to
hearken as to say, come, is rare; few so hearken as to say, Come Lord, come
Lord, Rev. 2.7. Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; Let every man that has an ear hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; so let every one that has an ear hearken unto the coming of Christ,
heed, attend it, observe, mind this business, for it is a thing of great
concernment, and things of concernment you will hear and hearken unto them,
attend and observe -- the coming of the Lord Christ is of very great
concernment.

What concernment you will say is it of? I shall show it you in some
particulars.

1 It is of great concernment upon this account, Of what concernment Christ's
coming is.
That there will be then the greatest discovery made of men and women that
ever was in the World, then shall the Sheep be discovered from the Goats, then
shall the Lambs be discovered from the Wolves, then shall those that fear God
be discovered from those that fear him not, Mal. 3. Then shall ye return, and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not; Then, when Christ shall come will be the clear
discerning, then will the difference be made between the sealed ones, and those
that are not sealed, Revel. 7. Those that have overcome, and have white
Garments, and Palms in their hands, and those that have not overcome, and are
in their wickedness; then will those that are redeemed from the Earth stand
with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, then will there be such a discovery made of who
are right, and who are wrong, as never was; Then shall Christ say, Who is on my
side, who? Then shall all Christ's friends run to him, then shall all his
enemies hang down their heads.

2 It is of great concernment, because then when Christ comes will be the
greatest change and alteration that ever was here in the World; there was a
great change when the Flood came in, in Noah's days, and drowned the World;
there will be as great at Christ's coming, yea a greater change and alteration
than that, 2 Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness; Then shall there be
new Heavens, and a new Earth, the Heavens shall be renewed, the Earth shall
be renewed. Then there will be, as in Revel. 21. I saw a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, for the first Heaven, and the first Earth were passed away, and there
was no more Sea, and I saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God;
Then shall be the new Heavens and Earth, the new Jerusalem, and there will be a
great change and alteration then, the Heavens then shall have new qualities,
and new dispositions, and produce new effects; the earth then shall be refined,
and renewed, and put into its primitive estate, and be made fit to be a
footstool for Christ when he sits in his Throne to judge the World.

3 When Christ comes will be the greatest distress and trouble to the wicked
that ever was, and the greatest comfort and consolation to the godly that ever
was; there will be the greatest distress and trouble to wicked men that ever
was, 2 Pet. 3.10. But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in
the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements
shall meli with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein
shall be burnt up. What work will here be now when all shall be on fire, and
Christ shall come in flames of fire -- What work will this make? -- you shall
see what work it will make with the wicked and ungodly, Revel. 6.14, 15. And
the Heavens departed as a scrowl when it is roled together, and every mountain
and Island were moved out of their places, and the Kings of the earth, and
great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondman, and every freeman kid themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks
of the mountains, and said to the mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?
it will be a dreadful, a terrible day to all wicked ones; when Christ comes,
who shall be able to stand -- but it will be as comfortable a day to the
godly, Revel. 21. New Jerusalem came down from Heaven, Behold, the Tabernacle
of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people,
and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are
passed away; and he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things
new; and he said unto me, Write, for these words are true and faithful; it will
be a day of great comfort to all Believers, to all Saints, to all that fear
God: all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, there shall be no more death,
no more pain.

4 Again, It is of great concernment, in regard that the Lord Jesus Christ shall
appear eminently in his greatness, and in his glory; Christ before appeared
like a Servant, in a state of Humiliation, but then when he comes he shall
appear eminently, in greatness and glory, Matthew. 24 30. And then shall appear
the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the
earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven,
with power and great glory. Christ shall come with power and great glory; It
will be a day of glory indeed, for the World shall be filled with the glory of
Christ, They shall see the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven. What is the sign
of the Son of Man? not the Cross, as the Papists say, nor other fancies of men,
but as you may gather out of the twenty seventh verse, For as the Lightning
comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West, so shall also the
coming of the Son of Man be; he shall come with Lightning; the brightness of
Christ shall fill the World with the glory of Christ; Christ is glorified, and
Christ's coming now shall be so shining, and so glorious, that there shall be an
appearance of his coming from the luster that shall be seen in the World; Paul
says, in Acts 26.13. that he saw a light brighter than the Sun at noon day;
Christ being so glorious, he is so bright that when he comes he will fill the
world with glory; so that it will be an eminent day indeed; a day of great
concernment, the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. So then you see that this is
a day, a time to be harkned unto; let him that hears say, come.

Now what is the use of this point?

Use. 1. This serves for reproof, and reproof of those that do not at all
listen after the coming of the Lord Christ; many they hearken after any thing
but the coming of Christ, they hearken after news out of all quarters, they
hearken after ships from all parts, and Ports in the World, they hearken after
Husbands, Friends, and Relations, they hearken after good Bargains, good
Matches, good Houses good Land, good Air, good Apparel; they hearken after new
Fashions, and the like, but who hearkens after the coming of the Lord Jesus?
this is a fault too general, a common Sickness, that we do not hearken after
the coming of Christ.

2 This is matter of comfort unto those that do hearken after Christ, and so
hearken as to say, Come Lord, come Lord -- It is matter of comfort unto them,
they are of the Brides mind, they are of the Spirits mind, they are of that
side the Bride and the Spirit are, let him that hears say, come; if he do so
hear and hearken as to say, come, I say, he is of the same side with the Bride
and the Spirit, ^^e is indeed the Bride, he has the Spirit that does so. This
is matter of comfort, Christ will come, and will separate thee ere long from
all thine enemies, free thee from all evils; ere long he shall come, and all
tears shall be wiped from thine eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow, pain,
or death; it is comfort to those that do so. As God took care of the Mourners
in Jerusalem, they were sealed, so those that desire the coming of Christ, they
shall be revealed, they are the Sealed ones, the Redeemed ones, and they shall
stand with the Lamb, and be with the Lamb; they shall lift up their heads, and
rejoice in the coming of Christ, when others howl, and run to Rocks and
Mountains.

3 Let us all then so hearken to the coming of Christ as to desire it sincerely
and heartily; you have heard of it, hearken after it, inquire whether Christ
be not coming daily; consult with the Word of God, see whether all things are
not accomplished, or near accomplished that be foretold, says Christ, When
you see the Fig Tree bud, then you say that Summer is at hand; -- If an
Ambassador were to come into the Land from some Foreign State, how you would
hearken, whence comes the Ambassabour? what comes he about? What if Gabriel
should come from Heaven? What if David, Moses, or Aaron? What if Eliah, Enoch,
or Paul should come from Heaven? If God should reveal by his Spirit unto you,
that these men should come from Heaven, would not you hearken after their
coming? God has revealed it by his Spirit, that Christ shall come, and come
with ten thousands with him, he shall come with David, and Enoch, and Eliah,
and the rest of them, and will you not hearken after the coming of Christ? O
hearken after his coming, and say, Come Lord, come quickly? You see of how
great concernment it is, it will be a day of discovery, and it will be a day
of distress, a day of change, a day of comfort, a day of glory to Christ; and
it will be a day of separation, wherein the wicked and godly shall be separated
one from another, you shall be no more troubled with the wicked; mark, Rev.
22.15. For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore-mongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie; they shall be shut out of
the new Heaven, and the new Earth, and chap. 21. ult. There shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination,
or makes a lie, but they which are written in the Lambs book of life. Then
there shall be no more a Canaanite, a Jebusite, a Hittite in the Land, none to
trouble or molest, therefore J say, hearken unto the coming of Christ, then
shall ye see the King in his glory, and in his beauty.

But to wind up all, let me tell you, There is another coming of Christ which
you shall do well to hearken unto, and to desire; before this personal and
glorious coming of Christ, I say, there is another coming of Christ which we
are to mind, and that is, Christ's Spiritual coming, Christ's coming in his
Ordinances, for Christ comes in every Ordinance unto us, Behold, I stand at the
door and knock; in every Ordinance Christ comes, and he stands at the door and
knocks, and he would have entrance, He that hears you, hears me; and in
breaking of Bread; in that Ordinance there is the Lords Body to be discerned,
there is communion with him in his Blood in the Cup, and in his Flesh in the
Bread, Christ is Spiritually there -- So in Prayer Christ is there, and in all
his Ordinances, Now let him that hears say, come; come Lord Jesus, and fill
up thine Ordinances with thine own presence, otherwise Ordinances are empty
things, they are Vessels without Wine, they are Baggs without Silver or Gold,
they are Canes without Sugar; If Christ do not fill up his Ordinances they will
be nothing unto you, therefore let him that hears say, Come Lord, come Lord,
afford thy presence, fill up thine Ordinances; come Lord, and do thou bless
thine Ordinances, and bless us in the use of thine Ordinances; for in Acts 3.
he is sent of the Father to bless; -- so again, Come Lord, and do thou counsel;
he is wonderful in counselling, he counsels, teaches, and instructs in his
Ordinances; -- So come Lord, and strengthen, for he does strengthen all his, I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me; In the way of the Lord is
strength; in the Ordinances of the Lord is strength, Ephesians. 3. Strengthened
with all might by his Spirit in the inner man -- Come Lord and comfort, he
comforts in his Ordinances, he comforts poor feeble Souls, doubting Souls, and
staggering Souls; he comforts them with flaggons of Wine, and apples of
comfort -- I, let him that hears say, Come Lord and heal; he heals wounded
Souls, he heals wounded Consciences in his Ordinances, Mal, 4. The Son of
righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings; he has healing virtue in
his Ordinances to heal your Souls, therefore let him that hears say, Come;
come Lord and fill up, come Lord and strengthen, come Lord and counsel, come
Lord and heal; and so you will find the coming of Christ to be desirable to
you indeed.

Of Spiritual Thirsting, and Thirsters.
REV. 22.17. And let him that is athirst come.


THese words are the Voice of Christ, as the Spirit had said, come; and the
Bride had said, come; And let him that hears say, come; So Christ also says
come, Let him that is athirst come; you would have me come, says Christ, and I
would have you come; you would have me come and complete all, and I would have
you come to me who am to complete all; so that the words are an invitation of
Christ to those that thirst, Let him that is athirst come. I shall speak at
this time of the Thirst, Let him that is athirst, etc.

There is a double thirst, a Natural thirst, and a Spiritual thirst; -- A
Natural thirst you are all acquainted with, you know what it is to be thirsty;
it is the desire of that which is cool and moist, but this is not the thing
here meant, a Natural thirst; there is a Spiritual thirst, which in the general
is, An efficacious desire after Christ, and the good to be received by him.

Now for the opening of this Thirst, let us consider what is in Natural thirst,

First, There is an absence of moisture, as David says, My moisture is dried
up, my moisture is gone.

Secondly, There is a sense of it, men and women are sensible that their
moisture is spent.

Thirdly, There is the knowledge of something suitable to releeve them.

And then Fourthly comes actual thirst. Upon these Four arises thirst.

So in this Spiritual thirst, There is an absence of moisture, there is a want
of Grace, a want of that is Spiritual, a want of Christ --

2 The Soul is sensible of it, as Sisera said, Give me a little water to drink
for I am thirsty; there was moisture gone, and sense of it, and water to be
had, and actual desire; so here in this Spiritual thirst, there is a want of
Gods Image, we had his Image but that is gone, as Paul says, In our flesh
dwells no good; there is no Spiritual good dwells in a man or woman -- And then
we must be sensible of this, and so know there is some relief to be had, and
that is, Christ proclaims in the Gospel, holds out in the Word the water of
Life; -- And then the Soul comes actually to desire Christ, when Christ told
the woman of Samaria of Water of Life, Water that she should drink of and
thirst no more, then she came to desire; so a Soul that knows Christ to be the
Water of Life, and finds and feels an absence of moisture, comes actually to
desire this Water of Life, therefore says Christ, Let him that is athirst come.

For our further proceeding in this, I shall show you why this thirsting is
required.

2 The nature and properties of it, and then make use, Why this thirsting is
required.
where we shall show some differences in the thirsting of men.

1 That this thirsting is required in men to fit them for Christ, for till we
come to thirst we have a fullness of our own, but when men and women are once
thirsty, have a Spiritual thirst, then they are empty of what is their own;
they have puddle waters of their own to drink, Cisterns of their own, and
something of their own that they do refresh themselves withal, their own good
natures, their own parts, their own righteousness and performances, they are
full of these; but now when they come to this Spiritual thirst they are emptied
of all these, there is a breach made between Sin and their Souls, and so all is
let out of this nature. This new Wine must not be put in full Bottles, the
Bottles must be empty. When a man therefore thirsts after Christ, this man now
sees that he has nothing to releeve him but Christ, and this man is fit for
Christ, he is empty; A Vessel that has a fullness before cannot receive Wine,
or Milk, or Water, or any Liquor whatsoever; but when a Vessel is emptied of
all was in it, then it is capable of something else.

2 This thirsting is required, because men will not come to Christ else, if men
be not thirsty they will not come to Christ; If any man thirsts let him come;
The full stomach loathes the Honey-combe; If the sweetest Honeycomb be
presented to a full ^tomack it loathes it. In Luke 14. there are many invited
to come to the great Supper, the Supper that Christ had made, the Dainties of
the Gospel, but because they were not thirsty, not one of them would come;
says one, I have a yoke of Oxen, to go and try; Another, I have a Farm to go
and see; says a third, I have married a Wife, and I cannot come: But had they
been athirst they would have come to Christ, the Water of Life; but where there
is no thrist there will be no coming. Tell a Drunkard that is full of Beer,
Wine, or Hot Waters, tell him of the best Wine, of the most excellent Drink
that is, he has no mind to it, he is full, and will not come to it; and
therefore without thirsting, men will not come to Christ. A man that is not
sick, he will not come to the Physician, but a man that is sick, and full of
pain, that man will come to the Physician.

3 It is required, because if men do come to Christ, yet they will not drink
when they come unless they be thirsty; you may bring a Beast unto the Water,
but unless he be athirst he will not drink; so many men may be pressed by
Arguments to come to Christ, to come to the Gospel and the means of Grace, but
unless they be thirsty they will not drink; When men come to a Feast, and
there are variety of VVines and Drinks there, if not thirsty, they will fault
the drink though Wine, and speak evil of it, and say, It is too new, too tart,
too flat, some expressions or other they will have against it; why, they are
not thirsty, whereas if they were thirsty they would drink; so is it with men
and women that come to Christ, not being thirsty, they fault the Doctrine of
Christ, which is the Drink he gives them, why you must deny your selves, you
must part with things that are dearest to you; you must take up a Cross, and
follow Christ; O this is drink that is full of Lees, this is drink that has no
savor in it, and will not down with men and women, therefore unless men be
thirsty they will not drink the drink that Christ has prepared for them; this
Water of Life, they will not see any life in it, but they will reject it, and
lay it aside, this Doctrine will not down with them; therefore says Christ, Let
him that is athirst come.

When Christ shall tell you of Reproaches, Persecutions, Temptations, loss of
Liberty, and loss of Lives for his sake, and the Gospels, this will not down
with men and women -- As Christ is refreshing drink, so Christ is purging
drink, and the ingredients in the one, are pleasing things; the Promises, and
the Loves of God, and Christ; but in the other, are very ha^sh things,
Afflictions, Sword, Death, Fire, and things of that nature, these are in the
purging drink.

4 Let him that is at hirst come, says Christ; because though men do come, and
do drink, yet unless they be athirst, they will not stay with Christ, stay at
this Fountain, and be content with this drink long, but they will give it over;
As many have come, and entered upon the profession of the Gospel, and have taken
upon them the Livery of Christ, but they have not long stayed in Christ's
Family, they have not liked his Diet, his Drink, they have gone away again. Men
think it a hard thing to be tied to drink one kind of drink always, yet those
that have the Gravel, the Stone, they will be content to drink such drink as
will advantage them; so those tha^ are truly thirsty after Christ, they will be
content to drink such drink as Christ will give them, therefore unless men be
thirsty they will not stay with Christ, not abide in his Family.

5 Lastly, Christ says, Let him that is athirst come; because such have a
suitableness in them to what Christ has for them. Christ in the Scripture is
set out to be a Physician, to be a Savior, to be a Fountain of Living Water,
and to be at a Throne of Grace; now those that are athirst have something
suitable to this; A thirsty man, he would fain have his Wounds healed; he that
has this Spiritual thirst has Wounds, and I say he would fain have them
healed, and so he will come to Christ, and Christ is a Physician, and he will
heal his VVounds; A thirsty man is a lost man, and he would fain be saved;
Christ is a Savior, and he will come to him for Salvation; A thirsty man is
dry, Christ is a Fountain, and he will come to Christ for the Water of Life,
to have the heat of sin quenched, and to have the Wrath of God which is
apprehended pacified, and so this man he would have the guilt taken out of his
Conscience, he would have his sins pardoned; Christ is at a Throne of Grace,
and holds out a golden Scepter; this man will come to Christ to have his sins
pardoned, therefore Christ says, Let him that is athirst come.

Secondly, For the nature and property of this Spiritual thirst.

1 This thirst, The reason of Spiritual thirst.
it is an afflictive thirst, a thirst that does afflict and trouble the Soul
where it is; when men are athirst indeed, O how does that thirst afflict, men
are more afflicted with thirst than with hunger, because there is a greater
desire of humidum then siccum, as the Philosophers do observe; men are more
desirous of moisture than of that which is dry, and therefore where there is a
true thirst there is affliction of spirit. It is said of Sampson in the
fifteenth of Judges, that he was sore a thirst, he did greatly, sorely thirst,
his thirst was a pain unto him, a trouble unto him, a perplexity unto him; so
where there is this Spiritual thirst, it is very troublesome and afflictive
unto the Soul, when once the guilt of sin stirs, the Fire of Hell is kindled in
the Soul, the Wrath of God is apprehended, a man sees himself lost and undone,
this man is athirst now, and this thirst is very troublesome unto him; this is
the nature and property of this Spiritual thirst, it does afflict and trouble
the Soul.

2 The nature of this thirst is: that it is vehement, it carries the Soul with
a kind of vehemence after the thing thirsted for, Give me children or else I
dye; there is a vehemence in the desire, it makes the desire very violent,
earnest, it is not a lasie sluggish desire, as is in many, Balaam desires to
dye the death of the righteous, the Sluggard lusts and has not; that is a
Voleitie, as the Schoolmen distinguish it from Voluntas; but this is a
vehement earnest desire, says Bartimeus in Mark 10. Jesus thou Son of David
have mercy upon me; he was carried out with a vehemence of spirit; and when the
Apostles and others charged him to hold his peace, he was more vehement, Jesus
thou Son of David have mercy on me; he cries louder, so that this Spiritual
thirst in the Soul is vehement, and carries out the Soul with earnestness.

3 This Spiritual thirst is Complanitive, full of Complaints, it cannot be
silent, 2 King. 3.10. says Jehoram there, There was no water for the Host, and
for the Cattle that followed them, And the King of Israel said, Alas, that the
Lord has called these three Kings together, to deliver them into the hand of
Moab; And so in Numb. 20.5. Wherefore have ye made us to come up out of
Egypt, to bring us into this evil place? it is no place of Seed, or of Figgs,
or Vines, or of Pomgranets, neither is there any water to drink. O we are come
into a place where there is no water; so a Soul that has this Spiritual
thirst, it complains, and does express it self, Romans 7. Paul there found sin in
him, that he was carnal sold under sin, led Captive, a Law in his Members
warring against the Law of his mind, and what says he, O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me? he was thirsty now after deliverance, and he
complains of his Corruption, and inquires after deliverance; so that a gracious
Soul in this case it is complaining, Psalm. 32.4. There David complains, that
his moisture was turned into the drought of Summer. O when says the Soul will
this drought be taken a way, and where, where is there water to be had, and
where is there remedy? the Soul is full of complaints.

4 And lastly, the nature of this thirst is such, as that it is never satisfied
without the Lord Christ. A true Spiritual thirst is insatiable till it has
Christ himself; says Christ to the woman of Samaria, I have water to give
thee, that thou having once drank shall never thirst any more, but it shall
spring up as a fountain of living water in thee; Lord, evermore says she give
me of that water -- A nd so Peter, in Joh. 6. Thou have the words of eternal
life: and to whom should we go? O thou art a Fountain, and thou art a Fountain
of living waters, Words of eternal life, and to whom should we go? we will go
to no other, we are satisfied with thee. Men that have Spiritual thirst, will
not be satisfied with honors, with pleasures, with gifts, they will not be
satisfied with any thing but the Lord Jesus Christ himself; so then you see
what this thirst is, why it is required, and the properties of it.

Application.
First of all, is this thirst of this nature you have heard? then here we may
be informed there are few Spiritual thirsters; it was in my thoughts to have
made this an Observation, and have prosecuted it, but I rather referred it to
the Use; and here I say we may see there are few Spiritual thirsters, which I
shall a little insist upon, says Christ here, Let him that thirsts, etc. If
there be a man that thirsts let him come. So in Joh. 7.37. If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. And in the Philippians, All men seek their own,
and no man the things of Christ; there is no thirsting after Christ. Now a
little to insist upon this.

Few Spiritual Thirsters there are; for few are afflicted in spirit; few are
sensible of the burden of sin, so as to be afflicted in spirit. Few have any
vehement desires after Spiritual things? few do complain of the corruption of
their Nature, few are restless till they have gotten Christ, and are satisfied
with him -- And to make it evident that they are few; Consider,

First of all, that a great number of men in the world are worldly and earthly
minded, these do not thirst after Christ; no worldly, no earthly-minded man is
a Spiritual thirster after Christ, the text is clear for it, in Phil. 3.18, 19.
For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping,
that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction,
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things. Mark, those who mind earthly things are enemies to the Cross of
Christ, and do not Spiritually thirst after Christ, no, they are enemies to
Christ, Jam. 4. Ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses, know ye not (says he) that
the love of the World is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend
of the world, is an enemy to God. If men's love be worldly, and they earthly
minded, they do not thirst after Christ, no, they are enemies to God and
Christ. John tells you in his first Epistle, chapter 2.15. Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world, if any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him: The love of the Father is not in him, the love of
Christ is not in him, he has no thirsting and desire after God and Christ.

Rich men, 1 Timothy 6.9. Those that will be rich pierce themselves through with
many cares and sorrows, and drown their souls in perdition. Do these thirst
after Christ? no earthly minded man or woman has any Spiritual thirst after
Christ.

2 None that do neglect the means of Grace do thirst after Christ, and yet do
not a multitude neglect the means, they never read the Scriptures, they never
hear a Sermon (or very seldom) they never pray, and do these thirst after
Christ? If they thirsted Spiritually after Christ, they would use the means to
come to Christ; If a man were athirst, he would use the means to get something
to quench his thirst; so if men do thirst after Christ, they would read the
Gospel, study the Gospel, call upon the name of God, and Christ. Jer. 10. Power
out thy Wrath upon the men that call not upon thy name. Now when men call not
upon the name of God, and Christ, use not the means, they are the enemies of
God, and Christ, and wrath is their portion; therefore you see whole Nations
never looks after Christ, multitudes in this place never look after Christ, nor
use the means, these do not thirst.

3 Again, no unregenerate man does Spiritually thirst after Christ, 1 Cor.
2.14. The Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them; because they are
Spiritually discerned. And if he do not know them, it is the old rule, There is
no desire of that. Now men that have not the Spirit, as appears ver. 12. they
cannot thirst. So in Jude, it is there, They are sensual, not having the
Spirit; Now what a multitude of men and women are there in the world that have
not the Spirit, they jear at the Spirit, and others know not whether there be
a Spirit of God or no; Oh! multitudes, the greatest part are in the broad way!
These now do not Spiritually thirst after Christ.

4 Again, those that do live and go on in any known way of wickedness, they do
not desire Christ, nor cannot desire the Lord Jesus Christ; And do not most men
and women go on in some way of wickedness or other, and they make their Lusts
their god, and they would not have that god destroyed; they say to Christ as
the Devils did, Why do thou come to torment us before the time. When men and
women walk in any way of wickedness, and it is their ordinary practice, they do
not desire the coming of Christ, neither can they; Many things I might instance
in this way, but it is too evident there are few that do Spiritually thirst
after Christ.

Q But whence is it that so few do so Spiritually thirst after Christ? Whence
is it that so few do thirst after Christ.


A. First, It is from the ignorance of men and women, the Law of God has never
entered into their Souls, for had the Law of God entered to convince them of
sin, for by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, had the Law ever entered to
convince them of the sinfulness of sin that is in them, of the pollution of
sin, how it defiles them; of the distance sin has set them at from God, of the
Curse hangs over their heads by reason of their sin, they would then begin to
inquire, and to thirst after Christ, but the Law has never entered into them,
they are ignorant of the Law of God, ignorant of the truths of God, and where
there is blindness, and ignorance, there can be no true thirst.

Secondly, This is from the conceitedness of men and women, most men and women
are conceited of their own goodness, they have good hearts, good natures, lead
honest lives, they are civil, and just, they walk unblameably, and these things
they rest upon, and so they feed upon these husks; Solomon says, Every man is
first in his own cause; A man is righteous in his own eyes, and a man will
judge himself, and justify himself, and think himself better than another; and
we are naturally prone to Hypocrisy, to see a mote in another eye, and not a
beam in our own. The Church of Laodicea conceited her self to be rich, and to
be full, etc. and to want nothing, when as she was poor, and miserable, and
blind and naked, and wanted all things. This is natural, for men and women to
conceit well of themselves; The Pharisee fasts twice in the week, etc. And not
like this Publican; this is incident to us all to think too well of our selves,
and hence it is that men and women do not thirst after Christ, but will be
their own Saviors, and so undo themselves.

Thirdly, This is from men and women's mistakes:

1 Of God. 2 Of the Creature.

1 Of God, They think God is like unto themselves, Psalm. 50. Thou thoughtest
that I was such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in
order before thee, and I will tear thee in pieces, and none shall deliver thee
unless thou do otherwise then so. We think God is all Mercy, and that he is
not so holy, so just, so severe and ridgid against sin; O it is but a saying,
Lord have mercy upon us, and all will do well; now here is their mistake about
God, God is exceeding holy, and he is wonderful severe; Gods thoughts are not
as our thoughts; A man judges well of himself, but God will send him to Hell
for judging well of himself; the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against
all unrighteousness, the very appearances of evil; God has cut off men for
small sins.

2 It is from peoples mistakes about the Creature, and the insufficiency of the
Creature; they do not see an utter insufficiency in all Creatures to releeve
them, and therefore they stick upon Creatures. One man he trusts unto his
estate, and riches, the rich man's wealth is his strong tower; Another man rests
upon his Wisdom, and policy; another trusts to his Strength, another trusts to
his Alms and good Works; and another thinks he shall never dye, he is not so
old but he may yet live another Month, or a Year; men are not convinced of the
insufficiency of all things to releeve them, and deliver them, but the Lord
Jesus Christ; but if they were satisfied, no Angel, nor Potentate, no Action of
their own, no action of others, not all the Saints in the World can deliver
one Soul; Then they would hunger and thirst after Christ, but while they are
not convinced of the insufficiency of all these things, there is no thirsting
after Christ.

4 Further, This is from their not understanding of the infinite worth, and
excellency, and good that is to be had in the Lord Jesus Christ alone; they
think they must join something with Christ, I will do a little, and Christ
shall do the rest; they set up themselves with Christ, and make themselves
equal to Christ, they must save themselves in part, and Christ must save them
in part; But now if men and women did understand the excellency of Christ, the
fullness of Christ, the grace of Christ, the mercy and love of Christ, and the
virtue of Christ; how that the only way for pardon, for peace, for life, for
strength, for comfort, for whatsoever their Souls stand in need of, it is in
Christ, then they would be carried out to Christ -- Is not he held out in the
Gospel to be a Sun, all Light in him? -- Is not he held out to have life in
himself, all Spiritual life in him? I am come that ye might have life, and
have it in more abundance -- Is not Christ held out to be the great High
Priest, that offered himself a Sacrifice, and such a Sacrifice that all other
Sacrifices have ceased? all lies upon Christ, and whatsoever your sins are,
whatsoever your nakedness and Poverty is, there is relief to be had in Christ,
he is Righteousness, he is Strength, he is Bread, he is all; so that peoples
not well understanding the worth of Christ, and all to be had in Christ, for
the Lord has sealed him, sent him, set him forth, and declared, There is no
name under Heaven by which you can have Salvation, but Christ; it is not in the
Spirit of God, but in Christ, who sends the Spirit; the very Spirit comes from
Christ, so that all is saved in him.

5 And lastly, Peoples not hungering and thirsting after Christ Spiritually, is
from hence, that they look upon the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ as
unsuitable to them; Christ's Doctrine is a hard Doctrine, a severe Doctrine,
Christ's Discipline and Government they will not be under, to bear his yoke they
will not endure it; what? for a yoke to come upon their necks, that is
intolerable; what, must I give up my self to Christ, and follow Christ?
farewell all comforts, all pleasures, and all delights; now because Christ's
Discipline and Doctrine is cross to flesh and blood, therefore they do not
Spiritually desire Christ; so then there are but few Spiritual thirsters, and
you see whence it is that there are so few.

The next use is a use of Examination, that we would examine our selves whether
we be Spiritual Thirsters yea or no, that so we may have this sweet invitation
of Christ, Let him that is athirst come; Christ will say to thy Soul come,
come; now I say, let us examine, and make inquiry whether we be Spiritual
thirsters yea or no.

But before I come to the discovery of it, let me tell ye, there is a false
thirst, and there is a true thirst -- The true thirst does arise from the sense
and feeling of want of moisture throughout the whole man, the false is
accidental; the one is Natural, the other is Accidental; Accidental thirst you
know is, when a man's Stomach has some saltish humor there, and his Palate is
dist^sted, then there arises a false thirst, he has some ill humor gotten
into those parts, and causes a drought there.

So now in his Spiritual thirsting; a true thirsting does arise from a defire
of union with the Lord Jesus Christ, through a general sense of sin; and the
false thirst does arise either from apprehension^ of Wrath, of Guilt, of
Condemnation, and Punishment, and so causes the Conscience to ache, and
thereupon he desires Christ; or it does arise from the good in the Gospel
propounded, which tickles his fancy, which is as it were the palate or throat
of the Soul, and thereupon he desires Christ; so that there is a false
Spiritual thirst (as you may call it) in some sense, as well as a true
Spiritual thirst; but then to distinguish between these thirsts:

1 If you would know whether you be true Spiritual ^hirsters, Difference
between true and false thirst
inquire whether your thirsts do arise from the whole man, the Natural thirst
arises from the whole man, for though the Stomach, or Appetite do crave, that
is because it is the first receptacle, and prompts you what Nature wants, and
must be conveyed that way to Nature, for it is not only your Stomach is dry,
but every Member of your body is dry, and there must be a repair of the whole;
so here in the Soul, when the thirst is truly Spiritual, it is a thirst of the
whole Soul, not a thirst of any one Faculty, or of the Affections, or
Conscience, or Will alone, but it is a thirst from the whole Soul, that the
whole soul does thirst after Christ, My Soul thirsts after God, says David;
but now in another it is a partial thirst, his Conscience it may be aches, and
he thirsts now for Christ to releeve his Conscience, and if guilt be taken away
he is well; or it may be he is athirst in his understanding, he thirsts for
some more light, because he sees some error in some way; or he would have more
parts and gifts, and so it is a partial thirst; but if it be a true Spiritual
thirst, it is a thirst of the whole Soul, the Conscience thirsts, and would
have the Blood of Christ to sprinkle it: the Understanding thirsts, and would
have the knowledge of Christ completed in it; it is a total thirst.

2 You may distinguish the true Spiritual thirst from the false one, from the
rise of the thirst; both these thirsts may arise from the same cause, yet have
a differing way; the true thirst arises from sin, and so does the other, but
under several Considerations;

1 He that does truly thirst after Christ, his thirst rises first from the
pollution --

2 From the separation sin makes -- And,

3 From the offense sin gives. --

1 It rises from the pollution of sin; sin he sees has so defiled the Soul, so
defiled the whole man, that he is unmeet for God, unmeet for all that are
Spiritual, and now because he is so defiled, so besooted and besmeared with
the blackness of sin, his Soul thirsts after the Blood of Christ, after the
Spirit of God, and Christ, his thirst rises from the consideration of the
pollution of sin. And,

2 From the consideration of the separation sin has made; this sin, this sin
has made a breach between God and my Soul, and separated me from God, who is
the infinite good, the only good; O it has put me in a great distance from
God, and therefore thirsts to have communion with God again.

3 It rises from the offense; O it has caused God to frown, God to be angry;
now his thirst rises from these, and therefore he thirsts after Christ. But
another now, his thirst rises from the consequence of Sin; O, Sin will Damn me,
it will bring Plagues and Judgments, sin will make me lie roaring in Hell for
ever, sin brings shame upon me, and the like so that this man thirsts after
Christ upon this account: I desire Christ that this punishment may be taken
away, that I may be kept out of Hell, and the like; and that I may not be
ashamed; so that the thirst arises from sin, but upon these grounds and
considerations.

3 Again, we may distinguish between these thirsts, by the consideration of
what is thirsted after, as well as what the thirst arises from -- where the
true thirst is, it does thirst after Grace, after Holiness, after Communion
with God, after the excellencies of God, and Christ: mark -- where the false
thirst is, it is after pardon, after peace, and after ease, so I may be
pardoned, and saved, and have peace and ease, says the Soul, that is all I
look after, this is a false thirst: but where the thirst is true, it thirsts
after Holiness, and Grace, and Communion with God, and the excellencies of God,
and so to be healed as well as saved; says David, Heal my Soul, for I have
sinned against thee: My Soul is athirst, says he, Lord heal my Soul; why it is
not pardon heals the Soul, nor peace heals the Soul, but it is Grace and
Holiness heals the Soul, that makes you like to God, that makes you such as you
should be. Now another man, he cares not for Holiness, nor for Grace, he would
have pardon, ease, peace, and Salvation; but as for Holiness, Grace, and
Communion with God, these things are laid aside; but here is the difference
between them, the true thirst carries thee unto Grace, Holiness, and Communion
with God, and makes you look at the excellencies of God, whereas the other look
for peace, ease, Salvation, and the like. Now it is true, that men and women
who look at Grace, Holiness, and Communion with God, shall have pardon, peace,
and Salvation, but these are as Consequences; Lord, says the Soul, rather make
me holy than pardon me, for if I be not holy what shall I do in Heaven? if I be
holy, I cannot miscarry in Hell; a holy Soul shall never feel pain though it be
in Hell, and a corrupt Soul shall never find joy though it be in Heaven; so
that in this there lies a great difference.

Of Spiritual Thirst, and Thirsters.
REV. 22.17. Let him that is athirst come.


WE now proceed to show you how you shall know the true Spiritual Thirst by
the effects and fruits of it.

1 True Spiritual thirst does cause even fainting in the Soul, ^he ef^cts and
^uits of ^^e Spiri^al thirst.
as the Natural thirst makes a man or woman to faint, as in Judges 15.19. it is
said there of Sampson that he drank, and revived, and his spirit came again;
his spirit was gone, he was ready to faint, his thirst was such that it brought
him low; and in Psalm. 107.5. Hungry and thirsty, their souls fainted in them;
they were very feeble, they were brought low with hunger and thirst; and where
there is this Spiritual thirst the Soul is brought low, it is ready to faint,
as the Spouse in the Canticles, Tell him that I am sick of love; O my desires
are such after Christ, and after my Beloved, that I am sick of Love, I am ready
to faint. And so David, Psalm. 42. his Soul panted and thirsted after God, as
the Heart when it is long hunted, wearied, and dry, pants after the water
Brooks: so a Soul that has a Spiritual thirst, it is ready to faint with
longing after God, with longing after Christ, with desiring of Grace, and the
incomes of his Spirit, the light of his Countenance, communion with God in
Christ, this is one effect of it.

2 This thirst will cause men to stir, and to seek out; when men are truly and
thoroughly athirst they will seek out for drink; a man that is thoroughly athirst,
he will out of his Bed at Midnight, and down to the Seller, and get drink to
quench his thirst; when men are athirst, they will run to this Brook, and to
that Brook for water; those in Judge. 7. they down on their knees and lapt
water. Men at Sea, what shifts will they make to get a little water when they
are dry? so the Soul that is athirst will not sit still, but seek out, it will
seek for Brooks and Fountains, it will run to every Ordinance, to every
Promise, run unto Christ, look up to God; If there be any means of Grace in a
Land, it will find the same out; if the Vision be never so rare, the Word
never so precious, it will look out after it; a Soul that is thirsty, it will
seek abroad, it will not be restrained and kept within bounds, that is the
nature of a Spiritual thirst; when their desires were a little stirred at
Christ's coming, how did they flock after Christ, and continued with him nights
and days? You have beon with me, says Christ these two or three days; and he
works a Miracle now to satisfy them, that they might not faint in going home;
so all night did they sit there with Paul, when he preached the Gospel, that
they might drink large drafts of that heavenly Doctin; a Soul that is athirst
will seek out for releef.

3 Again, Where there is true thirst, there men will part with any thing for to
releeve their thirst, hungry and thirsty men will part with any thing for those
necessaries which Nature requires; when Hagar saw the Bottle empty, and the
Child ready to perish, the water was spent in the Bottle, and she casts the
Child under one of the shrubs, and she went and sat her down over against
him, a good way off, as it were a Bowshot, for she said, Let me not see the
death of the Child, and she sat over against him, and lift up her voice and
wept -- What would Hager have given for a Bottle of water, for a morsel of
bread? and when her eyes were open to see the Well, how it did rejoice her that
a Well was near her -- And Esau, when he was hungry and thirsty, he gives away
his Birthright, he sells that for a little Pottage, and for Drink, he gives
any thing to releeve and help him in that case. Genesis 25. Then Jacob gave Esau
bread, and pottage of Lintals, and he sold his birthright unto Jacob for it.
So in this Spiritual thirst, men will part with any thing to have this
Spiritual thirst satisfied, they will accept of Christ upon his own terms, they
will pluck out a right eye, cut off a right hand, or a right foot, part with
their dearest lusts now, to have the thirst of their Souls quenched. The
young man that came to Christ, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? It was a false thirst in him; says Christ, Go and sell all that thou
have, and give to the poor: and thou shall have treasure in heaven. Now, had
his thirst been true, he would have parted with his riches for Christ; the
Disciples parted with all, Master, we have parted with all and followed thee;
the Soul that is truly athirst will let all go to have its thirstsatisfied, How
can ye believe says Christ, when ye seek honor one of another? let go your
honor, let go your pleasures, let go the Creatures, and seek honor of God
alone; If men were athirst after Divine enjoyments, and Divine honors, they
would let these things go; Spiritual thirst will cause men to part with any
thing.

4 Again, Those that are truly thirsty, things that are bitter seem pleasant
unto them; that drink which is sower and distaftful unto others, is wonderful
sweet and pleasing unto them; Darius and his Nobles, when they were dry, drank
puddle water, and thought that never any Wine was so pleasant as that water
was; unpleasing things, and things untoothsome, will be very delightsome unto
such Souls; and where this Spiritual thirst is, there is not any truth in all
the Gospel, though it seem never so severe, never so cross to Nature, never so
contrary to our wills, humors, and fancies, but we will drink it down; let a
man deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow Christ; this will down with
a man that is truly thirsty. A man to become a fool that he may be wise, this
will down: the Gospel has many things in it, which to flesh and blood are
something hard, unsavory; but were we truly Spiritual Thirsters, and did
thirst after Christ, even the most bitterest truths, and the tartest cup that
Christ presents to the Sons of Men, would be drunk off by them, To the hungry
Soul every bitter thing is sweet; so, to the thirsty Soul every bitter thing is
sweet: for a man to love his enemies, to bless them that curse him, to pray for
them that persecute him; to do good to them that hate him, this is very hard to
flesh and blood; but a Soul that is athirst after Christ, drinks down these
truths, and finds sweetness in them.

5 Another effect of this Spiritual thirst is this, That it does extinguish in
a great measure (if not wholly) the thirst after other things; it does
extinguish all sinful thirst, and does correct and moderate all other thirsts,
thirsting after the Creature; you know, the light and heat of the Sun puts out
the light and heat of the fire, and does abate it in a great measure when the
Sun shines upon it, so where this thirst comes after Spiritual things, and is
in truth, it does abate and extinguish the thirst after unlawful things, and
does abate very much your desires after other things; says Christ unto the
Woman, in John 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; shall never thirst as he had done before, shall never have
such strong desires after Creatures; says Paul in the Philippians; those
things which before seemed goodly and excellent, and were great privileges and
prerogatives to him, says he, I account all loss and dung now, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus. I have another thirst begotten in
me now, and this thirst has abated my thirst to the World, my desires after
Creatures, and delights in them, I have a thirst that carries me after more
high and excellent things than they are; so in Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world; I thirst no more after the world,
says he, it is Crucified to me, and I am Crucified to it, it is Christ I
thirst after, to know the power of his Death and Resurrection, to know Christ
more; this did abate and cool his desire and affections toward all externals,
and the glory of the world.

6 Again, where this Spiritual thirst is, the more you drink the more it is
increased, and this seems strange; where this thirst is; other thirsts are
abated, but this increases, the more you drink still the more you thirst; the
more Grace any man retains, the more eager after Grace still, the more thirsty
after Christ this day, the more the next; this thirst begets thirst, it makes a
man to see his need of Christ more, and of Grace, and God, and of Spiritual
things more and more, and inlarges his desire. As Lime, when you throw water
upon it, it makes the Lime burn the more; so when the Soul thirsts, and God
gives it water of life, it thirsts more, therefore says God, Open your mouth
wide, and I will fill it. In time God will fill it, but Grace does stretch our
desires, and makes men more vigorous in pursuit of heavenly things than over
before; that man or woman that can sit down content with a little knowledge,
with a little measure of Grace, with a little degree of Faith, with a little
portion of the Spirit, that man in truth has none, for it is the nature of
Grace to make more hungry, more thirsty, more desirous, it will draw out the
Soul more strongly after Christ; the Spouse was never so affected with Christ,
as after she had tasted of the love of Christ.

7 Again, Where this thirst is in truth, it breeds in the Soul a conformity to
the thirst that is in God, and in Christ.

Quest. Why? are they thirsty?

Ans. Yes, God himself is thirsty, and Christ is thirsty, Psalm. 81.13. O that
my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my way; Here is Gods
thirst, O that there were such a heart in this people, says God, where there
is a true Spiritual thirst, there is a conformity in the heart unto God, Psalm.
119.5. says David there who had this thirst, O that my ways were directed to
keep thy statutes; Lord, this is thy desire that men should keep thy Statutes;
Lord, this is my desire, O that I could keep thy statutes. Here is a conformity
now between God and the Soul that is athirst; says God in Psalm. 27. Seek ye
my face, my heart answered, says David, thy face Lord will I seek. Here is a
conformity between Gods desire and man's desire; so in the Canticles, says the
Spouse there, My beloved is mine, and his desire is toward me. And in another
place, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. Does Christ desire me? why I
desire Christ, says the Spouse; so that this Spiritual thirst breeds a
conformity between the heart and God, that look what God desires it desires.

8 Again, This Spiritual thirst does cause men to thirst after God for himself,
and Christ for himself; many do thirst after God, not for himself, but for
themselves; they thirst after the Loaves, they thirst after the Gifts of God,
as many seek to be in great Services, to be in great men's Houses, and Courts,
that they may have their Livery, that they may eat and drink of the best, that
they may live at ease, and not out of love to the Person; Shimei comes to
David, and to Solomon, but not out of love to David, or Solomon, but to save
his life; so many come to God, that they may be saved from Hell, and Damnation,
but they would live in their lusts, have their wills, have their ease, and bear
Gods Livery, some outward profession, but they come not to God for love of God,
for love of Holiness, for love of Truth, for love of Jesus Christ, it is for
themselves, but not for Gods Self; but this Soul that is truly athirst must
have God himself, and for himself, he knows all other things will come in
after; If I have God, I have all, if I have not God, I have nothing will do me
good.

9 Lastly, Where this true Spiritual thirst is, it is that a man may be
satisfied; and that a man may be fruitful, as the earth; why is the Earth dry,
and thirsts after the Rain, and gapes sometimes as if it would swallow up the
very Heavens? that it may be satisfied with the Rain, and be much fruitful;
so a Soul that has this Spiritual thirst, desires to receive from God, that so
it may be fruitful; O it cannot bring forth good fruit, and that is a burden
to it; and it longs to be fruitful, and thirsts to receive some influences of
Grace, some dews from Heaven, that so being watered, and moystned, it may grow
and yield good fruit; and thus you see some effects and fruits of this
Spiritual thirst, and so to know the truth of it, whether you have this thirst
or no.

Quest. Here now a Question may arise; may some say, I do not find this thirst
in my Soul, I do not find such a thirst as here is mentioned in my Soul, and
what shall I think of my self? others, it may be they have strong thirstings,
and such desires, but as for my self, I do not find the same?

Ans. To this I answer, that there is a difference in men in regard of this
Spiritual thirst, as well as in men in regard of Natural thirst; some bodies
are more thirsty than others, your Choleric bodies are more thirsty than
Phlegmatic, and so some Christians are more thirsty than others; some have
lived very profane lives, in scandalous courses, and run out into exorbitant
ways, and greatly have dishonored God, and if God ever stir in their hearts,
and bring them to thirst, their thirst will be vehement, their thirst will be
afflictive, their thirst will be stronger than other men's; some they are
trained up from the Cradle in the ways of God, they have more ingenuous
Natures, and breaks not out into such ill ways, and their thirst is more
moderate, and less discernable, -- it is not the degree of the thirst, but the
truth of the thirst that is required; though you have not a strong thirst, yet
you have a true thirst; as it is not a strong faith, but a true faith that is
required to Salvation. Now the degree of thirst, which will bring you to
Christ, which will make you come and drink, and stay with Christ, that is
sufficient.

Use of Exhortation.
But to come to another use, and that is an use of Exhortation, Let him that is
athirst come.

Men and women, O labor to be true thirsters after Christ; we can thirst after
other things; one thirsts after this, another after that, and another after
another thing, and all the things in the World are thirsted after by one or
other, but who thirsts after Christ? All seek their own, and none seek the
things of Christ, they neither thirst after Christ, nor any thing belongs to
Christ. Now here I shall do two or three things.

1 Show you grounds why you should thirst after Christ.

2 Give some directions to those that never thirsted, and directions to those
that do thirst, that they may thirst more.

First for some grounds.

1 Consider, Why w^^ should thirst after Christ.
Blessedness is fixed unto Thirsting, would you not be blessed all of you?
would you not have a blessing from the mouth of our dear Savior? Matthew. 5.
Blessed are those that hunger and thirst after Righteousness; it may be you
have not Righteousness yet, but do you hunger and thirst after righteousness?
says Truth it self, the Lord Jesus; Blessed is the man, blessed is the woman;
and is there nothing in a blessing pronounced by him? This word is a
comprehensive word, Blessed, there is all good wrapped up in it, all good for
Soul, all good for Body, all good for present, all good for future, Blessed is
the man that hungers and thirsts; if you would therefore have such a
blessedness as this is, O hunger and thirst after Christ, and the excellencies
of Christ.

2 Many great and precious Promises are made out to Thirsters, and will be
made good to Thirsters. In Isa. 44. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty,
and floods upon the dry ground, I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
blessing upon thine Off spring, and they shall spring up as among the Grass, as
Willows by the watercourses. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty; that
is, I will pour my Spirit upon him, that is meant by water; if thou be
thirsty, God will not only give his Spirit, but pour his Spirit; it notes
abundance, it notes vehemence, such a measure of the Spirit as shall bear down
your corruptions, and your sins, God will pour out his Spirit upon you; so in
the one and forty of Isaiah, When the poor and the needy seek water, and there
be none, and their Tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the
God of Israel will not forsake them, I will open rivers in high places, etc. If
you be thirsty, if you be even fainting, if you be brought low now in your
longings and desires after Grace and Holiness, and the things of Heaven, the
Lord says, I will hear you, mine ear shall be open, mine hand shall be
stretched out, I will not forsake you, I will not leave you in that condition,
I will releeve you; so that sweet and choice Promises are made to Souls that
hunger and thirst, they shall be satisfied.

3 Again, we should labor for this thirst, because the invitation here is unto
thirsters, If any man thirst, let him come; so in Joh. 7.38. If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. The Lord invites such persons; you know when he
made a great Feast in the fourteenth of Luke, he invited all sorts, but those
were not athirst, they would not come, the Yoke of Oxen, the Wife, the Farm
drew them away, but those that were athirst came, If any man thirst let him
come; You would take it ill if Christ should not invite you to the dainties of
the Gospel; well, do you thirst? Christ invites you; Are you a hungery? will
you eat? will you drink? Christ invites you; the invitation is to Thirsters,
therefore get this thirst.

Quest. But the Question is, What directions will you give us to attain unto
this thirst? --

Ans. First, Some directions to them that have it not.

Secondly, To them that have.

1 For those that have it not, Directions to those that have not this thirst.
and

1 Let such consider something of God -- something of the Law, -- something of
Sin, -- something of their Lives, -- something of Eternity --

God.
1 Something of God; Let them consider the Purity, the Justice, and Power of
God.

1 The Purity of God, God is a holy God, so pure that his eyes cannot behold
iniquity, to approve of it; see what is said in Psalm. 5. Thou art not a God
that have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee; no
unclean thing shall ever enter into his presence; God is a holy God, and who
can stand before him? 1 Samuel 6.20. He is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity,
Hab. 1.13. Well, if God be holy and pure, what will thou do then that art
unholy, unpure, wicked, carnal, and corrupt? he is an holy God, whom thou have
to do withal.

2 He is a just God, a God that has said, The soul that sins shall dye; Be
he great or small, rich or poor, young or old, learned or unlearned, The soul
that sins shall dye, Psalm. 143. says David there, Enter not into judgment, O
Lord, with thy Servant, for no flesh living shall be justified in thy sight.
The Lord is so just, so righteous, so exact, that no flesh living can be
justified in his fight; why flesh is guilty, guilty before God, and sinners
must dye, God is righteous.

3 Consider, as God is Pure, Holy, and hates all sin, the appearance of evil,
the thoughts of the heart; As God is just, and will punish sin, so God is
powerful to do it; God he has a strong Arm, and when he comes to punish he can
do it to purpose. See what Job says in chap. 16.12. I was at ease, but he has
broken me asunder, he has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces,
and set me up for his mark, etc. Did God deal thus with holy Job? what will
he do with sinners? Is not God a consuming fire? Is not God terrible in
righteousness? Can any escape the hands of God? Ye sinners in Sion, can ye
escape the hands of God? What will ye do in the day of Visitation, when God
comes? Can ye stand it out against the Almighty? can ye plead with God, and
bring forth your Arguments to justify your selves? God will Condemn you, he
will shake you to pieces, God will break your bon^s, he will make your re^es
speak bitter things unto you. Now, the consideration of Gods Purity, of Gods
Justice, of Gods Power, sold make you thirst after Christ, who may make you
holy, and free you from his Justice, and from his Power, that he might not
destroy you.

The Law.
Secondly, Consider the Law of God; the Law of God is, in few words, in the Ten
Commandments, there is much forbidden, and many things commanded; he that is
angry without cause, he that says unto his Brother Racha, or, thou fool, is in
danger of Hell fire -- He that looks upon a Woman and lusts after her, has
committed Adultery, and Adulterers shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven;
you think Thoughts are free, and lust free, but what says Paul, When the
Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed, the Commandment slew me; and if
the Law once enter, and seize upon your heart, it will drink up the moisture of
your spirit, it will make you restless night and day, it will be as an Arrow in
your Liver, as a hot burning Iron; Paul thought himself once that he was
righteous, blameless, civil, just, and that no man should be saved sooner than
himself, but he was deceived, when the Law came, he saw what a sinner he was,
what vild thoughts, vild lusts, and practices he had been guilty of, and the
Law slew him -- The Law pronounces a Curse over your heads; and James tells
you, He that breaks one is guilty of all; therefore do not you see a need of
Christ now? Have you no thirsting desires after Christ, who shall deliver you
from the Law, who shall free you from the Curse? if you have not Christ to do
it, you will stand and fall by the Law, and you cannot be justified; the Jews
would be saved, as it were by the Law, but they perished, seeking righteousness
by the Law, and so will all that go that way.

Sin.
Again, consider something of Sin; are you not sinners? If there be any here
that says he is not a sinner, let him depart, but if we be all sinners, let us
consider the nature of Sin; O how does sin defile us, how does sin black us?
what ugly, loathsome Creatures does sin make us? what Black-a-mores are we?
and those that are in their blood, in their filth, those that dye in their sin,
woe be to them; well, let us then lay to heart the evil of our sin, and I am
persuaded there is not one here that has any understanding about it, but sees
a great deal of evil at one time or other in sin; it is the offense of God, it
is the death of the Soul, it is the breach of the Command; Sin is that that
separates between God and men; now what you have in the notion, bring it down
and reallize it in your hearts, follow it with meditation, and let meditation
bring in the evil of sin, bring in the Indictment, I am guilty of this, and
that, and the other sin, and let Conscience now sit as Judge in you, and speak
out; Conscience will Condemn you, and say, O thou have sinned against my Lord
and Master, I am his Deputy, and I sit as a petty god in thy Soul, and I tell
thee, Thou art a Damned lost Creature; now when things are brought home thus,
then will ye thirst after a Pardon, then will you look out for Salvation, then
will you see Christ's Blood, Christ's Intercession, and Christ's Merits to be
precious -- Stout-hearted Sinners, and Highway Men, when the Sentence of death
has been pronounced over their heads, and they have seen that they are
Condemned men, then they have fallen down upon their knees, and have begged
mercy; so many stout-hearted Sinners, if they would but follow home their sin
by Meditation, and bring the Notion home to their hearts, they would see
themselves to have need of Christ, and to have Mercy and Grace through him.

Our own Lives.
Again, Consider your own Lives; have you any Lease of your Lives, as Hezekiah
had? Do you know you shall live another week, another year, another night or
day? Are not your Lives uncertain, your breath in your Nostrils? Do we not
find in Scripture, and in daily experience, how suddenly men and women are
pulled away, by some hand of God or other? Senacheribs Army smitten all in a
night, one hundred fourscore and five thousand men, fifty thousand Bethshemites
smitten for peeping into the Ark, Herod eaten up with Worms, the Tower of Shilo
fell upon eighteen, two Bears out of the Wood tare forty two Children -- And
have we not examples in our days? How many are blown up with Powder? how many
are burnt with fire? how many drop down in the streets as they go? Why do not
you thirst after Christ, and his Righteousness? There is no way for you but by
Christ, it is Christ alone that will secure your Souls; therefore can you be
too early? hie forward upon this account. If Christ be not yours, and you dye,
woe to you, you shall dye in your sins, says Christ, This were a sad Sentence
to be pronounced over your head, to be written upon your doors or hearts, Man,
Woman, thou shall dye in thy sins, it had been better thou had never been
born; now unless you get interest in Christ, you must dye in your sins.

Eternity.
Lastly, consider Eternity, here you have a being but for a little time, but
what comes after? there is an eternal condition of bliss or woe, and the most go
the wrong way; there is a possibility for thee for eternal Happiness, and the
way is to thirst after Christ; sit down and consider with thy self, whosoever
thou art, that art in the gall of bitterness, and have deluded thy Soul
hitherto with an outside, or form of godliness; Consider ere long I must go
hence, and there are thousands go to Hell for one that goes to Heaven; well, it
is time for me now to look to my self, I may be gone before next day, before
next year; and is Christ mine? what a Swearer, a Drunkard, a Worldling, a
Whore-master, one that does rail, slander, and backbite others? Christ is none
of thine, the Scripture is clear, none such shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; therefore consider, there is eternal woe for all those that dye in
their Natural condition, that have not this thirst in them after the Lord
Christ and his Righteousness; O therefore give no rest to God, nor no rest to
thy Soul, until thou find that thou art delivered.

2 To you that are godly, Direction to those that thirst after Christ.
and have some thirst in your Souls after Christ; many times you grow
lukewarm, flat, dead, and secure, you had need be quickened, and to have your
thirst stirred up in you, and for that consider,

1 Your own infirmities; have you no infirmities? is there no deadness,
dullness, laziness? how do you perform the Worship of God, and the duties
thereof? Are you not more Carnal than Spiritual? Do not your hearts wander? Are
you not sleepy, are not you formal? Do not you neglect many times your duty? do
not you come short? surely these, and many other things you know by your
selves; And whence came all these? from the body of Sin, from the Old man that
is in you? Paul, he was sensible of this, Romans 7. he found a Law in his members
warring against the Law of his mind, he found he was Carnal, sold under sin;
he found he was unspiritual, and he is troubled at this, and his thirst was
increased, what says he, O wretched man, who shall deliver me? his thirst now
is great, Who shall deliver me? I thank God through Jesus Christ; I thirst
after Christ, and the coming of Christ to deliver me; so that the serious
consideration of your own infirmities and corruptions, and the hindrances, and
cloggs, and lets you have from them in your way of Christianity, should cause
your thirst to be greater and greater daily.

2 Consider what work you have to do, and what little strength you have to do
it; Christians have a great deal of work to do here in the World, they should
pray continually, they should stand and with-stand the Tempter, and all his
Temptations, overcome the World, work the Works of God; they should side with
Christ, and his interest, and help on the Gospel, and the power of godliness;
they have their Lusts to mortify, and great things to do; Now how will you do
these? says Christ, Without me you can do nothing; will not you thirst after
Christ now, and strength from him, and assurance from him, and new influences
from him, and more of his Spirit daily? Many do act in their own strength, and
therefore so little good comes thereof. We pray by our own Natural abilities,
and Natural parts, and through Power and Gifts acquired, and therefore I say so
little good comes of all; but had we Divine strength to pray, and to do all we
do; did we go out in his Name, and in his strength, and work the Works of God,
who could stand before us then?

3 Consider the great good that is to be had by Christ; have you not wants?
why, there is infinite good to be had by Christ, In him is all fullness, with
him is plentious Redemption, he has unsearchable riches of Grace, he has the
residue of the Spirit, he has whatsoever may make our lives comfortable,
whatsoever may make our lives happy; Christ has all in his own hands, and
therefore you should hunger and thirst after Christ more and more.

4 Consider what is promised unto you by Christ; the Promise is, That there
shall be times of refreshing when Christ comes, Acts 3.19. then the times of
restitution of all things shall be; there are times for these things -- And so
when the Lamb shall be the Light, then the Lamb shall lead you to the Fountain
of living Waters, then you shall hunger and thirst no more, then all tears
shall be wiped from your eyes; Why do not you thirst after these things, and
after the Lord Jesus Christ and his coming? The Spirit says, Come, and the
Bride says, come; And what, are your Souls asleep? Should not we say, Come
Lord, come quickly? The times in which we live are sad times, but the coming
of the Lord would change all, and rectify all, and satisfy all; therefore
consider of these things, and your thirst after Christ will be increased.

5 Lastly, If you that thirst would have your thirst more lively, and enlarged,
remember what sweetness you have found in Christ at some time or other; when
men remember they have drunk admirable Wine, the very remembrance of it makes
them to thirst after that Wine the more; the Wine that Christ made at the
Marriage Feast, and brought forth, the people were so affected with it, that
they called the Governor, and asked him, why he kept the good Wine till then,
they were taken with the Wine; so when Christians do remember what ravishments
they have had from Christ sometimes, what hits of joy, what sound peace, what
sweet communion with the Father through him, what out-lettings of his Spirit?
This will enlarge their hearts, and their desires; some Christians have had
large experiences this way, they have had flaggons of Wine to drink, and apples
of comfort to feed upon; and the more they do remember these, the larger will
be their thirstings after Christ.

Christ's willingness to save sinners.
Reve: 22.17. Let him that is athirst come.


LEt him that is athirst, come, come. Christ does not say here, Let him that is
athirst seek out, and yet that had been humanity and courtesy: Christ does not
say, Let him that is athirst go to Jordan, Christ does not send them to Moses,
nor to any of the brooks or Cisterns, but Christ says, Let him that is athirst
come; and, whither should he come, or to what should he come: The meaning is,
let him come to me; Let him come to me for drink, for satisfaction, let him
that is athirst come: here is exceeding kindness, choice love, peculiar mercy,
let him that is athirst come: Come unto me, as it is said in the 7th of John,
and Drink: I have drink for him, water of life for him, as it is in the next
words, And whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.

To open this word unto you; what is meant by come? it is not meant come bodily:
so you all know what coming is, when the body removes out of one place and goes
to another; But it is meant spiritually; it is not the feet of the body but the
feet of the soul are required; and by coming in Scripture is meant beleiving:
unbeleife is departing from God; Heb: 9.12. Take heed Brethren, least there be
in any of you an evil heart of unbeleife in departing from the living God: An
heart of unbeleife is a heart departs from God, and goes away from God: So in
the 10th Chap: The Just shall live by Faith, but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him: An unbeleiving heart, is a heart draws
back, and departs from God: Now to come to God is to believe, and to come to
Christ is to heleive.

And this beleiving, it is not an assent only unto a truth; An assent unto
this that Christ is the Messiah, that Christ is the Savior of the world; it is
not only to assent, for so Devils do believe, so Antichrist beleives, so
many that perish^doe believe, they assent to the truth -- Neither is it an
assurance, as some do make Faith a full persuasion, or a through persuasion of
the heart that it is so and so: -- No, Assurance is not Faith: Assurance is a
consequent, or an effect of Faith, and not of the nature and essence of Faith:
many shall be saved that never had Assurance, and many are Justified that have
no Assurance: -- What then is this Faith? what is this Coming?

There is assent unto Truth, an assent unto Scripture, which is in the
understanding: and so is Assurance, Assurance of understanding. But Faith is in
the Understanding, and in the Will also; when upon clear understanding of a
truth, my will comes to choose and close with that truth.

This is to believe: some call it a Resting, a Rouling, a Depending, a Relying,
which are all metaphorical expressions; But if you will have it in the proper
nature and sense: Faith is the Assent of the understanding unto truth, and,
unto Christ, and the wills choosing of Christ; It chooses Christ for its
Righteousness, for its salvation, for grace, for life, for peace, for all. This
is coming, when the will puts forth an act that carries forth the soul to
choose Christ: says Christ here, Let him that thirsts come.

By this it should seem then, that there is a power in man to come.

What power was there in Lazarus to come forth of the grave, when Christ said,
Lazarus come forth; there was as much power in Lazarus to come forth of the
grave when Christ said come forth, as there is in man now to come to Christ,
when he says come: There was none in Lazarus to come forth, neither is there
any in Man naturally to believe. John 6.44. says Christ there, No man can come
to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. Christ says, No man can
come unless the Father draw him.

What is in the drawing of the Father?

Say some, It is this thirsting begotten in the soul; but surely that cannot
be the thing; for Christ says, Let him that is athirst come: a man may be
athirst; and yet not come to Christ; Let him that is athirst come: -- But this
drawing then of the Father, is a working of that power in the soul, as to go
out to Christ: It may see a need of Christ from sin, and wrath and the like,
yet till God does work a power in the soul to go out to Christ, it does not
come to Christ; and therefore you will find in the 6th of John, that what is
said in the 44. v: No man can come to me except the Father which has sent me
draw him; Gods drawing in the 65 v: is said to be Gods gift: Therefore said I
unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of the
Father: that is, unless God does give him power to come to me, to believe in
me: So that the Fathers drawing, is putting in that virtue and power into a
thirsty soul as to close with Christ.

But then it will be said, surely these Invitations are in vain, if a man
cannot come when he is Invited, to what end are they?

The Sun shines upon the Rock, and the rain falls upon the Rocks, yet no man
looks that the Sun should melt the Rocks, or the rain should make the Rocks
fruitful; But the adjacent parts and feilds have the benefit; and so, though
Invitations fall upon Rocks, yet the adjacent persons, other persons may have
the benefit.

But secondly, Generally in these Invitations the Lord does convey this power,
the Lord does work this Faith in their souls, and gives them this power to
close with Christ: Lazarus come forth, together with the Invitation, the power
was given to Lazarus to come forth. You have an observable place in the 2 Ezekiel:
1. And he said unto me, Son of Man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak
unto thee: mark, And the Spirit entered in to me when he spoke unto me, and
set me upon my feet. Ezekiel was smitten so down with the sight of Glory,
that he was not able to rise; Now, says he, Son of man stand upon thy feet,
but he could not stand up: But the Spirit entered into me when he spoke unto
me, says Ezekiel, and set me upon my feet: -- So when Christ says here,
come, with Christ's speaking, the Spirit may be, and is many times conveyed and
causes a man to come: There is that life, that Grace communicated to the soul,
together with the Invitation, as makes a man to do the thing, and inables him
thereunto: so that Invitations are not in vain: and so much for opening of the
word come: -- The point that I shall commend unto you is this.

Doct: 1. That the Lord Christ is very desirous that sinners, thirsty sinners
should come to him for releife, that they should be saved, that they should
have refreshing virtue from him, Grace, pardon, peace, and whatsoever will do
their souls good. Let him that is athirst come.

Now because it lies in the hearts of all sinners to question the willingness
of God and Christ to save them, and to do them good; Therefore I shall insist
the more upon this and make it out fully to you.

You know the Leper in the Gospel said, Master if thou will thou can make me
clean: I know thou have power, but if thou will, there lies the stick, and
here lies that which sticks with sinners, to question the willingness of God
and Christ: Now the Lord Christ is very willing that sinners should come unto
him; and this I shall make out several ways.

First, Of Christ's willingness for sinners to come unto him.
from the Consideration of Christ's laying down his greatness, and his Glory,
which would dant and discourage sinners, when one appears in majesty; when a
Judge comes into the Country with his greatness, it makes your Delinquents and
Malifactors afraid; But now Christ lays down his Majesty, and his greatness
and Glory, and whatsoever is dreadful and terrible unto us. Joh: 17.5. And now
o Father, Glorify thou me, with thine own self, with the Glory which I had
with thee before the world was; Christ had laid aside his Glory when he came
down into the world, and he came in the form of a servant, in a mean and low
condition; When a Prince shall lay aside his greatness, and come and converse
with beggars and sinners, then they can the more freely come unto him, and
speak to him: the Lord Jesus Christ has laid aside his Glory and greatness,
and came and converst with finners here in the world, which is a great Argument
that he was willing to do sinners good, that they should come unto him and be
saved by him.

Secondly, Consider how the Lord Christ has fitted himself to relieve
sinners, Christ has endured a great deal of hardship, suffered heavy things,
he trod the wine press of his Fathers wrath alone. You know Corn that makes
bread and drink, indures the heat and the cold, indures the slale, and the
Mill to be Ground, and so the bread and the drink are made thereof.

The Lord Christ has endured all that the Father required of him, that so he
might be bread of life, and water of life to us, he has suffered bitter
things, an accursed death: in the 12th of Luke says Christ, I have a Baptism
to be baptized with, and how am I streightened till it be accomplished? I have
a Baptism of Blood to be baptized with, and how am I streightened till it be
accomplished? I thirst to lay down my blood that it may be drink for the
world, as much as any in the world do thirst for my blood, and to drink of
that; I and more then all the world. The Lord Jesus has suffered Circumcision,
he has suffered whipping, crowning with Thorns, spitting upon, reproaches,
revilings, cursing, suffered the displeasure of his Father, dissertions,
temptations by Satan, suffered Death, and all that he might be fit, and fitted
to save us, that he might be bread for us, and drink for us, releife for us;
Is not Christ willing think you now, that you should eat of his flesh, and
drink of his blood, that you should come to him, and have the benefit of his
sufferings? I am streightened, says he, till it be accomplished; I thirst,
says Christ upon the Cross, and now its finished.

Thirdly, From the very end of Christ's coming, it is evident that Christ is
very willing and desirous that sinners should come unto him, and be saved by
him, and be refresht by him: what was the ends of Christ's coming, Mat: 18.11.
For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost: were not all lost in
Adam, are not all sinners, are not all under the curse of the Law, are not all
children of wrath by nature, are not all enemies of God through wicked works
in their minds? The end now of Christ's coming was to save that which was lost:
and in Luk: 10.10 you have it more fully; For the Son of man is come to seek
and to save that which is lost: It might have been said, It Is true, Christ will
save that which is lost, if it will come to him; I but Christ is come to seek
out them, to seek and to save that which is lost; this is the good Shepherd
that goes and seeks out the lost sheep, and takes it up upon his shoulders
and brings it home: A Shepherd when his sheep are scattered, some in one lane,
some upon one common, some in one field, some in another, he goes and seeks
out the sheep and brings them home: so the Lord Christ came for that very end,
to seek out, and to save that which was lost; art thou a poor thirsty,
sinful soul, art thou lost in thine own apprehension, art thou at the gates
of death and hell, the Lord Christ came to save thee, and seek out thee, he is
willing, forward, ready to do it, he came for that very end.

Fourthly, Christ's willingness and readiness to this work will appear, if you
consider the Cures that he wrought when he was here in the world; did not
Christ heal all diseases, the blind, the lame, the sick, the dumb, the
deaf, the possessed with Devils? did not Christ show compassion toward them
all and heal them; Mark: 4.23. And Jesus went about all Galile, teaching in
their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing all
manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases among the people; And his fame
went through all Syria, and they brought unto him all sick people that were
taken with diverse diseases and torments, and those which were possessed with
Devils, and those which were Lunatic, and those which had the Palsy, and he
healed them. Is not Christ willing and ready to do good to sinners, he does
not forbid them to come to him, let the disease be what it will, and the party
diseased be what he will:-And its conceived when Christ heald their bodies, he
heald their souls too, Christ heald all diseases. In Math: 8. you have two or
three remarkable passages; there comes a Leper to Christ, and says, Lord if
thou will, thou can make me clean; he did not come beleivingly, but he came
doubtingly to Christ; and what follows; Jesus put forth his hand and touched
him, saying, I will, be thou clean; why do thou question my will, says
Christ I am more willing to heal thee then thou art desirous of it, I will,
says he, be thou clean; here Christ presently shows his willingness, and
cures the man with a word; with a word and a touch he healed him.

Then afterward in the Chapter, there comes a Centurion to him, and sollicits
him for his servant, and says, Master speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed: says Christ, I have not found so great Faith, no not in
Israel, as in this Centurion: and v: 12. says Christ, Go thy way, and as thou
have believed, so be it unto thee; here Christ heales one with a word.

And then thirdly, he comes to Peter's house, and there his wives mother lay
sick of a Feavour, and he touched her hand, and the Feavour lest her. Christ
did but touch her hand, and says nothing, and the Feavour left her: Christ is
willing to cure sinners, and he can easily do it, with a word, or a word and a
touch, or a touch only.

Christ is so forward, that before it is desired he does it: In John 5. v. 6.
when Jesus saw the impotent man lie there, and knew that he had been now a long
time in that case, he says unto him, will thou be made whole? The man did not
ask him the Question, Lord will thou heal me; But Christ comes and finds him
out, and says, Man will thou be made whole; o Sir, I have none to put me in,
when the Angel stirs another steps in before me, says Christ, Take up thy
bed, and walk. Christ ask him the Question, prevents him, and heales him: Oh!
Christ is willing to do sinners good, and to save sinners.

Fifthly, This appears from the Command of Christ, when a thing is commanded,
those that command would feign have it done; now the Lord Christ commands men
to come unto him, commands them to believe: Joh: 14.1. Let not your hearts be
troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. Believe in me, there is ease,
there is rest, there is refreshing, there is deliverance, there is salvation for
you: Believe in me: and in the 1 John: 3. latter end; This is his Commandment
that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. This is the
Commandment of the Father that we should believe on the name of his Son, the
Lord Jesus Christ; and this is the Commandment of the Son that we should
believe in him When the Father commanded his Son to go to the Vineyard and
digg there; the Father was very willing the child should go and do it: And so
when God the Father, and Christ the Son, commands us to believe, they are very
willing we should. When Princes send out their Commands to the people to do
such and such things, they are very desirous they should be done: So when God
gives out his Commands in the Gospel, and Christ commands in the Gospel to
come, come, says Christ, Let him that is athirst come; I command you to
believe; It Is an argument there is a strong will in him for it.

Sixthly, Does not Christ sweetly invite you, use sweet Invitations and
allurements to draw sinners to him, can there be more sweet Invitations, then
what you have from Christ upon this account: in the 11th of Math: 28. Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest: oh! you
poor sinners of the world, you poor sinners of the earth, you that travel
under the burden of your sins, you that are heavy laden, you that are ready to
sink into hell through fear of wrath, come unto me, come unto me; he does not
say why have you broken Moses Law, why have you offended my Father, why have
you lived so basely and vilely? no, come unto me you that are weary and heavy
laden, you that are ready to sink and perish, and are hungry and thirsty, and
know not which way to turn your selves now for releife, come unto me.

So in the 55 of Isaiah, see what a blessed Invitation there is, Ho every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy
and eat, come buy wine and milk without money, and without price: Wherefore
do you lay out your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not; hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which
is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness: Is not here a sweet,
a gracious, a blessed Invitation now to poor sinners, unto such as we are here
this day: The Lord Christ is a speaking unto you this day, Ho every one, every
one that thirsts, young or old, rich or poor, learned or unlearned, of
whatsoever condition you be, are you athirst, would you have mercy, peace,
grace, the Spirit of Christ, would you have any thing to do your souls good,
come, come unto me, Come unto the waters.

I but I have no money; It matters not, come without money, come here is wine,
here is milk, and here is bread, and marrow, and fattness, here is that will make
your souls live, here is virtue in Christ to make your souls live for ever. So
in the 23 Pro: 26. My son give me thy heart; o my son, says God, give me thy
heart; Christ is the Everlasting Father, and he says, my son, give me thy
heart, come to me. One place more in the 3d Revelation is worth your observing;
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in to him and will sup with him, and he with me: Behold I
stand at the door and knock; I came down from heaven into mine Ordinances, I
knock at the door of your hearts and consciences, if any man will open now, if
any man would have water of life from me, if any man would have bread of life
from me, if any man would have communion with me, let him but open and receive
me in, and I will sup with him and he with me: what sweet Invitations have
we from Christ, how forward, how ready is the Lord Jesus to do poor sinners
good.

Seventhly, This appears in that the Lord Christ has Instituted and appointed
his Officers, his Messengers, his Ministers, and sent them to woo, entreat,
beseech, and to draw men in unto him: The Lord has set up in the Church
Officers purposely to make known his forwardness and readiness to receive
sinners, and to go forth in his Name, and to get them to come in to Christ;
It Is our work to beseech you Brethren, to entreat you to hearken to the Lord
Christ, to come in to him, to come and taste of his dainties, to receive
righteousness, grace, strength, salvation, to receive pardon; this is our
work, to get men in to Christ, to fetch you in to the Fould. In the 14 of Luke
16. A certain man made a great Supper, and bad many; and sent his servants at
Supper time to say unto them that were bidden, Come for all things are now
ready: Christ is the great Man, and he makes a Supper in the time of the
Gospel, and he sends out his servants, he sends out the Ministers to Invite,
and call men, saying, Supper is ready, and all things are ready. Christ has
satisfied Divine Justice, Christ has laid down his life, and shed his blood,
he is risen from the dead, he has overcome the world, overcome the Devil,
has opened heaven, all things are ready for you to feed upon, o come; But
they all made excuse; Then the Master of the house being angery, said to his
servants, go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the City, and bring in
hither the poor, and the maimed, the halt, and the blind; and the servants
said, Lord it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is room: and the
Lord said unto the servants, go out into the high ways, and hedges, and
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. Go ye (says he) my
Apostles, my Disciples, my Ministers, my Servants, go fetch in men and women
from high ways and hedges, from lanes and streets, and from all parts; o bring
them in to the Gospel, bring them into my house, bring them into the kingdom
of heaven, tell them of the dainties there, tell them of their danger abroad.
This is the great work now of the Ministry: which is a clear demonstration
that the Lord Christ would have sinners saved, he would have his house filled,
he stands not upon what they be, let them be blind, maimed, naked, poor,
wounded, bring them in says Christ, let them taste of the dainties of the
Gospel, let them hear of mercy through me, of pardon and forgiveness through
me: -- So in the 9 Pro: Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewn her out
seven pillars, she has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has
also furnished her table, she has sent forth her maidens, she cries upon the
highest places of the City, who so is simple let him come in hither, as for
him that lacks understanding she says to him, come eat of my bread, and
drink of the wine that I have mingled: For sake the foolish and live, and go
in the way of understanding: -- This is spoken of Christ, and the times of the
Gospel, and the Ministers are said to be maidens, who are sent forth to allure
and to draw poor souls in to Jesus Christ. So that the great work of the
Ministry is to make known the willingness of Christ, and to bring sinners unto
Christ, that they may have mercy from him: -- In the 2 Cor: 5.19, 20. God was
in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them: and has committed unto us the word of Reconciliation; now then, we
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray ye in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God: Says Paul I am an Ambassador of God,
and God does beseech you by us, God does beseech sinners, and therefore we
beseech you says he, we beseech ye for the Lords sake be ye reconciled to God,
do not stand out with God and Christ any longer, but come in to God, and come
in to Christ, and so God will receive you, and Christ will receive you: God
does beseech you by Ministers, God does entreat you. The Commission was, Go
teach all Nations: he commands them for to teach all nations, to acquaint them
with the riches of Grace by Christ, and the wonderful love and kindness of God
in Christ, and what is to be had by Christ, that people might come to him, and
have mercy and releife from him.

Eighthly, This willingness of Christ to do sinners good, will appear yet
further, in that he does accept of the least, and lowest degrees of Faith, and
will not discourage the weakest soul that comes unto him: Math: 12.20. A
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till
he send forth Judgment unto victory: Christ will be very tender of a bruised
reed, very tender of smoking flax, he will not break one, he will not quench
the other he will not deal harshly and roughly with them, but he will send
forth Judgment unto victory: He will give them power over all their
corruptions, over all their fears and doubts: he will make them to judge all
their Enemies, and be victorious over their Enemies. -- So in the 45 Isa: 22.
Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth: Look unto me and be
saved: If I have but a good look from you, says Christ, I will entertain
you: look unto me but with the weakest eye of Faith, though it be a dim eye,
be but half an eye, look unto me and be saved: -- In the 40 of Isa: 11. He
shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his
Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall Gently lead those that are with
young. See how tender the Lord Christ, the good Shepherd will be of those that
are weak; He will gather the Lambs with his Arms, as a Shepherd when he goes
abroad, and a Lamb is newly yeaned, and it is weak and feeble, and the weather
is cold and frosty, he takes up the Lamb in his Arms, and carries it home,
and gives it milk; So the Lord will deal by a poor weak feeble soul, he
will carry it in the Arms of his providence, in the Arms of his Spirit, in
those Everlasting Arms of his that never fail, he will carry the Lambs in his
bosom, and Gently lead those that are with young: Thus will he deal with
them: Hence he says in the 14 Rom: Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye,
but not to doubtful disputations: Receive him that is weak in the Faith, if
there be never so little Faith receive him, if there be but one dram of Faith
receive him.

Ninthly, The willingness of the Lord Christ to do sinners good appears in
this, That he shutts not up this water of Life, though he knows but few will
come unto him for it; and those of them that do come unto him, they do often
abase it, and abase him too: People do hasten more to the waters for their
bodies, to the Bath, Epsum, Tunbridge, and to new drinks that they have now,
they flock to have these for the body, and can magnify them, and speak
wonderfully well of them, but few come to Christ, and when they do come, they
will hardly drink, as I have told you before; they speak evil of those
doctrines he gives them; these are hard sayings. Peter himself denies Christ
his Master, denies him once, twice, thrice. Thus Christ is dealt withal by
sinners, and notwithstanding all this, Christ does not shut up the water, nor
lock up the water, but the waters stand open for any to come, let whosoever
will come, let him come and drink of the waters of life freely. If Christ had
not had a mind we should have these waters, he would have taken a course to
deprive us of them, he could soon dry up the waters, dry up the Gospel. But
the waters are not dried up, they are not taken from us, there is freedom for
any to come, notwithstanding they have abused the waters.

Tenthly, It is strong Evidence that the Lord Christ is willing to save
sinners, and to do sinners good, In that he is greived, troubled, and affected
very much, that sinners will not come to him for these waters; o Jerusalem,
Jerusalem; says Christ, weeping over it, how often would I have gathered thee as
a hen does her chickens, and ye would not: o Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou
hadest known in this thy day the things that belong unto thy peace, but now
they are hidden from thine eyes: -- Christ is greived at the heart that men and
women do not come to him, though they have no money, though they have nothing
to buy the water with, yet that they will not come and fetch the water, Christ
is greived and troubled at the very heart to see it: o that these public
places should be so empty upon a Lords day, so empty upon a week day: there is
water of life, and none will come and drink the water; how often, how often, may
Christ say, would I have saved such a Town, such a Nation, such a people, and
they would not; Christ weeps over souls and familyes, and Cities.

Eleventhly, It Is wonderful perspicuous and clear, that Christ would do
sinners good, in that he does press them with the strongest Arguments that can
be, to partake of the good is to be had by himself: What promises does he
make, what evils does he threaten? There are two great Arguments that do
prevail with all the world, yet will not prevail here, he setts lise and
death before men, If you will come here is life for you, if you will not come
you are dead men: people will not keep within doors when these are the
Arguments, my life is at the stake, and if I go I am a made man, if not I am a
lost man, an undone man. Why will ye dye o house of Israel? I am not willing ye
should dye, why will ye dye, why will ye dye, turn unto me and live, come unto
me and live. In the 55 of Isa: Incline your ^are and come unto me, hear and
your souls shall live, and I will make an everlaesting Covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David; Is not here Encouragement enough now to come to
Christ, Incline your ear and come unto me and your souls shall live, you
shall have everlasting mercies, and everlasting comforts. Joh: 3.16. God so
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life: Here Is life and death set
before you, Come thou poor sinner and believe in the Lord Jesus, close with
him, here is life for thee, everlasting life for thee; Refuse to do it, there is
everlasting death for thee, thou shall perish, how peremptory is the Lord here.
In the 16 Mark: 15, 16. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature, he that beleiveth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
beleiveth not shall be damned; how round is the Gospel, he that beleiveth, he
that comes to Christ, that is the meaning, he that beleiveth shall be saved;
saved from all his sin, saved from the power of death, saved from the wrath
of God, saved from hellfire, saved from the guilt of his own Conscience, he
that beleiveth shall be saved over and over and over, -- he that beleiveth not
shall be damned, -- how does he press men now to come to him? If there be any
weight in heaven or hell, it is laid all upon this, your coming to Christ, or
refusing Christ; if you come to Christ, all heaven is yours, all the glory, all
the joy, all the comfort, all the blessings, all the happiness there is yours:
If you will not come to Christ, all the terrors of hell are yours, all the
darkness, all the mournings, all the howlings, all the gnashings of teeth, all
the misery there will be yours; Therefore see how willing the Lord Jesus is,
that sinners should come, and that they should be saved.

Christ's willingness to save sinners.
Reve: 22.17. Let him that is athirst come.


12ly ANother evidence of Christ's willingness to save sinners that will come
unto him is, The Lord does venture and hazard the loosing many, by making
known his free Grace and willingness to save sinners, for when sinners do
hear that Christ is willing to save them, and very desirous also, many they
abuse his free grace, this rich mercy, this willingness of Christ to do their
souls good: If Christ be so willing, say they, we will stay a while, it will
suffice hereafter. In the 4th of Jude, it is said, They turn Grace into
wantonness, and thousands of scorners turn Grace into wantonness; when they
hear Christ dyed and shed his blood for sinners, that he is willing sinners
should come in, that he waits for them, that he entreats, and presses them to
come to him; they take advantage from hence to sin more freely, to stay it out
to the uttermost. And thus the Lord runs a hazard of loosing many, by making
known the riches of his Grace, the freedom of his mercy and loving kindness,
which shows there a very strong desire in Christ to save sinners.

Thirteenthly, It is evident that Christ is very desirous of sinners salvation,
in that he takes sinners when they are at the worst of all, at the height of
wickedness. If a Prince will take into his family those that are sick of the
plague, of the Leprosy, and of the worst diseases, it is an argument he has a
mind to have them live in his family, and that he is desirous of their
company: the Lord Jesus Christ he takes sinners when they are at the very
worst; Saul he was at the height of his blasphemy, at the height of murder, at
the height of persecution; and Christ says, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me, thy blasphemies rage, and persecutions are come up to heaven; and Paul
says in the 1 Timothy: 1. he was a persecutor, a blasphemer, and an injurious
person, but I obtained mercy, even when I was so great and notorious a sinner,
Christ came and took him in; it is an argument then that Christ is very
desirous of the salvation of sinners, that he will take sinners when they are
in the height of their wickedness. When the Prodigal had run out from his
fathers house, and had spent years in wicked practices, in whoredom,
drunkenness, gameing, and running in the ways of the world, when he had spent
all, and spent himself; now when he was in this height of wickedness, it
pleases God and Christ to call him, to bring him home, and to receive him
again: had not Christ been desirous of the salvation of sinners, he might have
shut the door against the Prodigal, and said, you shall never come in adores
again: had not the Father been desrous for the Sons sake to have sav^d
sinners, he would not have entertained the Prodigal; there is not a velleitie
but a strong efficacious desire in God and Christ to save sinners. The Jews
when they were at the worst, when they had put that innocent one to death, when
they had said, His blood be upon us and upon our Children, when they had mocked
him, reviled him, and accused him even after all this, Christ takes in many of
them; three thousand of them converted at one Sermon by Peter; Him whom ye have
Crucified with bloody hands has God raised; here is a clear evidence of the
earnest desire of the Lord Jesus to save sinners; he takes them when they are
at the worst, when they have done the uttermost mischeife and spite they can
against him, and against his ways.

Fourteenthly, It Is an argument that the Lord Jesus is very desirous to save
sinners, If you confider, that the Lord takes sinners at the last cast, at the
end of their days, when they have no time left to serve him, he t^kes them at
the very first entreaty and begging of mercy. The Thief you know that had
liv^d wickedly all his days, when he came to the last cast, and was upon the
Laddar, or nailed to the Cross, and ready to breath out his last breath, says
he, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom; Christ might have
said, Remember thee, why should I remember thee, thou have bin a bloody wretch,
a Thief and a murderer all thy days, and thou deservest nothing now but death
and damnation, and why should I remember thee,, No, the Lord Christ says not
so but he says, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: now when there was
no time left for him to honor Christ, and to serve Christ, he only now
entreats this favor of him, being on the Cross, says Christ, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. And doubtless though we have but this one
Instance, and so men should not presume to put off Repentance till it be too
late, yet I do believe, many a soul has met with mercy, when they have been
at the gates of death: I say, many a poor soul that has been burdened with
sin, asslicted in Conscience, and ready to sink, in the gates of death they
have looked up to Christ, and entreated him to remember them, and Christ has
shown them mercy, which shows the forwardness and willingness of Christ to
save sinners: Yet let not any presume to do so, for likely late Repentance is
seldom true, a deathbed Repentance usually is a dead Repentance, when fear of
hell shall drive men to look after heaven, they may thank hell for looking
after God and Christ, but that by the way.

Fisteenthly and lastly, It is clearly evident that the Lord Christ has a
strong Inclination to save sinners, by his giving out of Scripture in that way
and manner as he has done; the Lord Christ has given out Scripture so as to
Answer the objections of men and women, to Answer all the eavills of their
hearts, all the plea^s of corruption, and of a guilty Conscience, and of the
Devil himself: The Lord has given out Scripture so as to Answer all that
might hinder their coming in unto him. In the 12 of Math: All manner of sins
and Blasphemies shall be forgiven to the sons of men: -- What has a sinful
heart here to say, what can thou object against this? he tells thee, All
manner of sins shall be forgiven, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven, Are thy sins beyond blasphemy, are they such as come not within the
compass of all manner of sin? Let thy sins be slight or great, let them be old
or new, let them be against Law, against Gospel, against promises, all manner
of sins shall be forgiven: -- Christ says, The sin against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven: But if thou have a heart to look to Christ for mercy,
it is an argument thou art free from that sin, for where that is, there is
impenitency, there^s hardness of heart, no thinking of Repentance nor coming to
God: But all manner of sin and blasphemies shall be forgiven: Is not here
encouragement enough unto poor sinners: -- So here in the next words,
Whosoever will let him come and drink of the water of life freely: It^s laid
down so as to answer all your objections, and to take away all your plea's you
have to stave you off from Christ. So then you see clear evidences that Christ
is willing to save sinners.

But why is Christ so willing to save sinners?

First, Why Christ is so willing to save sinners?
from his own experience and sense of what it is to be under the displeasure
of God, he was once tempted he was once forsaken, he cried out in that
condition, and he knew what the wrath and displeasure of God meant: And now
being full of compassion, he pitties all those that are under the disfavour of
God; he knows sinners have broken the Law, deserved the curse, the wrath of
God, eternal death, and now his compassions being stirred within him, his
Bowels yearne, he desires that sinners may come to him; if any thirst let him
come, let him come, he shall be freed from the wrath of God, from the curse of
the Law, from guilt and condemnation, it is a sad condition, I am senceable of
it; I was in the share and round of sinners, and I know what it is to be in
such a condition.

Secondly, Christ is so desirous, that so he may see of the travail of his
own soul, and that men may see the end of his coming to save sinners, was
real for if Christ's end was to seek and save that which was lost, unless he
desire and use means to save them, you may say it was not real, therefore
Christ to make it out that it was really his end, and that he might see of the
travail of his soul in suffering, he desires sinners may come in, he gives
out the Gospel, he appoynts Ministers he invites them extraordinarily, and
ordinarily, he calls upon them and would have sinners to come unto him to be
saved.

Thirdly, and lastly, Christ does this that so the freeness of Gods Grace, and
of his love may appear and may be magnified, Christ is wonderful desirous
that sinners should come in, and when they do come in, they will magnify the
riches of Grace then they will stand and wonder at the Love of God, and of
Christ, and that he should wait upon the beseech, and entreat them to come and
accept of mercy and favor.

Use 1. First we may see here, that the way of the Lord Christ is for sinners
to come in to him, and to the Father freely; Whosoever is athirst let him come;
he does not say, let him be compelled to come forced to come, but let him come,
he holds out such riches of Grace and mercy, such treasures and excellencies,
that certainly if a soul do but consider and well weigh them, it will come:
Christ himself came freely to us, and he would have us come freely to him.
There is no forcing in the Act of Convertion, but all is free, though God puts
forth a mighty power in the hearts of people, yet he overcomes them with
sweetness and lovingnesse: Let him that is athirst come.

But it may be said, they are bidden in the 14 of Luke to compel them to come
in.

That is not an outward compulsion, he does not speak of force of Arms, but
go and compel them to come in with force of Argument; propound unto them such
motives in the Gospel, as may compel them to come in, tell them of the Beauty
of holiness, tell them of the Riches of Grace, tell them of the Love of God
and Christ, tell them of the pardon of sins, and answer their objections: --
There Is no forcing in the work of Grace; no forcing men to come unto God and
Christ, but it is all a free work: God draws, but he draws with coards of
love, he carries not men against their wills to Christ, and forces them to
believe in Christ, no, but he sweetens their wills, and overcomes them with
kindness, and Truth, the Majesty, Glory and loveliness of truth overcomes
their wills, so that men come willingly to Christ.

Secondly Christ being desirous that sinners should come unto him, then let us
not go to any other: many seek out to others, and say with them in the 4th
Psalm: Who will show us any good? there is no releife for poor sinners in any
other but in Christ, it is not running to Moses, nor to David, nor to Prophets,
nor to any but to Christ, it is not friends, it is not honors, it is not Riches,
it is not gifts and Talents it is not any thing in the creature can relieve a
thirsty soul, but Christ: If any man thirst let him come, come, whither, come
to Christ, all other things do proclaim unto you, it is not in them, says the
wedge of Gold, it is not in me, says house and land, it is not in us, say the
ships on the Sea it is not in us, and so say all other creatures, it is only in
Jesus Christ to relieve a poor soul: Math: 11.28. Come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest: he does not say that
mountains can refresh you, that Angels can refresh you, or any creature can
refresh you, but come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. All the virtue that refreshes a guilty soul, a thirsty
soul, a sinful soul, all the virtue is in the Lord Jesus Christ, he is water
of life, he is a fountain of living water, he has to give you that which will
do your souls good, he can give you his blood to quench the fire of hell, to
purge away your guilt, to remove wrath to come, it is in Christ and in none
other: Therefore all those that go to others, forsake their own mercies, and
embrace lying vanities, but those that come to Christ, they go the right way.

Thirdly; Does Christ invite us to come unto him, then let us examine and make
inquiry, whether we are come to Christ or no: I believe here is hardly any
under this roof, but thinks he is come to Christ that he is a true Christian;
and its worth the Inquiry then, that he may resolve this case, so that he may
not be deceived; for Christ says in the 7th of Math: In that day many shall
say, Lord, Lord have not we done thus and thus in thy presence; but Christ
shall say unto them, depart from me, I never knew you, you never came to me: I
say then, it may be worth our time to make Inquiry after this case of
Conscience, whether we are come to Christ yea or no; and I shall in a few
particulars clear it up unto you.

First, The soul that is in truth come to Christ, has seen a sufficiency in
Christ to relieve it every way, and such a sufficiency, as has made it to
venture it self upon the Lord Jesus Christ alone, and nothing else: -- Now
apply this to your own souls: have you ever seen such sufficiency in the
Lord Jesus, as heaven and earth besides has not? -- And so seen as to make
you come off from all, and venture upon him alone; if you have clearly seen
the suffiency of Christ, then your own righteousness is nothing to you, your
own civility, morality, and honesty, are as nothing, though they are good in
regard of men, yet they are nothing in regard of God, and in regard of your
souls: -- You see an allsufficiency in Jesus Christ, and an utter
insufficiency in your selves; Alas, what is my righteousness says the soul
that is come to Christ, my righteousness is filthiness, and all that ever I
can do is unprofitablenesse before God; and though I have learning and wisdom
and parts, and memory, and utterance and riches, and honors, and follow a
calling, and do good in my place, (and the like) alas all these are nothing, I
account them but as dung says the soul in respect of Christ, there is an
allusufficiency in Christ; I but these may damn me and send me to hell: now
put these to your own hearts, for it is ill to be deceived in matters of
eternity; have you seen (I say) such a sufficiency in the Lord Jesus, of
wisdom and strength, and righteousness, (and the like) as you have laid down
all your own, and see it nothing, and have ventured your souls nakedly upon
Jesus Christ. In the 45 of Isa: 24. Verily shall one say, In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, I have none in my self. It is a prophecy of the
last times concerning Christ: -- I have sworn by my self, the word is gone
out of my mouth in righteousness, and it shall not return; that unto me every
knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear: It Is spoken of Christ, and applied to
him in the Philippians, Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness
and strength, even to him shall men come; mark, in the Lord shall all the
seed of Israel be Justified and shall Glory; unto him shall they come, And all
that are incensed against him shall be ashamed: what go to Christ says one,
there is nothing in Christ, and men speak blasphemously and basely of Christ in
these days, but they shall be ashamed: But unto HIM shall men come, and in the
Lord shall all the seed of Israel be Justified and shall Glory; they shall be
justified in Christ, therefore deal really with your own hearts therein,
there is a fundamental truth to be taken off from your own righteousness,
and to build wholly upon Christ; those that come to him do so.

Secondly, The soul that is come unto Christ, it does stay it self upon him,
and rests upon him, and goes not out from him; as it ventures it self upon
Christ, so it rests it self content with Christ. You know a Woman when she
has chosen a Man for her husband, she rests content in him above all the men
in the world; and the soul that has chosen Christ, and come to Christ, and
beleives in Christ in truth, rests content with the Lord Jesus above all in
heaven and earth. In the 6th of John Christ puts a Question to Peter; Jesus
said unto the twelve, will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him,
Lord, to whom shall we go, Thou have the words of eternal life; Lord, to whom
should we go, we are satisfied with thee, we rest content with thee, we look
not beyond thee, we have enough in thee and from thee to bring us to eternal
life: -- so that a soul that is truly come to Christ will join nothing with
Christ, but rests satisfied with him alone; try your selves thereby.

Thirdly, A soul that is come to Christ in truth, does accept of the Lord
Jesus Christ upon his own terms; many they will accept of Christ but it shall
be upon their terms, so I may have Christ and the world says one, I will be
content to be a Christian, so I may have Christ and honors says another, so I
may have Christ and my lusts satisfied, and enjoy them, I will come to him,
says a third; so I may live and take my ease and go to heaven at last I will
have Christ, says a fourth man. Thus men will have Christ upon their terms,
but a soul that is thirsty and comes to Christ in truth, takes the Lord Christ
upon his own terms; If any man, says Christ, will be my Disciple he must
deny himself, and take up his Cross: These are Christ's terms, a man must lay
aside his own wisdom, a man must be content to bare a Cross, to meet with
reproach, prisons, temptations, persecutions, hard measure, Christ and a
Cross, Christ and a prison, Christ and hunger, and nakedness, and peril, and
temptations, or whatsoever God will; For we are slain all the day long for thy
sake, in the Psa: and in the 8 Rom: so that a soul that does come to Christ in
truth, takes Christ upon his own terms, Christ and mortification of your
lusts, Christ and death to the world, Christ and death to sin, these go
together; but men would have Christ and live to the world, and live to sin, and
live unto vanity, but these cannot stand together: he that is Christ's, he has
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, he has crucified
them, and accepts of Christ upon his own terms.

Fourthly, Where the soul does truly come to Christ and close with him, there
it gives up it self to Christ to be disposed of: As a woman when she is
married, she leaves her fathers house, her mothers house, and she gives up her
self to be guided by the Guide of her youth, by her husband. Therefore in the
45 Psalm says he, Hearken o daughter and consider, and incline thine ear,
Forget also thine own people and thy Fathers house, so shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty; For he is Thy Lord, and worship thou him: Forget thine own
people, and thy Fathers house: so a soul gives up it self to Christ, and
forgets all former Engagements, former customs, practices, and ways it walked
in, and gives up it self to be ruled now by Christ, and by his Laws; says
the soul I am come into a Kings Family, I am come into a great Court, I must
now be ruled by the Laws of this King, by the Laws of his house; and
therefore says Christ, My sheep hear my voice: If I am one in the Fould of
Christ, and a sheep of Christ, I will hear his voice, and a stranger I will
not hear, a stranger I will not follow.

Now how is it with you, do you follow the voice of the world, of the flesh,
of hell, you have not given up your selves to Christ, if you had, you would
follow him, and hear him, and not strangers. In the 14. Revel: The 144.
thousand follow the Lamb whither soever he goes; they do not follow the Lions
of the world, but follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: Christ is their head,
Christ is their Lord, Christ is their Guide; so the soul that is come to Christ
is guided and led by Christ, and follows Christ; try your selves there.

Fifthly, A soul that is come to Christ in truth, is daily made more and more
like unto Jesus Christ, the more it is conformed to Christ daily; when once it
comes to Christ, the soul sees such beauty, such glory, such excellency in
Christ, such wisdom in Christ, that it is willing to be conformed to Christ in
every thing, not my will but thy will Lord Jesus, not my thoughts but thy
thoughts; says the Apostle, we have the very mind of Christ, and not only
the mind of Christ, but the life of Christ; for in the 2 Gal: 20. I live not,
says he, but Christ lives in me; o I am conformed to Christ, I live the very
life of Christ; so that a true Christian, a true beleiver, is conformed by the
renewing of his mind into the Image of Christ, into the life of Christ, into
the mind of Christ, into the Graces of Christ, he is more and more changed
into Christ, so that in a sense he may be called Christ, as the Church is 1
Cor: 12.12. The Church is called Christ, because the Church is transformed into
the Image of Christ; so every true believing soul is transformed more and more
into Christ daily. 2 Cor: 3. last, But we all with open face beholding as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord, that is, of the Lord Jesus, are changed into the
same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Now then
beloved, reflect upon your selves, and deal impartially with your own souls,
and if you find these things, there is abundance of comfort will be to you, and
you will have abundance of peace when you come to dye. And if it be not so with
you, labor to have it so, and do not suffer Satan, nor the flesh, nor any
thing to delude and deceive you in a business of so great concernment; says
Christ, If any thirst, let him come, come to me; and so much for that use.

Fourthly, The last use is a use of Exhortation.

Seeing the Lord Christ invites us to come, let us come unto him: why Lord,
do thou say come, here I am, here I am, I come Lord, I come, with my whole
heart I desire it, I am sorry I have staid so long from thee: I come o Lord, I
come I come: -- how would this delight the Lord to see such a frame of spirit
in a Congregation, that sinners would come unto him. You have heard how
desirous Christ is of it, and why he is so desirous, o well, let us come to the
Lord Jesus, and to propound some things to promote this exhortation.

First, First of all Consider our own condition, what we are out of Christ,
what are we without Christ, are we not all like men of blood? You read in the
Law of Cities of Refuge, and when a manslayer was pursued by the Avenger,
unless he got to the City of Refuge, he was a dead man: why all the men in the
world are in that case, all murderers; we by sinning in Adam fell from God, and
have murdered our own souls, and we are pursued by the Devil, and there is
no City of Refuge but Christ, that is the meaning of it; The Cities of Refuge
were types of Christ; and as they flying to the Cities of Refuge were preserved
alive, so poor sinners flying to Christ, shall be preserved from Satan that
seeks to murder us to all eternity. Therefore consider what you are without
Christ, and out of Christ: -- we are men sick and sick unto death, and there is
no Phycitian can cure us but Christ; we are men that have a Leprosy, and it
cleaves so to us that it will be our death, unless we have the blood of Christ
to cleanse this Leprosy: -- we are blind, and unles we have a Guide we shall
fall into the ditch, into the ditch of hell, out of which there is no Recovery;
Therefore come to Christ, he is a Guide, he will Guide you in the way
everlasting; he will lead us so as we shall never fall into the ditch, o come
unto Christ; we are all under the Law, we are accursed creatures, cursed says
the Law is every man and woman that fullfills not all things in the Law to do
the same: Cursed be every one that thinks but a vain thought, that speaks but
an idle word; cursed is every man that has done amiss, that has deceived his
neighbor, etc. Now who must take off the curse, none but Christ, who was made
a curse by hanging upon the tree; o therefore come to Christ, choose Christ,
close with Christ, venture your souls upon Jesus Christ, trust in him, and him
alone, resign up your selves wholly to him.

Consider what you shall have by coming to Christ? -- have, -- who is able to
tell you what you shall have by Christ? If a man had the tongue of men and
Angels he could not set it out, what poor sinners shall have by Christ.

You shall have pardon of all your sins; -- you shall have peace of Conscience
that passes understanding; -- you shall have found Illumination and know God
and Christ, which is life eternal; -- you shall have Christ's wisdom, Christ's
righteousness, Christ's sanctification, Christ to be your Redemption; -- you
shall have the hidden Manna; -- you shall have the white Stone; -- you shall
have the new name; -- you shall be made a pillar in the Temple of God; -- you
shall be made a member of Christ; -- you shall be made a Temple of the holy
Spirit; -- you shall have the Inhabitation of the Father, and the Son, and
Spirit, everlastingly in your souls; -- would you have any thing that heaven
has, that God has, that Christ has, come to Christ and you shall have it.

Again, Consider who it is that Invites you to Christ it is not Moses, it is not
Abraham, it is not Ahasuerush, it is not Hester, but a greater then any of these,
a greater then all these; -- when Moses spoke to Pharaoh, he prevailed with him
to let the people go to Mount Sinai, Abraham and Lot prevailed with Angels to
come in and eat and drink with them; Ahasuerush prevailed with the Nobles of
127 Provinces to come and feast with him; Hester prevailed with Ahasuerush to
show mercy to Mordecai and the Jews, and to destroy Haman: shall these
prevail, and shall not the Lord Jesus Christ, who is greater then all these
prevail? Why Christ was greater then Moses, Moses was a servant, but Christ
was a Son in the house; Abraham rejoiced to see the day of Christ, and he saw
it; Ahasuerush he was but an Earthly Prince, but Christ is the Prince of life,
the Prince of all the Kings of the earth, an eternal Prince; Hester a poor
captive, and Christ is the Master of the marriage feast: And shall the Lord
Christ now entreat, Invite, and beseech you to come in, to come to him, and
will ye not hearken? Pharaoh hearkens to Moses, will not you hearken to Christ?
Angels hearken to Abraham and Lot, will not you hearken to Christ? Nobles
hearken to Ahashuerush, will not you hearken to Christ? Ahasuerush hearkens to
Hester, and will not you hearken to Christ? Let him that is athirst come, come
says Christ, it is I that speak to you, who am the Son of God, who am the
Savior of the world, who am the Everlasting Father, who am the Lord of Glory,
who have Heaven at my dispose, come, come, o come in then to the Lord Jesus;
let not your sins, let not Devils, let not world, let not your lusts keep you
back from the Lord Jesus.

And what is it Christ calls you for, why does he Invite you, is it for your
hurt, is it to upbraid you for your sin, is it to check you for your
infirmities, is it to revile you, and reproach you for any miscariages? If it
were so, then you might demurre, then you might argue the case, then you might
give a denial, but it is for none of all these it is for your good, and wholly
for Your good, God and Christ have no designs upon men, as here men have
designs one upon another: If they invite you to a feast, they have many times
a design upon you, but God and Christ have no designs upon you, it is purely,
merely, totally for your good. The Lord Invites you that you may partake of his
righteousness, that you may have his wisdom, his Spirit, his fulness, his
Grace, his Glory, that you may be happy as he is happy; Christ gets nothing
by it, you have all the gain, and all the benefit.

Again, Consider that Christ's tendering himself unto you, it is the greatest
mercy that heaven has to tender unto poor sinners; what has God in heaven
now to do your poor souls good withal besides Christ? The Spirit comes not
unless Christ send: The Father has promised him the sending of the Spirit: But
God he houlds out Christ to you; God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. it is the greatest mercy, I say, that heaven has to tender
unto you: -- And this day in the name of the great God, I do tender Jesus
Christ unto you all, come in and receive Christ, come in and receive Christ,
receive the Lord Jesus Christ to be your husband, to be your King, to be your
Prophet, to be your high Priest, to be your Savior, to be all in all unto you:
-- and know, that if you do refuse and will not receive Christ now offered to
you, if you will not let go your lusts, your drunkenness, whoredom, envy,
malice, slandering, and the like, if you will not let go these for Christ,
your damnation will be upon your own heads, salvation is brought to your
doors, Christ is laid before you, he is held out unto you; The Golden Scepter
this day is held out unto you, o receive the Lord Jesus Christ: -- And if you
do not, know you provoke God more in refusing of Christ, then by all the sins
that you ever committed: This will be the sin that will be your damnation, John
3. This is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, etc. They love darkness, they love sin, sinful
ways, sinful lusts, sinful company, and sinful practices: These you love,
this is The Condemnation, when men will not receive Christ, they make God a
liar, and what an injury is this to God, that you will put the lie upon God,
as if God did not love the world, as if God not hold out Christ to save
sinners: And if you receive him not, you do not bare witness to the truth of
God, and set to your seals that God is true, and so honor him: Therefore be
persuaded to come in and honor the Lord Jesus Christ. -- What will make it so
hard with those of Capernaum, with those of Jerusalem at the last day, but
because Christ was their Prophet, and there offered unto them, and they would
none of him; We will not have this man to rule over us; This is the Heir, come
let us kill him; o therefore, it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah at the
day of Judgment, easier it shall be for Constantinoble at the day of Judgment
then for Stepney, that will not leave your sinful courses and fall in with
Christ, and live as Christ, and look for Glory hereafter: -- Why you shall not
be always here, and then comes an eternal condition, and why will you loose
Eternity for momentary pleasures, and momentary riches? why will you loose
Glory, and loose all, and have that which will a thousand times more aggravate
your misery; for had you not lived where the Gospel is preached when you come
to die it would not have been so bad, but when as you might have had Christ,
and might have had salvation and heaven, and you have neglected this, it will
trouble you, and lie sad upon you to all Eternity: and this will sink you
deeper into hell, That mercy is your torment, that mercy is your hell, that
mercy is your damnation, and so it will prove to all Eternity to all who live
under the means, and come not in to Christ. Suppose a man is in a rotten Ba^ke
at Sea, and there is a great storm arising, and many Pirates abroad, and the
Admiral of the Sea, seeing his condition, sends unto him saying, Friend,
friend, come in to me and I will secure you; but he refuses, and anon he is
taken by the Pirates, carried away, and put into a Dungeon; now what troubles
this man, the Admiralls kindness; so it will be with sinners, Christ the
Admiral of the Sea he calls to poor sinners, come in to me, I will save you
from the storm, I will save soul and body to all Eternity; but you refuse,
and at last you are taken and cast into hell, and there you will lie with this
upon your souls, that you might have had mercy and would not, o therefore come
in to Jesus Christ, stand out no longer, but come and give up your selves to
him, and live like Christ, and you shall have a Heaven here, and a Heaven
hereafter.

The Water of Life.
Reve: 22.17. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.


THis is the last Invitation of Christ unto sinners in the whole book of God,
and as sweet an Invitation as ever sinners met with; -- And whosoever will,
let him take the water of life freely.

You have here in these words, -- first the thing tendered, water of life; --
Secondly, the persons to whom the tender of it is made, whosoever will; --
Thirdly, the manner of this tender, and that is freely; -- and then the
Invitation it self, let him take; Let whosoever will, take of the water of
life freely.

To open the words.

Whosoever will; (...).
The willing man, the willing one; says Christ in the 5th of John to the man
that had lain long at the poole of Bethesda, Will thou be made whole? says
the man, I am very willing to be made whole, but I cannot get into the poole, I
have not might and power to get into the poole, I am a lame man, and when the
Angel stirrs the poole one or other gets in before me, and so I can get no
benefit: says Christ, art thou willing to be healed? yes, then I am willing to
heal thee: This willingness that Christ requires, does not suppose any power
of free will in man, but a willingness in man to receive; for man has not
this willingness in him naturally: Christ requires a willingness, but this
willingness is not in man naturally: For Rom: 8. It Is said, The carnal mind
is enmity to God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be: and 2 Cor: 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think a good
thought; there is no willingness in us: Coll: 1.21. You are Enemies to God
through wicked works in your minds: If the mind be at enmity with God, there
is no willingness to close with God: Phil: 2.13. The will, and the deed are
of God: Then, how comes this willingness here that Christ requires? -- this
willingness arises from the promise, when a promise is made freely and
generally of some choice and great mercy, the very promise does beget a
willingness in man: When a Prince shall propound some great reward unto men to
do such and such a thing, they had no willingness to the thing before, but
when the promise is made, it begets a willingness in them: so when God or
Christ propounds water of life, salvation, eternal happiness unto men, and
tells them of such a good, and promises it unto them, the very promise begets a
willingness in men, where it was not before: But we may have occasion to
speak of this more hereafter. And so much for the word, whosoever will; the
willing man.

Let him take the water of life freely.
Let him take; -- What, with his hand, no; This water of life is not to be
taken with your hands, but it is to be taken by faith; Praecibus deum
sollicitet, fide accipiat; we are to solicit God by our prayers, and to take
it by our Faith: God does not thrust water of life upon men unwillingly, or
upon people that are sloathfull and sleepy, but he tenders water of life to
those are willing and industrious, that do seek it, let them take it.

Let him take the water of Life.
What Is this water of life? There be variety of Interpretations of these words;
-- Some make this water of life, to be Christ the Fountain of living water,
the Fountain of Grace and Glory; -- Some make this water to be the Spirit, who
is called water frequently in the Scripture; -- Some make this water to be the
Doctrine of the Gospel; -- Some make this water to be Grace; -- And I think
none of all these are out, but all these may be taken in: -- Christ is water of
life; -- The Spirit is water of life; -- The Doctrine of the Gospel, or the
Gospel it self is water of life; -- The gifts and Graces of the Spirit are
water of life. --

And why are they likened unto water; I might spend here much time in showing
you the resemblances; I will only name them.

First, Water clenses from filth and pollution, and so does the word of Christ;
so does the Gospel; so does Grace; so does the Spirit; so does Christ; You are
clean through the word that I have spoken, says Christ in the 15th of John.

Secondly, Water softens and mollifies the hard earth, so the Doctrine of the
Gospel, that heavenly dew, The Graces of the Spirit, The Spirit it self,
Christ himself, does soften the heart where he comes; Paul was a sour piece,
a stubborn hearted sinner, but when he met with Christ, and some of this water
fell upon his heart, says he, What will thou have me to do Lord? he was soft,
mollified, and melted.

Thirdly, Water it is of a cooling nature; it cooles the heat of the Air, and
the heat of the Earth; So this water of life, it cooles the heat of
Temptations, the heat of persecution, the heat of your lusts, the heat of
anger and passion; where any of this water comes, it cooles your unnatural
heat, and those sinful heates that we have contracted.

Fourthly, Water does make the earth to be fruitful, the earth does fructify
by the waters, dewes, and raines; so where any of this water comes, it makes
men and women fruitful; when Christ said to Zacheus, This day is salvation
come to thy house, how fruitful was he presently; The half of my goods I give
to the poor; wonderful fruitful does the water of the Gospel and the Spirit
make men and women.

Fifthly, This water does satisfy thirst, this water of life is the only
water that satisfies thirsty souls; when you have a promise given in, and
Christ comes, and the Spirit comes, and divine truths are let in to your
hearts, how are you satisfied and refreshed?

Sixthly, Water does cure and heal diseases and distempers of body; you go to
the waters, to the Wells, to the Bath, and other waters you use, which are
healing waters: The waters of the Gospel are healing waters: He sent out his
word and healed them: Christ said to the Leper, I will, be thou clean, and he
was clean: The word of God will heal all diseases of your souls: it is not
only a pattern of wholesome words, but a pattern of healing words.

Seventhly, and lastly, Some waters are very Comfortable and Cordial: so are
these waters of life; They are very Cordial waters, is not this text very
Cordial to think upon; Whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of
life freely? It Is a very Cordial the water of this text. -- And so much for
the Resemblance, between water and it.

The water of Life.
Quest: Upon what account is it called water of Life?

Answ: First of all this water begets life; take Christ for the water of life,
Christ himself is life; He is the Prince of life, and he is life: Joh: 14 6.
And he is our life, Col: 3.3. When Christ who is our life shall appear; Christ
brought life to the dead world; he is water of life.

Take the Spirit for water of life; The Spirit begets life in the soul; it is
a Spirit of life; and it is called living water: In the 7th of Joh: 38; 39. He
that beleiveth on me (as the Scripture has said) out of his belly shall slow
rivers of living water; and this he spoke of the Spirit; the Spirit is water of
life unto men and women.

Take it for the Gospel; Phil: 2.14. it is the word of life: the very word
begets life in men and women; 1 Pet: 1.23. Being borne, not of Corruptible
seed, but of Incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for
ever: The word of God lives, and begets life in men and women; It Is seed, and
all true seed has life in it; sow any Corn, it has life in it; this is
divine and heavenly Corn, and when it is sown in your hearts it begets life
there.

And Grace is life, Faith is life; all Grace is life; It is the life of the
soul; so that they are called waters of life, because these waters beget life.

Secondly, They are waters of life, because they do maintain life begotten;
We are nourished of the same things of which we consist, says Philosophy; And
so says Divinity; we consist of divine principles, a godly man is made up of
the word of God, of the Divine nature, and of the Graces of the Spirit, and we
are maintained by the same, we are maintained by Christ, and by the Spirit, and
by the word, and by this water of life, we live upon the same; Therefore
Christ, Grace, and Spirit, are compared in the Scripture unto things upon which
men live: Isa: 55. Ho every one that thirsts, etc. Water, and wine, and
milk, and marrow, and bread, by such things as these men live: Incline your
ear and come unto me, hear and your souls shall live, your life shall be
maintained by these things: Christ is the bread of life, and the water of life,
and we must live by this bread and water live by the flesh of Christ, and live
by the blood of Christ, live by the promises of Christ, and live by the Graces
of Christ, and so by the Spirit, these maintain life in men and women.

Thirdly, It Is water of life, because it makes us more and more lively; it does
not only beget life, and maintain life, but Increase life, and makes us
lively: It Is said in the 4^h of John, that this water shall be a Well of water
springing up into everlasting life: It increases life, and springs up into more
and more life: This water does make us lively. John 10.10. says Christ, I came
that ye might have life, and have it in more abundance: how lively was Peter
after the water of the Spirit came upon him, in Acts 2. and Peter it is that
writes of living and lively stones; Christians should not only be living but
lively: this water makes lively, full of Spirits.

Lastly, It Is water of life, because it brings unto everlasting life: he that
has the Gospel comes to be pertaker of the Spirit, and he that has the Spirit
is pertaker of Christ, and he that is pertaker of Christ comes to God: See how
this water of life springs up into everlasting life; says Christ in the 14 of
Joh: 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes unto the Father
but by me; so that by Christ we come to the Father. --

And in the 8 Rom: 9. He that has not the Spirit is none of Christ's: -- And he
that has not the Gospel, has not the ministration of the Spirit where the
Gospel waters come, and this water is conveyed to the soul, there the Spirit
is, and there Christ is, and there is coming to the Father, so that it springs
up from the Gospel to the Spirit, from the Spirit to Christ, from Christ to the
Father, as in the 4^h of Joh: 14. It is a Well, springing up Into Everlasting
life: This water came from the Father, and it will carry men up to the Father,
into everlasting life. So then you see what this water of life is, and why it is
said to be water of life: and how water?

Let him take the water of life freely.
There Is something in this word; Take of the water of life freely.

That notes first, let a sinner be what he will, there is no bar put in
against him to keep him off from this water: let a man be a great sinner, an
old sinner, let his sins be Crimsen and Scarlet sins, God puts in no bar:
Christ says not here, let a little sinner, or a young sinner, or a sinner that
has sinned once, or twice, or an hundred times, or a thousand times, only
come; but he says, whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely:
let his sins be what they will; All manner of Blasphemies, says Christ, shall
be forgiven: There Is no bar but only against the Impardonable sin; But what
sin soever, though long continued in, though of the most heinous nature,
clothed with the most dreadfullest aggravations, yet it shall be forgiven, let
that sinner come, and take of this water of life freely. A Leper, a man
leperous all over, may as freely go into the river or sea and wash himself,
as the man that is sound: There is no bar in his way.

Secondly, It imports thus much, let him come and partake freely; that
whatsoever qualification men have, let them be honest, moral, civil, sober,
righteous, just, (and the like) have good natures, and dispositions, yet no man
does deserve or merit any thing, not one drop of this water. Many think (and
it is the Popish Doctrine) that men may be made meet for this water, and that
men do deserve this water, and are worthy of it; No, let men be never so
righteous, just moral, never so civil, yet when they have done all that ever
they can, they do not deserve one drop of this water; But whosoever will let
him come and take it freely; there is no merit of thine, there is no desert of
thine, there is no meetnesse in thee, but it is water that is freely prepared,
and freely given.

Thirdly, It imports thus much likewise, That men may come and take abundantly
of this water; As when you Invite persons into your Orchard, Gardens, into your
Wine-sellers, you say, come, eat and drink what you will, that notes your
freedom, and that they may take abundantly; so here, whosoever will, let him
come and take freely, let him eat, let him drink, let him satisfy himself,
there is no measure set you shall have so much and no more, you shall have a
pint, a quart, a pottle, or a vessel full, and the like: No, here is no limitts
are set, but take as much as you will, as much as you can carry away, Joh:
10.10. James 1.5.

And lastly, It imports this, That what endeavors soever men use, let men
strive and endeavor never so much, yet it is not for their endeavors that
they have this water. Men must strive, must read, hear and pray; They must
digg for wisdom as for Silver and Gold; but when they have done all, it is God
that gives in this water: God gives it, but in the use of means, in their
digging, in their laboring, in their waiting, not for their digging, for their
laboring, for their waiting. Rom: 9.16. It Is not in him that wills, or in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy: It is water freely given. Thus
you see the words opened: -- Now I come to the point I shall insist upon.

Doct: That the offer, or the tender of the water of life, is free.

Whosoever will let him take the water of life freely: It is freely offered
unto men: Take Christ for the water of life, and Christ is freely offered unto
the world: Jo: 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish: What Is freer then gift:
God has given him, therefore Christ says in the 4th of Joh: 10. to the woman
of Samaria, Did thou know the gift of God, and who it is that says unto
thee, give Me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee water of life. Christ is the gift of God, he is freely given, freely
tendered unto the sons of men. Rom: 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all: God did not spare him, but freely delivered him up
for us all, so that this water of life is freely tendered and given unto you.

The Spirit, is not that freely tendered unto men; Ezekiel: 26.25. I will sprinkle
clean water upon them, and wash them from all their filthiness, I will put my
Spirit into them. In Joel, I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh: the Lord
tenders this water of life freely. In the 11th of Luke, says Christ, If ye
that are evil, can give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall my
Father give the Spirit to them that ask him?

The Gospel is freely given; says Christ to his Disciples, Freely ye have
received, freely give: and in the 16 of Mark: Go preach the Gospel to every
creature. The Gospel is the ministration of Grace, the ministration of the
Spirit: So that all the water of life is freely given: Revel: 21.6. And he said
unto me, it is done, I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the end, I will
give unto him that is athirst, of the Fountain of the water of life freely: I
will give freely. As this water of life is freely given: -- so it is freely
revealed: God made it known freely: Math: 13.11. To you its given to know,
etc. none else made it known: God might have kept this Fountain shut up in
heaven, and never have discovered the Fountain, never have made known to the
world any such water, any such Grace, any such mercy as here is held out to
you; hence is it that Christ says to Peter in the 16th of Math: 16, 17. When
Peter said, Thou art the Son of the living God, says he, Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, etc. God
revealed it unto him: and in the 21 of Math: I thank thee o Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes: -- God reveals this water and makes it
known: -- And as God reveals it, so it is the Lord that blesses this water,
and makes it a blessing to one and not unto another: This water was a blessing
unto Peter, it was not a blessing unto Judas: Judas had no blessing by the
Gospel, no blessing by Christ: So those of Capernaum and other places, they had
no blessing; it is God gives the water, reveals the water, and blesses this
water to whom he pleases.

Quest: Why does the Lord freely offer and tender this water of life unto the
world, unto sinners?

Answ: This water of life is freely tendered, first, that so God might make
known his goodness, and make way for his Glory. Things that come freely, do
discover the goodness of any, and redound most to their praise, most to their
honor: when a parent shall out of his own good will give unto a child great
matters, unlookt for, unsought for, unthought of, this argues the goodness of
the parent, and draws more honor: When a Prince shall give unto his Subjects
out of his own bounty and good will, not being moved by his Nobles or Princes,
or others about him, this declares his goodness and makes way for his honor:
and every one says, What a good Prince is this, or what a good King is this,
and how honorable is this: he does it freely, none mooves him to it? when men
are moov'd to do good, those that moove them they share in the good, they
share in the honor, had not the party moov'd, it had nor been done: Now God
will have none to share in his honor: God does it freely, according to the
Counsel of his own will, for his own name, that so his goodness may be
known, and his honor may be great; Be it known unto you, says God in the 36
of Ezekiel: that not for your sakes do I this, but for mine own Name sake: I do
it not because you moove me, or any moove me, but from within, for mine own
will, and so his goodness appears, and his honor is the greater.

Secondly, The Lord tenders water of life freely to sinners, that so he may
take away all objections, all scruples and fears which usually lie in the
hearts of sinners, when people have sinned against God, are guilty, and unholy,
they are afraid of God; Adam runs from God and hides himsele: they have hard
thoughts of God, and think God will not be pacifyed toward them. Now the Lord
to prevent this, and take away all such objections, scruples, and fears, out
of the minds and hearts of men and women, does freely tender water of life,
freely hold out the Golden Scepter, freely offer pardon, peace, Grace and
salvation.

Thirdly, The Lord does this, that so he may indeare our hearts the more unto
him: when a thing comes freely from others, how does it work, what hold does
it take of the heart, it knitts the heart much unto them. In the 2 Samuel: 7. the
Lord there comes to David and tells him what great matters he would do for
him, and for his house, and v: 18. Then went King David in and sat before the
Lord and said, Who am I o Lord God, and what is my Fathers house, that thou
have brought me hitherto, and this was yet a small thing in thy sight o Lord
God; But thou have also spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come,
and is this the manner of men o Lord God. What will God deal thus by man, to
come to him and offer him such kindness, and such mercy, to deal so
bountifully and freely with him, is this the manner of men, even this is the
manner of God to deal with man, that so he may indeare their hearts unto him.
And so Elizabeth says, Whence is it that the Mother of my Lord should come
unto me? What Mary, the Mother of the Lord Jesus Christ to come unto me, and
give me a visit that am a poor despised creature? When things are done freely,
and unexpectedly, they do indeare and engage the heart abundantly.

Lastly, The Lord does freely hold out Grace and mercy to sinners, to prevent
pride and boasting, were there any free will, power, or qualification in man,
which might move or draw God to bestow and give these waters, man would be
ready to attribute the thing to himself, and to glory and boast: now that man
may not glory nor boast, the Lord does freely bestow and give the water of
life. 1 Cor: 1.27. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things
which are mighty; The base things of the world, and things which are despised
has he chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught the things which
are; That no flesh should Glory in his presence. God would have none to Glory
in his presence, therefore he takes things that are most unlikely, foolish, and
weak, contemptible, despised.

Application.
First of all, Does the Lord freely tender water of life unto us: Then this
serves to reproove those that do refuse to receive this water.

But you will say, are there any such in the world, what will any refuse water
of life, can there be any such living?

Yes beloved, too many, the world is full of them, always was, and now is full
of such: And that I may not give you words only, take Scripture, look into
the 81 Psalm: 11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would
none of me: Mark, My people, says God, would not hearken to my voice, I came
and told them of water, and water of life, and set life and death before them,
but my people would not hearken to my voice, they would none of me the
Fountain of living water; Though God were the Fountain of living waters they
would none of him: Israel it self would none of him. And in the 65 of Isa: 2.
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a Rebellious people, which walks
in a way which is not good, after their own thoughts: I have all the day
spread out my hands to them, and held out water of life unto them, and they
would none of me. So in the 1 of Pro: 24. I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hands, and no man regarded, but set at naught all my
Counsels, and would none of my Reproof: It was very frequent in those days,
they would none of the water of life: -- And was it not so in Christ's time, and
in the Apostles times, 23 of Math: 37. o Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would
I have gathered thee, as a hen does her chickens, and ye would not: I would
have had you to receive water of life, and to have lived, but ye would not: He
came to his own and they received him not. In the 23 of the Acts 46. It was
necessary that the Gospel should first have been preached unto you, but seeing
ye put it from you we turn to the Gentiles. So in all Ages, the greatest sort
of people refuse the water of life: -- they choose strange waters, 2 Kings
19.24. Heb: 13. They follow strange Doctrines, strange opinions, strange
Blasphemies, puddle waters, poisoned waters, but as for the waters of life they
will have none of them.

Now see the evil of this in Refusing the waters of life.

First, This will appear, The evil of refusing the waters of life.
if you Consider what it is they do refuse; It is water of life: If it were
ill, bitter, corrupt, poisoned water, it were something, but it is water of
life, that begets life, maintains life, increases life, brings unto life
everlasting: the more excellent any thing is that is refused, the greater the
evil: To refuse a bag of dust, To refuse a bottle of some musty liquor were
nothing, but to refuse a wedge of Gold, a bottle of Spirits, this shows folly
and weakness: Who that has a right mind would refuse Gold, when it is offered,
water of life when it is offered? it is the most excellent thing, and yet men
refuse it.

Secondly, It is that which is freely offered, if it were put upon hard terms,
if men were to buy it at dear rates, if they were to bring bags of money for
it, there were some pretense for refusing, for every one has not bags of
money, as Simon Magus had, but it is not to be sold for money, it is freely
given, and when such a Commodity of such infinite worth is offered freely to
you, and you will have none of it, your sin is great; it was freely offered,
and you would have none of it.

Thirdly, Consider who it is offers it, it is offered by Christ, by the
Ministers of Christ it is offered unto you daily; but here in the Text it is
offered by Christ. Now shall Christ who is the Son of God, the Prince of life,
the Heir of the world, who is worshipped by Angels, who is the great
Commander of Heaven and Earth; shall he come and offer you water of life, and
will you have none of it? shall he that loves sinners, and laid down his life
for them, and would wash them in his blood, shall he come and tender the
Gospel, and Grace to you, and will you have none thereof? your sin is great,
exceeding great.

Fourthly, Consider, it is the greatest Ingratitude that ever was in men and
women, that Christ should bring water of life, and freely offer it unto you,
and you have extreme need of it, and yet will have none of it: he does it out
of love, and aims at your good, and the saving of your souls, and yet you
will have none of this water, what Ingratitude is this? Christ may say, I
brought water to your door, and such water as was water of life, it would have
quickened you, maintained life in you, and brought you to Eternal life, and you
would none of it; hear o Heavens, and hearken o Earth, was there ever such
Ingratitude!

Fifthly, Consider, that this water of life is the only remedy can do your
souls good: It Is the mercy of God in Christ, its Christ's merits, the Spirit
and the Graces thereof must do sinners good, if any thing in heaven and earth
can do them good; There is nothing in Heaven and Earth besides free Grace and
mercy, this water of Life, which can do your souls good: If you will not
drink of this water, you must die: you must die and perish for ever, as in
Jonah; They embrace lying vanities, and forsake their own mercies; so all men
and women in the world embrace lying vanities, who forsake these waters, they
will drink the muddie waters of the world, the filthy waters of sin, of the
ditches of Rome, of the puddles of Egypt, and Babylon, but of these waters
which would save their souls, they will not drink: this is an evil against
the Remedy.

Sixthly, Consider that the refusal of these waters provokes God and Christ
greatly to wrath, you cannot provoke God more then by refusing his kindness;
you greive you vex the Spirit, you resist the Spirit, and so provoke God
bitterly: Psalm: 81.11, 12. says he, My people would not hearken to my voice,
and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts: I
will scourge them no more, but give them over to the saddest Judgments in the
world, they shall be left to their own lusts, their own wills and humors: I
will leave them now to drink waters will poison them, waters will ripen them
for hell. So in the 14 of Luke, those that were Invited to the Supper, they
made excuses all and would not come, says Christ, not one of them shall taste
of my Supper: The meaning is, they shall not only not taste of the dainties I
have prepared, but they shall taste of the severitie of my wrath: In stead of
cups of wine, they shall have cups of Brimstone and fire: The vengeance
written they shall have executed upon them. When God offered Canaan to the
Jews, and they resused it, and would go back to Egypt, God was so moved,
that he swear in his wrath, If they shall enter into my Rest, If they enter
into my Rest, let me be thrust out of heaven; And the siercenesse of Gods anger
never came upon the Jews till they had refused Christ, and these waters of
life; But then the wrath of God came upon them to the uttermost, to perfection
it came upon them.

Seventhly, Lastly, Those that refuse the waters of life, The Lord Christ, and
God, does keep account of all such passages, and will bring them in against
them, and urge them as aggravations of their misery at last: The Lord keeps
account: I have stretched out my hands all the day long, says God; A whole
day, the day of their lives I waited upon them, Forty years long was I
greived with this Generation: Revel: 3.20. Christ says, Behold I stand at the
door and knock; Christ keeps account how long he stood there, how many knocks
he has made there; how many tenders of Grace have been presented to you? how
often you refused and turned them away? He will come at last and say, At such a
place I stood and knocked twenty or thirty years, And in such a place I
tendered Grace to them a thousand times, and my Spirit presented good motions
to them ten thousand times, and yet they refused: All these will be brought in
at last, and then when you shall see this black bill, this will sink you into
the bottom of hell. Grace offered, peace offered, heaven offered, Christ and
his righteousness offered to be your portion, and you would none of all these:
and what did you choose, chafe, earth, puddle water, your misery will be
exceeding great?

The Water of Life.
Reve: 22.17. And whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life
freely.


WE come now to a use of Exhortation. If the waters of life be freely offered,
then here is an Invitation to all sinners to come and accept of these waters:
Come ye sinners whosoever ye be, ye that are in the chambers of Death, ye that
are in the broad way, ye that are enemies to God through wicked works in your
mind, ye that have lived basely to the dishonor of God and man, to your own
prejudice and damnation; If you will come, here are waters and waters of life,
waters will give life to the dead, here are waters to increase life, here are
waters to be had freely, Come to these waters; these waters are held forth upon
such terms, that ye may all come and receive them, whosoever will let him
come and take of the waters of life. In the 55 of Isa: 7. It Is said, Let the
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his thoughts, and turn unto the
Lord, and he shall have mercy: Pro: 28. It Is said, He that confesses his sins
and forsakes them shall find mercy: There the terms are somewhat hard, who
can forsake his ways, and turn from his evil thoughts, and the like, it is a
hard thing to do: But here it is upon other terms; Whosoever will let him come
and take of the waters of life freely: -- You may have them freely, whatsoever
your sins have been, crimsen sins, scarlet sins, crying sins, sins against
light of nature, against Law, against heaven, against earth, sins against
State, against Church, against soul or body, sins against Gospel, whatsoever
your sins have been, here are waters of life freely for you: Abraham was an
Idolater, and yet he had water of life freely: Saul was a persecuter, and he
had water of life freely, and why may not you have waters of life freely. A man
may go and take water at any Well in a Town, he may go to the Thames and
take water what he will, when the Rain falls who may not have a share of it?
here is water, here is rain from heaven, and who will, may come and take water
of life. Sometimes money is given in a place for poor people, and it is made
known for them to come and fetch it, but they must first get Petitions,
Justices, Ministers, and other men's hands, of their honesty, of their
faithfulness, of their service, of their sufferings, of their losses, and a
great deal of do there is before they can have the money; but it is not so
here, Christ does not say, Let him that is righteous come, let him that is so
qualified take it, let him that has suffered such hard things, let him that
has been tempted so long by Satan, no, but he says, who ever will, let him
take the waters of life freely: what will you stand out then and not receive
waters of life: o come in this day, come in to Christ, come in and drink
waters of life, come in and live, come and live comfortably, come and live
eternally.

Thirdly, Again in the next place: If the water of life be freely offered to
sinners, then you that barren and dead hearted, and complain of
unfruitfullnesse and unprofitablenesse: wait upon the Lord Christ in the use
of means, for here is water and water of life, and Christ gives it out in the
use of means: Are you dry, barren and fruitless? have you a dead heart?
Christ has water of life to quicken you: Christ has water of life to make you
more lively: I am come, says Christ in the 10th of Joh: 10. that ye might have
life, and that ye might have it in more abundance: I am come for that very end
to give life, and to give life more abundantly, to give out these waters freely
and fully. You know when the Rain falls from heaven upon the mountains and
barren places, it will make them look Green; so when Christ gives out these
waters to mountanous hearts, to barren spirits, this water of life will soke
into you, soften you, make you grow, flourish, and bring forth fruit. Lam:
3.25, 26. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeks him; it is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord: -- The Lord is good to them that wait for him; If you
will wait for Christ in his Ordinances, he will be good unto you, he will
water you, and make you like a watered Garden. In the 40 of Isa. 28, 29.31.
Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord,
the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary, there is
no searching of his understanding, he gives power to the faint, and to them
that have no might he increases strength, they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run
and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint: -- Wait up-upon the Lord
Christ, he has virtue for you, he has water of life for you. And in the 64 of
Isa: 4. For since the beginning of the world, men have not heard, nor perceived
by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has
prepared for him that waits for him: Thou meetest him that rejoices and
works Righteousness; Those that remember thee in thy ways, he will meet
them, he will water them, and refresh them, and they shall be fruitful. You
made the Lord Christ to wait for your tears, he waited a long time before you
shed one tear of Repentance, and will not you wait upon him that has water
of life for you? wait upon him in the use of means, and he will give water of
lise.

Fourthly, You that have received water of life, Remember how little it cost
you, give the honor and the Glory unto God: It cost you nothing, you had it
freely. Psalm. 115.1. Say not unto us, not unto us, but to thy name be the
praise and Glory: yea all the praise and all the Glory. Did we Contribute
ought unto this work of Grace, and Salvation, then we might Sacrifice to our
own Netts, but we Contribute nothing: Ephesians: 2.8. By Grace are ye saved
through Faith and that not of your selves; mark, it is the gift of God: not of
works least any man should boast: -- The Lord knew what man would do if he
should come in, and be a Coworker with God, therefore says, By Grace are ye
saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God; If you
have faith, if you have Grace, if you have salvation, water of life, it is the
gift of God: Not of works least any man should boast; therefore let no man
Glory in himself, but give the honor and Glory to God. In the 9th of Jer: 23,
24. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither the mighty man in his
might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glories
glory in this, that he understands and knows me that I am the Lord which
exercises loving kindness: and Isa: 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out
thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins; I do
not do it for thy sake says God, but for mine own sake: for the honor of
mine own name I blot out thy sins freely, I pardon thee, I give thee water
of life. So then let us give God the honor and the Glory, and say as it is in
Micha 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the Remnant of his heritage: he reteineth not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy; and who is a God like unto
our God, that pardons Iniquity, sins and transgressions, and why, because he
delights in mercy, not because he delights in thee, or delights in me, but
because he delights in mercy, he delights to show mercy, he blotts out sins
freely for the honor of his own name; If therefore you have pardon of sin,
peace of Conscience, if you have any Grace, any Comfort of the Spirit, if you
have any drops of this water of life, give God the Glory of it, he has freely
given it unto you, and that in abundance, when others have none or puddle water
only.

Lastly, If God do give us water of (...) freely, then this should unite and
Indere our hearts unto him, and make us serve him freely: As he freely gives to
us, so we should freely serve him, many they are hardly brought of to seeve
God, the Sabboths are tedious unto them, and when will the Sabbath be gone,
prayer, Reading of Scripture, hearing of Scrmons, and to discourse of heavenly
things, is tedious unto them, they cannot Endure them: It Is an argument they
are flesh, and corrupt, that they have none of this water of life; If they had
they would serve God freely, cheerfully, willingly. In the 2 Phil: It is God
that works in you both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. Do all
things without murmuring and disputing: When God works in men according to his
good pleasure the Will and the Deed, Then men will do all things without
murmuring and disputing, they will come off roundly and readily to do the
work of God: they will be then like to David who fullfilled all the Wills of
God, and gave Counsel to Solon his Son, 1 Chronicles. 23.9. And thou Solomon my
Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind, etc. God regards not any of your services, that come off
heavily, dully, and with murmurings, but God loves a cheerful giver, a
willing mind: he is free himself, and gives water of life freely, and he
would have you serve him cheerfully and willingly. --

But to proceed to another observation; -- Whosoever will, says he, let him
take the waters of life freely: Whosoever will, The willing Man: The
observation is this.

That man who is willing, or has a willingness to have the waters of life,
shall have them.

Be the man what he will, high or low, rich or poor, learned or unlearned,
young or old, bond or free, whosoever has a willingness in them to have the
waters of life shall have them: -- To make it out from the Scripture unto you:
--

Joh: 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have life: That ye might have
waters of life; were there in you a willingness to have the waters of life,
says Christ, ye might have them. In the 55 of Isa: 1.2. Ho every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters, and ye that have no money, come buy and eat,
yea come buy wine and milk without money and without price: says Christ, are
ye willing to have waters of life? are ye willing to have wine and milk
without money? there is the stick, you say you have no money, says Christ, will
you have them without money, are you willing to have them? If you be but
willing, says Christ, you shall have them; are you athrist, you shall have
water, I look not after your money, I look not after such qualifications, or
dispositions, and preparations; But are you willing to have it? -- Wherefore
do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that
which satisfies not? And because men will not come to Christ, Christ comes to
them: Pevel: 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, says he, If any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will Sup with
him and he with me: -- Christ comes and stands at the door and knocks: You
know when one comes to the door of a house and knocks, if there be one within,
and the party will not open the door you cannot come in: but if the party will
open the door, you come in presently: -- Christ comes and kcocks now, and he
would feign come in; but men and women will not open the door: -- What Is the
opening of the door? your hearts are the door, and the opening of your
hearts, is your willingness that Christ should come in, but men and women
keep the door shut, and so Christ enters not: they have no willingness in
them; there is a Will in all men by nature, but there is not a willingness. If
a man have a hand to receive any thing, while he keeps his hand shut he can
receive nothing: but if he will open his hand, then he is fit to receive: a man
that keeps his mouth shut, he can take in no water, no wine, no food: This is
the case, sinners so long as they keep their hearts shut, Christ knocks, the
Spirit knocks, the Minister knocks, the word knocks, God knocks, but they will
not open: and so there is no entrance: But willingness now is the opening of
the heart, and makes way for Christ's entrance. Lydia was hearing, and her
heart was opened, and Christ came in, the waters of life came in. And in the 1
of Isa: 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the fatt of the
Land; If ye be willing ye shall have the blessing: There is a willingness
required in sinners to receive Grace, to receive mercy, to receive the waters
of life.

Quest: Now wherein lies this willingness that should be in sinners to receive
the waters of life, to receive Grace and Mercy?

Answ: It lies in three things.

First, In a high prizing of this water of life; when a man comes to have
apprehensions of worth and excellency in it, thereupon he prizeth what is so
apprehended; for you must know, that the opperations of the will are according
to the apprehensitions of the understanding: If a man's understanding have
apprehensions of a great deal of good and worth in a thing, then his will
prizes the good that is in the thing answerably. When men have weak
apprehensions of things, they have weak prizings of them, and value them
accordingly: But if men apprehend things strongly, to have a great deal of
worth and excellency in them, then they prize them answerably: Now when the
waters of life are apprehended to be exceeding good, to be an Infinite mercy,
an unspeakeable mercy, then the will prizes them, and prizes them above all
other things: -- Take Christ he is water of Life: Coll: 1.19 It pleased the
Father, that in Christ should all fulness dwell. There is then all fullness
in Christ. Coll: 2.3. In him are hid all the Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: -- Coll: 3.11. Christ is all in all. Paul had a large apprehension
of the excellency of Christ, and Paul prizes Christ answerably, and accounts
all dung for Christ, loss for Christ. So that there is the first thing in this
willingness that the soul having seen a worth, an excellency a transcendency
of good, prizes it answerably.

Secondly, The soul hereupon comes to make choice of this good for it self:
The Will chooses this good so apprehended and so prized. As a man, he beholds a
person beautiful, amiable, and suitable unto him, he prizes the person, and
makes choice of the person in himself, for himself: So the will upon
apprehension of water of life, and the Infinite good by it, does choose this
water of life for it self. And thus David in the 73 Psalm: 25 v: Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that my soul desires in
comparison of thee. David saw such worth in Christ, as that he does choose
Christ in heaven, and in earth, and none besides him: Whom have I in heaven but
thee, and there is none that I desire upon earth besides thee. So the Spouse in
the 5 Cant: 10. My beloved, there is the choice, is white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousand: I know what a one my beloved is, I have such
apprehensions of him, he is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand,
better then all, and therefore I choose him he is my Beloved. The will comes to
choose and take in the object so apprehended, for it self; that is the second
thing, the will acting in the choosing of Christ.

Thirdly, The Will mooves and carries the soul to the Enjoying of the thing
prized and chosen: As when a man has cast his eyes upon a virgin, and he
values her, and in his heart chooses her; Then he uses all lawful means to
Enjoy her, his will carries him to the use of means: so here; The Will mooves
the soul now toward Christ, to close with Christ to enjoy Christ, and does
act both inwardly and outwardly: Inwardly by longings, sighings desires,
thirstings, o that I had water of life, o that I had water of the well of
Bethlehem, as David said, o that I had Christ, o that I had the Spirit, o that
I had Grace: -- And then outwardly, it carries to the use of all means, to
reading, to hearing, to meditating, to prayer, conferring, and the like, to all
the ordinances, and all the means that it may Enjoy Christ, and meet with him
whom it has chosen, this is the willingness that is required: If you be
willing; If he has had such apprehensions, and prized the water of life,
whosoever has made choice of it, whosoever is moov'd and carried out to Enjoy
it, let that soul take the water of Life.

Quere. Now a Quere moveable upon this is.

Whither can man by his own abilities make this choice of Christ, or of this
water of life?

Answ: Men by their natural abilities may desire the word, and be carried out
after it; Amos 8.11, 12. Behold the day is come says the Lord God, that I will
send a famine in the Land, not a famine of Bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hearing the word of the Lord, and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and
from the North even to the East: They shall run too and fro to seek the Word
of the Lord, and shall not find it: Mark; when the word should be taken away,
they would have a desire, and there would be a motion after it in them, and yet
these it is conceived were not regenerate and Godly, but of the ordinary and
common sort of people: The work of reason, and natural apprehension of some
good to be in the word, carried them after it: But I conceive, no man can by
natural abilities thus will the Lord Jesus Christ as we have spoken: There be
Scriptures that do hold it out strongly; If you look into the 7 Rom: 11. Sin
taking occasion by the Commandment deceived me, and by it slew me: -- Sin slew
me, says Paul, if Paul were slain, a dead man, how could he moove in such a
manner then toward Christ? for mark in the 6 Chap: 11 ^^ Likewise reckon ye
also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord: Says Paul, I was slain through sin: But as You have life
through Jesus Christ, so must I have life through Jesus Christ; I have no life
naturally and of my self: and that place, 1 Cor: 2.14. But the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: -- Some
would make this verse to speak to young Christians weak Christians: But says
he, the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God: a young
Christian having the Spirit of God, would receive the things of the Spirit of
God, and would have some spiritual discerning: But the natural man, is a man
destitute of the Spirit; for he says, We have received, not the Spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God: But the natural man now which has not
the Spirit, he receives them not, he discernes them not: -- And that this is
the meaning of the word, look but into the 19 Jude, where you have the same
word, Sensual, he might Interpret it Natural; Sensual not having the Spirit.
Now he that has not the Spirit, he cannot discern the things of God, he
cannot desire them, he cannot receive them; therefore says Christ unto Peter,
Blessed art thou Simon Barjona, For flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee: Some boast they come to this by the power of nature, but God has
revealed it by the power of his Spirit: and in the 1 Cor. 1.21. For after that
in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe: All the wisdom of the
world brought them not up to the knowledge of God: So then, by man's natural
ability he is not able to come to this willingness.

Quere. To what end then are these waters of life freely offered, if a man have
not this power to will these waters; are they not offered in vain?

Answ: To this I answer first, It Is not so, it is not in vain; for where the
Gospel comes, there is so much mercy, love and goodness of God held out, such
great precious and free promises presented unto men, as that being heeded, they
beget a willingness in sinners to live, there goes a general virtue and power
with the Gospel to do something in the hearts of men and women which they
could not do before: When the Loadstone touches the needle, it makes an
impression, and leaves some virtue upon it. It Is said in the 47 of Ezekiel: 9.
That whithersoever the waters of the Sactuary do come, they heal the waters;
That is, If men and women who are like the dead Sea, who are corrupt, filthy,
stinking, and loathsome in their natural condition, The waters of the Gospel
do something there, and they do enable men to will, and will otherwise then
they could before: so that men now living under the Gospel, if they heed the
Gospel, there is so much Grace, mercy, and love of God held out in the Gospel,
and such breathings of Gods Spirit goes along with it, that if men heed the
same, something is wrought in their hearts that may Enable them to will these
weters of life, and their not doing of this, is sufficient Ground for their
condemnation.

And secondly, The Lord he tenders these waters of life unto whosoever will,
that so these persons might beg of God a will to receive these waters, who is
ready to give them these waters: For when they shall see waters of life held
out, and it is thus, whosoever will let him take of them: The soul may well
conclude and say, Surely God will give me a will to receive these waters, if I
beg them: So that if men and women now having waters of life held out freely,
do come to God and beg of God this willingness, Lord give me a Will, give me
a will to close with Christ, to prize Christ, to move out after Christ, God
that will give them the waters, will give them the will: Phil: 2.13. Pro: 16.1.

Thirdly, Lastly: This will Justify God, and this will be Condemnation to the
creature, that here is the Gospel offered to men freely, that the Gospel if
heeded will beget a power and will in men; that God if prayed unto will give
them the will, and yet they neglect all. Men's Condemnation will be upon their
own heads, where is God to be blamed? This being so, let us give you the
reasons why the Lord holds out waters of life to those that are willing to
receive them: Or why is this willingness required at our hands?

First, This willingness is required, Why this willingness is required
because otherwise men will not take the waters of life, let God offer them
never so freely, or never so long; If men be not willing they will not take
them; present what you will to a man that has not a Will to a thing and he
will not take it: so present Christ, the Spirit of God, life eternal, Heaven
and Glory, the great and precious promises, pardon of sin, or what you will,
if a man have not a will he will not take it: so that vvillingness is
required to the taking: If a man have not a mouth, it is in vain to offer him
meat; If men have not a will, they will not receive, Math: 23.37. Acts 13.46.
Therefore God requires willingness that men may receive the waters of life.

Secondly, This willingness is required, that so men may not complain; for if
men should be brought to drink waters of life by a compulsory Act, they will
complain of what follows: Therefore says Christ in the 16 Math: 24. If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me: If any man will come, if a man have a will says Christ to follow
me, let him, he will meet with hard things, and if he be not willing, he
will complain that I should cause him to follow me: Men must deny themselves,
and take up crosses, and endure persecutions and temptations, and if they did
not come willingly to Gods way they would complain of it; Now God to prevent
Complaining of his ways, he requires that men be willing.

Thirdly, This is, that so the Communion between Christ and the soul may be
the sweeter: where there is willingness on both sides, there will be the
sweetest life: -- If the parties do not consent on both sides, you will say,
it will be an Ill match: But if there be a willingness and a freeness on
both sides, there the Communion will be the sweeter: -- So Christ says, I
freely give, and I would have them freely receive, and so there will be a
sweet Communion between Christ and the soul: I am my beloveds, says the
soul, and my beloved is mine: There was mutual Consent and Agreement between
them.

Lastly, This willingness is required, that so the wisdom of God in the
Governing of his Church and of the world might not be Questioned: for should
God force men to his service they would say, where is the goodness of God?
where is the wisdom of God? here is Tyranny, here^s forcing of men into the
service of the Lord. Now God will have none to be his servants, but those that
come freely: Psalm: 110. In the day of thy power thy people shall be willing: --
And when he speaks, Compel them to come in; It is not by Clubs Law, but by
strong Arguments, tell them what the water of life is, tell them what Supper is
prepared, tell them of the excellency of the provision, that so that may
compel them, no other compulsion does God use, but the Grace of the Spirit,
and divine Arguments set on upon the heart.

But this may seem contrary to Joh: 6.44. says Christ, No man comes to me
except the Father draw him: It should seem then that it is not voluntary and
free.

I answer, God does not force a man's will, but God does sweetly and lovingly
take away the unwillingnesse of his will, the corruption of his will: Ezekiel:
11.19. I will give them one heart, and I will put a new Spirit within you, and
I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of
flesh: I will take away the stoninesse, the hardness, that corruption, that
enmity and opposition, I will take away all these out of them, and put a new
heart, and a new Spirit into them. So in the 36 of Ezekiel: 26. A new heart also
will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments and do them: He will cause them to walk in his
statutes; what will he thrust them on against their wills, no, see what the
Church says, Cant: 1.4. Draw me o Lord, we will run after thee: When God comes
to draw, the soul runs willingly and freely. So that you see a willingness is
required.

The Water of Life.
Reve: 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.


TO proceed to the Uses of the point: and so to finish the Text.

Use. First, If those that are willing shall have the waters of life, then here
it serves for Conviction, and does convince us that all who think and say they
have drunk of these waters of life, yet have not: Every one thinks that he
has Grace, and has the Spirit, has Christ and God, and that he shall be
saved, but here is clear conviction to the contrary; for, have you had this
willingness in you that is required? have men seen such excellency in these
waters, as to prize them above all? have you so prized them as to choose them
above all things in the world? have you so chosen them as to pursue the getting
of them to the uttermost of your power? few have done so: In the 7 of Math: 21,
22, etc. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven:
Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in thy name done many
wonderful works; And then I will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart
foom me ye that work Iniquity. These men did not see so much worth in the
waters of life as they did in Iniquity; they did not prize Christ's Grace, his
Spirit, the Gospel, and the promises thereof so much as works of Iniquity;
they would drink puddle water, poisonous water, they would not let go their
Iniquity for Christ, yet these thought themselves Christians, thought
themselves safe, happy and blessed creatures: The five foolish virgins in the
25 of Math: they had gotten lamps, but they had gotten no Oil in their lamps,
they had none of this water of life, they had no Grace, they had no Christ,
they had none of the Spirit, they had none of the truths of God in their
hearts, they thought that to profess Christ, and profess the Gospel was
sufficient; they had lamps, but where was the oil? where was the water of
life? where was Grace, they had none of it? So in the 2 of Tim: 3.5. Having a
form of Godliness, but denying the power: They had a form, they came to the
Assemblies as you do, and sat there, heard the word, profess Christ, seemed
to be Christians, and it may be, did something in their families, but they
denied the power; they never had this willingness, to see the excellency of
the power of Godliness, never did they choose the power of Godliness, never
did they pursue after the power of Godliness: -- And many in these days, they
live in base and sinful ways, and yet think that they have water of life,
that they are living Christians; But it is with them as with the Church of
Sardis; They have a name to live, but they are dead indeed: What reviling are
there of one another? what reproaching? what backbiting and slandering? what
drunkenness, what whoredom, what oppression, what defrauding, what
contention is there? brother against brother, seeking to eat up one another,
and to undo one another, by ill language, by seeking to get one from another;
and yet desirous to come to the Sacrament; whereas when men live in hatred and
strife, they are murderers in the Scripture account: -- A dreadful thing when
those that are of the same family, flesh and blood, walk in those ways, and
pretend that they are Christians, and would have the ordinances, and yet will
not lay down their malice, revenge, and humors, no not for Christ, not for
waters of life, not for any of his ordinances: -- All are not true Christians
that think so, all have not tasted of the waters of life that think so, all
have not Grace that imagine they have. The five foolish virgins, afterward
they got oil as they thought, and they came and knock at the gate of heaven,
but they were deceived, they had not true oil, they would have been let in
then: That Is the first.

Secondly, This serves for reproof, and reproof of many that say they would
gladly have waters of life, they are willing, and would feign have Christ,
Grace, and the Spirit, but it is evident there is no such thing, because they
never prize them, so as to see them better then their earthly sensual and
sinful enjoyments, then their outward estates and what ever is dear unto them
of that nature, because they never make a real and actual claim of them, nor
use the means to attain them: Corn, wine, and oil, they prize, they close
with, and make out after, and bestirre themselves so in the pursuit of them,
that they hazard their souls eternally for them, but as for the waters of
life, they care little for them, they have some sluggish desires after them,
but no strong no lasting endeavors, Math: 19.16, 17, 18, etc. Luke 13.24.

Therefore it is not enough for men and women to say they would have waters of
life: there are many wishers, and many woulders in the world, but few do truly
and really will, they come not up to a prizing of them, to a choosing of them,
and to an using of all means for them they give not diligence to add Grace to
Grace, to work out their salvation, to shake off security and sloathfulnesse,
and put forth themselves as a matter of life and death, as indeed it is a
matter of life and death, to get these waters of life.

Thirdly, If the willing man shall have the waters of life, then here God is
excused, and justifiable in the destruction of sinners: The Lord he holds out
waters of life freely; he says, whosoever will, whosoever is willing let him
take the waters of life, let him live and be blessed, whosoever is willing: now
if men perish where is the fault, who is to be blamed, God has provided
Christ, he has provided Gospel and ordinances, provided his Spirit, he holds
out the promises, and says whosoever will, whosoever is willing come, come
without money, here is water of life freely for you: now if men perish, where is
the fault; Revel: 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man will
open, I will come in: -- And what if you will not open the door, if Christ do
beat down the house and the door, and destroy him that is in it, who is in
the fault? the fault is yours, you are not willing that Christ should come in.
In the 19 of Luk: 27. Those mine enemies that would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither and slay them before me: Those mine enemies that would
not have me to reign over them, I come and tell them that I will cast out
their enemies, and I will reign sweetly and lovingly in them, and I will do
them good, I will save them, give them waters of life, cordial comforts, and
they will not; what then? Bring those mine enemies and slay them before my
face. In the 23 of Math: How often would I have gathered thee, even as a hen
does her chickens and ye would not: had ye been willing ye should have eat the
fatt and drank the sweet; But ye would not; now is your house left desolate;
Man's destruction is of himself, and God is to be justified and cleared, he
makes such tenders of Grace and mercy, and that freely he comes and waits upon
men and calls upon them, and yet they will not. You have a remarkable place, 2
These: 2.10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved; Mark, the truth was sent forth, the truth came, and the truth
wooed them, but they would not receive the Love of the truth, But they received
not the love of the truth that they might be saved, for this Cause God shall
send them strong Delusions that they should believe a lie; and this is made
good in our days exceedingly, for the truth has come, and knocked at the
hearts of men and women, and it has not been received with the love of it,
Therefore God has sent them strong Delusions that they should believe a lie,
That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: men and women have pleasure in unrighteousness, and therefore
they will not receive the truths of God: And then God gives them over to strong
Delusions that they might be damned, would they have received the truth, they
should not have been damned, nor had strong Delusions; so that here God will be
excusable and justifiable in the destruction of sinners at the last. Joh: 3.19.
This is the Condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil; This will be their
Condemnation, they will shut their eyes against the light, they will not let
truth enter, and if they do, they withhold the truth in unrighteousness, and
imprison the truth as Herod did John.

Fourthly, This serves for Exhortation: Whosoever will, let them take of the
waters of life freely: Shall all that are willing have water of life freely,
let us labor for this willingness, it is a matter of great concernment, it
concerns your souls and bodies for the present, and to all eternity, to see
that there be this willingness in you, willingness to have water of life; for
all are not willing, nay when it comes to the trial, hardly one of a hundred
will be found really willing to have waters of life, therefore give your selves
no rest night nor day till you find a real willingness to have waters of
life, to have Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, to have Grace, salvation, peace
and pardon to your souls, give your selves no rest (I say) till you find this
willingness in you: -- And a little to excite you unto it, and then to show
you how you may come to this willingness.

First, Consider that you have a willingness to other things, and that
willingness will do you little good without this, nay, your willingness to
other things it may prejudice you, and will prejudice you unless you have this
willingness: men are willing to have honors, riches, greatness in the world,
willing to have all things about them in the best manner; -- what will this do
you good unless you have a willingness to the waters of life: Riches will not
deliver in the day of wrath, there will be a day of wrath, and what will your
Riches, your honors, and all do then? These will do nothing for you, but
these may prejudice you: 1 Timothy: 6.9, 10. They that will be rich; mark, they
that will be rich, that have a willingness that way, that see an excellency in
Riches, choose them and follow them, They that will be rich fall into
Temptations, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition: Mark, these prejudice you: For the
love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows:
when men have strong wills to creatures, they may prejudice themselves and
undo soul and body. But if they have such a will to the water of life that
will advantage them. So in the 5 Chap: 6 v: She that lives in pleasure is dead
while she lives: Some their wills carry them to pleasure, the pleasures of the
body, carnal delights, and they are dead while they live; have they waters of
life, no, their wills have slain them: They are dead while they live. So in
the 2d Ephe: 3. Among whom we all had our Conversations in time past in the
lusts of the flesh, fullfilling the desires of the flesh, or the wills of the
flesh and of the mind: when we fulfill the wills of the flesh and of the
mind, we are dead in sins and trespasses, Children of wrath, enemies to God.
So that to have a will that prizes other things, that chooses, and makes out
after them, this may damnifie you and undo you.

The second Reason why you should labor to get this willingness is, because
it is that which God requires, and that which he does only require, and all he
does requi^e: under the Covenant of works, there was, Do this and live: But
now the last motion that Christ makes when he leaves the world, and gives out
the Scripture is this; If any man have a will, if there be willingness in you
to waters of life, that is the thing I require, and all I require, and the only
thing I require: He does not require great matters at your hands, he does not
say, give me house and Lands, give me your shops and ware, give me your Ships,
give me your Limbs, your blood, your lives, no, says he, If any man will, let
me have but willingness in you, this is all I require. Pro: 23. My Son give me
thy heart; What^s his meaning, Let me but see a heart in thee prizing,
choosing, and pursuing of the waters of life, that is all I require, my Son give
me thy heart; he does not mean that piece of flesh which is in your body, that
you call your heart; But he would have you have so much understanding as to see
an excellency in himself, his Son, his Spirit, his Word and Grace: and then to
choose the same, and to use the means to attain them. This is that that God
requires, and all he requires; shall the Lord only require your hearts,
nothing but your hearts, and will not you study to have a heart willing to have
God, willing to have water of life?

The third and last Reason is, because unless you are willing, you shall have
no water of life: whosoever is willing let him take water of life, it is for
him, God will never force you to it: If you lead a Beast to drink, you do
not force the Beast to drink, and God will never force men; But if willingly
they will prize Christ, if they will choose Christ above all, if they will
close with him, if they will use the means that he has appointed to Enjoy
him, Christ shall be their water of life, the Spirit shall be theirs; Take,
take presently says he then, take the water of life, it is for you and for none
other. By this time me thinks I hear you are ready to say, o that we had this
willingness in us, we hope we have it or if we have it not, o that we had
hearts willing now to prize Christ, to choose Christ, to close with Christ, his
Grace, his Spirit, his ways and ordinances, then we were made, how shall we
come by it?

I shall propound several Considerations unto you, whereby this willingness
may be begotten.

First, Consider your own Condition; Let every man and woman, every son and
servant, seriously Consider with themselves in what Condition are we: were we
not all lost in Adam? are we not all under the Law, and the Curse of the Law?
Are we not all enemies to God through wicked works in our minds? have we not
abundance of guilt in our hearts and Consciences? Are we not afraid of hell, if
we should die that we should be damned? are we not helpless in our selves, and
miserable creatures? Is not God just, holy, and righteous? does not the
greatest part go the broad way, and why may not I be in the broad way? surely
I am a wretched miserable, a lost and undone creature; If any poor soul in
the world have need of water of life, I am the creature; For mine own part I
speak it freely here as in the presence of God, I know none of your greater
sinners then my self, and none of you to have greater need of the waters of
life then my own soul; let us not deceive our selves, we are all miserable
and wretched creatures, and we all have need of the water of life, need of
Christ, need of Grace, need of the Spirit, need of promises, need of all. When
a man sits down and Considers, I am in debt, I owe this man 10 l: another man
a 100 l: another man a 1000, and I am in danger of resting every day, I have
need of some friend to help me: This is our Condition now, if you would but
seriously Consider, it would make you think, is there Grace, mercy with God,
redemption, salvation for sinners, why not for me? This would make you begin to
have some willingness in you to have waters of life.

Secondly, Consider two things of Christ.

First, Consider the very end of Christ's Incarnation, the end of his coming,
the end of his being here in this world: -- why did Christ come, I will show
you two or three places of Scripture; Math: 18.10. For the Son of man is come
to save that which was lost: If any be a lost creature, Jesus Christ is come to
save that which was lost; I hope then he is come to save me a lost creature, I
am a lost sheep, a lost Son, I am a lost Goat: surely if Christ came to save
that which was lost, he came to save Me: -- So in the 19 of Luke 10. you have
it a little more full; For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost; he is come to seek it out, he seeks out the Goat, seeks out
the lost sheep, he seeks out a lost sinner, as he did the man at the poole of
Bethesda, Will thou be made whole? o Lord I would feign be made whole, but I
have none to help me; well, says Christ, be thou whole; Now see what use Paul
makes of it, 1 Timothy: 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I
am chief: o Lord, do thou come to save sinners, here is good tidings indeed,
Lord it is a faithful saying, and it is worthy of all acception, it is worthy you
old ones should receive it, you young ones should receive it, you afflicted
ones should receive it, you that are conceited of your own righteousness,
that you should receive it, Jesus Christ came to save sinners, what sinners
soever they be, great sinners, old sinners, that have lived many years in a
height of wickedness such as Paul was, persecutors, injurious persons, etc. If
you seriously weigh this, it will make you willing to have these waters of life.

Secondly, Consider in Christ how sweetly he does Invite you to take these
waters of life: If an enemy would give you water when you were thirsty, would
you not take it, Give thine enemy to drink if he thirst; But if the dearest
friend you have in all the world should say, o friend, you are athirst, come
here is water, here is wine, here is milk, here is any thing you would drink; you
would take this well which is offered willingly: Now have you a better friend
in heaven and earth then Jesus Christ, who laid down his life, and shed his
blood for you, says Christ, who ever will let him come, take water, even water
of life, poor soul, I have taken thy nature upon me, I have borne the wrath
of God, I have satisfied the Law, I have laid down my life, I come awooing to
thee, and do entreat thee, do not damn thy self, do not throw thy self
into hell, poor soul take hold of me, come I Will lead thee to the water of
life, come I Will give thee pardon, I Will give thee peace, I Will give thee my Spirit,
I Will give thee my blood; why do thou drink puddle water, and poisoned water?
why do thou not follow me, but follow the Devil the Beast, and thine own
lusts? Thus the Lord Jesus Christ does entreat us to take water of life In the
7 of Joh: Christ stood up after a great seast and makes a Proclamation, If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; You have been drinking wine water,
and such things as do not quench the thirst of your souls; But if there be
any one man among you that is athirst for the waters of life, let him come unto
me, my arms are out, the waters are ready to give forth unto him, let him come
and drink.

Thirdly, Consider the promises, and in them Consider three things.

First, Consider the freeness of the promise, the promises are held out
freely; Whosoever will let him come and take of the waters of life freely: I
require no money, no qualifications or dispositions, but freely take them;
only be willing to take them, and here they are. So in the 21 Revel: 6. I will
give unto him that is athirst of the Fountain of the water of life freely; I
will give unto him that is athirst, that is, unto him that is willing, of the
Fountain of the water of life freely. If a man should freely say to all the
poor in a Town, come, here is an Angel apeice for every one that will come,
would not the poor come, would not this beget a willingness in them? It Is
freely: he does not say, if you be thus clothed if your hands and faces be
clean, if you be finely dressed; no but let every one come: Though they have
Leperous hands, scald heads, lame legs, and full of soars, let them come:
Thus it is with the Lord Jesus, his promise is free, whosoever will shall
freely have the water of life.

Secondly, Consider the sufficiency and fulness of the promise, if a promise
be free, and have not enough in it to relieve a man, then he would stick: But
there is a sufficiency and fulness in the promise; Rom: 8.32. He has
delivered up his Son for us all, and how shall he not with him freely give us
all things? The promise has all things in it, all things needful for soul
and body, for heaven and earth, for this life or the life to come, there is
enough in the promise. So in the 81 Psalm: 10. Open thy mouth wide, says God,
and I will fill it; let your desires be never so large, there is enough in the
promise to satisfy your desires. Math: 5. Blessed are those that hunger and
thirst, they shall be satisfied, they shall have abundance of satisfaction.
Joh: 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and have it in more abundance:
would you have life, and be lively Christians, there is abundance of life in
Christ, abundance of life in the Spirit, and in the promise, there is enough to
answer all your souls.

Then thirdly, Consider the promise it is General, it is not limited to the
Jew or Gentile, to one sort of men or women, but it is General, Whosoever
will, whosoever is willing: If it were made to rich men, poor men, learned
men, noble men, wise men, fools, then some Question might be made, but it is
tendered to all: If a State offer a pardon to all the Traitors, or all the
Delinquents therein, would not every one come in and say, I am a Delinquent,
but here is a pardon offered to me; so every soul that is willing may come in
and say, Lord Jesus Thou say, Whosoever will, lo I am willing, let me have
water of life: so that the freeness, the fulness, and the General tenders
of the promise unto all, is a special means to beget willingness in us to
receive the water of Life.

Fourthly, Further, Consider the excellency of these waters of life, the
necessity of them, the use of them, these waters of life have a greater
excellency in them, then any thing you can Imagine, there is nothing in all the
world is fit to be compared to the least drop of the water of life, all your
Gold, Silver, Diamonds, and Pearls, all your parts, gifts, and things of that
nature, are shadows to the water of life: Christ with all his merits are
water of life; The Spirit with all it is Graces are water of life: The Gospel
with all its promises are water of life; and you have great necessity of
these; if you have them not you will perish, you will die and be damned for
ever, if you drink not of these.

And of admirable use, whosoever drinks of this water, they will be full of
spirits and life; full of peace and Comfort; they will be fitted for Communion
with God and man, for the service of heaven and earth: 7 Joh: 38, 39. when
Christ had said unto them, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink:
it presently follows; This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on
him should receive: and says he, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water: he shall have living water to flow out of his belly, and be useful, so
as to water others.

Fifthly, Lastly, Consider how easy that which the Lord requires at your hands
is: the Lord requires no hard matters of you, only he says, who ever will let
him take the waters of life: The Lord might have put hard Conditions, and hard
terms upon men and women, as Saul did upon David, Give me 200 foreskins of
the Philistines, and thou shall have Micha my Daughter to wife: as Caleb did,
If any man will go and take Kiriahsephar and subdue it, he shall have my
Daughter Achsah, Josh: 15.16. He might have put you upon it as he did the young
Man in Math: 19. Go and sell all that thou have, and follow me, and thou shall
have waters of life; but he does not put you upon such things, he says,
Whosoever will, let him come and drink of the waters of life; so that it is
upon an easy account. Therefore Consider these things, and through the
blessing and Grace of God, they may prevail with your hearts to be more
willing then ever to have the water of life.

The next use is to let us see the Infinite goodness of God, and Condecension
to poor creatures, That he who is greatness, and Glory, Majesty and
excellency, should condescend to us who are flesh and blood, corrupt, full of
guilt, full of deformity, having no beauty, no excellency, no good in us, That
God should condescend so far, as that upon being willing we should have
waters of life, as was said before, he put no hard terms upon us, but says,
Whosoever will, let him take waters of life, that is, let him take me for his
Portion let him take my Son, he shall be his Righteousness; Let him take my
Spirit, it shall be his Sanctification; Let him take my word, it shall be his
Light, Rule, and Comfort, and he shall be blessed here and hereafter: o the
infinite goodness and condescension of God toward poor wretches, such as we
are. Should you have seen Solomon in all his Glory and Royalty, to have
stooped thus far to a poor Blackamore, full of soars, and leperous, having
no friend to speak for her, as to say, Come manifest thy willingness to have
me, I will have thee into my house, I will wash thee, make thee my Queen, and
make thee happy, had not this been wonderful condescension in Solomon? Thus
is it with God: We Blackamores that were in our blood, and full of soars,
having no friend to plead for us, but all against us, we have no good nor worth
in us. Now Solomon the Prince of peace and life, he comes and says, will you
be saved poor creatures? will you be washed in my blood? will you go along
with me? will you be happy? come go along with me, I will carry you to my
Father, you shall sit upon a Throne and live for ever, and Enjoy God: o the
goodness and condescension of God to poor sinners!

Lastly, Here is matter of Comfort unto those that do desire and thirst after
waters of life: The Doctrine says, Those that are willing shall have waters of
life; and the text says, Who ever will, let him take the waters of life:
Waters of life are prepared, and reserved for those are willing, for those are
thirsty; therefore he says in the 21 Revel: 6. If any man thirst, he will give
him of the Fountain of the water of life freely. It may be you thirst, and you
are willing, but you still want the waters of life: -- is it so, wait
patiently, you shall have waters of life in due time, and they are worth the
waiting for, we can wait for a Bottle of wine, it may be, two or three hours,
and for a ship of wines, many months, and will not you wait for waters of
Life? Every promise is a tree of life, and the fruit is growing, and when it is
ripe for you, you shall have it; every one is a bottle of wine, and when it
pleases God, he will unstop it, and power out the wine into your hearts: you
shall have Christ, and the Spirit to seal you up to the day of Redemption; you
shall have the blood of Christ to wash you; you shall have God himself and all
that is good, therefore wait.

Do but Consider a little of the Prodigal in the 15 of Luke: And when he came
to himself he said, how many hired servants of my Father have bread enough,
but I perish for hunger, I will arise and go to my Father, and say, etc. And
he arose and came to his Father: Now mark, here is the Prodigal, and what
says he? there is bread enough in my Fathers house, there is water of life in my
Fathers house, here is none but stones, here^s none but swill for swine; in my
Fathers house there is bread, he prizes it, I will go eat of that bread, he
chooses it, and then he pursues it, I Will go, says he, and so goes and makes
all the speed he can to get to his Fathers house, and have it. And was he long
without it? -- See what follows, -- And he arose and came to his Father; but
while he was a great way off, his Father saw him, had Compassion, ran and fell
on his neck and kisses him: the Son says, Father I have sinned, etc. But the
Father says to his servants, Bring forth the best Robe, and put it on him, and
put a Ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and bring hither the fatted
Calfe and kill it, and let eat and be merry, (and the like:) -- When you are
willing thus to have water of life, the Father sees you a far off, and says,
there is one a coming to me, there is one coming for bread, for water of life,
and what then? God will run and meet such an one, he shall not be long without
his water, he will kiss, and embrace him, and give him water of life, he will
give him wine, marrow, fattnesse, and all that is good. Therefore be not you
discouraged, but moove toward your Fathers house, toward the water of life,
and it shall be brought forth unto you, and given you in abundance.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Chief Heads of the preceding SERMONS.
A
ABilities natural, see Man. Assurance is not of the nature of faith. 146
B
Beleiving what. 146 147 Branch, who meant by it. 29 Bride, see Church.
Brother, who is a brother. 57.
C
Christ wherein he resembles a root, and wherein not, 2, 3, 4, 5. He is the
root of nature, grace, and glory, 6, 7.11. He was true man and why, 25, 26. He
is honorably descended, 29. How to come to esteem him, 32. His coming what it
calls for, 35. Christ's coming is desired, 63. Christ is desirable, 75 His
coming is to be made known, 85. Why so often mentioned in Scripture, 87. Its
to be hearkened unto, 91. Of what concernment his coming is, 92, 93, 94. Great
good to be had by Christ. 142 Christians have much to do in this world, 141
Coming, see Christ what it is, 145. How we may know whither we be come to
Christ, 173, 174, 175. And what is to be had by coming to Christ, 180 Motives
to come to him, 179, etc. Church, wherein likend to a Bride, 62. Triumphant and
militant desire Christ's coming, 65, 66
D
David the most lively type of Christ, 20, 21. The founder of the kingdom of
Israel, 20. His seed numerous, 38 Desire, what kind of desire the Church has
for Christ his coming, 67. Why the Church desires Christ's coming, 70. what
comfort desire of it yields, 76, 77. How to know whither we desire Christ's
coming. 78, 79 Doctrine of Christ the nature of it. 42, 43 Drawing of the
Father what. 147
E
Eternity. 139 Expectation of Christ to come and sit upon the throne of David,
34, 35
F
Faith how strengthened, 32 Free, what taking water of life freely imports. 133
G
God is pure. 132. just. ibid: powerful, ibid: justifiable in the destruction
of sinners. 225 Gospel, the nature of it. 42, 43 Grace inlargeth the desires.
125
H
Hearkening to Christ's coming, 91. Of what concernment it is. 92 Heart, the
opening of it. 212
I
Incarnation of Christ, what the end of it was. 231, 232 Infirmities, what use
to make of them. 140, 141 Invitations not in vain, though man have no power in
him. 148 Christ does sweetly invite sinners. 233
L
Law, its comprehensive terrible. 134, 135 Life, water of life upon what
account its so called, 190. Man's life short. 138
M
Mariners, by what starr they should sail. 53 Man, his natural abilities what
they may do. 215 Mystery in Christ a Mediator. 36
O
Offense take at Christ's meanness, how helped. 31 Offspring, Christ is the
offspring of David rather than of others. 20 Opening of the heart, what. 212
P
Plant, the plant of renown. 30 Power, none in man to come to Christ. 147 Why
waters of life are freely offered. 217 Prepare for the day of Christ, 35.59. for
his coming, 89. what it is. 89, 90 Promises, the nature of them. 234, 235
R
Refusers of water of life 199. Evil of refusing, 201, 202, 203, 204
Righteous, their memory honored. 39 Root, wherein Christ is likend to a
root, 2, 3, 4. How to be rooted in Christ. 17
S
Saints, Christ in near relation to them. 37 They are Stars, but not as
Christ is. 49 Scriptures fullfilled in Christ. 37 Sin, the nature and evil of
it. 136, 137 Sinners, God is justifiable in their destruction, 255. Of Christ's
willingness to save sinners, see willingness. Stars, how Christ resembles
them, 41. etc. Whither this Star be risen in our hearts. 55
T
Taking waters of life freely, what it imports. 193, 194 Thirst, natural and
spiritual. 101. Why thirsting is required, 102, 103, 104, 105. The properties
of spiritual thirst, 106, 107, 108. There be few spiritual thirsters. 108,
109, 110, 111. Whence it is there are so few thirster Safter Christ, 111, 112,
113, 114. There is a false thirst as well as a true, 115, 116. How to know the
one from the other, 116, 117, 118. The effects and fruits of spiritual thirst,
120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126. Why we should thirst after Christ, 129, 130,
131. Directions how to attain this thirst, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138,
139, How to stir up and increase this thirst, 140, 141, 142, 143.
W
Waters of life, what, 188. and why likend to water, 188. Why called water of
life, 190 Of the excellency and use of it, 235, 236. To be had upon easy
terms. ibid: Wicked, whither a wicked man may desire the coming of Christ. 84
Willingness, several Arguments to show Christ's willingness to save sinners,
149, 150 to 169. Why he is so willing, 169, 170. No willingness in man, 187.
How willingness comes, ibid: The willing shall have waters of life, 211.
Wherein this willingness lies, 213, 214. Why required, 219. Motives to it,
228, 229. Means to get it. 230, 231 Wishing and woulding not sufficient, 225
FINIS.

