TEARS AND BLOOD, OR, A Discourse of the Persecution of Ministers, with
Motives to Martyrdom and Cautions about it, Set forth in Two Sermons, both
lately Preached at Saint Mary's in Oxford. By FRANCIS GREGORY, Master of Arts,
and Schoolmaster of Woodstock, in the County of OXFORD,

OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. Lichfield, Printers to the University. 1660.

To the Right Worshipful my Honored Friend the Lady ATKYNS, the truly
Virtuous Consort of the Reverend and Honorable, Sir EDWARD ATKYNS Baron of the
Exchequer.
Madam,
THE Dedication of these Sermons to your Lady-ship, will be no wonder to him
who is acquainted with your worth and my Obligations. To publish my Engagements
to your Family, were but ingenious; to publish your Lady-ships worth, so
generally known already, were superfluous; I did ever account my self rather a
Clown th^n a Courtier; more guilty of rudeness then Complement; yet, were it
not to bring your Modesty to a blush, and my own respect to an undeserved
suspicion of flattery, I might tell the world, and that in truth, that God has
made you, knowing, above most women; Religious, above most Ladies. That you
spend those precious hours before the Pulpit, which other Ladies spend at the
Theater; that you employ that Time in reading sacred Writings, which others
employ in reading vain Romances, is your Lady-ships honor now, and will be
your Glory for ever.

Madam, The Subject of this discourse is Persecution; nay, the Persecution of
those whom you ever have an heart to love, an hand to help, an house to
harbor. Those Ministers of God, whom, I know, you would relieve, if persecuted
to a Prison, be pleased to countenance, though persecuted but in a Paper; be
pleased to own that in a discourse, which you would abhor in its Execution;
that, which your eye would weep to behold, it may read, I hope, without a Tear.
That Persecution, which I mention, I do also, in some measure, feel; what I
have made good by reason, I am forced also to prove by my own Example. And had
I felt it more, possibly I had expressed it better, however, I shall account
any Greivance to be my gain, that shall render me an object fit for the
Continuance of your Lady-ships Patronage, which is the humble request of

Your Lady-ships most obliged Friend and Servant FRANCIS GREGORY.

Christian Reader,
IT is not the Practice of wise Architects to build a large Porch for a little
House; nor was it my purpose to presix so long a Preface before a short
discourse. It Is design is, to give some account, not so much of what I
Preached, as why I Print. When I first penned these Sermons at and for
Woodstock, I little thought to preach them at Oxford; and when, to gratisy a
friend, I had preached them to the University, I thought as little to publish
them to the world. I was no otherwise resolved then to bury this poor Embryon,
where it was first conceived and born. And yet notwithstanding, some Reverend
and Learned Ministers, who had heard these Sermons from the Pulp it, did also
desire, but then in vain, to see them from the Press. It was not then my
Ambition, but is now my Necessity to be a second time in Print; what I could
not then induce my self to do at the request of some, I am now constrained to
do through the injury of others. So that my design in this Edition is, not an
aucupation of undeserved applause, but a just vindication of my self and truth.
Nor should I have craved the assistance of the Press, had it been possible for
me, by any other means, to have made my innocence as public, as some have
made my imaginary guilt. It is not Curiosity, but Prudence, to spread the
Plaster as large as the wound.

It is the close of these Sermons, which I hear, some Persons censure, as if I
had reserved the Gall for the bottom, where indeed the Sugar should be. The
beginning and middle of this Discourse, as far as I yet know, passed not only
without dislike, but with approbation; but, it seems though there was the
Pearl of Truth found in its Head and body, yet some men felt a sting, and
therefore pretend to taste some poison in its Tail.

That I should plead for Episcopacy, Liturgies, and Ceremonies, is the matter
of my Accusation* well, and what if I should wholly confess this Charge, and
yet withal, deny the crime? possibly, in this matter, I might cry guilty, and
yet not hold up my hand at the Bar, as a Malefactor.

But, as to these things, my present business is not to declare what I think,
but what I said; what I think, another Tract may show, what I said, with a
little addition, rather then the least substraction, this discourse shall
testify. And truly, though some men censure me for saying so much, I fear
others will blame me for saying no more. But however, I doubt not, but what was
said in the close of this discourse is truth; so that as its van and main body
is unassaulted, so, I do not fear, but I shall easily make good and bring off
the Rear. But if not, what I cannot prove, I shall recant; where I shall not be
so able as to give satisfaction, I shall be so ingenuous, as to make a
Retractation.

This I shall add, which indeed to sober minds is satisfaction enough; the
Church Government, Forms of Prayer and Ceremonies, mentioned in these Sermons,
are pleaded for only upon this supposition, that they are agreeable to the word
of God. If there be any such, who dares blame him, that shall press them? if
there be none such, then, I answer, none were pleaded for; and if so, they,
that censure this discourse, mistake its Crime: to press the Use of
nonentities, were not, as is pretended, superstition, but vanity, and upon that
score, without any further trial at present, we shall dismiss the
Plaintiffes, not as if the Defendant did fear the Issue, but because they have
Nonsuited themselves by a mistake in their Enditement.

In the mean time, I wish, that men, even good men, do not mistake Passion for
Reason, Anger for Zeal, one Ingredient for the Compound I must be pardoned, if
I cannot look upon some men's dissatisfactions to be convincing Arguments; as
if to be disliked, were to be disproved; as if to be prejudiced, were to be
confuted: As for Superstition, I do as far hate the thing, as understand its
name, but, that Episcopacy is Antichristian; that Liturgies are
Anti-scripturall; that all Ceremonies are superstitious, I cannot grant, till I
see it proved by better Arguments, then discontent and faction.

ACTS 21. 13. Then Paul answered, what mean ye to weep, and to break my heart?
for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name
of the Lord Jesus.
IN the Verses before my Text, we find S. Paul in his journey toward
Jerusalem; by the way, he makes a stop at Cesarea; whilst he is there, God by a
Prophet foretells him, what persecutions he was like to meet with at Jerusalem;
upon this, the Saints of God endeavor to dissuade him from his intended
journey; they beseech him with words; and, which is more Rhetorical, they
beseech him with tears; well, and what is the issue? why, what was Paul's
answer, My Text acquaints us; Then Paul answered, what mean ye to weep, and to
break my heart? etc.

The Text contains Two General Parts.

1. A Patheticall Question, what mean ye to weep, and to break my heart? It Is
true, I hear of Bonds and Imprisonment, but what then? these are not the things
that move me; it is not my own future suffering, but your present sorrow, that
grieves me; it is not the danger I hear of at Jerusalem, but the tears I see on
you, that breaks my heart in pieces; be my own persecutions what they will be,
I am as a man not much concerned, I am not at all troubled about them; tell me
then, what mean ye to weep, and to break my heart?

2. A Noble Testimony of our Apostle's Christian Courage, Magnanimity, and
Resolution; I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for
the name of the Lord Jesus: Let the Jews deal with me as they please, let them
throw me in prison; nay, let them put me even to death, if they will; yet
here is my resolu^ion, come what will come, in the cause of Christ, I am ready
to suffer all. Now in this Second Cenerall, we have Five Particulars very
considerable;

1. The Person, that is like to suffer, I; well, and what I is this? why, we
may consider him upon a double account;

1. Consider what this Person had been, and what is that? why, I that ere while
was a Persecutour, am now resolved to become a Martyr; I that but lately threw
others in the Goal, am now ready, upon the same account, to lie there my self;
I, that even now was consenting to the death of Stephen, am now consenting to
my own; I am the man ready not to be bound only etc.

2. Consider what this person was at present; and what is that? why, I that am
now become a Saint; I that am n^w ordained a Preacher; nay more; I that am
become an Apostle, what ever becomes of others, though others may be unwilling,
though others may be afraid to suffer for Christ, and his Gospel, yet as for me
now a Saint, now an Apostle, I am ready:

Two Things we may note from hence:

1. God can, and sometimes does, change even Persecutours into Preachers,
eminent Sinners into eminent Saints. 'Twas our Apostle's case; (...), says
Chrysostom, in him, God turned a Wolf into a Shepherd; he, that ere while was
an instrument to devour Christ's flock, does now become an Instrument to feed it.

2. It Is the concernment of Eminent Sinners, when once made Saints, to do and
to suffer eminent things for God: The Church of Christ had no enemy like Saul
whilst a Persecutour; yea but the Church of Christ had no friend like Paul,
when once an Apostle; that Church, which Saul once made such havoc of, even
for that Church is Paul now ready to spend his blood; I am ready, But

2. This Persons Preparation and Willingness to suffer for Christ: I am ready;
he does not say I am content to suffer, I Will make what shift I can to suffer; he
does not say, it is an hard service, a severe duty to suffer; O no, (...), I am
Ready, I am Prepared, the Jews are not more forward to lay the Cross upon me,
then I am to bear it.

3. The Measure, and Matter of what Paul was to suffer; and what was that? why,
I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye; you will say, that is Courage
indeed; it is an act of courage for a man to loose his liberty for Christ, yea
but to loose his life for Christ, that is more; to spend an Estate for God, is
a service considerable; yea but for a man to spend his blood for God, that is
higher still; now, here is the case, our Apostle was willing to wear a Chain for
Christ, yea and he was willing to bear a Cross; he was willing to become a
Prisoner to a Goal, yea he was willing to become a Prisoner to a Grave; Fetters
of Iron, or Fetters of Death, he is ready to put on both; so runs the Text, I
am ready (...), not to be bound only, but also to dye.

4. The Place, where our Apostle was like to suffer, and where is that? why I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem. A strange place for
such a transaction! is there a Tragedy to be acted, and is Jerusalem the Stage?
are the Ministers of God to be imprisoned, and must the Dungeon be at
Jerusalem? are the servants of God to be Butchered, and is the Slaughterhouse
at Jerusalem? alas! 'twas enough that Christ died at Jerusalem, had it been but
once, but must he dye there again and again? 'twas enough that Christ died at
Jerusalem in his own Person, but must he dye there in his Ministers too? yea,
Jerusalem that city of God; Jerusalem that place of Gods more special
presence; Jerusalem that place of Gods more solemn worship, even this Jerusalem
becomes the Golgotha of Saints; it becomes the place, where Paul must suffer: I
read that the Israel of God were sometimes bondmen, but 'twas in Egypt; I read
that the Israel of God were sometimes Captives, but 'twas in Babylon; yea but
when the Prophets of God were to be Martyred, that was usually done at
Jerusalem.

5. The Cause for which our Apostle was like to suffer, and what is that? why,
I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of
the Lord Jesus, surely no cause like that; I have read of some, that have been
willing to dye to get themselves a name; yea but Paul is willing to dye to get
Christ a name; it is noble for a Subject to dye for his Prince, but what is it
for a Saint to dye for his God? the consideration of this cause is of great
concernment; it is that, which adds a further guilt to the sin of the Jews, it is
that, which adds great Glory to the Sufferings of Paul; were it not for this
name of the Lord Jesus, the Sin of the Jews had not been so dreadful a
persecution, nor had the sufferings of Paul been so glorious a Martyrdom; O
no, the weight of their sin, and the worth of his sufferings do both lie in
this, I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the
name of the Lord Jesus.

1 Persecution, Imprisonment, Death it self, is that, which the 4 Doctrines.
Ministers of God must sometimes look for. No sooner is Paul bound for
Jerusalem, but here is the news, bonds and afflictions abide him there. I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to dye: the Text seems to imply, that as
he was ready for bonds, so bonds were ready for him; as he was prepared for
death, so death was preparing for him.

2 The Persecution, the Imprisonment, the Death, and consequently the loss of
the Ministers of God is a just ground of Tears; their sufferings are a
sufficient ground for our Sorrows, what mean ye to weep? Surely, their tears
had some meaning in them; indeed, Paul would not have them weep for him, but
yet weep they must; as to him, their Tears might have been spared; but as to
themselves, their Tears did well become them; the loss of an Apostle, the loss
of such an Apostle, the loss of a Paul, such a loss as this was, they could not
brook without a tear.

3 It Is the concernment of the Ministers of God to suffer Persecution,
Imprisonment, nay Death it self, upon Christ's account, with willingness,
courage, and resolution, I am ready, if the concernments of Christ be engaged,
if the name of Christ once lie at stake, our Apostle resolves to venture all;
bonds or death; liberty or life; a prison, or a grave, he sticks at neither.

4 Gods faithful Ministers are sometimes persecuted, imprisoned, yea, put to
death even by the Citizens of Gods own Jerusalem: It Is clear in the Text, I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, Gods own pretended
Saints and People, even the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, do sometimes persecute
the faithful Ministers of that God, whom in the mean time they pretend to
worship.

Persecution, Imprisonment, Death it self is that which the Ministers of God
must sometimes look for: Do you ask me how this appears? First Doctrine.
I answer,

1 It Is that which Christ himself has foretold us. Behold, I have foretold you,
yea, but of what? why, in the World ye shall have Tribulation, ye, what ye does
he mean? why, not only ye my Saints, Mar. 13* ^3. Joh. 16. ^.
not only ye my Servants, but ye my Apostles, ye my Ministers; who ever he be
that scapes persecution, be sure, it is not you; now, that which Christ
foretells his Ministers, why should we not look for? if Christ foretells us of
Glory, of a Reward, of an Inheritance; these things we are apt enough to look
for; So here, Christ solemnly foretells us of Persecutions and Sufferings, if
so, why should we not expect them?

2 It Is that, which Christ has cautioned, encouraged, and armed his Ministers
against, beware of men, what need this caution, if there Mat. 10. 17. Mat. 10.
28.
were no danger? fear not them that kill the body, what need this encouragement
from Christ, ^ere there no discouragements from men? Cordials are needless,
where there is no fear of fainting, put on the whole armor of God: Surely,
putting on Arms supposes an Enemy; laying in Provision supposes a Siege:
Take heed unto your Ephesians. 6. 11. Act. 20. 28.
selves, and to the flock; this Caution would be impertinent, were there no
beasts of prey to devour; Encouragements are vain, where there is no fear;
Arms are no defense but a burden, where no wound is looked for; if Christ, who
does nothing in vain, has cautioned, encouraged, and armed his Ministers
against Persecution, we may strongly infer, it is that they have cause to look
for.

3 It Is that, which the most renowned Ministers of God have often met with in
former Ages, I read of a Jeremy, a Prophet sanctified from the womb, and yet in
a prison; I read of a Dariel, a Prophet of more then ordinary visions, and yet
in the Lions den; I read of John Baptist, one of the greatest of the sons of
men, and yet beheaded; I read of James, an Apostle of Christ, and yet slain
with the Sword; now, if the Prophets of God, if the Apostles of Christ met with
storms and tempests, what reason have we still to expect a calm? if the strong
ship miscarry, what is like to become of the weaker Vessel? if Martyrs lay down
in flames, can we expect to ly ur on beds of ease for ever? if they lost their
lives for God, it is no wonder if we loose our good names for God; if they lost
their blood for Christ, it is no wonder, if we loose our estates for Christ; that
persecution, which in experience was theirs, in expectation should be ours.

4. It Is that which the Ministers of God are wont to prepare for. This lies in
the Text, I am ready, (...), I am prepared; that expression implies an
habitual preparation in Paul to suffer; tell me now, why should Paul prepare
himself to suffer, were not suffering a thing he looked for? if the Soldier
prepare his Arms, it is a sign that he looks for a skirmish; if the Mariner
prepare the strongest tackling, it is a sign that he looks for a storm; so
here, if the Minister of God prepare for suffering, it is an argument, that
Persecution is the thing they look for. Put you will say, why so? Why should the
Ministers of God be still looking for Persecution? I answer.

1. There is a Devil in Hell, that hates them: Simon, Simon Satan has desired
you: indeed, the Devil graspes at all, yea but the Magistrate, and the
Minister, the Statesman and the Churchman, the man of power, and the man of
parts, these are the great prey the Devil Lu. 8. 12.
aims at: I will smite the Shepherd, it is that, which God threatens; it is
that, which the Devil designs; If the Devil can but secure the Shepherds, he
has no way, like this, to gain, not some single Sheep, but whole flocks at
once; if he can but make sure of the watchman, he well knows, that the
Garrison is his. It Is said, the Devil Apoc. 2. 10
takes away the word out of their hearts; surely that Devil, that takes away
the word, would feign take away the preacher too; that Devil, who steals away
the seed out of men's hearts, would fain cut off the hand that sows it there;
if so, it is but reasonable that Mat. 12. 17. 1 Reg. 22. 8.
we should expect that persecution, which by Gods permission, the policy of
Hell stands engaged to contrive; which the power of Hell stands engaged to
effect. The Devil shall cast some of you into prison: God here permits the
Devil to prevail, and what then? why, Polycarpus, that Angel of the Church of
Smyrna, must not escape. Joh. 15. 18.


2. There are still Men on Earth, that hate them. Beware of Men: what Men? why
men of Ahabs mind: There is yet one Micaiah, a Mat. 10. 16.
Prophet of the Lord, but I hate him: there is many a man, if not of Ahabs
language, yet of Ahabs judgment still; Ahab himself is gone, but Ahab does not
want an heir; Nero is gone, Domitian is gone, Julian is dead, but alas! there is
enough to succeed them still. If the world hate you: why, is there but an If
for this? alas! it is an If not of doubt, but of Concession; that the man of the
world should hate the man of God, is as easily granted as usually done; I send
you as Sheep among Wolves: the Wolf, has not only a nature to hate the Sheep,
but nimble feet to pursue; sharp teeth to devour: tell me then, can Sheep
converse with Wolves, and yet be safe? can Lambs dwell among Lions, and be
secure? here is our case, we dwell among Wolves and Lions, and shall not we
expect so much as a bite? We walk among briers and thorns, and shall not we
look for a scratch? we converse among Shimeies, and can we look for less then
a reproach? if we do but consider where we are, the persecution of the
Torgue, the persecution of the Hand, is that we have cause to look for.

3. Persecution is that to which the very work of the Ministry does expose us,
such is the nature of our Commission, that it is hard for us to keep in with
God, and yet not to break with men. Son of man I have made thee a Watchman: and
what then? why, Caeduntur Vigiles, the Watchman is the first that is shine; God
has made us Ezekiel. 3. 17.
the builders of his Sanctuary, yea but building is a dangerous work, it is
usual to break a leg, or an arm: Woe is me my Mother; but why this woe? thou
have born me a man of Contention: the Prophets Commission Jer. 15. 10.
was to contend against men, Men thought it their concernment to contend
against him; But you will say, what is there in our Commission that thus betrays
us to persecution? I answer, Four things.

1 Our commission is to contend against s^n, cry aloud, spare not, Esa. 58. ^.
spare not the least sin, spare not the greatest person, lift up thy voice like
a Trumpet, the sound of the Trumpet reaches not only the common Soldier, not
only the inferior officer, but even the General of the Army; so here, the
Ministers voice must reach not only the beggar upon the dunghill, but even the
Prince upon the Throne, speak unto the Kings of Judah all that I command thee,
yea, Jer. 1. 17.
but will the Kings of Judah bear with Jeremy? O no, they shall fight against
thee: he that soundly reproves a Prince, provokes him too; to reprehend his sin
is to incur his displeasure; the Apostle tells us, that men have Itching Ears,
and what then? why Itching Ears will endure to be scratcht a little, to be
gently clawed; yea, but we 2 Timothy 4. 3.
must not rub too hard, lest we gall them; men, that can be content to itch,
will not endure to smart. I read, that Herod was pleased with some of John
Baptists Sermons, yea, but when John tells him of this lust, that proves a
dangerous point, his head must off for it; no readier way to persecution, then
to contend against the sins of Princes; but must we forbear to tell the Lion of
his cruelty for fear of his paw? shall we not tell the Fox of his subtilty, for
fear of his tail? shall we not dare to tell the Soldier of his miscarriages
for fear of his sword? shall we be afraid to tell great men their sins, even to
their face, for fear of a frown? O no, we must resolve to peck these milstones,
though when we have done, our own hands be ground to powder.

2 Our Commission is to contend against the Errors of the Times, contend
earnestly for the Faith indeed, it is every man's duty, Jud. 3.
yea, but it is chiefly ours; it is our office, as to proclaim the commands, so to
countenance the truths of God; surely, God is as jealous of his Truths as of
his Commands; to pervert a Truth seems as great a sin as to break a Law; God
loses as much of his Glory by damnable opinions, as by desperate practices;
and yet alas! how loath are men to let their Errors go? It Is as easy a Task to
persuade a man to forsake a sin, as to renounce an Error. Errors are the
brats of our brains, we deal with them as with our Children; though they be
hard favored, yet we like them, yet we keep them, because they are our own.
Well, but must these brats be laid at the Pulpit-door? or is it safe to remove
them? the Martyrs of England once found it otherwise; the great Controversy
then was this? is there a Corporeal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, or
no: affirm it and sin, deny it and die; 'twas more safe in that Age to break the
commands, then to own the Truths of God; it was more safe to be vicious in life
then orthodox in Judgment; Malefactors suffered less for guilt of sin, then
Martyrs did for the defense of Truth; well, and what is the Genius of this Age?
are there not some Truths amongst us, that are ready to strike out that man's
teeth, that dares follow them too close at heels? It once passed for a Truth,
that no man ought to act as a Minister without Imposition of hands in his
ordination; surely, it is a truth still, but it is dangerous to plead it; it once
passed for a Truth, that sacred Oaths and Covenants, solemnly made with God
and men, ought to be inviolable; surely, it is a truth still, but it is not safe to
press it; well, but must we forbear? shall we not plead for the Truths of God,
because they cross the interests of men? shall we not oppose the Errors of
our Age, because they are maintained by a scurvie Argument, that is drawn from
a scabberd? indeed, it is a dangerous Topic, but yet venture we must; it is our
concernment in Gods quarrel to take up the Cudgels; and yet when we do it, it is
like enough we our selves may get the knock; if it be our work to pluck up
briers, it is no wonder, if we scratch our hand; if it be our employment to weed
out nettels, it is no wonder, if we sting our fingers.

3 Our commission is to denounce the judgments of God, Son of man, prophesy and
say, a Sword, a Sword; God puts such severe Ezekiel. 21. 8.
messages into the mouths of his Servants, as make their breath too strong for
sinners to bear; men can delight to commit the sin, but they cannot endure so
much as to hear of the punishment; indeed, it is sad that it should be so; to be
angry at the threatenings of God is their folly, but withal, it is our danger
too; Moses denounces the judgments of God against Pharaoh; well, Pharaoh
groves angry, see my face no more lest thou dye; Micaiah threatens Ahab with
Exodus 10. 28.
an overthrow; well, Ahab grows angry, put this fellow in prison, no 1 Reg.
22. 27.
Prophets for Ahabs turn but such as cry; go up go up, and prosper, such
Prophets did Israel like, speak unto us smooth things, the judgments of God are
too rough for sinners, they grate so hard, that men will not Esa. 30, 10.
endure them. But, ^^s, this is not our commission; as to sinners, Gods
Ministers must be sons of Thunder, and what does that do? why, Thunder does not
please, but affright; it does not tickle the ear, but strike it, feriunt summos
fulmina montes, if we are sons of Thunder, we must make men, that are as
Mountains, quake and tremble, though when we have done, it is like enough, those
Mountains may crush us to pieces. Sure I am, here is our danger, when we
denounce against sin the displeasure of God, we often contract upon our selves
the displeasure of men.

4 It Is our concernment, in Times of difference, to own that cause that is most
just and righteous, indeed it is a policy in men to take that side which is most
strong; but surely, it is the duty of Ministers to espouse that cause which is
most holy; Gods Ministers must not be as cunning Gamesters, who surely bet on
that side, that seems most likely to win; we must not do as Gamesters; we must
not prefer the Club before the Diamond, barely because, at present, it is turned
up Trump. In that contest betwixt David and Absalom, I find, that Ahitophell
that Politician, and Statesman of Israel, took part with rebellious Absalom;
yea, but as for the Priests of the Lord, as for the Levites, I read, that they
all were with David; yea, 2 Samuel 15 24. 1 Samuel 22. 17.
but is it always safe for the Priests of the Lord to side with David? surely
no, Turn and slay the Priests of the Lord: That Saul, who had a sinful mercy
for an accursed Agag, has no mercy for the consecrated Priests of the Lord;
that Saul, who could save Sheep and Ox* for a Sacrifice, does now refuse to
spare the Sacrificers themselves; It Is his command, slay the Priests of the
Lord; well, and why so? what have the Lords Priests done, that they must be
slain? why their Crime was this, Their hand also is with David, David was the
right heir of the Crown, a man designed by God himself to succeed in the
Kingdom, and yet the Priests of the Lord must dye, barely upon this account,
Their hand also is with David, alas! 'twas a very little, they had done for
David, they had given him bread to relieve him, a Sword to defend him; that
Sword which David himself had won; the Priest gives David the Sword of
Goliath, and for that must dye himself by the Sword of Doeg. Sure it is, for the
Priests of the Lord to side with David, to own that cause that is righteous and
holy, it is ever just, but seldom safe; if so, the very discharge of our duty is
that which renders us liable to persecution, our good names, our estates, our
liberties, nay, sometimes our lives are in danger, except we will basely betray
Gods cause, our own Trust, and our Peoples souls.

1 By way of exhortation, and that both to Ministers, and People. First to you
who are the People of God; is Persecution, Imprisonment, Uses.
nay, death it self, that which the Ministers of God have cause sometimes to
look for? why then,

1 Be sure you pray for the faithful Ministers of God, if you ask me why? I
answer. First, Gods Ministers pray for you. Secondly, Gods Ministers upon many
accounts deserve your prayers; but the Argument in my Text is Thirdly this,
Gods Ministers need your prayers; alas! the Devil hates them, the men of the
world hate them; they are in danger sometimes of bonds, sometimes of death;
well, and what then? why Brethren, pray for us, 2 These. 3. 1. 2
but why would Paul be prayed for? that we may be delivered from unreasonable
men, Persons still in danger, are persons still in need to be prayed for; the
former is our condition, the latter should be your practice.

2 Be sure you bear with Gods faithful Ministers in the discharge of their
duties toward you. See how, in three particulars.

1 Be sure, you bear with us when we justly reprove you for sin, to chide you
for sin is not our delight, but our duty; to rebuke our hearers is not our
pleasure, but our danger; reproofs for sin are your safety, but our hazard;
when we contend against your sins, we contend against your ruin, yea, but we
venture our own; when we would fain chide you into Heaven, possibly we may
chide our selves into a Goal, and will you not bear with us in this? is it
reasonable, that we should lose your love, barely because we would save your
lives? shall we lose your hearts, because we would save your souls? though it
be hard to bear with an injury, yet me thinks it should be easy to bear with
kindness, and what kindness like to this? Let the righteous reprove me; and
what if he do? why, it Ps. 1^1. 5.
shall be a kindness, when we reprove you for sin, we v^nture your displeasure
to prevent your undoing; we hazard our own advantages to endeavor yours; and
is this a thing, that cannot be borne with? if this be a wrong, why yet forgive
us this wrong? if this be an injury, it is such an one, as does not wound, but
engage; if you are to bear with wrongs when real, methinks you may make some
shift to bear with real kindness; and such is this, we endanger our selves to
secure you.

2 Be sure you bear with us when we reprove you for errors in Judgment?
Surely, errors in Judgment are as damnable as errors in practice; Leprosy in
the head, is more dangerous then in the hand; it is the Devils great design to
corrupt the brains of men, when he cannot debauch their lives; the Scriptures
mention not only the works of the Devil, but the Doctrines of Devils too; and
doubtless, there is many a man embraces the Devils doctrines, that seems to
renounce his works: It Is observeable, that the first Fathers of Heresies were
men of acurate lives; poison looks best in Plate, tastes best being wrapped up
in Sugar; the Devil well knows, that damnable doctrines will not easily be
embraced without a disguise of external holiness to commend them; now, here is
our Employment, we venture our selves to unmask the Devil, and undeceive you;
it is not against your persons, but against your errors, that we contend, (...),
surely, it is such a contention, as you may bear with; fain would we pull off the
scales from your eyes, and will you, upon that account, throw dust in ours?
Will a man bite off that finger, that plucks the bone from his throat, which
otherwise would stick and choke him? Am I become your Enemy because Gal. 4. 16.
I tell you the Truth? so say I, shall we be counted your enemies, because we
would teach you Truth? It Is Gods command, buy the Prove. 23. 23.
Truth, and sell it not; it is your concernment to purchase the Truths of God at
any rate, and will you be angry with us, who venture our selves to redeem them
for you? a man that diveth for Jewels, ventures drowning; so here, the Truths
of God, those precious Jewels, may cost us dear, they may cost us our estates,
our liberties, our lives but however let them not cost us your unkindnesse,
your displeasure; O no, though we reprove your Errors, yet bear with us still,
the benefit is yours, there is little but danger ours.

3 Be sure you bear with us, even when we denounce the judgments of God against
you; indeed, the judgments of God must needs be sore ones; yea, but is it not
better to hear them, then to feel them? if you cannot endure the Thunder-crack,
o how will you endure the Thunderbolt? if the report of a Canon be terrible,
how terrible is the bullet? so here, if you cannot bear so much as the
denuntiation of a judgment from the mouth of a man; o how will you bear the
execution of judgments from the hand of a God? It Is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. Alas! Heb. 10. 31.
Gods little finger is heavier then our loins; its easier to bear a thousand
threatenings from a poor Minister, then to bear one stroke from an angry God;
well, but when we do denounce the judgments of God, pray, where is our gain? I Will
tell you, we gain your displeasure, we gain your reproaches; when we declare
Gods anger, it is like enough we our selves gain yours; 'twere as easy for us to
preach nothing but mercy, nothing but peace, nothing but liberty, were it not
to destroy our hearers; as to men, twere safer for us to let their sins alone,
their Errors alone, their judgments alone, were it not to undo you; twere
better for us by preaching pleasing things to gain your love, to gain your
affection, were not this to confound you for ever; if we denounce the judgments
of God against you, it is because we are loath to see you damned; we do even
venture our selves among the sparks, because we are loath to see you burn for
ever; you know, had not Jonas ventured to denounce the judgments of God in the
streets of Niniveh, had not Niniveh thus been threatened, it had been ruined; So
here, did not the Ministers venture your frowns, your scorns; did they not
hazard their own estates, liberties, and lives in reproving of sin, in
denouncing of judgments, poor souls would miscarry for ever. Tell me then, if
we endanger our selves upon your account, will you not bear it? we expect to
suffer, and why so? why, next under God, we do it for you; what ever we do,
what ever we suffer, next under Christ, it is done and suffered for you; were it
not for your Interest, our own might be safe erough; if so, bear, o bear with
the faithful Ministers of God; it is but reasonable, upon this account, they are
men that expose themselves to persecution for you. But

2 To you my brethren, who are the Ministers of God, is Persecution,
Imprisonment, death it self, the thing you have cause to look for? why then,

1 Be sure you bless our God, for his wonderful Power, and Providence in your
preservation, we are persecuted, but not forsaken? cast down, but not
destroyed, 'twas thus with Paul, and is it not so with 2 Cor. 4. 9.
us. We are still in the midst of danger, and yet we are safe, still in the
midst of death, and yet alive; tell me, was it not a wonder to see a bush in
the midst of flames and yet not burnt? was it not a wonder to see a Daniel in
the midest of lions, and yet not devoured? for Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
to be thrown in to a fiery Furnace, and yet to be untouched? for a thin bubble
to be exposed to storms and tempests, and yet to be unbroken? you will say, here
is wonders indeed! Arguments of more then an ordinary power in God! why,
behold, the case is much like ours; we are as earthen Vessels, knocked and yet
not broken; our estates are aimed at, and yet we enjoy them; our function is
struck at, and yet it stands; the wild Boars twang strikes at the Vine, and yet
it is upheld; the Foxes tail strikes at the Grapes, and yet they flowrish;
though our Vine may bleed, yet it is not dead; and why so? why, great is the
Power and Providence of God in our preservation, that in the midst of waters we
are not drowned; if so, it is but reasonable that we should bless his Name.

2 Be sure, you prepare for sufferings, it is true, as yet we escape, but who
knows how long? the Clouds seem to gather about us, if a storm should arise
twere good to be provided; it is no easy thing to suffer; common Endowments
will not do it; it is not our every days habit that will serve for a Winter
journey. Its true, our usual Gifts may enable us to do for God, yea, but it is
more then ordinary Grace, that enableth us to suffer for God; our Gifts may
make us Preachers, yea, but it is Grace that makes us fit for Martyrs; Parts may
enable a man to speak for Christ, yea, but Parts will not enable a man to dye
for Christ; nay more, a small measure of Grace will hardly do it; Peter
promises to dye for Christ, and yet when he comes to the pinch, he dares not
own him, he dares deny him. 'Twas once a Martyrs Infirmity to set his hand to
that which his soul abhorred; poor man yet honest still! he loved the Truth,
but did not like the flame. O surely, if we have cause to look for suffering,
we have also cause to look for suffering Graces; but what are they? I answer.

1 It Is our Concernment to provide our selves with Faith in Christ: great
sufferers had need be strong believers. Alas! what man would suffer present
loss, that beleives no future gain? what man would part with Earth, that is
not sure of Heaven? who would lay down a Temporal life, that beleives not an
Eternal? dare a man dye, except he believe that he shall not be damned? Surely
without Faith it is hard to suffer, yea, and without faith it is vain to suffer,
absque fide quid est Martyrium nisi poena? says Bernard; to die without Faith
is to offer up to God, not a Sheep, but a Swine, to suffer without Faith is to
be murdered, not to be martyred, They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, but
how so? why, (...), it was through Faith they suffered; if we want this Faith, we
want our Heb. 11. 37.
Shield; we can neither keep off the blow, nor yet with comfort receive it, but
now, when once a soul does strongly believe, o then with what joy can it kiss
the Rod, and embrace the Flame! o says the soul, I am now in bonds for Christ,
but behold a glorious liberty comes anon; I am now in a Goal, but ere long I
shall be upon a Throne; what does a scaffold do but mount me nearer Heaven? I
am now to die for Christ, but here is my Cordial, I am ere long to live with
Christ for ever. Surely, as ever we would suffer for Christ at all, as ever we
would suffer for Christ with comfort, it is our Concernment to provide our selves
with strength of Faith.

2 It Is our Concernment to get our hearts enflamed with the love of Christ, it is
said, greater love then this has no man, then that a Joh. 15. 13.
man lay down his life for his friend; indeed, it is an office of love for a man
to speak for his friend; it is an Evidence of love for a man to relieve his
friend, yea, but for a man to die for his friend, that is choice love indeed,
behold how he loved him, said the Jews, when Christ did but weep for Lazarus,
if love be required to pour out Joh. 11. 36.
Tears, o what love is required to pour out blood? I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to dye, well, and what made him so? why, the love of Christ
constrains us, if we love our estates, liberties, lives more then Christ,
upon this account, we shall never lose them; 2 Cor. 5. 14.
indeed, twere vain to pretend it, though I give my body to be burnt, 1 Cor.
13. 3.
and have not Charity, it profits me nothing, it is vain for a man to offer
himself a sacrifice to God, except there be this fire of love to burn it; if
so, would you be able to suffer for Christ? o then be sure you love him.

3 It Is our Concernment to beg hard of God for patience, ye have need of
patience, but when; Surely, in times of suffering; there is no Heb. 10 36.
suffering well without it, ye have heard of the patience of Job, a man Jac. 5.
11.
of Jobs sufferings had need be a man of Jobs patience too: Job was not only
poor, but patient, even to a a Proverb, here is the patience Apoc. 13* 10.
of the Saints, Impatience under Trials makes a man suffer, not like a Saint,
but like beast, I was as a beast before thee; Among the Heathens Ps. 73. 22.
it was judged an ill omen, if the poor beast did but strugle before the Altar,
and shall our Sacrifice do so? it is the swine that roars under the knife, the
Lamb dies in silence, if when ye do well and suffer 1 Pet. 2. 20.
for it, ye take it patiently, what then? why, this is acceptable to God, the
promise is not made simply to our punishment, but to our patience: it is not so
much what, as how we suffer for God. It Was the Custom of Heathens to crown their
Sacrifices with flowers: Surely, if we would crown our Sacrifice to God, it is
patience that must be the Garland, in your patience possess your souls, would
you possess your Souls for your selves? do it in patience; would you let your
Lu. 21. 19.
Souls go for God? do it in patience still; an impatient sufferer is but a
Sacrifice without an heart.

4 It Is our Concernment to be men of Courage, Magnanimity, and Resolution, we
say, fortius est pati, quam agere; there is more Courage required to suffer,
then to do, (...), the object of Courage is something that is formidable, and
what is that? why, it is not duty, but danger; it is not doing, but suffering;
duties would be easily done, did no danger attend them; were it safe to contend
against sin, who would refuse it? were it safe to plead for Heb. 12. 1.
Truth, who would not do it? a poor spirit may speak for Go^, that costs but
little; it is the noble spirit that suffers for God, sufferings is that which
touches home, even to the quick. That of the Poet, ausus es esse bonus, was
somewhat high; yea, but ausus esse miser, 2 Cor. 4. 9.
that is higher yet: he, that in evil times, dares be good, is a man of
prowess: yea, but he that upon Gods account, dares be miserable, that is the
man indeed. It Is storied that when Polycarpus was going to be martyred, there
was a voice heard from Heaven, (...), o Polycarpus, be Courageous, play the man
now if ever. Surely, as for our praying and preaching, simply considered a
little Courage may serve our turn; yea, but if once we come to bleed for
Christ, if once we come to die for God, here our valor is seen indeed. It Is but
a cheap service to declare the Truths of God with our Mouths, our Gallantry
lies in this, namely, to seal those Truths with our dearest blood; it is but an
easy duty to serve our God in a Pulpit, out valor lies in this, to serve our
God in a Prison: we can be content to use our Tongues for God, yea, but if
occasion should be, can we be content to lose our heads for God? had not the
Saints of old been men of Courage, that Cloud of Witnesses, which the Apostle
mentions, had been but as Elijahs Cloud, a Cloud but as a man's hand at most,
our Book of Martyrs had been but a Manual. Surely, without suffering there is
no thorough Martyr, without Courage there is no thorough suffering: if so,
since our Vessel may expect to be severely scowred, its Metal had need be
right; since we have cause to look for sufferings, it is our Concernment that our
Courage should be Christian.

2 By way of Consolation; It Is true, Persecution, Imprisonment, Use 2.
nay, sometimes death it self, is that, which Gods faithful Ministers have
cause to look for; why yet this Consideration is a ground as of Caution, so of
Comfort too; indeed, these waters are bitter, but something there is to make
them sweet; our Persecutions like Bees have their sting, yea, but like Bees
they have their honey too; if once a Be does but lose its sting, it becomes a
drone; some say, the Be that has no sting gathers no honey neither; so here,
were there not a sting in our sufferings, there would be less of sweetness in
them. Our Persecutions may be sharp as Thistles, yea, but from these Thistles
we may gather Figs, our sufferings may be like Thorns, yea, but these Thorns do
bring forth Grapes; shall I reach you but this one bunch for your Souls to feed
on? Consider, if Persecution be that we have now cause to look for, it is a sure
Argument, that the reward of our Ministry lies elsewhere, doubtless there is
a reward for the righteous, says David; so here, doubtless there is a Ps. 58.
11.
reward for the righteous Ministers of God, but wherein lies it? Surely, not
in reproaches, not in Imprisonment, not in Persecution; O no, there is laid up
for me a Crown, our Cross is present, our Crown to come, the day of battle is
not the day of Triumph, Hic operis locus, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
ille mercedis. our Workhouse is here, and our Warehouse is yonder; the World
is our Shop, our Counting House is Heaven; that little we have in the World,
what is it? it is our viaticum, not our reward, it is not half our vailes, much
less our wages, when men shall persecute you, rejoice, but why such joy? joy
in reproaches? Mar. 5. 11.
joy in persecutions? why so? the reason follows, great is your reward: Gods
persecuted Servants shall have an eminent reward, but where lies it? why,
great is your reward in Heaven; it is for sinners to receive their reward on
Earth; it is for the glowworm to shine upon a dunghill, the proper Orb sor Stars
to shine in is above; that is your case, you faithful Ministers of God, you
are the stars in Gods right hand; at present it may be, you are under a veil,
under a cloud, under an Eclypse, but here is your Comfort, your Glory is
reserved for Heaven; that is the Orb: where you shall shine for ever.

The Persecution, the Imprisonment, the Death, and consequently the Second
Doctrine.
loss of Gods faithful Ministers is just Matter of Tears: their sufferings
are a sufficient ground for our Sorrows: What mean ye to weep? Surely, their
Tears were not for nothing; for the loss of a Paul they could not chose but
weep; but you will say, how appears it, that the loss of Gods Ministers is such a
loss as deserves our Tears? I answer,

1 The Saints of God have been wont to weep for the loss of Gods faithful
Ministers; the children of Israel wept for Moses thirty days? Its true, Moses
had not one Mourner at his Funeral, Deuteronomy. 34. 8. 1 Samuel 25. 1.
yea, but Mose^ has Mourners enough for his death: Samuel died, what follows?
all the Israelites were gathered together and lamented him, 'twas almost as
impossible for Israel not to lament, as for Samuel not to die; devout men
carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him; Stephen
died under a shower of stones, but Stephen Act. 8. 2.
was not buried without a shower of Tears; now, if the loss of Ministers be
that which the Saints of God are wont to weep for, then surely it is a loss that
is very considerable; it is not for men but children; it is not for Saints, but
Sinners, to weep for toys and trifles; the Saints of God have better use of
Tears then so; a Saint is loath to lose those Tears he sheds; put my Tears into
thy bottle, says David; Ps. 56. 8.
if our Tears are spent upon grounds unwarrantable, they fall besides Gods
bottle, they are lost for ever. But who would lose such precious Pearls? who
would lose his sighs and groans? Surely, not the Saint, not the Child of God;
Saints would not spend idle words, much less drop idle Tears; if once Christ's
Vine does bleed, we may be sure, it is cut and wounded; if the Church of Christ
do weep for the loss of her Ministers, we may conclude, it is a loss
considerable, a loss that deserves our Tears indeed.

2 The loss of Gods faithful Ministers is that which the Saints of God are
wont to pray against; Herod imprisoneth Peter, and what then? prayer was made
by the Church without ceasing for him; Peter's in Chains, Saints are upon their
knees; the Saints of God Act. 12. 5.
seem more concernd in Peter's Imprisonment, even then Peter himself; as for
himself, as one sensible of his own innocence more then his danger, he lies
fast asleep in the Goal; but as for the Saints, as men sensible of their loss,
they watch and pray; Brethren, pray for us, 2 These. 3. 1. 2
that we may be delivered from unreasonable men? Surely, that deliverance,
which the Saints of God stand engaged earnestly to pray for, is a deliverance
of some Concernment; that loss, which the People of God do expressly pray
against, is a loss of moment; and such is the loss of our faithful
Ministers, a loss of the highest Consideration, a loss to be lamented with
Tears, why else do the Saints of God so solemnly pray against it? Surely, that
hardly deserves a prayer, which is not worth a Tear.

3. The loss of Gods Ministers is that which God himself counts one of his
sorest judgments: Though the Lord give you the bread of Adversity, and the
water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed; Esa. 30. 20.
you will say, the bread of Adversity is hard fare, the water of Affliction is
drink that is sour and bitter; yea, but the removal of our Teachers is more
sour, more bitter still; I will send a Famine in the Land; Surely, of all
judgments Famine is the sorest; but what Famine means he? not a Famine of
bread, o no, that Famine Amos. 8. 11.
will not do; its true, a Famine of bread is a sore judgment, yea, but it is now
too easy, it is too light a judgment to serve the turn; there is yet a Famine of
another nature, and what is that? why, but a Famine of hearing the words of the
Lord, yea, that is a Famine indeed; there is no sorer judgment that a Nation can
lie under: I will remove thy Candlestick, it is one of the severest sentences
that God ever pronounced against a People, and yet not a ground of Tears? do
but leave a child in the dark, and it is ten to one but it falls a crying; should
God leave our Nation in the dark, should we be worse then Children and not
lament it? tell me, if Judgments, nay the sorest judgments of God be no ground
of Tears, what is? but you will say, why is this so great a Judgment? why
should the loss of our Ministers be a loss that deserves our Tears? I answer,

1. The loss of Gods faithful Ministers is, damnum purum, a pure loss, a
loss without the least mixture of gain: It Is not always Reasons.
thus in other losses; we say, what the Sea loses in one place, it gets in
another: It Is so with men, a son loses his Father, but he gains an inheritance
by it; a man loses his friend, but he gains a legacy by it: a Saint loses his
life for God, but he gains a Kingdom by it: in other cases, there may be some
gain or other that makes our losses easy; but alas! the loss in hand is a
loss of another nature, it is a loss that is pure, and upon that account, a
loss that is perfect; that Gold is the most perfect Gold, that has the least
mixture of any other metal; that water is the most perfect water, that has the
least mixture of other Elements; so here, that Judgment is the most perfect
Judgment, that has the least mixture of mercy; that loss is the most perfect
loss, that has no mixture of gain; and such is the loss, such is the
Judgment, when God removes his Ministers; other Judgments may tend to save a
Soul, but this Judgment tends to damn a Soul; other losses may tend to our
spiritual gain, but this loss tends to our utter ruin, and yet not a loss
to be mourned for? an ingenious Child cannot but weep for the loss of his
Father, even though he gain an estate by his death, and were not the loss of
Gods Ministers to be mourned for, since thaus a loss that brings no gain at
all? indeed, should we lose our Ministers, we should gain Errors and Atheism,
profaneness and Heathenisme; we should gain, not the Gold, but the dross of
Indians, their superstition and Idolary would be ours; but would this gain
countervail our loss? 'twere sad gain believe it; if this be the gain by the
loss of our Ministers, sure I am, it is a loss, you would find cause to mourn
for.

2 The loss of Gods Ministers is, damnum irreparabile, a loss for which there
is no amends to be made; In other losses possibly it is not so; a man loses by
one bargain, but possibly there is some amends made him in another; a man loses
his house by fire, yet possibly the Charity of Friends enableth him to build a
better; losses of this nature may be borne with ease; if a Friend be only sick
a little, we do not use to put on Mourning; it is like enough, our Friend may
recover; but if once a dear Friend be dead, we then sit and take on, and why
so* alas! there is no amends to be made for the loss of life. Now, ^uch is the
loss of the Ministers of God; should we lose them, where is our amends? what
amends can be made for the loss of the Gospel? what amends can be made for the
loss of Ordinances? might you in the loss of these enjoy peace and plenty,
'twere but a poor amends; it were a poor amends to receive dross for Gold,
pibles for Pearls, counterfeits for Jewels; so here, to lose the Gospel and
gain a Kingdom, to lose our Ordinances and gain an Empire, would be but a sad
exchange; we say Change is no robbery; but surely, such a Change would be the
highest robbery imagin^^le; a man, that robs me of my estate, may possibly make
up that loss again; but he that robs me of the Gospel, o what satisfaction can
he make me! that man, who would recompense a soul for the loss of the Gospel,
I Will tell you, what he must needs do; he must find out for that Soul another
Christ, another Jesus, another God, another way to Heaven; but so long as this
is impossible, so long a satisfaction for this loss is impossible too; if so,
if you will mourn for any loss in the world, mourn for that loss, for which
there is no amends to be made.

3. The loss of Gods faithful Ministers is damnum ingens, a great loss;
consider it in it self, and in its consequences, and there is no loss like it:
when losses are but small ones, we make but an hard shift to bear them; the
loss of an estate, the loss of a good name, the loss of a Place, such losses
as these are, we can hardly down with; but surely, if Trivial losses be a man's
burden, Considerable losses would prove his Ruin; if the smallest Mote do
trouble the Eye, a Beam would put it out; if a loss, but as a Molehill make a
man's shoulder ache, a loss, like a Mountain, would make that shoulder break;
now, such is the loss in hand; a loss, not of Pence, but Pounds; not of
Mites, but Talents; other losses are the loss of the Purse, this is the loss
of the Gold; other losses are but the loss of the Ring^, this is the loss of
the Finger; now, will you weep for other losses, and not for this? should this
Judgment once come upon us, we should have cause to weep, as Christ once wept
in the Garden; he wept not only with his Eye, but with every Member; all the
pores in his body became as so many Eyes, and so he wept all over. But you will
say, why is this so great a loss? what makes it so? I answer.

4. It Is a great loss, because it is, damnum spirituale, a spiritual loss:
Surely, of all losses in the world, Spiritual losses are the sorest; outward
losses at most do but crack the Cabinet, they are Spiritual losses that
spoil the Jewel; outward losses are as storms, that only rattle upon the
tiles and slates of the house, they are spiritual losses, that wet to the
skin; temporal Judgments at most do but destroy the outward man, they are
spiritual Judgments that undo the soul: Indeed, as to a Carnal man, this
Argument is spent in vain, it is an Arrow, that is lost, it only peirceth the
Air, but enters not the Mark; men, that care little for a soul, care less for
an Ordinance; that man cannot value the Gospel, that valueth not Christ, that
is in it; men in the dark care little for the Lanthorn, when as they care not
at all for the Candle; but tell me, are your souls enlightened? do you know
what spiritual Judgments mean? do you know what the want of spiritual mercies
mean? if so you will easily grant, that the loss of your Ministers, your
Ordinances, your Sacraments, is a loss, that deserves even tears of blood; were
your Head a Fountain of water, this one Consideration would turn the Cock, and
let it run; but you will say, why is this a spiritual Judgment? I answer

1. The loss of our Ministers would be the loss of our spiritual Shepherds;
it is true, Christ Jesus, who is the great Shepherd of the flock, is still in
Heaven; yea but our Ministers are the deputies of Christ here below; Take heed
to the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. If these
Overseers miscarry, the flock is in danger; if there want a Shepherd to guide
the flock, the silly Sheep will wander; if there want a Shepherd to feed the
flock, the poor Lambs are like to starve; if there want a Shepherd to defend
the flock, it is to be feared, the Dogs and Wolves will tear the Sheep in
pieces; now, shall these Shepherds miscarry, and yet the Sheep not blea^?

2. The loss of our Ministers would be the loss of our Spiritual Watchmen:
Son of man I have made thee a Watchman: The loss of a Watchman is a loss
considerable; if the Watchman be slain, it is ten to Ezekiel. 3. 17.
one, but the City is taken; so here, if the Ministers of God, our spiritual
Watchmen, should be removed, what danger would the Church of God be in? the
loss of their Watchman may cost thousands of men their blood; sure I am, the
loss of our Watchmen, should not cost us less, then Tears. The Prophets of
God are styled by the name of Seers; our Ministers are the eyes of the Church
of England, and doubtless, if our Church should lose these eyes of hers, we
had reason enough to weep our own away.

3. The loss of our Ministers would be the loss of our spiritual Husbandmen:
Paul has Planted, Apollo has Watered: If we lose our Paul's, If we lose our
Apollo's, who then shall plant and water? Behold 1 Cor. 3. 17.
a sower went out to sow, and who is he? why, it is the Minister of the Gospel;
God puts his seed into our hand; we are to drive God Plough, we are to scatter
Gods seed; nor is the seed one jot the worse, because it is our poor dirty hand
that sows it. Its true, the Ploughman is a poor inconsiderable person, but
yet he is one, that is necessary, we could not be without him: So here, Gods
Ministers may be men of no great quality in the world, and yet believe it, they
are men, that would be dearly missed; tell me, should our Seedsmen fail, would
there not be a Famine? Sure I am, should Ministers fail, poor Souls must
starve; if so, Starve without a Tear, who can?

4. The loss of our Ministers would be the loss of all ordinary means of our
salvation: He, that beleives not shall be damned: well, but how come men to
believe? why, Faith comes by hearing; by hearing of what? why, hearing comes by
the word of God: no preaching, no hearing; no hearing, no faith, no faith, no
salvation. Tell me now, what do you think of the loss of Heaven? what do you
think of the loss of Glory? what do you think of the loss of Eternity? Is
the loss of your Souls a loss considerable? Is the loss of Saints and
Angels a loss considerable? If you cannot bear these losses themselves,
methinks, you should not bear with that which does procure them? If you cannot
bear the loss of a Soul, a Christ, a Jesus, without endless pangs and torments
for ever, me thinks, you should not loose your Ministers without some Sobs,
some Groans, some Sighs, and Tears; Sure I am, if any loss in the world, it is
this loss, that deserves them all.

1. By way of Information.

Is the loss of the Ministers of God a loss that calls for Tears? Use 1. For
Information.
then surely, this doctrine informs us,

1. That the Ministers of God are not men so inconsiderable and useless, as
some would make them: We are made as the filth of the world: We are made so, we
are counted so, yea but still we are not 1 Cor. 4. 13.
so indeed. The Heathens had an higher esteem for their Idol Priests (...)
says Plato, there was still a respect and reverence showed the Priests; and
that, not in this or that particular Nation, but, in Gentibus omnibus in honor
sunt Sacerdotes says Figurirus, there is no Nation under Heaven, where their
Priests are not in honor; he tells us, that the dishonoring of the Priests was
Vitium Judaeis peculiare, a Sin peculiar to the Jews; it is that sin, which the
Saints of God discountenance; their Practice proves it; had Paul been a person
inconsiderable indeed, the Question in the Text upon all accounts had been but
reasonable, What mean ye to weep? alas! who weeps for a toy? who boweth down
the head for the loss of a Bullrush? who sits and takes-on for a trisle? the
loss of an ordinary blessing, were but an ordinary loss; men do not put on
black for the loss of an ordinary Neighbor; if the Heaven put on mourning,
it is not a Star, but the Sun, that is Eclipsed or clouded; so here, if the
Saints of God weep and mourn, if the Spouse of Christ sigh and groan for the
loss of her Ministers, it argues, that the Ministers are persons
considerable; Saints would not cast these pearls upon Swine; O no, the Saints
tears argue the Ministers worth; were not our Ministers men of parts, men of
Use, men of necessity, why then, Lachrymae simulare docentur: There would be a
kind of Hypocrisy even in the Tears of Saints.

2 That those who undermine the Ministers of God, are men of a strange kind of
spirit. It argues a strange temper for a man to endeavor that, which when
effected, would prove but a ground of Tears. Surely, it is not a Citizen but an
Enemy, that longs to see the Watchman slain; It is not the Sheep, but the
Wolf, that rejoices to see the Shepherd removed; So here, it cannot well be
a Saint, but a sinner, that plots and contrives the Ministers ruin; The loss
of Gods faithful Ministers is that which the Saints of God complain of; and
how then can Saints effect it? The loss of Gods Ministers is that which Saints
do weep for, and how then can Saints contrive it. That, which is the matter of
one Saints Tears, can it be the matter of another Saints endeavors? the Church
of Christ laments the loss of her Ministers, and can the Sons of the Church
desire it? It Is an unnatural Child, that rejoices in that, which its Mother
mourns for; To see the Child laugh, and the Mother weep; To see the Child dance
with the foot, and the Mother wring the hand, what a sight were this? Surely,
it is as strange a sight this day, to see men contriving the ruin of the
Ministers of God; those Ministers, for whom Saints would weep, and the Church
would bleed; Surely, it is a shrewd argument, that such men are no Saints, they
are of another spirit.

3 That men, who act against the Ministers of God, are very irrational in what
they undertake. The loss of Gods Ministers is a loss of losses; for a man to
bring this loss upon himself, it is hardly rational: Brethren, pray for us that
we may be delivered from unreasonable men; The Text implies, that men who
oppose the Ministers 2 These. 3. 2.
of God, are unreasonable men, they act like bruites; tell me, is it rational
for a man to act against his own salvation? That a man should contrive a way
for himself to become a loser of Heaven, a loser of glory, a loser of God; that
a man should sit down and plot how he himself may be surely damned, what reason
can be given for this? here is the case, whosoever contrives the Ministers
ruin, does also contrive his own damnation; and if so, you will easily grant,
that such persons are so far from acting like Saints, that they do not act like
men.

4. That men, who act against the Ministers of God, are small Friends to Gods
Church and People: Surely, that man is hardly my Friend, that procures me my
greatest loss; men's pretenses may be fair, and yet their actions cruel; Judas
may pretend but a kiss, and yet betray his Master; Men may bleat like sheep,
and yet bite like wolves; Men may look like Lambs, and yet act as Lions; That
of our Savior is sad; whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service;
a sad mistake believe it, for a man to destroy Gods Ministers, Joh. 16. 2.
is that to do him service? tell me, does that man do me a service that speaks
me fair, but robs me? is that man my friend that pretends a kindness; but cuts
my throat? now, he that undermines the Ministers of God, shall, I say, he is
one that robs you? shall I say, he is one that cuts your throat? I Will tell you,
did such a man but rob you, it were a courtesy; did such a man but cut your
throat, it were a kindness: to lose your estates, were an easier loss then to
lose the Gospel; to lose your lives were an easier loss, then to lose your
souls; tell me, do you count the Gospel a Pearl of price? if so, what then is
he that would take this Pearl away? do you prize your souls as things of value?
if so, what then is he that does what he can to damn them? Sure I am, what
enemies soever you have in the world, you have no enemy like him who endeavors
your Ministers ruin, and thereby your own.

2. By way of Exhortation.

Is the loss of Gods faithful Ministers matter of mourning? Is it a just
ground of sighs and tears? why then.

1. Be advised, how you act against the Ministers of God; a wise man is loath
to run himself in the briers; the Lord knows, we are in far enough already;
tell me, does this poor Nation of ours, this day, want matter of Mourning? need
we act like him that should put out his own right eye, that his left might have
something to weep for? one would think we have enough to weep for already; sins
enough, calamities enough, we need no further losses; Surely, England may vent
her Sables some other way; England may sell of her mourning blacks without the
funeral of the Gospel; but should our Churches Funeral be to day, I fear, our
Nations would be to morrow; it is a miracle of mercy, that a Nation, which has
lain gasping so long, has not yet breathed its last; it is a miracle of mercy,
that a Nation, which has been so long a dying; should not yet be dead; that a
divided Nation should be a Nation still! you will say, the hand of England must
needs be red through the blood it has spilt; yea, but the face of England, the
body of England may well look pale through the blood it has lost, and yet,
Behold, there is blood in our veins, our vital spirits are still alive; but
now, when our jealousies, our schisms, our divisions have cracked our Vessel
already, the loss of our Ministers would be such a stroke, as would break it
all to shatters; shall I speak to this in four particulars.

1. The loss of the Gospel would prove an undoing loss to the Nation in
general; do you ask me why? I answer,

1. The loss of the Gospel is the loss of that which is the only token of
love, which we have from God; Outward mercies are not Gods love tokens; were
Gold a token of love, who more the darlings of God, then poor Indians? were
success and dominion a token of love, who so beloved of God as the Turks this
day? outward mercies are but the common gifts of Gods hand; his Ordinances are
the kisses of his mouth; Such kisses, as God never bestows, but where he has
a spouse, and were it not sad to be without them?

2 The loss of the Gospel is the loss of Gods special presence; under Ps. 80.
1. 1 Samuel 4. 7.
the Law God dwelt between the Cherubims, God is come into the Camp; It Was the
Ark that came, but the Ark was, Praesentiae divinae Testimonium, a Testimony,
that God himself was there; under the Gospel, Christ is said to walk in the
midst of the golden Candlestick, his Ordinances are the Galleries where he
walks; his Church Apoc. 1. 13.
is the garden, where he delights to be, I am the light of the World, but alas!
lose your Candlesticks, and lose your light; and what a Joh. 8. 12.
loss would this be? the loss of the Sun would ruin the world; the loss of the
Gospel would ruin a Nation. It Is said when the Sun begins to dart its Rays
upon them, that half the year lie in the dark, they meet it with an acclamation
of joy, (...), behold the Sun! behold the Sun! Surely, if the presence of the
Sun be of such concernment, what then is the presence of Jesus Christ? what
then is it he presence of God amongst us? the Heathens were wont to chain their
Gods within their City gates; if the loss of an Idol were judged considerable,
what then is the loss of a God indeed?

3. The loss of the Gospel is the loss of our strength and safety: It Is said of
Jehosaphat, the Lord established his Kingdom; why so? 3 Chron. 17. 5.
why, Jehosaphat had restored the pure worship of God; our establishment does
not lie in the laws of men, but in the institutions of God; our safety does
not lie in an Army, but in a Church, my Father, my Father, the Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof; 2 Reg. 2. 12.
The defense of Israel was not Ahab the King, but Elijah the Prophet; our
strength does not lie in an Ordinance of Parliament; but in an Ordinance of
Christ; lose the Gospel, and lose our royal fort; and if once we lose our
strength, where is our Nation? Sampson loses his hair, and dies for it; let
but England lose her Gospel, and the next news is this; England is dead,
England is ruined.

4. The loss of the Gospel is the loss of our glory; Glorious things are spoken
of thee, thou City of God; Jerusalem was once a glorious Ps. 87. 3.
City; well, but what made her so? Surely, not her Treasures, not her Towers,
not her Bulwarks, not her Princes; o no, it was the Temple at Jerusalem, it was the
worship of God that was there, to them pertained the glory; and why to them?
the reason follows, to them Romans 9. 4.
pertained the Covenants and the service of God; when once Jerusalem lost her
Religion, she lost her glory too, from the Daughter of Zion all her glory is
departed; Why so? what is the matter with Zion? Lam. 1. 6. Lam. 2. 6.
the Lord has caused the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion:
If Zion lose her Sabbaths, if Zion lose her worship, Zion must lose her glory
too; here is our case, if England lose her Gospel, if England lose her
Ordinances, o then Ichabod, Ichabod, where is our glory? should it come to this
we might say with them, fuimus Troes, fuit Ilium, and ingens Gloria Teucorum,
England was a glorious Nation, England was a glorious Church, but alas! our
glory is gone, we have lost our Crown.

5. The loss of the Gospel would likely prove the loss of our Laws; if the
Church fall, the State will hardly stand; Magistracy and Ministry are twins
that usually stand or fall together; thou leadest thy People by the hand of
Moses and Aaron; it is observable, Ps. 77. 20.
that in Scripture Moses and Aaron have but one hand between them; do but cut
off that hand, and by one stroke you lame them both. Moses was the Magistrate
of Israel, Aaron the Priest: and surely, 'twere a pertinent note to consider,
that after Aaron was dead, Moses lived but a while, they both died the same
year; Surely, where Ministry dies, Magistry will not long survive; The Lord
has despised the King and the Priest, the Priest lost his Miter, the King lost
his Crown; They shall abide without a King, and without a Sacrifice, Lam. 2. 6.
Hos. 3. 4.
the King and the Sacrifice, the Magistrate and the Minister go together. Now,
here is our case, should our Ministry fall, we have cause to fear, that our
Magistracy would down too; men, that will not spare the Temple of Sion, will
hardly spare the Walls of Jerusalem; Men, that now pretend they can teach
themselves without a Minister, may pretend ere long, that they can rule
themselves without a Magistrate; it is that which some men whisper already, they
own no teacher but the spirit; they own no King but Jesus: alas! what would the
Issue of these things be but confusion and ruin? lose your Ministry, and undo
your Nation; it must lose its strength, it must lose its glory, it must lose
its God, it must lose its self; if so, why should you act against the Ministers
of God? why should you burn that nest wherein you were hatched? why should you
be as the horse that muds the stream, where he drinks himself? O spare that
womb, that bare you; spare those breasts that give you suck, why should you
ruin the Land of your Nativity?

2 The loss of the Gospel would be a sad deplorable loss to the Saints of God,
do you ask me, why? I answer,

1. The loss of the Gospel to you that are Saints, would be the loss of your
Fathers? Surely, the loss of a tender Father is a loss considerable; Elisha
laments it: my Father, my father, who was that Father of his? 'twas Elijah,
'twas the Prophet; your Ministers 2 Reg. 2. 12.
are your Fathers in Christ; I have begotten you through the Gospel, says
Paul; now, can you lose your Fathers, and yet not 1 Cor. 14. 5.
drop a Tear? can you see your Fathers ruined, and yet that eye which sees it
be dry? (...), O man do not kill my Father Croesus, said a Child that never
spoke before; do you not read how solemnly Joseph mourned for his Father? and
were there no cause why we should mourn for ours? Joseph mourned for his Father
from Egypt to Canaan; but should we lose these Fathers of ours, we should
mourn from Canaan to Egypt, should our spiritual Fathers dye, this Canaan of
ours would quickly become an Egypt. But,

2 The loss of the Gospel to you, that are Saints, would be the loss of your
food: Its true, you are born again, but can you live without any food? can the
Child, that is newly dropped from the womb, subsist without its milk? will the
hungry babe be content without the breast? O no, do but deny your Child the
breast, and it cries and roares; now the promises of the old and new Testament
are the Churches two breasts, and shall our Mother lose these breasts, and her
babes not cry? it is not milk in the dish, it is not milk in the spoon, that always
stils the Child; O no, it is the Dug, and that alone; so here, it is not the
outward mercies of God, it is not the common blessings of Providence; O no, it is
milk in the breast, the promises in the Gospel, that content a soul: Now
should this Gospel be lost, should our breasts be dry, when then? Essurire and
non comedere says Rupertus, for a man to be hungry, and yet have nothing to
eat: Sitire and non bibere, for a man to be a thirst, and yet have nothing to
drink, surely, this were sad; here is our case, should we lose our Church, we
lose our Mother; should we lose our Ministers, we lose our Nurses; should we
lose our Gospel, we lose our breasts; and what Judgment so sore as this?
hunger and no bread? thirst and no drink? alas! who can bear it?

3. The loss of the Gospel to you, that are Saints, would be a loss of your
comfort: Thy word is my comfort, says David; Ps. 119. 50.
but if this word were lost, what then were yours? indeed, God is the Fountain
of Consolation, but his Ordinances are the streams where you must drink; God
himself is the spring, but the Ordinances the Conduit pipe; now if this pipe be
broken, whence can you draw? if these streams be cut off; where will you
drink? it is true, your Cordials are of Christ's preparing, yea but to administer
these Cordials, is a work, that is ours; your Physician is Christ, his
Apothecaries are we; when a soul is wounded for sin, what then? O now, For an
Interpreter, says Job; your plaster is the blood of Christ; yea Job. 33. 23.
but under the Spirit, your Minister is the hand, that must apply it; propter
penuriam verbi Dei, solent homines in peccatis contabescere and desperare,
says Osiander; when a soul is dejected for sin, what can raise it without a
promise? when a soul is disconsolate; what can it do without a Minister? God
indeed is the Father of Comforts, but his Ministers are his Barnabasses, they
are the Sons of Consolation; there may be a God of comfort in Heaven, and yet
without a Son of Consolation on earth, our souls may be still sad; there may
be a Sun in Heaven, and yet without it is rays on Earth, we are still in the
dark; it is a dark night indeed, that has no Star to shine; it is a dark soul
indeed, that has no beam of comfort; sure I am, if we lose the Gospel, we
lose our Sun; if we lose our Church, we lose our Moon; if we lose our
Ministers, we lose our Stars; and if so how can it be, but poor dejected
souls must sit down in the dark? upon all these accounts, the loss of the
Gospel would be a sad deplorable loss, even to the Saints of God.

3. The loss of the Gospel would be a destroying damning loss to sinners: alas!
unregenerate men are dead in sin already, but if they loose the Gospel, that
word of Life, they must needs ly dead, and rot in their graves for ever;
Unregenerate men are enemies to God already* but if they loose the Gospel, that
word of reconciliation, they are like to be enemies to God for ever; Sinners
are in a state of damnation already, but if once they loose the Gospel: the
Gospel of salvation, the poor sinner is like to be damned for ever; now, is the
damnation of sinners the thing you thirst for? Surely, if you have any mercy
for sinners, if you have any pity for souls, you dare not endeavor the loss
of the Gospel, that man, who pittieth him, that is like to starve, dares not
take his food away; that man, who pittieth him, that is wounded, dares not tear
his plaster in pieces; so here, that man, who pitieth dying souls, dares not
prevent them of their remedy; 'twere strange for men to talk of pitying the
Sick, and yet to withdraw the Physician from them; 'twere strange for men to
talk of pitying the Poor, and yet under hand to rob them; here is the case, for
men to talk of pitying souls, and yet undermine the Gospel; for men to talk of
pitying sinners and yet remove the means of their salvation; what is this, but
to kill with a Complement? what is this, but to flatter souls into Hell?
that is the issue, should once our Ministers fail, should our Ordinances but
cease, 'twere a loss, which thousands of sinners were like to feel and lament
for ever.

4. The loss of the Gospel would prove an undoing loss to our Posterity: Our
Infants are born babes in age, but not babes in Christ; they are Children of
Nature, and so Children of Wrath too; they bear the Devils image as well as
Ours; Infants of a span long, but sinners of a great dimension; poor Babes!
Cockatrices in the Egg, and when once hatched, Cockatrices still; sinners in
the womb, and sinners from the womb; indeed, that it should be so, is our
shame, but their undoing; well, but is there no remedy? Our Children are born
sinners, but must they live so? our Children are born Heirs of Hell, but must
they dye so, and be damned for ever? It Is true, their being born in s^n we
cannot prevent, but cannot we prevent their dying in Sin? Surely* there is but
one way in the world to do it: Except a man be regenerate and born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom Joh. 3. 3.
of God: If our Children be not born again, better had it been they had never
been born at all; well, but how must they be born again? it is true, Regeneration
is the Spirit's own work, but who is the Spirits instrument? our first birth is
a great work of God, and yet the Creature's hand is in it; so here, our second
birth is God's own mighty work, and yet there is an instrument used; well, but
who is it? I have begotten you through the Gospel; there is no ordinary means
to regenerate your Children, but Paul and the Gospel; 1. Cor. 4. 15.
the Minister, and the Ordinance; the Font and the Pulpit, the Water, and the
Word; should Gospel Ordinances fail amongst us, should the word of God, that
spiritual seed, be spilt, and taken away; should the Ministers, our spiritual
Fathers be once removed, should the Church, our spiritual Mother be ruined and
dye, O then! what means were left for our Children to be born again? Surely,
should it once be thus, our poor Posterity were like to be undone for ever. Now
Sirs, tell me, what do you think of your Ministers ruin? What do you think
of the Gospel? Would you bring forth Children to be Fuel for Eternal flames?
you are loath to see your Children in a Goal, and would you not be loath to see
them in Hell? you would be loath to see your Children beg their Bread, and
would you not be loath to see them damned? it cost you pangs, and granes to
bear them, and would it cost you no sighs, no tears, to loose them? we have a
knee to dandle our Babes, and yet not an heart to pity them? we have a bosom to
embrace, a lip to kiss our Infants, and yet no bowels of mercy for them? we
count Herod not a Man, but a Monster, for murdering the Babes about Bethelem,
and what shall we be, if we murder the Babes of England? the Babes of Bethlehem
were but an handful, the Babes of England, would be Millions; the Babes of
Bethlehem died as a kind of Martyrs, the Babes of England would dye as Sinners;
the Babes of Bethlehem did but Dye, the Babes of England would likewise be
damned, Damnati antequam nati, says Austin, to damn their Souls, before we
beget their bodies; to secure them of Hell, before ever they live on earth; is
this the Portion, we intend to provide them? is this the Inheritance, we intend
to leave them? Our Fathers dealt not so with us; they spent their blood to
transmit the Gospel to us their Children; and shall we endeavor to take it
away from ours? Surely though we care not for Gods Ministers, yet we should
care for our own Babes; though we regard not our Spiritual Fathers, yet we
should regard our Natural Children; down with your Ministry, and undo your
Posterity; remove the Gospel, and damn the Babe, that is yet unborn; if so, be
advised, how you dare attempt it; pi^y the Nation, you live in; pity the Saints
of God, that love you; pity the souls of sinners, that lie at stake; but if
not, yet, at lest, pity them, who are a part of your selves, your tender
Infants, your pretty Babes, O why should these miscarry for ever? why should
you be as Adam? why should you strick a Church, a Nation, your whole Posterity
dead at one blow?

It is the concernment of the Ministers of God to sUFFER Persecutior,
Imprisonment, nay, death it self upon Christ's account, with willingness,
Doct. 3.
courage and resolution, (...), I am ready not to be bound only, but to die,
etc. It was thus with Saint Paui, and it must be so with us; But why so? I
answer,

1. To suffer for Christ is but just and equal; Christ himself Reasons.
has suffered for us. Surely, the sufferings of Christ were somewhat
considerable; 'twas much for the Son of God to be reproached by worms; it was
much for the Son of God to be scourged by those hands which himself had made;
it was much for him that sat upon a Throne, to be laid in a Manger, to be
hanged upon a Cross; 'twas much for the Lord of Heaven and Farth to want at
his birth, a room of his own to be born in, at his death, a Grave of his own to
be laid in; it was somewhat considerable for the beloved Son of God to bear the
wrath of his Father; and why all this? why, he was delivered for our offenses;
yea, but was Christ Jesus Romans 4. 25. Lu. 12. 50.
willing thus to suffer? yea, I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how am
I straightned till it be accomplished? The Baptism which he speaks of, was not
Baptismus fluminis, a Baptism of water, that was past already; nor was it
Baptismus flaminis, the Baptism of the spirit, that was over; o no, it was a
Baptism of another nature, Baptismus sarguinis, Baptism of sufferings, a
Baptism of tears, a Baptism of blood, and yet says he, (...), how am I
straightned, till it be accomplished? ah Lord, what an expression is here!
straightned till it be accomplished? why, tell me, are these things thus
desirable? reproaches, buffettings, the sorest of death, the displeasure of
God, are these things to be longed for? o how would I fain lie down in flames?
how fain would I bear the torments of Hell? how do I long to bear the wrath of
God? where is that soul, that faith so? surely, that Baptism, which Christ Jesus
speaks of, was, a Baptism of horror, a Baptism of wrath, a Baptism of death
and Hell, and yet, how am I straightened, and now, (...) faith Chrysostom; if our
Lord and Master was Crucified, what great matter is it if we be bound? if
Christ was ready to be thrown into a Grave, into Hell, for us, shall not we be
ready to be thrown into a Goal for him?

2. To suffer for Christ has been the Practice of Saints; we have a Cloud of
witnesses, and what became of that cloud? why, alas! that cloud emptied it self
in shovers of blood; I might spend not Heb. 12. 1.
only Time, but Tears, to mention the sufferings of Moses, Elijah, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, men that sealed the Truths of God with their dearest blood;
had it not been the practice of all Saints to suffer, whence is it, that our
Book of Martyrs swells into a Volume? now, shall others suffer, and yet not we?
shall others kiss the stake, and we avoid it? shall others embrace the flame,
and we refuse it? as Alexander once said to a Coward of his own name; quit thy
baseness, or quit thy name; so say I, be content to become Martyrs, or be
content to be no Professors; if Saints have have suffered, Saints must be
willing to suffer still.

3. To suffer for Christ is your Covenant; it is part of that Contract which you
have made with Christ. If any man will be my Disciple, what then? let him take
up his Cross; It Is a considerable Mat. 16. 24.
part of those Terms, upon which every Soul must close with Christ. Now, a man
that is honest, must needs make good his bargain; it is a Character of a Citizen
of Heaven to perform his Covenant, though himself thereby becomes a loser. But
tell me, what are you like to lose by this bargain of yours? has thy soul
closed with Christ upon these Terms, and yet repent? O consider, Christ Jesus
is well worth a Cross, Christ Jesus is well worth a Prison; for a man to give
an estate, to give his liberty, his life, his blood for Christ, were Philip. 1.
29
the rarest bargain under Heaven, shall I tell you Heaven without a Christ
would be an Heaven no more; if once a soul close with Christ, it is impossible
for that soul to become a loser; here is your case; let him take up his Croffe,
it is the bargain which you have struck; and if so, though you may be afraid to
shed your blood, yet be not afraid to keep your Covenant; though you dare not
be brave and gallant Christians, yet dare at least, to be honest Christians,
that you would suffer for Christ, you have passed your Promise, you have pawned
your faith; and if so, why, O why will you break it?

4. To suffer for Christ is your Privilege, it is your preferment, To you it is
given, To you, not to others, not to All. Indeed, every Saint is commanded to
do for God, yea, but every Saint is not called to suffer for God. This is such
a privilege, as Saints would not easily part with it; our Apostle was loath to
do so; I would to God that not only thou, O King Agrippa, but all that hear me
this day, Act. 26. 29.
were altogether such as I am, except these bonds? Surely, Paul was a man of
Excellent Parts, a learned Scholar, a rare Preacher, a great Apostle; and are
not these Privileges high? why yet Paul could be content to have sharers in
each of these; am I a Christian? O that King Agrippa were so; am I a man of
gracious Qualifications? O that my hearers were so; But now, when once he comes
to mention his sufferings, here Paul must be pardoned, in this thing Agrippa
must spare him, in this thing his hearers must excuse him; upon all other
Accounts, I would to God ye were altogether as I am; yea, but still, except
these bonds; Paul seems to look upon his fetters, as such choice privileges,
as he would by no means part with; in this particular, non fert secundum, he
would have no sharers with him. But, you will say, are sufferings such favors
indeed? for a man to be thrown into a Goal, is that such a boon from Heaven?
for a man to be burnt at a stake, to be hanged on a cross, to rot in a
dungeon, are these things such Privileges indeed? why so? I Will tell you why;

1. Sufferings for Christ are things of advantage. That which brings in profit,
we can easily count a privilege. It Is that which sufferings do, they bring in
profit; you will say, to whom? I answer.

1. Our sufferings for Christ are advantageous to the Church of God; Ecclesia
totum mundum convertit oratione and sanguine, says Luther; the more sufferers,
the more Saints. It Is storied that Justine Martyr was converted by seeing the
Christians courage in suffering; suffering Saints do, Cadaveribus suis vineam
Domini stercorare, Manure the Lords Vineyard with their blood. It Is disputable
whether Saint Paul did the Church of God more service in the Pulpit, or in the
Prison; whether he did more good by his Sufferings, or by his Sermons; the
things which happened to me have Philip. 1. 12.
fallen out to the furtherance of the Gospel; what Martyrs lose, the Gospel
gains; Paul's Prison converted some in Caesar's court.

2 Our sufferings for Christ are advantageous to our selves; they bring in that
comfort which a Saint would not lose for a thousand worlds. It is true, there
is comfort in what we do for God, yea, but there is more Comfort in what we
suffer for God. I read, that Paul and Silas sang, but where? why, not in the
Church, but in the Goal; and why so [O says he, as our Sufferings abound, so
our Consolations abound much more; we use to administer the strongest Cordials
2 Cor. 1. 5.
to fainting Spirits; so here, God administers the greatest Consolations to
suffering Saints; when men persecute you, rejoice, as it is a command, so it
looks like a Promise too; your sorrow shall be turned Mat. 5. 11.
into joy; though there be Gall in the top of the Cup, yet here is your Comfort,
you will surely meet with Sugar in the bottom.

2. Your Sufferings for Christ are services full of honor, that which makes
for a man's honor, he counts his privilege; it is that which sufferings do;
they surely bring in honor; you will say, to whom? I ans.

1. Your Sufferings for Christ are honorable to the Gospel; it is the Gospels
honor that it makes men

1. Posse pati, to be able to suffer; to suffer for Christ, is no easy
service* it must be a strong shoulder that can bear a Cross; a man that would
suffer, must be a man of prowess, a man stout and Gallant; now, what is it
that makes men so? why, it is the Gospel, and if so, Persecutours must needs
acknowledge, that, in this Gospel, there is somewhat more then Ordinary; there
must needs be some strange and wonderful thing, that is able to bear up the
spirits of Saints in the midst of Torments.

2. Velle pati, to be willing to suffer: Suffering is that which nature has no
mind to; sinners choose rather to deny the Truth, then Seal it with blood; a
man may prevail with himself rather to do much, then suffer little; O this
suffering is that which comes home, and pincheth hard; if so, what is it that
makes men so willing to suffer: I am ready; what made him so? why, it was the
Gospel, and what then? why surely, that Gospel, for which not only men, but
knowing men, men of Parts and Learning, are willing to suffer, must needs be a
Glorious Gospel indeed; Surely, no wise man would lose his life for a Toy, a
man would never spend his blood for a Trifle; O no, the Greatness, the
Goodness, the Glory of Christ and his Gospel is displayed no way more, then by
the sufferings of Saints.

2. Your Sufferings for Christ are honorable to your selves; Spices, if
pounded, smell the sweeter; Diamonds, if rubbed shine the brighter; never is the
Sun more Glorious then at its setting; never do the Saints of God appear like
themselves more then when they suffer; if a Diamond be knocked, and yet not
break, it is a sign, it is right indeed, if a Saint be persecuted, and yet hold
out, it is a sign, he is a Saint indeed; Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ; how
Romans 1. 1.
does he prove himself to be so? why, Paul a Prisoner of Jesus Christ; That Is
the Title wherein he glories, I Paul the Prisoner Philem. 1.
of Jesus Christ, it runs, Paul a Servant, but I Paul a Prisoner; it implies,
that Paul owneth the Service of Christ as a degree of honor, Ephesians. 3. 1,
but his suffering for Christ, that, o that is the top of honor; I bear in my
body the marks of the Lord Jesus Christ, what marks were those? why, the
stripes he received for Christ; O these were marks of honor indeed! so he
counts them. I bear (...), it is not Gal. 6. 17.
(...), I have, but (...), I bear; bare them how? not (...), as burdens, but
(...); so Chrysostom; as Trophies, as so many Flags, Ensigns, and Scars of
honor indeed. They rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame,
(...), that Acts 5. 41.
they were honored with dishonor; that they were graced with disgrace; no
greater honor then to suffer shame for Christ.

1. Of Exhortation, be willing to suffer upon Christ's account; Uses.
for consider.

1. Not to suffer for Christ, if we are called, is basely to disown him.
Martyrdom is styled the Testimony of Jesus, if to suffer Martyrdom Apoc. 1. 9.
be to bear a Testimony, then surely to refuse Martyrdom is to give a denial;
it is, in effect, to say, we know not the Man.

2. To suffer for Christ, is to do him the highest honor. It argues a man to
be a loyal Servant, and Christ to be a gracious Lord, bonum habemus dominum,
is the Martyrs Language, Quot vulnera, tot verba, Martyrdom is a Proclamation
in red Letters, that God is the best of Masters.

3. If the Minister suffer for Christ, it will be a great Encouragement to the
People, many waxing confident by my bonds; the courage Philip. 1. 14.
of a Commander puts valor into the Soldier; the courage of the Minister puts
valor into the private Christian. But, (...), etc. says Chrysostom, if Peter
that great Apostle, deny his Lord, what might inferior Disciples do? if the
Minister be afraid to suffer, what may the People do?

4. When we suffer for Christ, God looks on We are made a Spectacle to the
World, Angels, and Men; to do bravely in the sight of man and Angels, is an
Encouragement; but what is it to suffer bravely 1 Cor. 4. 9.
in the sight of God? It is storied of a Roman Soldier, that dying valiantly,
breathed out his life, and this express^on with it. O si conspectu Caesaris
mori contigisset! O that I had but died thus in the sight of Caesar! here is our
case, precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: when Saints
dye Martyrs, their comfort is this, Ps. 116. 15.
they die in the sight of the Lord.

5 If we suffer for Christ, our reward is great. So it is promised, great is your
reward; what reward is that? why, a reward of comfort on Earth, of Glory in
Heaven. But, Mat. 5. 12.


2. Of Caution. Methinks, in this Assembly, I cannot but speak Second Use.
to some who, as to suffering, should rather need a bridle then a spur, a
caution rather then an exhortation. My request to you is this; when you suffer,
be sure it be for Christ. It is true, to suffer will be your Glory; but then,
it must first be your Duty; as we must not be haled, so we must be sent to our
Execution. It is our Concernment to take heed that we do not first make a
cross, and then endure it. That of our Savior is considerable; let him take
up his cross, a Disciple of Christ must take, but not make a cross; and what
cross must it be? his cross, His, not by his own invention, but Gods
appointment. For

1. If a man suffer without a call, it is more then probable, that he is like
to suffer without a comfort. Doubtless, there is a great deal of comfort in
suffering; yea, but this comfort springs not from the Act of suffering, but
from the Occasion; When men shall persecute you, rejoice and be exceeding glad;
well, but is there such Mat. 5. 11. 12.
an abundant joy arising from persecution upon any account whatever? Surely no,
there is no such Encouragement in the Text; When men shall persecute you for my
sake, rejoice, etc. indeed, if we Act. 5. 41.
suffer for Christ, then shall we suffer with joy; so the Apostles rejoicing,
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame; but what was the ground of this
joy? that follows, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for the name of Christ; if Christ's name be written upon our sufferings, then
will Christ's joy be imprinted upon our Souls, but otherwise, a man that
suffers can expect but little comfort from God in his heart, except he first
have a warrant from God in his hand; it is not the bare thorn that bears this
Grape of joy.

2. If a man suffer without a call, it is more then probable, that he is like
to suffer without a reward; that reward of suffering is Gods gracious Promise,
and man's great Encouragement; it would be sad to endure the cross, and yet
lose the crown; Blessed are they which are persecuted, there is a precious
promise indeed; yea, but it is made with this restriction, with this
limitation; blessed are Mat. 5. 10.
they which are persecuted for righteousness sake; the blessing of God is in
those sufferings only, wherein there is a righteousness first. So the Apostle,
if when ye do well ye suffer for it, this is acceptable to God, if God call us
to this service, we may then, and not otherwise, 1 Pet. 2. 20.
expect its wages.

3. A man that suffers without a call, is no Martyr. We say, that which makes a
Martyr, is not the punishment, but the cause; it is not so much what, as for what
we suffer; We have a cloud of Witnesses Heb. 12. 1.
(...), a cloud of Martyrs; well, how came they to be Martyrs? the Apostle
tells us, not by fancy, but by faith, they suffered, as by, so for the faith.
Thus suffered Saint John for the word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus;
the highest Testimony Apoc. 1. 9.
is no Martyrdom, except it be the Testimony of Jesus. It is the beast that is
slain, not in the shambles, but, ad Aras, at the Altar, that dies a Sacrifice;
so here, it is the man that suffers, not upon every Account, but, pro Aris, for
the Altar, that dies a Martyr.

4. A man that suffers without a call, is an Usurper; Martyrdom is an Honor, a
favor, a special privilege, which God bestows where he ple^seth; To you it
is given, not only to believe, but also Philip. 1. 29.
to suffer: Privileges must not be snatched, but given; a man may invade a
Prison as well as a Throne; a man may usurp a Cross, as well as a Crown; no man
takes this honor upon himself, but he that is called; surely, as a man may not
make himself a Priest, so neither may he make himself a Sacrifice. Sacrifices
must be chosen beasts, Heb. 5. 4.
and Martyrs, must be persons singled out by God.

5. A man, but especially a Minister, that suffers without a call is highly
injurious to the Church of God; Take heed unto your selves, and to the flock;
Ministers, to secure their flocks, must, if possible, Act. 20. 28.
preserve themselves; Sheepheards may be driven, but must not run away. I lay
down my life for the Sheep; Christ dies to save the Joh. 10. 15* Mat. 5, 14.
Sheep, we must not dye to destroy the Sheep; ye are the light of the World, if
so, we must not be theives to our own candle and waste it, till either it dye
of it self, or be extinguished by some unavoidable storm.

6. A man that suffers without a call, is highly injurious to himself, to put
even a Malefactor to death without a warrant from Authority, is a kind of
Manslaughter; so here, if a man put himself upon suffering without his warrant
from God, that man is fel^ de se, one that destroys himself. Surely, it is
not Sacrifice, but Murder, to offer up an Isaac, when God calls but for a
ram; we Ministers are to blame, if we Sacrifice our estates, our liberties, our
lives, when God requires only the calves of our lips, our praying and
preaching. Our Ministry, estates, and lives, are things too dear to be parted
with, till God require them. I know but two cases wherein it is lawful for a
man, especially for a Minister to suffer.

1. Our suffering is warrantable, when we chose rather to suffer then to omit
some necessary duty which God requires. God commands, Darius forbids Daniel to
pray; in this case, Daniel resolves to suffer; he will be upon his knees in his
Chamber, though by and by he must be in the Lions den; rather then omit this
great duty to one God, he ventures the rage of two Kings, Darius King of Men,
and the Lion King of beasts. Again, the Jews forbid the Apostles Acts 4. 18.
to preach; yea, but preach they will, whatever follows. here is our case,
should we be commanded not to pray, not to preach, we must as soon lose our
heads as hold our tongues; to dye upon this account, were to dye with a Warrant.

2. Our suffering is warrantable, when we chose rather to suffer, then to
commit a sin. So did those three Confessors, bow down and worship my golden
Image, says Nebuchadnezzar; yea, but that is a sin; in this case we will
rather break then bow; we will rather sacrifice Dan. 3. 5.
our lives to God, then our devotion to an Image; we will rather die Martyrs,
then live Idolaters. Now, here is our duty, should man command us what God
forbids, should we be commanded to adore an Image, a Relic, a Crucifixe, we
must rather dye then sin. But now, in Adiaphoris, in things indifferent, the
case is otherwise; as

1. If Authority shall command the use of such and such Ceremonies, Garments,
Gestures, as are reconcilable with the word of God; if a man out of ignorance,
humor, fancy, or from a spirit of contradiction shall refuse these commands,
and thereby suffer; I think such a man's suffering will be as far from a
Martyrdom, as it is from a Warrant. Nay more, I am afraid that such a man must
account to God, why he disobeyeth the Magistrate, and why he ruineth himself.
How far the Magistrate may lawfully impose indifferent things, I shall not
dispute; it is not my present work to consider what the Magistrate ought to do,
but when the Minister ought to suffer.

I confess, it were to be wished, that there were in most places, more
reverence, and if possibile, a general Uniformity in the outward worship of
God; that one God might be served in one way, as well with one shoulder as with
one heart. Holiness indeed becomes the house of God, but Reverence must not be
excluded. Yet notwithstanding, I am so far from pleading the cause of
superfluous Rights, and symbolical Ceremonies, that I do humbly pray, and
thankfully hope, that Authority will be sparing in them; but however, if some
Rights and Ceremonies, innocent in this nature and use, should be commanded, I
should rather think it my concernment to obey, then suffer; I should rather put
on a sinlesse garment, then put off my honest Employment; being a Minister, I
should look upon it, not only as matter of choice, but as matter of duty,
rather to be a preacher in a Surplisse, then no preacher at all; and my reason
is this; it is expressly written; Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel, but I do
not find it written either in express Terms, or necessary Consequence; Woe is
me, if I use such or such a Garment.

The truth is, things of this nature being not simply necessary, it were to be
wished on the one hand, that the Magistrate out of a respect to tender souls,
would not so severely press them: but, on the other hand, things of this nature
being not simply unlawful, I could wish that the Minister out of a due respect
to Authority, would not so stiffely refuse them. Surely, if the thing be
indifferent in its own nature, the Interposal of the Magistrates command, which
determines it as to its use, does rather render it necessary then sinful;
Necessary, I mean, not as any substantial part of that Worship which I owe to
God; but as a part of that duty, which, in things lawful, I owe Authority. I
might here mind some men, that there is a superstition Negative as well as
Positive; it may be superstition not only to impose some Ceremonies, but to
refuse them; to place religion and holiness in things of Indifferency, is
superstition one way; to place irreligion and profaneness in things of mere
decency, is superstition another way. It is our concernment to take heed lest
we inconsiderately run upon that which we first ruin our-selves to avoid. But,

If Authority shall command our submission to such or such a form of Government
in the Church, as is at least agreeable to the word of God, I think it is every
man's duty rather to obey, then to suffer for refusing. It is Gods own express
command; Obey them that have the rule over you.

Surely, Government is of Absolute Necessity to a Churches Welfare; if the
Church be the Vineyard of God, Government is the fence that mounds it; now,
break down your fence, and where is your Vineyard? alas, the beasts of prey
devour it: Again, if the Church be the flock of Christ, Government is the
hurdle of the Fold; now, pull away the hurdles, and where is your flock; alas!
poor silly sheep will wander. Now, here has been the misery of the Church of
England for many years; it has wanted a Government; had we had a settled
Government, men durst not have vented what Errors they please; had we had a
Government, you would not have seen the Buff-coat, and the Apron, but the Gown
in the Pulpit, had we had a Government, you should not have seen, Altar
adversus Altar, private meetings set up in opposition to Public; it is a mercy
that our Churches have not been quite empty; that our back ditches have not
drawn our main stream dry; had we had a Government, we should have had more
Ministers, though possibly fewer Preachers; Its true, no form of Government
will satisfy all parties of men amongst us; there are some that can as little
endure the remedy, as the disease; but what then? all men are not satisfied
with Parliaments, and shall we therefore have none? all men are not satisfied
with Kings, but upon that account shall we have none? Surely, if to satisfy
the lusts, pride, and ignorance of a few Persons, we shall leave Church and
State under Confusion for want of a Government, we shall do much like him that
fires his House to roast his Eggs.

Sirs, it is not my purpose to plead for this or that form of Government in
Church and State; only thus, little did England know what it meant to pull
down her ancient Government; you well know, Great have been the distractions in
the state of England, since we lost our Crown; sad have been the Confusions in
the Church of England since we lost our Mitre; Surely, to ruin one Government,
though untowardly managed, and set up none at all, was Englands folly, Englands
madness, and no wonder, no wonder, if we who cut off our head, did also lose
our Brains.

That which I would leave with you, is only this; if you love the Vineyard of
God, be not angry to see some fence about it; we say, Tyranny is better then
Anarchy; it were better to have a fence of thorns, though it prick our
fingers, then no fence at all. But, O may the Bishops and Presbyters of England
agree as brethren! O may we not lose our peace whilst we dispute our power;
let us not endanger our Religion, whilst we debate our Titles; O may not the
Church of England be ruined, whilst we dispute whether its governor shall be
styled a Presbyter, or a Bishop! doubtless, there should be some subordination
of Ministers; whole Hedges are not made of stakes.

3. If Authority shall command us to use such and such forms of prayer; I mean
forms of prayer, against which there can be no exception, unless it be
because they are forms; if a man shall refuse these forms and thereby suffer,
I think 'twere rashness rather then well grounded zeal. I am persuaded there is
much to be said for set forms of Prayer; when I am to beg the same things, I
cannot tell why I may not use the same words. I remember I once heard that
Reverend and Learned Bishop, the Primate of Ireland, now with God, thus declare
his judgment in this particular? Surely, God Almighty is not taken with variety
of Expressions; But if his Authority, because a Prelate, will not pass, what
shall we say to that of our Savior? a set form of prayer is that which Christ
used himself, and taught us. I cannot look upon the Lords Prayer, barely as a
pattern, but as a Prayer too; it is not only a form that must be imitated, but
may, (...), be used. Doubtless, where there is the matter and form, the only
Essentials of a Prayer, there is a Prayer; and where a Prayer is, why should it
be a Crime to use it? If set forms of Prayer be unlawful, what means Saint
Paul in the beginning and ending of all his Epistles, except that to the
Hebrews, to use them?

I am persuaded I might justly plead, if not a necessity, yet a great
Covenience of public Liturgies; and yet, defending only their lawful use, I
am censured. I confess, to press the use of set forms of Prayer, where this
Sermon was delivered, might lately be an Act, though not of sin, yet of
Imprudence. it is notoriously known, that in our University Church, the best of
forms for several years was generally laid aside; some would not use it, many
durst not, few did, and no wonder, when that sacred prayer began by some to be
reckoned only amongst the Formalities of the University; but with this
difference, some, who would have voted down other Formalities, endeavored to
laugh down this; well then, it might indeed be an Act of Imprudence to plead
for any set forms of Prayer, in that place, where of late, through some men's
example and Tyranny, it was grown, if not a Crime, yet a Prejudice to use the
best. But doubtless, our banisnt University being now restored to it self,
will also restore that blessed Prayer to its Pulpit; for surely, we had not so
long wanted our dear Lords prayer at Saint Mary's, had we not also in a great
measure wanted our University, even at Oxford. That, which I shall add
concerning the Liturgy of the Church of England, will lie in three Particulars;

1 It is Evident, that men, holy, and learned, made it at first* that men holy
and learned, do still approve and use it. This makes me wonder, that some good
men should so much disown it. Methinks, on the one hand, were not our Liturgy
good, Conscientious men durst not use and press it; Methinks, on the other
hand, were not our Liturgy some way liable, conscientious men should not so
stiffely refuse it. That good men use it, is an Argument, that it is without
all Crime; that good men refuse it, is an Argument, that it is not without some
seeming blemish. Indeed, I shall not undertake so far to justify every
particular phrase, expression, and passage in our Liturgy, as to affirm it
incapeable of the least amendment. That, which is gold indeed, may want a
further refining; That, which is confessed to be wheat, may possibly want a
second winnowing, There are some few expressions in our Service Book, that
possibly might be well reviewed, though, as it is, it may be used without sin,
yet why should it not be used without Scruple too? if a very little Alteration
in some few particulars would render it acceptable to most opposers, why might
it not be done? Surely, it were prudence, as well as duty, to do that out of a
tender respect to the Consciences of others, that may be done without the least
violation of our own. I am so much a friend to the Liturgy of England, that I
could wish it a little reformed in this or that particular, that so, without
regret, it might be used in General. It were much to be desired, that our
public form of worship might be not only without sin, but beyond all
exception, that it might be, as without Corruption in its body, so without the
least spot upon its face. I could wish it washed, but not worn out; altered, but
not abolished; we may pair the nail that is dirty, or scratcheth, without
cutting of the finger. Yet,

2. I dare affirm the whole body, frame, and composure of our Public Liturgy
to be so innocent as that it may be used without sin. I cannot here take its
body into pieces, for want of room to lay its distinct members one by one. But,
in the General, I dare assert, that our forms of Confession, Absolution,
Petition, Thanksgiving, Administration of the Sacraments, etc. are without sin;
and most of them without, I will not say, Cavil, but just exception. Nor do I
think, that the Liturgy of England, because, as some object, gathered out of a
Popish Mass Book, must needs upon that account, be charged with Original Sin.
But, our present disquisition is, not to examine, whence it came, but what it
is; if we can prove the child to be legitimate, let others take pains to find
out its fathers name; if we can prove the Jewel, as to its freedom from sin,
to be clean and orient, prove who can that it was found upon a Dunghill.

3. The public Liturgy of the Church of England is established by law. That
law, which under God, puts my bread into my mouth, does put this book into my
hand; That law, which secures my estate from men; commands me this way of
worship to God; nay more, that law, which requires the people to pay their
Tithes, requires the Minister to use the Liturgy; if the Minister refuse the
the one, what if the People should refuse the other; in case of non payment of
Tithes, we have recourse to the law, and, with confidence as well as Justice,
expect treble damages; but methinks, it is somewhat unreasonable, that, in time
of need, we should crave assistance from that law, to which, in point of duty,
we deny our homage. If it be said, that our Liturgy is taken away by law, it
will with better reason be denied, then affirmed; indeed, it was laid aside by
violence, but not dismissed by Authority; we say, cujus est ponere, eius est
tollere; if so, the Acts of several Parliaments cannot be rendered Null by an
Ordinance of one Juncto. So then; if the law and Sanction be still in force,
why should not the Liturgy be still in use? do I plead for the Liturgy? so does
the law; what then? why, methinks, Obedience should not be charged as sin; I
ever thought that sin consists in the Transgression, not in the Observation of
Laws.

FINIS

