CONCIO AD CLERVM, OR A VISITATION SERMON, Preached at Great Wycomb within the
Diocese of Lincoln, May 13. 1673. By Francis Gregory, D. D. Rector of
Hambleton, in the County of Bucks, and one of His Sacred Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary.

-- (...),
(...).
Nazianzen. Carm. Iamb. (...). Basil. Magn. Epist. 181. Impuri Sacerdotes
hominum ludibria, mortalium vilissimi, quisquiliae, and peripsemata. Cornel. a
Lap. in Mal. c. 2. v. 9. LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Richard Royston,
Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. M DC LXXIII.

IMPRIMATUR,

Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno Gilberto divina Providentia
Archi-Episc. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aed. Lambeth. Jun. 21. 1673.
1 TIMOTHY IV. 16. Take heed to thy Self, and to the Doctrine.
THE Text contains a double caution; the first is this, (...), or, as Saint
Chrysostom varieth the composition, (...), Take heed to thy self, that branch
concerns his person. The second is this, (...), take heed to the Doctrine, that
branch concerns his ministry; the former relates to his Conversation; the
latter respects his Function: So that here are two things, which Saint Paul
does commend to Timothy, who was his Son; and the same two things would I
commend to you, who are my brethren. What was Saint Paul's command to Timothy,
shall be my request to you, and that first is this, (...), Take heed to your
Selves, that your lives be Holy, Blameless, and free from all manner of
Scandal; and that upon these considerations;

First, The holiness of our Lives is that, which the great God of Heaven, whose
more immediate Servants we are, does most strictly require.

It is our business to press all Gods Commands upon other men; and certainly,
we do all stand obliged to obey them all our selves. Now amongst the commands
Lev. 21. 8.
of God this is one, the Priest shall be Holy, Holy in his Person, Holy in his
Life; whosoever is unholy in either, it must not be the Priest. To mind the
Priest of this and the like Commands, there was engraven, and that by a Divine
injunction, upon his golden Plate, (...) Holiness to the Lord. It Is observed,
that in after Ages the word was doubled, (...) to intimate the greater
necessity, and the greater measure of Holiness, that should be found in the
Priest more than in any man In Zach. c. 3. v. 8.
besides. Thus Cornelius a Lapide, Sacerdotes Sanctitatis sint portenta, God
requires that the Priests should be the Prodigies and wonders, i. e. the grand
examples of holy lives. But,

Secondly, The Holiness of our lives is that, which Non provenit dignitas ex
Nomine, sed Virtute; merito non vocabulo; sanctitate, non Ministerio. Ber.
Sermon. de Coena Domini. Sacerdotes Dei non immerito vos dixerim, si vixeriti^
Sa^erdotali^er. Bern. Sermon. de Coena Domini. Vt sit quisque veru^ Sacerdos,
oportet ut non solo Sacramento, sed justitia quoque indua^ur. Aug. contra
literas Petiliani, lib. 2.
our own usual Names and Titles do require. We usually say, Bonum nomen bonum
omen, Good names are lucky signs; they should be so with us; we are styled
(...), Sacerdotes, which terms do suppose as well the Integrity of our Lives,
as the Functions of our Office. The Title of an Archbishop is this, Your Grace;
and that of the Pope himself, His Holiness. Historians tell us, that when
Aeneas Sylvius came to be Pope, he thought fit to change his name, rejicite
Aeneam, recipite Pium, old Aeneas must be forgot; it is Pius* that must now be
received.

I read, that Arcadius the Emperor writing to Flavianus Bishop of Antioch began
his Letter thus, (...), your Holiness has heard. And the Council of Carthage
in their Synodical Letter to Celestine Bishop of Rome, tells him, (...), your
Holiness has declared. It seems that Holiness, as it is one of Gods most
glorious Attributes, so is it one of his Ministers most necessary
Qualifications too.

Matt. 5. 13.
Our Savior calls us the Salt of the earth, and certainly the purer and
whiter the Salt is, it is so much the better; our Savior styles us, the Light
of Matt. 5. 14.
the world, and doubtless, the more pure the oil is, and the less snuff we
have, the brighter shall we shine. I remember Cornelius a Lapide tells us, that
the Bishop In Epist. priorem ad Tim. c. 3.
in the Church is, instar Solis, like the Sun in the Firmament; and if so,
methinks there is no inferior Minister, but in his own lower Orb should be a
Star; and if in Saint John's language the Bishop Apoc. 2. 1.
be, as we grant he is, (...), an earthly Angel; Sacerdo^ Domini Angelus. Ber.
lib. de Pracepto and dispensat. Cap. 12.
then certainly, there is no Clergyman whatsoever, but is obliged to live as
becomes a Saint. But,

Thirdly, The Holiness of our Lives is that, which our Employment does require.
Saint Paul puts the 2 Cor. 2. 16.
question, (...); who is sufficient for this Sacred Function? Saint Chrysostom
spends six Tracts upon Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Episcopi, Presbyteri, aut Diaconi ^ffi
io nihil in hac vita difficilius, laboriosius, periculosius. Aug. Epist. 148.
ad Episc. Valerium. Georgius Archiep. Alexand. in vita Chrysostom.
this one Argument, (...), how Sacred the Priesthood is, and how holy the
Priest himself should be. Authors tell us, that after the death of Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople, several Presbyters, desiring to be his Successor,
were refused, as being, (...), unworthy of that great employment. Now, that the
employment, not of the Bishop only, but the Presbyter and Deacon too, requires
this Holiness of our respective lives, will appear from two considerations.

First, we have to do, by virtue of our employment, in an especial manner, with
an holy God. It Is Saint Bernards caution, vide, ne immundus ad Deum accedas,
when you come to God, look you be clean. Exodus 19. 22.
It is Gods own Argument, let the Priests sanctify themselves; and why the
Priests more than the people? why thus, let the Priests, that draw nigh to God,
sanctify themselves; the Text implies, that there is something in God, which
requires holiness in the Priest, that Ministers before him, and what that Lev.
21. 8.
is, Moses tells us, the Priest shall be holy, upon what score? why thus, for I
the Lord am holy. It seems that an unholy Priest is not fit to deal with an
holy God. But,

(...). Synesius Epist. 57. contra Andronicum. 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Secondly, We have to do, by virtue of our employment, in an especial manner,
with holy things. See what they are in three particulars;

First, We have to do, in an especial manner, with the Word of God: thus Saint
Paul, He has committed unto us the word of reconciliation, and what kind of
Word is that? the same Apostle styles it, (...), 2 Timothy 3. 15.
the holy Scriptures. And well he may; for the Author of the Scriptures is,
(...), the holy Spirit; the grand Subject of the Scriptures is Christ, (...),
that holy one of God. And the Penmen of the Scriptures are expressly styled, 2
Pet. 1. 21.
(...), holy men of God. And certainly, if the Scriptures be thus holy in their
Author, in their subject matter, and in their Scribes, it is but fit that they
should be holy in their interpreters too.

Corn. a Lap. in Epist. dedicat. (...) Hovium A^^hi^pisc. Mechl.
So Sacred are the Oracles of our God, that Cornelius a Lapide tells us,
Charles Borromoeus, whom he styles, Novus Mediolanensium Ambrosius, did never
read the Scriptures, no not in his old age, but nudo capite, and flexis
genibus, with a bare head, and a bended knee. And methinks that, which the
Turks are said to write upon their Alcoran, may with better reason be written
upon our Bibles, nemo immundus me tangat, let no unclean person touch me; God
himself has discovered his mind in this particular, unto the wicked, says
God, what have thou to do to declare Psalm. 50. 16.
my Statutes? it is such a Text as once stopped Origens (...), Chrysostom. in locum.
Corn. a Lap. in Epist. ad H^v.
mouth; and if our lives be wicked, may justly stop ours too. Sure it is, if the
Scriptures be thus holy, and if these holy Scriptures be, as Saint Ambrose was
wont to call them, libri sacerdotales, the Priests Books, so ours, as no man's
else; we are concerned, that our persons and our lives be, what these Books not
only are, but require too, Righteous, Just and Holy.

Secondly, We have to do, in an especial manner, with that solemn duty of
Prayer; so the Prophet, Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, say, spare
Joel 2. 17.
thy people O Lord, etc. the Minister is Gods mouth to man, and man's mouth to
God; from God we bring Commands, from man we carry Petitions. And 1 Timothy 2. 8.
(...). Oecum. in locum. Calvin. in 1 Timothy c. 2.
how this must be done, Saint Paul tells us, I will, that men pray, lifting up,
(...), holy hands, it is not manus lotas, washed hands, but, manus innocuas,
innocent hands, so Tertullian. Certainly, that tongue, that begs a mercy; that
eye, which expects a kindness; that hand, which would fain receive some boon
from God; must be, as Calvin words it, puri cordis indices, signs of a pure
heart, and a spotless Soul.

Thirdly, We have to do, in an especial manner, with the holy Sacraments, those
(...) those dreadful and sacred mysteries of the Gospel.

Nulli Angelorum, null^ spiritibus supernis, etc. Bern. sermon. in Coena Domini.
Ecc. 2. 10.
Saint Bernard tells us, that the administration of Sacraments is, munus plus
quam Angelicum, such a service, as Angels never had to do with. It Is true,
Angels have been Preachers, (...). Behold I bring you good tidings, etc. An
Angel has the honor to be the very first Preacher of our new born Jesus; but
as to the Administration of Sacraments, it is (...), Chry. (...), etc. (...).
Dionys. Arcop. de Hier. Eccles. c. 5. Bern. in sermon. de Coena Domini. De
imitat. Christi. l. 4. c. 12.
the Minister alone that has to do with this.

And certainly, upon this score, is the Minister highly obliged, to be holy;
thus Saint Chrysostom, (...), it behooves the Minister, when he stands at Gods
Table, to be as holy, as if he now stood in Heaven in the midst of Angels. We
must not be like those, whom Saint Bernard thus complains of, non sicut
Sacerdotes in Altari, sed sicut carnifices in Macello, they behaved themselves
not like Priests at the Altar, but like Butchers in the Shambles. We must
remember, it is such a Service, that requires, as Thomas Theodidactus expresses
it, Mundas manus, purum os, immaculatum cor, clean hands, a pure mouth, and an
unspotted Soul. But,

Fourthly, The holiness of our lives is that, to which the malice of our
enemies does oblige us.

Sophocles in Antigone.
Sophocles tells us, what an imprudent thing it is (...), to give an enemy
great occasion to laugh and jeer us, and surely, that counsel, Demosth. de
falsa legatione.
which Demosthenes gave the Athenians in this matter, concerns us this day,
(...), we are obliged to take heed, that we give not our enemies just ground to
rejoice against us.

That the Church of England has store of enemies, we are too sure; the Papist,
the Heretic, the Sectary, the Atheist, all these are the professed enemies of
our Church. Now, if Ministers prove scandalous, what then? May, I not say,
Virgil. Aen. 2.
Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae?


It Is impossible to name that thing, whereby we can gratify our enemies more,
than by being scandalous. It Is sure, that the Papist, who magnifieth his own
good works, will magnify our bad ones too; it is sure that the Fanatic, who
glories in the strictness of his own life, will take advantage from the
looseness of ours; and as for the Atheist, who owns no God, we shall but
confirm and comfort him in that monstrous opinion, if we, who profess to serve
a God, do walk as if there were none.

Well; since we have such store of enemies, let us make the best use of them,
that we can; from the consideration of their malice let us learn to be so much
the more innocent; let us be as sure to avoid crimes, as they are to censure
them. If a Sectary shall object that we are Gluttons or Drunkards, let our
constant Sobriety and Temperance confute them: if Fanatics shall say, as
commonly they do, that we are covetous muckworms, let us give them the lie, not
by uncivil language, not by evil words, but by good works.

And perhaps this may be the design of Heaven in letting loose these Beasts
upon us; perhaps God designs by the worst of men to make us so much the
Plutarchus in Tract. (...), etc.
better. I remember, Plutarch tells us the opinion of Diogenes, that whosoever
would lead a virtuous life, does stand in need either (...), of right and plain
dealing friends, or else (...), of incensed and enraged enemies; and the
reason, he gives, is this, As for our cordial friends, it will be their
endeavor to preserve us from vice, (...) by their admonitions; but if these
fail, it is possible that our bitter enemies may better effect it (...), by
their reproaches.

And O that this might be the blessed event of our enemies accursed malice! If
we will not be stricter in our lives to comply with the Commands of an Holy
God, yet let us be so to escape the Calumnies of wicked men. Would we but make
this advantage of our enemies, how might we say with Ovid, Ovid. Met. 2.
aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo? What cause should we have, not only, as our
Savior bids us, to bless our enemies themselves, but also to bless God for
them, as being, though not proper and Physical means, yet happy occasions to
make us wiser. But however, the way for us to confute their objections, is not
to dispute like Scholars, but to live like Christians; to cleanse our own hands
is the surest course to stop their mouths: and were but this once effectually
done, our establishment would be the firmer; the Motto of our Church would be
like that of Venice, Nec flatu, nec fluctu moveor, all the storms and tempests,
that men or Devils could raise against us, would never shake us. But,

Fifthly, The Holiness of our lives is that, to which (...), Arist. in Apost.
Can. 61.
the Church of God does much oblige us; what has been, and still is, the
Practice of the Church, as to this, we may see in three particulars.

First, It has been the constant care of the Primitive Church, and still is
the care of ours, that no scandalous person be received into holy Orders.

Basil. Mag. in Epist. (...).
To prevent this, Saint Basil tells us, that the primitive Church did (...),
receive no Minister but with a great deal of Examination. The main things
(...). Council. Nic. Can. 9. Novel. 123. c. 12, 13, 14. Just in Epist. ad
Epiphanium Archiep. Constantinopol.
enquired into were, (...), a man's Faith, Learning, and Life, and the law was
strict in all. As to Faith, to be sure no Heretic could be Ordained; as to
Learning, the statute was this, (...), or, as Justinian otherwise words it,
(...), a man that is void of all learning, shall not have the least sacred
Office in the Church of God.

Joannis Antiocheni Capita Ecclesiastica.
But as to the Life and Conversation, the Law if possible, was sticter yet,
(...), etc. says the Emperor; we command all the Bishops of the Empire to
Ordain no man whatsoever, till they have first enquired, and that strictly too,
into his manners. This law was made to confirm the Canons of several Councils,
among which this Council. Chalcedon. Oecum. 4. Can. 6.
was one, (...). As with us, the names of persons to be married, so with them
the names of persons to be ordained, were solemnly published in the
Congregation, that so, whosoever could, might object against them. That this
was the only reason of that practice, may be concluded from that of Justinian,
(...) Balsam. Constable. Eccl. Collectio. lib. 3. ex Novel.
(...), etc. Whosoever can and will object against any person to be Ordained,
has his liberty. (...). Apost. Can. 61.


Well, suppose any crime were objected and proved, what then? why thus, (...),
let not that man be Ordained, let him not be admitted into the Clergy; so say
the Apostles Canons. (...). Balsam. Constit. Eccl. Collect. l. 3. Council.
Nicaeni. Can. 9.
Again, suppose the person himself did confess the guilt of such and such
crimes, but withal testified his repentance, how sped he then? why, (...), the
Canon admits them not; so the Council of Nice. It Is that, which the first
Council of Toledo thus confirms, placuit ut poenitentes non admittantur ad
Clerum. And this Pope Siricius, Siricius in Epist. Decretal. Dion. Exig.
Collect.
Si probabiliter vixerit, si vitae integritas sit approbata, etc. If a man's
life be plausible and well approved, he is so far in a capacity of holy Orders:
but suppose a man has been a great sinner and now repents, what then? why, his
decree runs thus, nec post poenitudinem, etc. such a man notwithstanding all
the repentance that he can profess, shall not be made a Minister.

Nay more, a man might be refused in this case Council. Neocaes. Can. 8.
for the scandalous lives of his relations, (...), If the wife be an Adulteress,
the husband, though never so chaste, shall be no minister; so says the Council
of Neocaesarea. And certainly all these Laws and Canons, made purposely to
prevent the Ordination of Debauched persons, are so many evidences, how greatly
the Church of God does abhor Scandal in its Clergy. But,

Secondly, It has been the great care of the Christian Cavete omnes
suspiciones, and quicquid probabiliter fingi potest, ne fingatur, ante devita*
Hieronymus ad Nepot. de vita Clericorum.
Church to prevent in all persons, that have been ordained, not only the foul
and grosser acts, but even all occasions, jealousses, and suspicions of
Scandal. What was the practice of the Church in former ages, as to this, may be
seen in these Four instances.

First, To prevent the least suspicion of uncleanness in the Minister, the
Council of Nice forbids him to receive into his house, (...), mulieres Council.
Nic^^. Can. 3. Justellus in Codic. Can. Eccl. Vniversa.
extraneas, ascititias; or, as others nearer to the Greek, subintroductas, any
woman, except a mother, a sister, an aunt, or some such person, in whom there
could not be, as the Council words it, (...), any the least suspicion. It seems
that Con. Nic. Can. 3.
there were in that Age certain women entertained in Christian Families, (...),
says Epiphanius, (...), Epiphan. Haer. 63. de Origen^. Chrysostom. (...).
Gregorius Nys. (...). cap. 23. Chrysostom. ubi. supra.
(...), says St. Chrysostom; they were not Wives nor Concubines; they were not
used for the Procreation of children, nor the satisfaction of Lust; no, (...),
says Gregory Nyssene; this cohabitation they styled the Brotherhood and
Sisterhood; and they had, (...), many reasons and pretenses for it, as St.
Chrysostom tells us. But yet notwithstanding, this must not serve the Ministers
turn; the Law excludes all such women from his house, and the reason alleged
was this, (...), it did Joan. Antioch. Nomocanon. ex 19. Constable. Tit. 3.
occasion no small suspicion and ground of reproach.

And as to that other sort of women, who were styled, (...), Deaconesses,
Council. Chalced. Can. 15. (...) Novel. 6. c. 6. (...). Bals. Constable. Eccl. Coll.
ex lib. 1. Codic. Council. Laodic, Can. 11.
whose business was, in some cases, to attend the Minister and serve the Church,
to prevent all suspicion of levity and wantonness, the Council of Chalcedon
decreed that no such woman should be Ordained, (...), before she were at least
Forty years of age. And lest this Canon should not be enough to prevent all
jealousy, Theodosius made a Law, that no such woman should be employed, except
she were, (...), above Sixty years old; so great was their age, that the
Council of Laodicea expressly calls them (...), and accordingly Hieronymus in
Epist. ad Gerontiam.
St. Hierom, Anus Ecclesiae, the Elder or Ancient women of the Church; whatever
their employment was, there was no Young woman admitted to it for fear of
Scandal. But,

Secondly, To prevent the suspicion of covetousness, Council. Nic. Can. 17.
Apost. Can. 44.
the sin that is so usually objected against the Clergy, the Council of Nice
does severely forbid the Minister, (...), to take any use for the money he
lends; no not (...) not so much as one in the Leo decret. 40.
hundred; and that, as Pope Leo afterward decreed, nomine aut suo aut alieno,
either in his own name, or any man's else. The design of this Canon was to
prevent Justel. in Can. Vniv. Eccl. 17. Council. Chalced. Can. 3. Council.
Carthag. Can. 16. Negotiatorem Clericum quasi Pestem fuge. Hieron. ad
Nepotianum de vita Cler. Joan. Antioch. Nomocan. Constit. 36.
(...) all suspicion of filthy Lucre in the Clergy; so Justellus.

And perhaps, the Council of Chalcedon might have some respect to this, which
forbids the Minister, (...), or, as the Council of Carthage otherwise words it,
(...), to be a Taker, a Renter, a Farmer of Lands. To the like end seems that
law of Justinian, (...), it is bad Greek, but it seems the Emperor thought the
constitution was good, and this it was, We forbid all Clergymen to play at
Tables; and it is probable enough, that the reason was to prevent the suspicion
of Covetousness.

Thirdly, To prevent the suspicion of rioting, gluttony, and drunkenness in the
minister, the Council of Council. Laod. Can. 24. Non debet, qui animarum curam
gerit, ta^^rnas intrare, nisi necessitate co^ctus. Aug. sermon. 36. ad fratres in
Eremo. Council. Carthag. Can. 40. Apost. Can. 54. (...). Arist. in Apost. Can.
54.
Laodicea does strictly charge him, (...), not so much once as to enter into a
Tavern, Inn, or Alehouse. The same thing did the Council of Carthage enjoin,
only with this exception, (...), we forbid all Ministers to enter such Public
houses, unless the necessity of travail oblige them to it.

And as the Canons of these Councils forbid the Minister all public Houses, so
did the Synod of Laodicea Council. Laod. Can. 54. Non licet Clerico extra horam
libere, vel de domo in domum transire* and prandium vel coennm ordinare. Aug.
sermon. 36. ad fratres in Eremo. Apost. Can. 42. Novel. 123. de Episc. And. Joan.
Antioch. Nomocan. Constit. 36. Council. sextum in Trullo Can. 24. Symsons
Church History.
restrain all Clergymen from all private revellings and merry meetings, (...),
it is not for Clergymen to join their money and club for wine and junkets, as
other men do. Once more,

Fourthly, To prevent the suspicion of voluptuousness and the love of worldly
delights and pastimes in the Ministers, the law forbad them not only, (...), to
play at dice themselves; but (...), to be standers by and lookers on, whilst
others play. To the same purpose the Sixth Council in Trullo at Constantinople
forbids the Minister, (...), to be present at horse-races; and the Council of
Tours called by Charles the Great, forbad all Clergymen to hawk, hunt, etc.
Perhaps some of these Canons may be too severe, forbidding the Minister such
recreations, as, being innocent in themselves, may, by some circumstances, be
rendered as necessary for him, if not as food, yet at least as physic; but yet
they prove that, which I bring them for, namely, the care of the Church to
prevent all suspicion of scandal in the Clergy. But,

Thirdly, It has been the constant practice of the Christian Church, where it
could not by the Authority of all its Sanctions prevent Scandal, there by the
Severity of its laws to punish it.

There are two sorts of Persons, in whom the sin is, and the punishment should
be greater than in other men; the Magistrate and the Minister; As to the
Magistrate, Laertius tells us, that amongst the laws of Diog. Laertius in vita
Solonis.
Solon, this was one, (...), If a Magistrate should be found drunk let him die
for it.

Indeed, as to the Minister, the Laws of the Church are not sanguinary, but
they have been somewhat severe; the censures, which the Church passed, were
proportionable to those crimes, which any Clergyman committed: in some lesser
cases the sentence was Joan. Antioch. Nomoc. Constit. 36. Justinian. ad
Epiphan. Archiep. Constantino. Apostolorum Can. 5.
only this, (...), or, as it is otherwise worded, (...), in our dialect and
according to our discipline, let him be suspended for three years time. But in
other cases thus, (...), let him be excommunicated; upon some miscarriages
thus, (...), let him be degraded; upon other crimes Apostolorum Can. 6.
it rose higher, (...), let him be deposed, (...), let him be thrust out of the
Ministry; or, which is all one, (...), let him be turned out amongst the
Laics.

And if once this were done, there was no place left for repentance; in this
respect the Church dealt more severely with the Clergy than they did with the
Laity; Council. Nic. Can. 11. Council. Nic. Can. 12. (...). Council. Ancyrani Can.
16. Council. Laod. Can. 2.
what crime soever a Layman had committed, yet after he had been so much time
amongst the (...), so much time amongst the (...), and so much time amongst the
(...), after he endured the discipline of the Church and manifested his
repentance, he was readmitted, (...), to stand and pray with the Congregation,
he was, in the Council of Laodicea's language, a man thought fit, (...), to be
received into the Communion of the Church again, and the Participation of all
its privileges, as if he had never so highly sinned.

But if a Clergyman, for some notorious and scandalous crime, was once
degraded, deposed, and turned out of his office; if once he became, as the
Apostles Canons Apostol. Can. 5.
word it, (...), unhallowed; if once he Council. Nic. Can. 17, and 18.
were made, as the Nicene Bishops express it, (...), and again, (...), to cease
from his Ministry; such a person, what repentance soever he might profess, was
seldom restored; to be sure, he did, (...), Symeonis Magistri Canonum Epitome.
(...). Conc. Ancyr. Can. 1.
perform no holy office any more for ever; so much does the Council of Ancyra
inform us. And now methinks, all this practice of the Christian Church, in its
several ages, is enough to convince us, that Scandal in a Minister is by no
means to be endured.

Uses.
(...) Dionys. Areop. Epist. ad Demophilum Monachum.
FIrst, Consider how much to blame those persons needs must be, who charge
those Ministers with Scandal who deserve it not.

The truth is, in some men's mouths, we are all grown scandalous; we are
scandalous, eo nomine, because we are Ministers; for a Minister to be ordained,
as Timothy and Titus certainly were; for a Minister to comply with the lawful
Commands of Authority, as St. Paul himself does strictly require, it is grown
Romans 13. 1. Heb. 13. 17.
little less, than to be a Priest of Baal. Nay more, there are some amongst us,
who would be reputed Ministers themselves; such, I mean, as formerly received
their own ordination, as we still do from the Bishop, and yet now, do not only
take, but snatch and create occasions to declaim against their sacred function;
acting too much like those unthankful clouds, which darken the Sun that raised
them.

But besides these, there are many amongst us, who do most narrowly watch for
all our haltings; who rejoice to see us trip, hoping that every stumble will
tend toward our final fall. I am persuaded, that those very humane infirmities
of ours, which are the subject of our own daily sorrow, are grown the matter of
their triumph; they will not allow us to be the Ministers of God, because they
see in us the imperfections of men.

Nor is it enough with these barely to report our miscarriages, but they must
advance them too; it is not more usual than easy, through the poison of their
virulent tongues, to make our mole-hills swell into mountains, and every mote
to become a beam. To withdraw the people from our Ministry, their art is to
vilify our persons; and the surest way to do that, is, to aggravate our
failings, and make them crimes; there is not the least Gnat that we swallow,
but represented through their perspective, appears like a Camel, and carries a
Bunch on his back.

The great sin, that is commonly charged against most of us, is that of
covetousness; they cannot say, that we are dumb dogs; but something they will
say, and that must be this, we are greedy dogs; since they must grant, that we
bark, they are concerned to affirm, that we bite, and that more hard than
becomes us. Well, here is their Indictment, but what is their Evidence? How is
this sore Article proved against us? Why thus, the Minister, who perhaps has
nothing else but his Tithes to live on, makes bold to demand, what God and man
have made his due; we would fain have something, and that something is our own
too, to enable us to those acts of Hospitality and Charity, which God requires,
and these very men, who grudg at our Tithes, do themselves expect; we would
have something also to maintain our families, to furnish our studies, to find
us books, that we may preach, and bread that we may live. Yea, hinc illae
lachrymae, this is it, that makes us covetous; it is because we would not lose
that which every man else is allowed to demand, I mean, our own; we are
therefore covetous, because we are not willing to starve; or which is almost as
bad, to beg or live on alms.

If there be any person in this assembly, that does either raise or spread such
false reports against the Ministers of God, let him consider, what sin he
commits, and what danger he runs. And here, I might as easily foretell you,
what such false accusers are like to suffer in the next world; as to inform
you, what they have already suffered in this.

Cicero pro M. Coelio.
I remember Tully tells us, aliud est maledicere, aliud accusare, it is one
thing to reproach, another thing to accuse; accusatio crimen desiderat, so he;
And so Thucydides, Thucyd. l. 1.
(...), an accusation does suppose and require some crime; but if there be none,
what then? (...), Justinian. Imp. Petro Magistro officiorum.
let the accuser suffer what punishment he well deserves; and what that is, the
same Justinian, that made this law, does elsewhere specify, (...), Balsam.
Constit. Eccl. Coll. l. 3. ex Novellis.
an everlasting, or, at least, a very long excommunication.

The Law of England, that very Magna Charta, to which we appeal in our other
concerns as a refuge, that is Sacred and Inviolable, has long since provided,
that whosoever shall dare to slander any Peer of the Kingdom, or Prelate of the
Church, shall suffer Imprisonment; but if not, if you make some shift to escape
man's Gaol, yet you are concerned to take heed of Gods.

Sure it is, scandal in a Minister, whether it be real or but reputed only, is
ever attended with dreadful circumstances and events; if the Minister be
certainly either proved or believed to be wicked, presently his person is
contemned, his doctrine is slighted, and, upon that score, it is too too
probable, that the Souls under his charge may perish. Now, past all
peradventure, that man, who raises or spreads those false reports of the
Minister, that prove so destructive to his Parish, is justly chargeable with
all the sad consequences of those forged Calumnies, the result whereof is
nothing less, than the damnation of Souls.

Remember, Sirs, when you revile such and such worthy Ministers of God, you
revile those very persons, who make it their business, in Public to Pray, and
in Private to Weep for such as you; when you basely reproach Christ's pious and
Learned Servants, you cast dirt upon the Chariots of our Israel, the Fathers of
our Church, and the Ambassadors of Heaven. Remember yet once more, when you
raise false Aspersions against the Minister of such and such a Parish; you do,
what in you lies, to render his Person odious, his Labors vain, and his Flock
undone to eternity; and if so, it is at your hands that God will require the
blood of so many Souls. But,

Secondly, Consider how much to blame those Parishes are, that content
themselves with a scandalous Minister, if perhaps there be any one such person
yet found amongst us. That amongst those eight or nine thousand Ministers, that
are in our Church, there may be here and there a man that is Scandalous, is a
thing neither new nor strange at all; In the Church of the Jews, that was
nothing so numerous as ours, we find a wicked Saul amongst the Prophets, a
scandalous Hophni and Phineas among the Priests; and in the New Testament, when
the Ministry, set but aside the Seventy Disciples, was confined within Christ's
own family, we find but amongst Twelve Apostles a weak Peter, that denied his
Lord; and a (...), Chrysostom. (...). Orat. 4.
wicked Judas, that betrayed him. Nay more, in the Church Triumphant in Heaven
there was a proud Lucifer, and many Apostate Spirits amongst the Angels those
more Immediate Ministers of God. And certainly, whilst the Church below is like
the Moon, subject to Eclipses, Alterations and Changes, it will not be without
her Spots.

And methinks, the presence of some few untoward Ministers, which has been the
constant and general unhappiness of all Churches and Ages, should not be urged
as the peculiar crime of ours.

Indeed, that scandalous Ministers are justly decried, and ought to be severely
censured, there is no good man but grants; all the question is, where lies the
blame? upon whom shall we fix it? why thus; one man blames the Bishop that
Ordains; a second blames the Patron that Presents; a third blames the Diocesan,
that gives Institution and commands Induction.

But notwithstanding all this, what if I tell you, and that upon very good
reason, that the main fault lies somewhere else? As to the Patron that
presents he is commonly some Noble person, at least some man that is Rich; and
since he is so, let him fee his Lawyer, or answer for himself; but as to the
Bishops of England, they are our Fathers; and their just honor, by the Law of
our God, are we bound to vindicate; and for them who Ordain and Collate all
Ministers, we have enough to reply.

It Is well known, that the Bishops of England do not pretend* as the Bishop of
Rome does, to be infallible; after their strictest enquiry into the lives of
persons to be Ordained or Collated, it is possible, that the wisest of them
being but men, though styled Angels, may be mistaken. It Is impossible, that the
Bishop, who is neither omnipresent nor omniscient, should certainly and
personally know the conversations of all, nor the hearts of any, that come to
be Ordained or Collated. But yet, whoever does so, does present (...). Chrysostom.
(...). Orat. 2.
himself to the Bishop as a pretender to Religion and Holiness; and to justify
that pretense of his, he brings along with him fair Testimonials, Certificals,
and Subscriptions from some eminent persons, who, upon their own knowledge,
bear witness to the Integrity of his Conversation. It is true, what our
Learning is, what Intellectuals we have, the Bishop himself may sift and easily
know; but as for our Morals, there is a necessity, that he must rely upon that
Testimony, Character, and Credential Letters that are given by others.

And as it is impossible that the Bishop, who is but a man, should discover the
present hypocrisy of any man's heart; so is it equally impossible, that he
should foresee the future miscarriages of any man's life. There may be after our
Ordination, Quinquennium Neronis, I mean, we may carry our selves very fair for
a while, and yet break out at last; But what then? is the Bishop to blame for
this? tell me, is it possible, that the Governors of our Church should fly as
Cherubims? is it possible, that our Bishops, who are clogged with flesh, should
move in an instant, like so many Intelligences, from parish to parish, from
Church to Church, that so they may see and hear how the Minister preaches upon
the Sunday, and how he lives all the week after? No; it is absolutely
necessary, that the Bishop, though he be the great Watchman of Israel and the
Seer of the Church, must notwithstanding see with other men's eyes, and hear
with other men's ears; he must be informed of those misdemeanors in the
Diocese, which it is impossible that he should otherwise know himself, and that
is the design of our solemn convention this day.

And doubtless, the want of this information is the only just ground of those
complaints, that are continued of such and such miscarriages in the Clergy. I
dare affirm, that if there be any one scandalous Minister yet found amongst us,
the blame does not lie in the Bishop, who is the great Officer and Judge of the
Church; but rather in the Churchwardens, those inferior Officers, who are the
Trustees of every Parish.

It Is like enough, that in some Towns the Officers themselves may be men of
Debauched lives; and, being such, do love that Minister best, that is most like
themselves, who perhaps spares their sins, because they are his own too. But if
not, then tell me, is your Minister a drunkard? can you prove him such? if so,
then by all the respect, which you owe to God, the Church, your Neighbors, and
Your selves too, you stand obliged to present him; but perhaps you will say, to
what purpose? I Will tell you what, do but prove your Minister to be a drunkard,
and I dare warrant, that he will be quickly forced either to leave the
Alehouse, or quit the Church.

Once more; is your Minister a Swearer? can you prove him such? if so, then by
all that Sacred respect, which you owe to your own solemn Oaths, you are
obliged to present those rash ones of his: and when once that is done, I dare
assure you, that such a Minister, if he will not reform his mouth, shall find
it stopped.

To conclude; you are this day obliged to present whatever is found amiss among
your selves or us; you are concerned to take heed, that your Presentiments be
Candid, Fair, and Impartial: Present no man that is Innocent, because perhaps
you hate him; spare no man that is Guilty, because perhaps you love him; were
it thus, your just complaints would be removed, your just desires would be
accomplished; were it thus, you would all be convinced, that the design of this
days meeting is Christian, high, and noble; in a word, you would find by your
own experience, that the End of a Visitation is not, as some dare falsely
mutter, to enrich the Officers, but barely to reform the Church.

(...).
THE END.

