THE EXPOSITION CONTINUED UPON The Nineteen last Chapters of the PROPHET
EZEKIEL, WITH Many useful OBSERVATIONS thereupon, DELIVERED In several LECTURES
in London:

By WILLIAM GREENHIL.

Prove. 23.26. Buy the truth and sell it not. Veritas est animae Pabulum. Lact.
Sponsa intellectus. Mirand. Cujus aures veritati sunt clausae and ab amico
verum audire nequeat, hujus salus desperanda est. Cicer. de Amiciti. LONDON,
Printed for ^homas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns in Cheapside overagainst the
great Conduit. 1662.

TO THE Christian Reader. AND Especially to those, who helped on and
countenanced THE EXPOSITORIE-WOORK.
THis is the fifth and last part upon Ezekiel; which was finished in the latter
end of the year 1654. and has been latent full seven years, like Josiah in the
Temple: but now through the instigation of learned and godly Ministers, some
others, and considerations of mine own comes to public view. Ezekiel
prophesied unto the Jews, who were then the only people God had in the world,
and honored with singular Titles, Sons of the living God Hos. 1.10
his first born Exodus 4.22.
his inheritance Isa. 19.29.
his peculiar Treasure Ps. 134 ^.
his pleasant Portion Jer. 12.10.
a noble Vine Jer. 2.21.
the holy flock Ezekiel. 36 38.
a chosen generation Isa 41.11.9. 1 Pet. 2 8
the Lords glory Ps. 78.61.
the dearly beloved of his Soul Ier. 12.7.
and endued with great Privileges Romans 9 45.
yet were they not exempted from afflictive and severe sufferings; they were a
Reproach to the Heathen, a mocking to all Countries, and much vexed Ezekiel. 22.15.
The Pestilence, Sword and Famine consumed them, so that the pitiful women did
eat their own children Lam 4.10.
and plucked off their own breasts Ezekiel. 23.3^.
the Priests and Elders gave up the ghost, while they sought for meat, to
relieve their souls Lam. 1.19.
those brought up in Scarlet embraced dunghils Lam. 4.5.
the women were ravished in Sion, the maids in the Cities of Judah, and Princes
were hanged up by their hands Lam. 5.11.12.
they could not walk safely in the Streets Lam. 4.18.
their necks were under persecution Lam. 5.5.
Lions Tiglathpileser, and Shalmaneser, took away the ten Tribes, and
Nebuchadnezzer broke the bones of Judah and Benjamin Ier. 50.17.
He burnt the Temple and City, he ruined Church and State, and carried the
Jews into Captivity, where they suffered unspeakable misery. The Prophet tells
us, that their punishment was greater then the Sodomites. Lam. 4 6.
That which chiefly provoked God to deal thus severely with them, as Ezekiel,
and others testify, was their leaving his pure worship, Ordinances and
Institutions, falling to false ways of worship and compliance with the
Nations. They had the Image of Jealousy, Ezekiel. 8.3.
the Altar of Damascus, 2 King. 16.
the Statutes of Omri, Mic. 6.16.
High places 2 Chronicles. 20.33.
Traditions and Statutes of their Fathers Ezekiel. 20.18. Ier. 9.14.
customs of the Nations, they set their posts with Gods posts; worshipped with
their faces toward the East: Ezekiel. 8.16.
they would be as the Heathens and walk after their own Imaginations Ier. 18 12.
whereas they should have walked in Gods Laws and Statutes Ezekiel. 20.19.
when therefore the house of Israel degenerated into dross, Ezekiel. 20.32.
God gathered them into the Furnace, and poured out his fury upon them: Ezekiel.
22.19.20.21.22.
Apostatizing from the pure worship of God, to the superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies of men, provokes bitterly; It is a Reproach to God, his Worship,
Truth and Ordinances, it is a violaon of former promises, it is high
Ingratitude and Rebellion against God, it is a great scandal to all the godly,
especially the weak, it encourages, justifies and hardens the wicked, it ruins
souls, gratifies Satan, it exposes men to visible, and unavoidable judgments.
When the Jews purposed to leave the Lords Tents, and fall to Babylonish
Temples, Ezekiel. 20.22.23.
Then did he swear, that he would rule over them with Fury. This should
caution us to keep distance from inward approbation of, (...) appellatione,
omnia ea intelliguntur quae homines: cole^do, aut representando numini solent
comminisci, Bez. vid. Leigh in Verbo
and outward compliance with, either Jewish Ceremonies, or Romish Rites; The
first are abrogated by the Lord: and it may be Jericho work to raise them up
again; The other are the Mark of the Beast, and its not safe to bear that Mark,
Rev. 14.9, 16.2, God is a jealous God, and would not have his to Symbolize with
Idolatrous: or superstitious practices; He forbad his people to take, or desire
in their hearts the silver and gold was upon Idols; (...)
they might not touch with their hearts or hands, any thing belonged to them,
they might not do as other Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.25.
nor enquire after their gods, Levit. 18.2.
and mode of worship, Deuteronomy. 12.30. In Treatise of Ido^^tr. chap. 11.. 1.
They might not be like the Nations in Apparel and Hair, says Maymonie, much
more not in the service, and Worship of God; we should not be as other Nations,
but keep Gods Ordinances, and walk therein. Levit. 18.
Symbolizing with Idolatrous worship, persons or things, Is^. 52.11.
God allows not. In Babylon they might not touch any unclean thing, and shall
we in Sion, where all is to be pure according to the mind of the Holy one of
Sion? This made that great Apostle Paul say, 2 Cor. 6 17.
touch not the unclean thing (whatsoever is from man in the worship of God has
aliquid faecis and terrae, like the man whence it comes and is an unclean
thing) and if non-touching do cause Suffering, casting out, or off, God will
receive, be a Father and recompense sufferings. God would not have his touch or
countenance any corruption in worship. When the Damascene Altar was in the
Temple, ^ings 16.14. Ezekiel. 9.2.
and Gods Altar removed out of its place, our Savior and those with him did
not appear at that Altar, lest they should seem to countenance it, but at the
Brason Altar, though deserted and despised. As Christ will own nothing but what
is appointed of the Lord; so those are with him will not own the
susuperstitious appointments of men, but cleave to the Institutions of God,
though out of place, and despised; The Papists say of the Protestants, that in
matters of Religion, in praying, reading their books, hearing their Sermons,
Rehmist. on epist of John v. 10,
presence at their service, partaking of their Sacraments, and all other
communicating with them in spiritual things, is a great, damnable sin. If they
hold it so sinful, to communicate with us in the Institutions of Christ, shall
we Symbolize with them in the Superstitions of Antichrist. Fidel bus fas (...)
est u^^^o^ym^^o ostendere, sibi cumsu^e stitio^s esse con sensum, in Ps. 16.
Judicious Calvin says it is unlawful for Believers, to manifest by any Rite,
that they Symbolize with superstitious ones. Mr. Paget tells us, that Temples
wherein Idols, and Idolatrous Service are still retained, and daily practiced;
cannot lawfully be frequented, nor walked in, In his arrow against separat.
page 319.
because of of the woe, incurred by reason of scandal, Mat. 18.7. Marcus Bishop
of Arethusa, having pulled down an Idolatrous Temple, at the command of
Constantine, and being put upon it by Julian, The^dor. l. 3. c^p. 6. juxta
(...).
either to build it up again, or pay for building of it; he denied both, a
small sum was demanded, his answer was, it is as great wickedness to give a
halfpenny toward such a work, as to give the whole; he suffered great
tortures, rather then he would contribute (...) one halfpenny to promote
Idolatry, Arrow against seperat page 253.
and the forenamed Paget holds it to be the duty of a Christian man rather to
die then give any thing, for the furtherance of Idolatry, though it were but a
halfpenny. De cerona militis.
Tertullian defends and commends the Christian Soldiers that would not wear a
Crown of Laurel, like the Heathens: and Rhenanus in his argument before that
Book of Tertul. says curandum fuit Christianis ne profanis, Ethnicorum
ritibus subscribere viderentur; Mor. same quam Idol^thritist esci August. de
^ono conjug^l. c. 16.
It concerned the Christians to take heed of complying with their Rites.
Another of the Fathers says it were better to be starved to death than to eat
things offered to Idols: Those take part in the ceremonies of Idolaters offer
to Devils, and join themselves to the service of Idols, 1 Cor. 10.

Reader, it is dangerous to Symbolize with the Superstitions Rites and
inventions of men. Do not Judaize, do not Gentilize, do not Romanize but see
you Christianize. Nothing in Worship pleases God but what is his own; what man
brings is spurious, pollutes his Ordinances, and frustrates his commands, Math.
15.6. That comes from God, is set up by him, carries to him, is pure, and
approved of by him. False Worship, and mixtures with the pure Ordinances of
God, are as smoke to his eyes, Vinegar to his teeth, Ezekiel. 8.6.
an abomination to his spirit, and when they come into his Sanctuary, he goes
out of it and far from it. God had chosen Sion to dwell in, Psalm. 132.13.14.
Ezekiel. 9.3.11.23.
There was the glory, but when the people grew profane, the Princes, and
Priests corrupted his worship, then the Glorious Lord, and Glory of the Lord,
left them. Gods Worship is his Name; and that is so dear unto him, that he will
not endure any humane mixtures therewith, but show vehement Indignation against
them, Hos. 4.15. Ier 23.16. Per ministeristerium verbale, says. Boderianus
(...) id est (...) Leigh in critica. sacr. service of the word id. in Romans
12.1. if (...) be the milk of the word (...) it the service of the Word.
and had rather men's souls and bodies should perish, then his Name be polluted;
go ye serve every man his Idols, but pollute ye my holy Name no more, etc.
Ezekiel. 20.39.

Keep off therefore from false Worship, and mixtures of men; you are not to
come there, you are not to hear those teach such things, but to decline them as
Serpents in the way, and as poison in your meats, you are to feed on nothing,
but the sincere milk of the Word, and to Worship God only with * Word-service
Romans 12.1. Such as is appointed and ordered by the Word, not contrary to, or
besides it. The jealousy of the Lord about matters of his worship appeared
eminently in Ezekiels Temple (which represented the Church under the Gospel)
where nothing was to be of the Priests devising; but the Rule was, they shall
keep my Laws and my Statutes in all my Assemblies, and they shall hallow my
Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 44.24. The Assembiles are the Lords, in them must be, not men's,
but his Laws, and Statutes, otherwise his Assemblies are robbed, and wronged,
his Sabbaths polluted, and profaned. Some say Imperium sequitur Ecclesia; the
false Church may, but the True Church, sequitur Christum, It follows Christ;
His sheep hear his voice, and not Strangers. They say Christ we know, and Paul
we know, but who are you? They will not comply with false ways, and mixtures,
but stand for pure worship, and pure Ordinances, Vt cael^m t^rrae m scer^
contingu, merito tat^m plu^^s esse nobis debet sinc^rus Dei cultas and sac^o
sancta e^us veritas, in quo nobis repo^ta est (...) ^^^u* quam ce^tam ^undi.
C^lv. Epist. Com. in Tot. Col. 2 ^^.
saying Let heaven and earth be confounded, yet the sincere worship of God, and
his holy Truth in which eternal life is laid up for us, deservedly ought to be,
and shall be more dear unto us then an hundred worlds. Happy be the souls are
so resolved, they will buy the Truth what ever it cost them, and it will be no
Symonie; they shall find in Gods pure ways where nothing of man is, Gods
gracious presence, large discoveries of himself, transformation into his Image,
intimate communion with him, sensation of his goodness strong consolations, and
increasments with the increases of God, which will make all losses and
sufferings, and fit men for the New heavens, new earth, wherein shall dwell
righteousness, which the Lord hasten, and for which let us beleevingly, and
patiently wait, giving diligence that we may be found of him in peace, without
spot, and blameless.

Reader, if thou have found any benefit by the four former parts upon Ezekiel,
or shall gain any by this, give God all the Glory, who has led me through the
difficulties and depths of this Prophet, and vouchsafe him an interest in thy
prayers, who has spent his strength for thee, and be at some pains to read
what he has taken much, and long pains to write. The faithful God, who makes
good his promises, put his spirit into thee, and cause thee to walk in his
Statutes, to keep his Judgments, and do them. So prays.

He that affactoinately desires the spiritual, and eternal good of souls. W.
G.
The 1th. of the 3d. Month. 1662.
ERRATA.
PAge 5 in marg. r. Junium, p 6 l 24 r. (...), p 6 l 24 r. (...), p 10 l 18
dele are, p 13 l 32 r. Psalm. 90.11. p 23 l 29 r Taphanehes, p 24 l 2 r. this, l
21 put the comma after nigra, p 30 l 26 r. brake 32 l 23 r Noak. p 50 l 21 r.
bejad, l 27 r. Oecolampadius, p 56 l 19 r. Akdir, l 27 r. (...), p 64 l 6 r.
(...), l 11 r. deprive, p 6^ l 10 r. are, p 71 l 23 r. (...), p 72 l 3 r. (...)
Caas, p 77 l 26 r. (...), p 89 in marg. r. Rab. Salom, p 100 l 14 (...), p 112
l 16 r lammaveth, p 117 l 10 r in question, l 12 d. in, l 17 r. (...), p 118 l
1 r. Chapherz, p 130 marg. r. consequitur, p 134 l 18 r. (...), p 149 marg. r.
Rivet, p 161 l 24 r. Agaf l 29 r. (...), p 176 l 7 r. Ils -- chanson, l 9 r.
(...), p 167 l 18 r. sicut, l 11 r. chalaf, p 179 l 12 r. chelef, l 15 r.
(...), p 180 l 16 r. avez, l 18 r. neither, p 181 l 21 r. (...), p 182 l 24 r.
(...), p 185 l 7 r came, p 225 l 18 r. tugida, p ibid: marg: imbuerentur, p 227
l 23 r. servum, p 229 l 3^ (...), p 232 m^rg: praedit, p 235 l 17 r. series, l.
10 11 r. ^e does sometime signify, p 253 l 29 r. Oecolampadius, p 263 marg*
superari, p 218 l 22 r. Cannibals, p 280 l 5 r differ as much from each other,
p 330 l 26 put comma after there, p 336 l 13 r Adamantine, p 340 l 18 r.
sequax, in marg for auts, r. facile, p 343 l 15 r. Polanus p 364 l 16 r. (...),
p 369 l 34 r. (...), p 376 l 10 d. that. l 11 d. and, p 381 l 15 r, ver. 25. p
385 l 22 r. Christianity, p 390 l 17 r. words p 427 r. of these and other
things must be said, Lord thou know, p 431 (...), p 438 l 6 Ezra p 439 l 4
r. said, p 464 l 3 r, stands, p 465 l 24 r. Canaan, p 478 l 17 r. Mat. 19.28. p
483 l 1 r. perhaps, l 6 r. pintus, p 491 l 21 r sus^, p 492 l 8 r. magen, I
ult^r. Gomerites, p 499 l 13 r. novissimo, l 15 r. Mariana, p 204 l 28 r.
Manuaises, p 210 l 27 r. Aphars^thch^tes, p 215 l 27 r. look ar, l 28 d. in
lat. ^b. r some at Jer. 1.14. p 232 l 29 r. been, p 234 l 20 r. (...), p 237 l
8 r. senarium, p 340 l 10 r. hecharutz Joel 3.19. l 18 r. seven, p 250 l 27 r.
Tzitun, p 251 l 15 r. for by ^ v^z. p 258 l 3 r. for, l 5 r. mounted, p 264 l
10 r. baalvonam, p 270 l 27 r. to be led p 279 l 18 r. Ezekiel 34, 25, p 282 l 1
r. Haffen: l 29 r. Jeholak^n, p 283 l 2 r. so l 21 r. of the, p 284 l 26, 27 r.
City, p 295 l 26 r. expression^, p 307 l 21 r. in the, p 308 l 6 r. Rev. 16. p
315 l 21 r. one, p 316 l 8 r. probable, p 318 l 21 r. resecta, p 320 l 21 r.
Sh^ttim, p 321 l 25 r. destroy.

Page, 326 l. 17 r. the outer, p. 328 l. 19 r. infallible, p. 325 l 1 r. bride,
p. 336 l. 27 r. bickneh hammiddah, p. 345 l. 24, 25 r. we cy, p. 351 l. 14 r.
lead, p. 351 352, 353 etc. for carkeises r. carcases, p. 353 l. 13 r. Ezekiel. 48.
last. p. 354 l. 8 dele or, l. 9 r. Jehoiachin, l. 16 r. pegarim, p. 361 in
marg. exuendus l 4. Junius. p. 363 l. 21 r. chok, p. 364 l. 4 r. That, p. 367
l, 13 r. holy, p. 370 l. 18 r. by it some, l. 33 r. made, p. 371 l. 31 r. this
Altar, p. 372 r. this Alt. l. 11 r. Har^^l, p. 375 l. 4 r. s^crifices, l. 6 r.
that validity, p, 385 l. 27 r. your p. 388 l. 31 r. the Lord, p. 389 l. 26 r.
lowest, p 388. l 3. r. Lev, 10.12 p 393 r one of the musts, p 394 l 6 r.
military, p 396 l 23 r. their, p 399 l 2 r. thine, p 405 l 31 r. those p 418 l
1 r. 1 John 2.1. p 419 l 12 r. corruption, p 535 l 3 r in part, p 536 l 12 r.
there, dele comma after worshipped, p 540 l 20 21 r. to a bullock, l 20 d^le
and, l 22 r. with the L^mbs, l 25 r. were, p 541 l 19 r. would, p 546 l 4 d.^ l
5 r. Sanct^u^, p 550 l 2 which suits with, l 4 r. fruimur. l 12 vehicalum, p
552 l 5 r. quenches, l 26 dele M^t. p 558 l 14 r. proceed, p 559 l 16 r. on, p
560 l 9 r. riches both, p 564 l 33 r. (...), p 567 l 22 r. Arias, p 581 l 2 r.
Hamath, l 6 r. Hauran, l 19 r Kadeth, l 24 r. Sanctius, p 582 l 16 r. came, p
583 l 30 put comma after the f^rst in, p 586 l 15, 16. r. Ephraim, l 23 r.
distribution: and so elsewhe^e, p 590 l 1 r. he shall, p 596 l 27 r. but even,
p 600 l 10. r. Hafenrefferus, l 22 r. greatest p, 603 l. 12, r. only, l 13 r,
bear, p 607 l 31 r. he will.

There is likewise in Press the Second part of that practical piece of Divinity
called, The Christian man's Calling. by Mr. George Swinnock, containing,
Dealings with all men, in all conditions, whether inprosperite or adversity; in
all companies, good or bad, in solitariness on the Week day from morning to
night; in visiting the sick upon a dying-bed

AN EXPOSITION Upon more Chapters of EZEKIEL.
CHAP. XXX.
1. The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

2. Son of man, prophecy and say, Thus says the Lord God, Howl ye, woe worth
the day.

3. For the day is near, even the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day, it
shall be the time of the heathen.

4. And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia,
when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and
her foundations shall be broken down.

5. Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub, and
the men of the Land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.


THIS Chapter is a continuance of the former prophecy, and has two general
parts in it. The 1. is concerning the destruction of Egypt, and those that were
confederate with her, to the 20. verse.

2. Is concerning Pharaoh King of Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon,
from the 20. verse: to the end.

In these Verses we have, 1. The Authority of the prophecy, it is divine, from
the Lord, ver. 1, 2. 2. The thing imposed upon Egypt, Howling, verse. 2. 3. The
Reasons thereof, verse. 3, 4, 5.


Verse. 1. The Word of the Lord came again unto me.
This Preface is to many Chapters before; it adds weight to the prophecy,
making those concerned to mind it more seriously: When the Lord speaks, who
can but prophecy? Amos 3.8. And who can but mind what is prophesied?

Verse. 2. Son of Man, prophecy.
The immortal God speaks to a mortal man, honors him with Divine
Revelations; and that he might not be exalted therewith, he minds him of his
meannesse and mortality, saying, Son of Man, prophecy. Prophesying was not at
the will of man, but when the Spirit moved them to it, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Thus says the Lord God.
What the Prophets gave forth as Prophets, was not from their own hearts and
heads, some humane thing, but it was altogether Divine, from Jehovah, Adonai,
whose Being is of himself, and has Dominion over all: What they and the
Apostles writ, was the word of God, and so ought to be esteemed and received, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Howl ye.
He speaks to the Egyptians and others, upon whom sad judgments were coming, he
calls to them to lay to heart, and lament for the evils were at hand. The
Hebrew Jalal has agreement with Alal, which signifies in nihilum rediger^, to
reduce a thing to nothing, because when men do mourn and lament greatly, it
wastes and consumes them, so as it well nigh brings them to nothing.

Woe worth the day.
The words may be read, Ah the day, alas for the day, as Joel. 1.15. Or, O the
woe of the day, an unhappy day wherein thy Cities shall be made heaps, man and
beast destroyed, all laid waste and desolate. The French is malediction, sur ta
journee, a curse be upon that day.

Verse. 3. The day is near, even the day of the Lord is near.
Day here is put, not for a day in strictness of sense, but for the time
wherein those judgments should befall Egypt and other parts; and its called
the day of the Lord, because of his special manifestation of himself: When God
does either in mercy or judgment declare himself Emphatically, that is said to
be the day of the Lord. Other days are his days, but such in a special
manner. The duplication of the day here, is to make the deeper impression both
upon the Jews, who rested too much upon Egypt, and also upon the Egyptians, who
were secure and feared not; he tells them of the nearness of it, that they may
be awakened; and that they might the more fully be awakened, he tells them what
kind of day it will be.

A cloudy Day.
The Hebrew is Dies Nubis, a Day of a Cloud, there will no Sun shine that day,
a black thick dark cloud will arise that day, and make a terrible tempest. Gods
judgments are likened unto clouds and rain for the sadness and terriblenesse
of them, Psalm. 11.6. He shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest. The French is iour tenebreux.

It shall be the time of the Heathen.
Heathen may be taken either for the Babylonians who should come and conquer
Egypt, and then do what they pleased therein, and so it should be their day; or
for the Egyptians, and the Nations adhering to them, and so it should be their
day to be spoiled, and suffer grievous things; it was a time of undoing these,
and a time of making the other: God had appointed that time for them both.

Verse. 4. The sword shall come upon Egypt.
The Chaldean Army shall come and make war^e upon the Egyptians, and they shall
be under all the miseries and mischiefs which attend war, and they are many.

And great pain shall be in Ethiopia.
The word for pain in Hebrew is Chalchalah, which Montanus renders Vacillatio,
shaking, the Septuagint (...) trouble or perturbation, the Vulgar pavor fear,
others dolor magnus, great grief, which the word imports, for its from (...)
parturire to bring forth, and notes such grief and pain as women have when they
are in travail: When the King of Babylon came into Egypt, Ethiopia was in
travail.

When the slain shall fall in Egypt.
It were better rendered when the wounded shall fall; men slain are fallen, men
wounded are ready to fall or falling: The Hebrew word (...) Chalal signifies
one wounded, and so the French has it, qui seront naurez tomberont en Egypt.

And her foundations shall be broken down.
By Foundation^, Cities, Towers, Forts, Castles, any strong holds may be
understood. Some make the foundations of Egypt to be their riches, forces, and
confederates, but the first sense of the Word is more Genuine, because he
speaks of breaking down, which is proper to the one, and not the other.

Verse. 5. Ethiopia.
In Hebrew Chus, so called from Chus the Son of Cham, Genesis 10.6. who first
inhabited that part of Africa, and from him the people were called Cussites;
from the Grecians it received the name of Ethiopia, which is from (...) to
burn, and (...) the countenance, because the heat of the Sun there, is such
as it scorcheth the faces of the people. This Country is judged to be as large
as Germany, France, and Italy, but not very populous, because of the extreme
heat: they circumcise their Males and Females, baptizing the Males forty
days, and the ^emales eighty days after their Circumcision, and they
rebaptize themselves in Lakes and Ponds every year on the day called Epiphany,
Heylin in his Microcosm.
because they conceive that the Lord Christ was baptized by John in Jordan that
very day: But whether this was the Ethiopia Nebuchadnezzar should spoil, some
question, because it is said chap. 29.10. That Egypt should be made desolate,
from the Tower of Syene unto the border of Ethiopia, that is, to the Asian
Ethiopia; Syene was at the front of the African Ethiopia; and whether
Nebuchadnezzar entered that Ethiopia, is doubtful: In locum.
Quistonpius is peremptory in it, and says, he never passed beyond Sy^ne into
it.

Lybia.
In Hebrew Phut, from Phut the son of Cham, Vid. suum in Genesis 10.6.
Genesis 10.6. and the inhabitants thereof, were at first called Phuthaei or
Phuttians, and afterward Lybians, the Country being named Lybia from Lybs a
King of Mauritania, or from Lybs the Southwind which gently breaths there, or
from Lybia a Queen thereof; it is now called Sorra, which signifies a Desert,
because its a Country full of sandy Deserts: And Varro will have it called
Lybia, Heylin in Microcos.
quasi (...) because it wants rain. Heretofore all Africa was called Phut,
afterward only the Western Parts of Africa as Mauritania and Tingitana,
Shindler. Martinius.
where the Kingdom of Fez or Lybia now is.

Lydia.
The Hebrew is Lud, from Lud the Son of Shem, Genesis 10.22. as some will have it;
or from Ludim the Son of Mizraim, as others affirm. This Lydia was a Region of
Asia the less, formerly called Maeonia, in it were those famous Cities
Philadelphia, Sardis, Pergamus, Thyatira, and Laodicea: Alapide would not have
it to be this Lydia, Heylin ubi ante.
because those Lydians were too far off to be helpful to the Egyptians, he
therefore makes it to be Lydda, Acts 9.32. where Peter healed Aeneas: This City
was in the Tribe of Ephraim near unto Joppa; It was therefore taken by
Nebuchadnezzar before, when he took Jerusalem, and made the whole Land
Tributary unto him. The distance of Lydia was not such as to hinder the
Egyptians from confederating with them; they were on the one side of the
Mediterranean Sea, and the Lydians on the other.

And all the mingled people.
Montanus says, All the Vulgar. The Hebrew is Col haeref, which Junius
Piscator and Others render tota miscellanea turba, all the mixed Company, that
is, those that came from other Parts to be milltes conducti, to serve the
Egyptians for pay: When Wars are among Nations, strangers will flock out of all
Parts unto them, to be their Auxilaries. -- Some make them the Arabians.

Chub.
This word is no where else in holy Writ. Symmachus thought it to be Arabia;
but Interpreters by it understand the Cubaeans and people in the inward Lybia,
near unto the River Nigris, where Ptolomy in his Geography places the City
Cuphe.

The Men of the Land that is in League.
The Hebrew is Filii terrae foederis, the Sons of the Land of League. Piscator
translates the words thus, Qui degunt in terra confederata, those who live in a
Land confederate, that is, these were confederate with the Egyptians. Some put
these words upon the Nations which had engaged themselves to help the
Egyptians: Others more probably put them upon Judaea, which was the Land in
League with God, for God promised it to Abraham and his Posterity, whereupon
the Jews were called the Children of the Covenant, Acts 2.25. And the
Septuagint here have it (...) the Sons of my Testament or Covenant. The Jews
were in League with the Egyptians, and after the destruction of Jerusalem,
Gedaliah being treacherously slain by Ishmael and others; Johanan carries the
Jews the Sons of the Land in League, into Egypt, where they suffered by
Nebuchadnezzar what the Egyptians did, Jer. 43. and 44. Chapters. Some fell by
the sword, some were carried Captive.

First, Observe.

After days of mirth come days of sorrow. Egypt had seen many days of
prosperity and rejoicing, and now howl ye, woe worth the day: Her Summer was
over, and Winter coming upon her, black, cloudy, stormy, terrible days were at
hand. As there is a change in things, so in times; Eccles. 3.4. There is a time
to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance: These
succeed each other, and neither keeps possession long; mirth and jollity is
thrust out of doors after a few days, by its contrary. Babylon had her days
of delight, she was given to pleasure, Isa. 47.8. but suddenly there was a
change, Jer. 51.8. Babylon is suddenly fallen, and destroyed: Howl for her.

Secondly, Observe.

The approaching of those days, wherein God will visit and punish sinners, is
just cause of mourning. Howl, for the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day:
The Judgments of God were at hand, ready to take hold of the Egyptians,
therefore they had sufficient cause to howl: Isa. 13.6. Howl ye, for the day
of the Lord is at hand; It shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Its
spoken of the Babylonians, who thought themselves safe, strong, having subdued
most Nations, but they must howl, for that the day of the Lord drew near; it
should be a day for destruction and not an ordinary destruction, but as a
destruction from the Almighty; it should be such a destruction as should
proclaim to the world that the hand of God was eminently in it. Joel 2.1. Let
all the inhabitants of the land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, for it
is nigh at hand. The time of Nebuchadnezzar's coming to execute the judgments
of God upon Jerusalem and Judaea drew nigh, and thereupon the Prophet calls
upon all the inhabitants of the land to tremble, to repent and mourn; there is
great and just cause so to do at such times, because thereby judgments may be
averted, delayed, mitigated, or sanctified unto us.

Thirdly, Observe.

God has his times to visit heathens, it shall be the time of the heathens. If
heathens do God any service, he has a time to reward them, as he did
Nebuchadnezzar, by giving him the spoil of Egypt; if heathens do provoke him by
their pride, idolatry, profaneness, oppression of his people, or any other way,
he has his time and day to punish them, Jer. 46.8, 9, 10. Egypt rises up like
a flood, and his waters are moved like the rivers; and he says, I will go up
and cover the earth, I will destroy the City (that was Carchemish by the river
Euphrates) and the inhabitants thereof. Come up ye horses, and rage ye
chariots, and let the mighty men come forth, the Ethiopians and the Lybians
that handle the shield, and the Lydians that handle and bend the Bow: For this
is the day of the Lord God of Hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him
of his adversaries. The Egyptians, Ethiopians, Lybians and Lydians were all
heathens, and God had his day to visit them; when they went to Euphrates to
fight the Babylonians, he made the Babylonish sword drunk with their blood: Not
long after, God had a day for the Babylonians, Jer. 50.27. Slay all her
bullocks, let them go down to the slaughter; w^ unto them, for their day is
come, the time of their visitation. The Princes, Nobles, great Ones who were
the Bullocks of Babylon, had their day of slaughter.

Fourthly, Observe.

Where public judgments come, they are troublesome to neighbor Nations. The
sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia. The evil of
the sword was not confined within the Egyptian borders, it reached to the
Ethiopians and others, they were filled with fear, they were in pain, as a
woman in travail; when evil borders upon us, some evil or mischief is to be
feared from thence; Aliquid mali propter vicit^m malum.
if our neighbors house be on fire, we may fear some sparks of that fire may
fall on ours. The wars of England have made the Nations about us to be in pain.

Fifthly, Observe.

Wars lay all waste, the sword makes no difference between things or persons:
The sword shall come upon Egypt, and her foundations shall be broken down, and
the men of the land that is in league shall fall with them by the sword: As the
sword spared no City, Towers, Castles, so no persons, even those Jews that fled
to Egypt for safety, should not escape; what Jews, what mingled people it found
in Egypt, they all suffered alike, the sword pittyed, spared none.

Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Thus says the Lord, they also that uphold Egypt shall fall, and the pride of
her power shall come down: from the Tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the
sword, says the Lord God.

And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate,
and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted.

And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and
when all her helpers shall be destroyed.

In that day shall messengers go forth from me in Ships, to make the careless
Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt;
for lo, it comes.


IN these words is further set forth the destruction of Egypt, with those that
were her strength and confederates, as also the events following thereupon.

Verse. 6. They also that uphold Egypt shall fall.
The Hebrew word is Somechee, which Montanus renders fulcientes, the Septuag.
(...) fundamenta, the foundation of Egypt. These upholders or foundations were
not the titular gods, but the Princes, Nobles, Rulers and confederates, who by
their power, policy, persons and estates, did assist the King of Egypt.

The pride of her power shall come down.
Egypt had strong Towns, Castles, men, and presumed upon, was proud of them,
but these should be destroyed and taken away, so should her pride come down:
The Vulgar is destruetur superbia Imperii ejus, the pride of her Empire shall
be destroyed. What ever Egypt confided or gloryed in, that should be brought
low. Egypt was lifted up with her power, and sat like one on the top of a
Mountain, and God by his judgments would bring her down.

From the Tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword.
Of the Tower of Syene or Sevene was spoken, Chap. 29. 10. The meaning is, that
the sword should pass through all Egypt, from one border to another.

Verse. 7. And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are
desolate.
This verse is the same with the 12. verse of the 29. Chap. Egypt and her
Cities should be like other Lands and Cities which were extremely wasted.

Verse. 8. When I have set a fire in Egypt.
When God brought the Caldean Army into Egypt, there was a fire in it dreadful
and consumptive: The wars were terrible, and devoured all things like fire, and
its probable many strong Cities and Holds were burnt with fire.

When all her helpers shall be destroyed.
Egypt being rich, powerful and renowned, had many confederates which here are
called helpers. The French is, Tous teux qui luy donno yent aid, are those
that gave her aid, they should all be vain helpers, for they should not secure
or save themselves.

Verse. 9. In that day shall messengers go forth from me in Ships.
In that day when Egypt was conquered, Messengers, not Chaldeans, but Egyptians
or some that escaped the sword, fled into Ethiopia to inform them what the
Chaldeans had done, and in what case they left Egypt. They are said to go forth
from God, because they went by his counsel and providence, or because they
fled from his angry countenance, which appeared in the destruction of Egypt,
for the original is from my face. God sent them to carry tidings of his
dreadful judgments to the Ethiopians: They went in Ships, Batzim, in some
vessels that were for speed; the Septuag. is (...) hastening.

To make the careless Ethiopians afraid.
Nebuchadnezzar passed through the oriental Ethiopia to come to Egypt, and
these Ethiopians seem to be the African Ethiopians; and when Egypt was spoiled
from one border to another, even to Syene, he was near it, his passage lay fair
open and easy into it, and its not said that Nebuchadnezzar should not go
beyond Syene, but that Egypt should be made desolate from the Tower of Syene to
Cush that was the other Ethiopiae. The messengers hasted to this Southern
Ethiopia (the inhabitants whereof were a secure careless people) and assured
them the sword had devoured Egypt, and was come to their gates; this struck
fear into them. The Hebrew word to make afraid, is, Charad, which notes,
externam commotionem ex metu mali, outward trembling from fear of some sudden
evil, such tidings put all Ethiopia into trembling.

And great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt.
When sad and grievous judgments are upon a place, that is called the Day of
that place, as the day of Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.7. In the day of Jerusalem, the
Edomites said, raze it, raze it, even to the foundations thereof. When
Nebuchadnezzar besieged, took, spoiled and burnt Jerusalem, that was the day of
it; so here, in the day of Egypt, that was, when the plagues were upon it,
especially when their first born were slain, then were they in great pain. When
the land was in travail, and when they were all drowned in the red Sea, then
great pain was upon all the Nations round about: so here Ethiopia should be in
travail, filled with fears, and shaking fits, as Egypt and the Nations then
were.

Observe, First.

When God will visit a Nation, it is not their great Ones in it, or confederates
with it, which can secure it. They that uphold Egypt shall fall; the Princes,
Nobles, Counselors, Associates, and whosoever were in league with her, should
all feel the hand of God, and be crushed with her: when men do storm a City,
it is not her Outworks, her Walls, her Gates, her Towers that can preserve her,
and when God will destroy a Nation, it is not outward, nor inward helps can
uphold. No policy, no power, no number can stand it out against God.

Observe, Secondly.

States are not to confide in power, but pride and confidence therein, hastens
their ruin. Egypt had power, was proud thereof, and confided therein, and the
Lord said, the pride of her power shall come down, Is. 16.6. We have heard of
the pride of Moab (he is very proud) even of his haughtiness and his pride;
but his lies shall not be so. He thought himself strong, secure, but his pride
and confidence did deceive him: For verse. 7. Therefore shall Moab howl for
Moab, every one shall howl: The Moabites amongst themselves should howl one
for, and with another; for the foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn,
surely are they stricken. Kir-hareseth was a chief City for strength, in which
they placed much confidence, and to which they fled in their streights; but her
foundations were stricken, and their hopes disappointed, and the pride of their
power brought down. Its the pride of States and Princes which levels them with
others. Isa. 10.12. I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. Senacherib prided himself in his
great Army, and presumed he should take Jerusalem, and eat up all the prey
thereof, but his high looks were abased, and his confidences his ruin. 2 Kings
19.35.36, 37.

Observe, Thirdly.

God sends dreadful and consumptive judgments upon Nations, and makes himself
known thereby. They shall know that I am the Lord, when I have set fire in
Egypt, and when all her helpers are destroyed: It Is God kindles fires in
Nations, and Kingdoms, to consume Towns and Cities: Men, and their habitaons,
they are all his, and he may do to them what he pleases, having transgressed
his laws. By fire and sword did the Lord plead with the Egyptians, laying all
wast, and by so doing, made himself known to be a powerful, righteous, and
dreadful God.

Observe, Fourthly.

In the soarest judgments of God upon men, usually some escape. God threatened
Egypt, Chap. 29.8. that he would cut off man and beast, and make it utterly
wast from one end to another; verse 10, yet here in the ninth verse he says,
Messengers shall go forth, some should escape to carry tidings of his severe
judgments.

Observe, Fifthly.

Those things which seem accidental and casual unto us, are ordered by the
wise Counsel, Power, and Providence of God: In that day shall messengers go
forth from me in ships. When all Egypt was in a confusion, some running one
way, and some another, to secure themselves; and some hastening unto ships to
tell others what the Chaldeans had done, in the midst of these hurries and
disorders, God saw, acted, sent out messengers: they went not, however the
appearance was to men; without Gods ordering hand; themselves thought of no
such thing, nor those they went unto; they dreamed not that they were sent
forth of God, that they came from him; it was looked upon as a mere
contingencie, but Gods hand was in it. Things may be contingent to us, they are
not so to God.

Observe, Sixthly,

Such is the efficacy of Gods judgments made known, that they do afflict those
are at a distance from them, and fill the most secure with fears and pains. The
Ethiopians were absent from the judgments executed upon the Egyptians, they
were secure, careless people, but when the messengers told them their Cities
were burnt, their men slain, their foundations and helpers destroyed, they were
afraid, and great pains came upon them, they were in travail for their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates. There is a mighty power in the judgments of God to
terrify sinners even at a distance. When Tyrus understood such was the efficacy
of that judgment upon those afar off, that its said, all the Princes of the
Sea clothed themselves with trembling, Ezekiel. 27.35. so that we may say of Gods
judgments as David, Psalm. 10.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? who
knows what efficacy it is of, and how far it extends?

Observe, Seventhly. Former judgments are not to be forgotten: As in the Day
of Egypt. God had visited Egypt many hundreds of years before, and now he minds
them of that visitation. So Isa. 9.4. God mentions the days of the Midianites,
minds them of the great destruction of the Midianites by Gideon, Judge. 7 and 8
chap. God minds the days of men's sinning, Hos. 9.9. they have deeply
corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah, and therefore he would visit
their sins; and when he has visited for sins, he would have us remember those
visitations, Jer. 7.12. Go to Shiloh, and see what I did to it for the
wickedness of my people Israel. As we should remember ancient and former
mercies to strengthen out faith, so ancient and former judgments to quicken
our fears.

Verse. 10, 11, 12.
Thus says the Lord God, I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.

He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations shall be brought to
destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the
Land with the slain.

And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hands of the
wicked, and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein by the hand of
strangers: I the Lord have spoken it.


THese words hold out unto us the efficient and isntrumental causes of the
forementioned judgments which are in part repeated.

The efficient cause is God himself, ver. 10, 11.

The instrumental are Nebuchadrezzar and his people, ver. 10, 11.

The judgments repeated are, the destruction of Egypt, and the Egyptians
putting the land into the hands of others, with an addition of drying up the
rivers.

Verse. 10. I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease.
The Hebrew word for multitude is hamon, which signifies both multitude and
noise, for where there is a multitude there will be a noise. Egypt was
populous, and God would diminish the people, they should be slain, and carried
away captives, so should both the multitude and noise cease. Increase of people
is a blessing, the lessening of them a judgment.

By the hand of Nebuchadrezzar.
Hand here notes power, as in 2 Chronicles. 2^.10. and Job 1.12. all that he has is
in thy power, the Hebrew is in thy hand. Nebuchadrezzar by his mighty powerful
arm should come and lay all Egypt waste, and make it like a wilderness. Armies
are the hands of Princes, by which they do great and dreadful things.

Verse. 11 The terrible of the nations shall be brought to destroy the land.
The word for terrible is arizze from (...) araz to deal violently, to
terrify, which Piscator renders crudelissi^^ the most cruel, the Septuagint
(...) pestes, the French les plus hide^^, the most hideous; and Junius the most
violent; Vatablus calls them Tyranni Gentium, the Tyrants of Nations; those were
most Tyrannical and terrible God brought and set on work to destroy the land.
The Chaldeans were a bitter nation, terrible and dreadful, Hab. 1.6, 7. these
words we had chap. 28.7. so terrible they were that they should fill the land
with dead bodies. When an Army of friends pass through a Country no hurt is
done, but when an army of Tyrants of strong and terrible enemies come to spoil,
what mischief will they not do?

Verse. 12. And I will make the rivers dry, Heb. drought.
Though the Chaldean Army was great, yet not so great as to drink up all the
waters of Nilus, which is one of the chiefest rivers in the world. Nilus had
many rivulets cut out of it, whereby the land was watered; all those might they
stop up with earth and other materials, for their better passage, and so the
rivers were made dry: Or by rivers we may understand that benefit came by them;
the Chaldeans should take away all the wealth of Egypt which came by the
rivers, and so the rivers were as dry things to the Egyptians: So Maldonate and
some others interpret the words; but rather thus, God would send great spoil
and desolation into Egypt, whereby the rivers might become useless unto them:
or should we take the words literally, as some Expositors are of the mind,
viz. that for the great wickedness of the Egyptians God dried up Nilus, and
punished them with sore famine, as in the days of Joseph it was when there
were seven years of famine; This sense may be safe: or we may take rivers for
the people and their power.

And sell the land into the hands of the wicked.
The Lord gives, he does not sell: The word for selling is Macar, which
signifies to give, to deliver, as well as to sell, and the Septuagint says
(...) I will give the land; those who sell do deliver what they sell into the
hands of others; and this is attributed to God metaphorically, for that he
disposed of the land of Egypt to others, that is the Chaldeans, who are called
wicked, the Vulgar has it in manus pessimorum into the hands of the worst.

I will make the land waste and all that is therein.
Egypt was a land abounding with men, horse, charets, wealth, Cities, and all
desirable things, but God would make it desolate, and all the fullness of it,
so the words are in Hebrew, for all that is therein, it had a fullness of all
things, and by the hand of the Chaldean it was emptied, who in the next words
are called strangers, because they were such to the Egyptians.

I the Lord have spoken it.
These words are a ratification of what is threatened. Ezekiel has not spoken a
vision of his own, or from his own spirit, but what is said is the word of the
eternal God, I the Lord have spoken it, I have determined it shall be so, and
nothing shall let it.

Observe, First.

God has ways to empty lands of their m^^titude and fulness. Egypt had her
multitude of men, of beasts, of Cities, of riches, she had her fullness of all
things, and God had an Army, a multitude of Soldiers to plunder and spoil her,
to empty her of all her multitudes and fulnesses: Jerusalem had its multitudes
and fullness, but Nubuchadnezzar emtyed her, and made her like an empty vessel,
Jer 51.34. Babylon had her multitudes and fullness of Treasure, Jer. 51.13. and
God had Fanners to fan her, ver. 2. and empty her land; those Fanners were the
Medes and Persians, who scattered the Babylonians, and made a Prey of their
Treasures.

Secondly, observe;

When God will execute severe Judgments, he makes use of suitable Instruments:
He intended utter destruction to Egypt, and the terrible of the Nations were
brought to destroy it. Nebuchadnezzar had men out of many Nations, and the
terrible ones of those Nations, by the secret hand of God, were brought to lay
Egypt waste. They roared like Lions, Isa. 5.29. They were cruel and without
mercy, Jer. 6.23. They hanged Princes by their hands, Lament 5.12. And here
they filled the Land with the slain.

Thirdly, observe;

Gods designs shall go on whatever lies in the way to hinder. He was resolved
upon the destruction of Egypt, the Rivers of it lay in the way, so that an Army
could not get over Nilus that great river; if gotten over, it could not march
and do the work appointed for the multitude of little Rivers were in the land;
shall these hinder the design of God? No, he will dry up the Rivers to make
way unto his designs; the Babylonians shall pass over, and pierce through the
whole land. When the Israelites were at the Red Sea, that lay as an impediment
unto Gods design, which was to carry them to Canaan, but did it hinder the
same? No, speak to the Children of Israel that they go forward; what go forward
and be drowned in the Sea? No, because they had not Faith to go upon the
waters, therefore he divides the waters, and makes a dry path for them through
the midst of the deeps, Exodus 14. There were Mountains in the way hindering the
building of the Temple, but one great mountain above all the rest. Zech. 4.7.
Who art thou, O great mountain? whether it were the Persian Monarchy, or Satan
and all the enemies of the Jews, God made it a plain before Zerubbabel, and
notwithstanding all enemies and opposition, he carried on the work of God.
Things may be too hard for men, impossible for them, but nothing is too hard
for, or impossible to the Lord. He enabled Nebuchadnezzar to take Tyrus, to
destroy Egypt; all the Rivers thereof shall not hinder it, God will dry them up
rather then his design shall fail. Psalm. 74.15. Thou dryest up mighty rivers.
God has divided Seas, plained Mountains, and dried up Rivers in our days, to
make way for his designs, and in due time he will dry up the great River
Euphrates to make way for the Kings of the East, Rev. 16.12.

Fourthly, observe;

All Lands are the Lords, and he may dispose of them to whom he will, even to
the wicked; he sold, he gave the land of Egypt into the hands of the
Babylonians who were wicked, yea the worst of men. Ezekiel. 7.24. Kingdoms are not
such excellent things as we imagine, were they so, they would not be given to
Gods enemies. That Kingdom is of great worth which God gives to his children,
Luke 12.32.

Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Thus says the Lord God, I will also destroy the Idols, and I will cause their
Images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no more a Prince of the land of
Egypt, and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.

And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and will execute
Judgments in No.

And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the str^^gth of Egypt, and I will cut off
the multitude of No.

And I will set fire in Egypt, Sin shall have great pain, and No shall be rent
asunder, and Noph shall have distresses daily.

The young men of Aven and of Phibeseth shall fall by the sword, and these
cities shall go into captivity.

At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there the
yoaks of Egypt, and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as for her, a
cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into Captivity.

Thus will I execute Judgments in Egypt, and they shall know that I am the Lord.


HAving formerly threatened destruction to Egypt and her Cities in general; the
Prophet descends now to particulars, in the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 verse. and
then in the 19. verse shows what is the end of God in his exercising judgments,
viz. That they may know him to be the Lord.

I will destroy the Idols.
Egypt was the most idolatrous Land of any, and God would now destroy the Idols
out of it. The word for Idols is gillulim, which Piscator renders stercora,
dung, filth, so the word signifies, and their Idols were dunghill filthy Gods,
fitter to be trodden under foot by Man and Beast, then to be worshipped.

I will cause their Images to cease.
Elilim Images, from Elil nihilum, for an Image or Idol is res nihili, a thing
of no account. 1 Cor. 8.4. It cannot profit; therefore, Isai. 2.20. They shall
cast away their Idols as useless things, and God would make them to cease.

Out of Noph.
This Noph was a great city in Egypt, very populous and famous for the Pyramids
and Monuments of Kings, who leaving Thebes, made that the Royal City. Isai.
19.13. The Princes of Noph; thither many of the Jews fled, Jeremie 44.1. It was
seated on the west side of Nilus over against Cairo; though it was once the
Metropolis of Egypt, now nothing remains but the mere ruins. The vulgar
renders it Memphis, and so it was commonly called by Heathen Writers, and Hos.
9.6. Memphis shall bury them. The Hebrew word for Memphis is Moph litterarum N.
and M. facili permutatione, Jun. in Isai. 19.13.
by the chang-of N into M. says Martinius, and hence Memphis but Junius makes
it so called from Moph a Mountain near unto it. In this City was that Idol Apis
in the form of an Ox worshipped, like unto it was the Calf the Jews made when
Moses was in the Mount, and those Calves Jeroboam set up at Dan and Bethel.

And there shall be no more a Prince of the Land of Egypt.
God would so visit Egypt that he would either cut off all the Royal Blood, not
leaving any of the Egyptian race to reign, or which is more consonant to truth,
he would keep Egypt a long time without any Prince: He had threatened in the
former Chapter, ver. 11, 12. That Egypt should be desolate Forty eight years,
and that is the time here meant, there shall be no more a Prince of the land of
Egypt. Lavater extends these words no more beyond the Forty years, saying, that
for a long time they had no Kings, for after that time the Macedonians, Romans
and Sarazens ruled over them.

And I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.
The Egyptians were like the Ethiopians, a secure careless people, they trusted
in their Rivers, their Cities, their Horse, their Foot, their Confederates and
wealth; therefore God would awaken them, and put a fear into all sorts; they
should f^ar the issue of things, an enemy being at hand, and ready to lay all
waste.

Verse. 14. And I will make Pathros desolate,
Of Pathros was spoken Chap. 29. 14. There its joined with the Land of Pathros;
there its reckoned amongst Cities; and Junius says its likely to be that City
which afterwrds men commonly called Herculis parvam urbem, the little City of
Hercules, because it was strong, and situate in the Front of Egypt for defense
of it. When Nebuchadnezzar came into Egypt, he made desolate both Pathros the
Country, and Pathros the City.

I will set fire in Zoan.
Zoan was a City in Egypt very ancient, built seven years after Hebron, Number.
13.22. a Royal City where the Princes resided, Isa. 19.11. to it came Princes
from Judaea for help. Isa. 30.4. The Septuagint calls it Tanis, and because it
was not far from Nilus one of the mouths of Nilus was called Ostium Tanicum or
Taniticum. Among Authors there is mention of Tanis in Goshen, and Tanis on the
other side Nilus, where Memphis was; and because the Jews dwelt in Goshen, I
conceive Tanis in Goshen is sometimes meant in Scripture, and not always the
other Tanis or Zoan, as Psalm. 78.12. and 43. verse. God did marvelous things and
wonders in the ^ield of Zoan or Tanis, that might be that where the Jews
inhabited. By Fire here may be understood fire materially, which consumed Zoan
to ashes; or fire Metaphorically, Gods vengeance upon it by the Sword.

and will execute Judgments in No.
No was another great City in Egypt, of which the Prophet Nahum speaks thus,
Chap. 3. 8. Art thou better then populous No, that was situate among the
Rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose Rampart was the Sea, and her
wall was from the Sea. The word for populous is Amon, which signifies
nourishing. No was matter and nutrix totius Egypti, the Mother and Nurse of all
Egypt, by reason of her great wealth and traffic, situate amongst the
Rivers, cut out of Nilus. The Septuag. terms it (...) the Chaldee Paraphrast,
Rabbis, and most Expositors make it to be the City which in aftertimes was
called Alexandria. Junius thinks it that City and Tract which Ptolomie calls
Neuth. This City God did punish, for it was idolatrous, Jerem. 46.25.

Verse. 15. I will pour my fury upon Sin the strength of Egypt.
Exodus 16.1. Mention is made of the wilderness of Sin, which some Expositors
affirm had its name from this City here called Sin, which afterward obtained
the name Pelusium, and was by that mouth of Nilus termed ostium Pelusiorum,
over against Arabia Petraea, and is now called Damiata Castaldo Zeiglero, and
Suidas names it, Clavis Egypti, the Key of Egypt, and our Prophet robur Egypti,
the strength of Egypt; it was of grand import to hinder the coming in or going
out of ships. So strong it was that God must pour his fury upon it, else it
would not be ruined.

And wlll cut off the multitude of No.
This City No had great trading, and Idol Gods in it, both which drew
Multitudes of people; but the Lord would cut them off, some by the Sword, some
by captivity, and some by other Judgments.

Verse. 16. I will set fire in Egypt.
In ver. 14. he said, I will set fire in Zoan, and here in Egypt. The
Babylonians were Firebrarnds, whom God brought to consume all Egypt and her
Glory.

Sin shall have great pain.
The Hebrew is dolendo dolebit, she shall be in such pain as women in travail
are; God would pour his fury upon her, and that would pain her to purpose.

No shall be rent asunder.
Garments we use to rend in pieces, and weak materials: Cities are weak things
when God comes to deal with them, he can rend them asunder; the strongest
Walls, Towers, Houses, he can in a moment pull in pieces, as easily as the
strongest man can paper or clothes.

And Noph shall have distresses daily.
Noph shall hear of, and meet with those things as should put her into
continual streights; provisions should fail her, the spirit of her Soldiers
and Inhabitants should fail her, her hope of help from Confederates should
fail her, so daily she should have distress, and especially when besieged by
the Enemy.

Verse. 17. The young men of Aven.
Aven the Septuagint, have it (...) Heliopolis, which is the City of the Sun,
and Isa. 19.18. its called (...) Ir Cheres the City of the Sun, so its rendered
in the Margent; and it was so called, because it was simulachrum and templum
solis, the Image and Temple of the Sun, it was sometimes in Holy Writ called
On, Genesis 41.45. Pharaoh gave Joseph to wife Asenath, the Daughter of Potiphera,
Priest of On, of Heliopolis says the Septuag. It was after by the Graecians
called Thebe, by the Arabians Bethsemes. The men of this City were accounted
the wisest of all the Egyptians; neither their wisdom nor their strength could
preserve them from falling by the sword.

And of Phibeseth shall fall by the Sword.
This City is affirmed to be Bubastis or Bubastus, a City in Egypt, where
Diana, whom the Egyptians called Bubastis, had a Temple; and there was once a
year great solemnity had in honorem Dianae, by some its called pubastum.

These Cities shall go into Captivity.
The Inhabitants of them shall be taken and carried away by Nebuchadnezzar and
his forces, viz. The Citizens of Aven and Phibeseth.

Verse. 18. At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened.
Some make this City to be the same with Zoan or Tanis. In Jeremiah its called
Tahpanhes: Chap. 44. 1. in it dwelt many of the Fugitive Jews; its thought to
be so called from Tahpenes the Queen Wife of Pharaoh, 1 Kin. 11.19. In Isa.
30.4. Its named Hanes on Chanes, in Jerem. 43.7. Tahpanthes, so its in the
Hebrew, and it was a Royal City, ver. 9. Pharaohs house was there. Its by some
Expositors said to be Daphnae or Daphnis, which was in ostio Nili Pelusiano, of
his Judgment was Junius in his notes on Jer. 30.4. but in this place he makes
Tehaphnehes to be in the remotest part of Egypt, Southward, above Syene, where
Nilus makes an Island called Tacompso or Cacompso, by Herodotus; Now there
should the day be darkened, that is turned into night by reason of mourning and
sadness; all their mirth should be taken away, Fears, Sorrows, Distresses,
should come as thick Clouds upon them, and darken all.

When I shall break there the yoaks of Egypt.
The Egyptians held them there in great subjection, ruled over them
Tyrannically, they made them serve like Beasts with yokes on their necks, and
burdens on their backs. God would set them at liberty, and put yokes upon the
Egyptians own necks. Junius thinks there were some works or chains in those
parts to keep out the Ethiopians from making incursions into Egypt. Lavater
reads the words, vectes Aegypti, the Bars of Egypt. The people thereupon were
put to great Taxes, and hard Services, which were Yoaks: Some read the Scepters
of Egypt, the word Mototh is rendered by some Scepters, by others loca nigra
vectes; where there be Scepters, Power, there will be heavy and burdensome
things, such Laws, Decrees, Orders, Taxes, Services imposed upon the people,
as that they may well be called Yoaks, Bonds, Bars, Lets to their Liberty and
Comfort, these Yoaks would God break and remove from their necks and backs.

And the pomp of her strength shall cease in her.
The Hebrew is, the pride of her strength. Egypt had strong Cities, strong
Garrisons, which made her proud, confident; The Septuag. is (...) the injury or
violence of her power and strength; she abused her strength in oppressing
others, and God would put an end unto it, he would destroy it, and she should
no more glory in her strong Holds, or in her Multitudes of men.

As for her a cloud shall cover her.
Here is a Nominative case absolute in the Hebrew (...) Hi ipsa, which is
rendered as for her, that is Tehaphnehes, a cloud shall cover her.
Nebuchadnezzars Army, which brought a cloud of fears, a cloud of sorrows, a
cloud of perplexities, a cloud of reproach; Such a cloud was upon Worcester.

And her Daughters shall go into captivity.
By Daughters we may understand the women of Tehaphnehes, who properly were the
Daughters thereof, or, the little Towns thereabouts, each were under the
protection and power of Tehaphnehes, and so were her Daughters metaphorically:
The Inhabitants of them should be carried away into Babylon.

Verse. 19. Thus will I execute Judgments in Egypt.
Egypt was full of Sin, and God filled it with his Judgments from one end to
the other, he said he would cut off man and beast, break down her Foundations,
dry up the Rivers, lay all waste, fill the land with the slain, send Multitudes
into Captivity; and thus will I execute Judgment in Egypt.

First, observe;

Idols and Idolatrous worship are so far from benefiting a State, as that they
provoke God to ruin them, and the State with them. Egypt had many Idols, many
Images, in most Cities they were set up and worshipped, this caused God to
destroy them, and Egypt with them. I will destroy the Idols, and will cause
their Images to cease out of Noph, and I will set fire in Egypt. Idolatry is a
Sin robs God of his Glory, and so provokes him to fury, to take vengeance on
Idols and Idolatrous Kingdoms. Jer. 46.25. I will punish the multitude of No,
and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their Gods and their Kings. The Kings set up their
Idol Gods, they commanded and countenanced the worshipping of them, therefore
they should be punished together. Idolatry is very destructive, it was the
destruction of the ten Tribes, 2 King. 17.7. and you may see how Judah suffered
for this Sin, 2 Chronicles. 28.2. Ahaz made Moul^en Images for Baalim, and burnt
incense to Idols, but what was the issue thereof? ver. 5. The King of Syria
smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them Captives; Pekah also the
Son of Remaliah slew in Judah 120000. in one day, which were all valiant men,
because they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers; they fell to Idolatry.
ver. 6. Besides the loss of those men, 200000. women, sons and daughters, were
carried away captive, ver. 8. O what spoil was Judah brought unto for its
abominable Idolatry!

Secondly, observe;

God may and can deprive Lands of their Princes at his pleasure. There shall be
no more a Prince of the Land of Egypt. P^inces have their Patents and Power
from God. Prove. 8.16. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth. Its God sets them up, and he may and does pull them down as he sees
cause; he set up Saul and he rejected him, 1 Samuel 15.23. he planted Zedekiah,
and pulled him up, Ezekiel. 17.8, 9. He cuts off the spirit of Princes, he is
terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.12. He cuts them off as suddenly,
as easily as the Vine-dresser does branches off the Vine, he is terrible unto
them. 2 Chronicles. 22.21. he sent an Angel and cut off all the mighty men of
valor, and the Leaders and Captains in the Camp of the King of Assyria: The
Angel made terrible work among them in one night. God is King of Kings, and in
the day of his wrath he strikes through them, and deprives their Land of them.
He can say to any Land, as he did to Egypt, there shall be no more a Prince
there.

Thirdly, Observe;

There is nothing can secure a wicked Prince and Nation from the judgments of
God. Egypt and her King had many Cities, Strong Cities, populous Cities,
wealthy Cities, Men of wisdom and might in them, yet these could not keep off
the Sword and Fire; I will make Pathros desolate, I will set fire in Zoan, I
will execute judgments in No, and pour my fury upon Sin; Noph shall have
distress, the men of Aven and Phibeseth shall fall by the Sword, and a Cloud
shall cover Tehaphnehes. Men might run from one City to another, but Gods
judgments would outrun them, if they escaped one Judgment, another would
overtake them.

Fourthly, observe;

God has his times to take off the heavy Burdens, Tributes and Taxes are laid
upon people by oppressing Princes and Rulers, when I shall break there the
Yoaks of Egypt. The Rulers of Egypt decreed unrighteous things, oppressed the men
of Tehaphnehes, sucked their blood by hard Rates and Taxes, burdened them with
difficult and dangerous Services, and made them groan under their Yoaks, as
they did, so do the Princes and Rulers of most Nations in the world; but as
they have their times to make and increase such yoaks upon the people, so God
has his time to take them off. Levit. 26.13. I have broken the bands of your
yoke, and made you to go upright. The Jews were under the Egyptian Yoke a long
time, but at last he break the bands of the Yoke, those Laws, Decrees, that
kept them in Egypt, held them to hard labor, causing them to stoop, and made
them free, so that they could go upright. Bondage makes men to bow, but Liberty
to go upright. Heavy burdens upon people make them sigh, press them down to
the Earth, and when they are eased they rejoice and look up. Its God breaks the
Yoaks off, whoever puts them on. Isa. 10.27. It shall come to pass in that day,
that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulders, and his Yoke from
off thy neck, and the Yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing. The
King of Assyri^s, Burdens and Yokes lay heavy and hard upon the Jewish State;
but for Hezekiahs sake, or rather Christ's, who is called the anointing, he
would break the Yoaks, and take off the Burdens.

Fifthly, observe;

God makes some Nations exemplarie with his judgments; Thus will I execute
Judgments in Egypt; thus as becomes me a provoked God; thus as an Idolatrous
profane guilty Nation deserves; thus as themselves and all Nations round about
shall know that I am the Lord, they shall see that in my Judgments which shall
convince them that no hand but mine could do such things, take such Strong
Holds, ruin so many Cities, and lay waste such a land as Egypt was. Some Lands
are Theaters of Gods severe Judgments; we have been made Monuments of Gods
choice Mercies, wonderful Deliverances. Let us fear the Lord and his Goodness,
least he turn our Mercies into Judgments.

Verse. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
And it came to pass in the Eleventh year, in the First Month, in the Seventh
day of the Month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, I have broken the Arm of Pharaoh King of Egypt; and lo, it shall
not be bound up to be healed, to put a Roler to bind it, to make it strong to
hold the Sword.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold, I am against Pharaoh King of Egypt,
and will break his Arms, the strong, and that which was broken; and I will
cause the Sword to fall out of his hand.

And I will scatter the Egyptians among the Nations, and will disperse them
through the Countries.

And I will strengthen the Arms of the King of Babylon, and put my Sword in his
hand: but I will break Pharaohs Arms, and he shall groan before him with the
groaning of a deadly wounded man.

But I will strengthen the Arms of the King of Babylon, and the Arms of Pharaoh
shall fall down, and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall put my
sword into the hand of the King of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon
the land of Egypt.

And I will scatter the Egyptians among the Nations, and disperse them among
the countries, and they shall know that I am the Lord.


THese seven Verses are the second general part of the Chapter, and Treat of
two great Kings, Pharaoh King of Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon.
Concerning Pharaoh, two things are threatened against him;

First, Diminution of his power, verse. 21, 22, 24.

Secondly, Dispersion of his people, verse. 23.26.

Concerning Nebuchadnezzar, he is the instrument God will use, and promises to
strengthen in doing his work, verse. 24, 25. and both these are illustrated from
the Chronology of this Prophecy.

Verse. 20. In the Eleventh year in the First month, the seventh day of the
month.
That was in the Eleventh year of Jehoiakins Captivity; the First month and the
seventh day, Ezekiel had this Prophecy given in; it was three months and two
days before the taking of Jerusalem, Jer. 52.5, 6. for it was taken the
Eleventh year, the Fourth Month, and the ninth day. This Prophecy though it be
set after that in chap. 29.17. yet was sixteen year before it. The Penmen of
the Scriptures do not exactly observe the order where every thing should come
in; among the Psalms you have the third Psalm, which was made at that time when
David fled from Absalom, set before the 34, 51, 56, 57, 59, 60. and others,
which were made before that, as appears by their Titles.

Verse. 21. I have broken the Arm of Pharaoh King of Egypt.
By Arm, the forces and power Pharaoh had, are intended. Vatablus says the
Preter Tense is here put for the Future Tense, I have broken, that is, I will
break; but Pharaoh had his arm broken before, when the Babylonian forces beat
him and his Army by the River Euphrates in Charchemish, which was in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim, Jer 46.2. And at that time he took from him all that he had
between Nilus and Euphrates, 2 Kings 24.7. which was the breaking of his Arm,
and such a breaking as it could not be cured. But notwithstanding this
breaking, Pharaoh got up forces again; and when Nebuchadnezzar besieged
Jerusalem, he came forth out of Egypt, whereupon Nebuchadnezzar raised his
Siege, went to meet Pharaoh, and caused him to retreat, Jer. 37.5, 7. as having
a broken arm, and not being able to encounter with him.

And lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, etc.
That wound and loss which Pharaoh received by overthrow of his army, he never
could cure and recover; neither his own people, nor his Confederates could set
him into his former condition; he is here resembled to a broken Arm, which
cannot be bound up, or if bound up, not be healed, so as to be useful any
more. Pharaoh could never recover his strength and greatness again.

Verse. 22. Behold, I am against Pharaoh King of Egypt.
Here is the cause of Pharaohs breakings, his not binding up and healing, the
Lord was against him; not only the Babylonians and Cyreneans were his enemies,
but the Lord himself; when he breaks in pieces, who shall bind up? when he
wounds who shall heal? when he is an Enemy, who can stand before him? The Lo^d
makes himself Author of all the Judgments fell upon Pharaoh.

And will break his Arms, the strong, and that which was broken.
Pharaohs Arms were Egypt, and those Territories he had from Egypt to
Euphrates. His Arm was broken already by the Babylonians as you have it
before; One Arm yet remained, and that is called a strong one, viz. Egypt with
all her strength; This Arm God break by the Cyreneans (against whom Pharaoh led
out an Army which they overthrew) and the Civil Wars amongst them; after that
Victory they were so consumed and weakened, Chap. 29.4. vid. Juni.
that they had not hearts nor means to defend themselves against Nebuchadnezzar
when he invaded them.

I will cause the Sword to fall out of his hand.
When an Arm is broken, the hand is disabled from holding any thing; so Pharaoh
having his arms broken, Syria and Egypt, the Sword should fall out of his hand,
he should not be able any more to make war: he should neither have forces in
the one Kingdom or the other to do him service; or thus, if he did get up some
forces, and engage with the Babylonians, God would so order things that the
Egyptians should be overcome, throw down their Arms, cry for quarter, or fly
for safety.

Verse. 23. And I will scatter the Egyptians among the Nations.
The Hebrew word for to scatter is (...) puts, which signifies confringi cum
dispersione, to be broken and dispersed; he spoke before of the breaking
Pharaohs forces, and now says they should be scattered, some running one way,
some another, some carried into one part of Babylon, some into another.

And disperse them.
(...) Sarah, which is the Hebrew word, signifies to disperse by breaking in
pieces, and also by fanning. The Septuagint has it (...) I will fan them: And
so Lavater, Piscator, and the vulgar render the word. God would fan them as
chafe out of the Land of Egypt, and drive them from country to country, as the
wind drives chafe from place to place.

Verse. 24. And I will strengthen the Arms of the King of Babylon.
Chizzikti, Montanus renders it comfortabo, I will comfort; Vatablus noborabo,
I will make strong. Jun. and Pisca. confirmabo, I will confirm; the French,
fortifiray, I will fortify. The Septuag. (...) I will harden. The word Chazak
says Kirker, signifies properly, firmam apprehensionem, such a taking hold of
a man, as thereby to confirm his Spirits, and to strengthen him: God would take
hold of Nebuchadnezzar and his forces, so as to add spirit, courage and
strength unto them; he would be on their side, and make them victorious. He was
against Pharaoh, brake his Arms, weakened him; but he would be with
Nebuchadnezzar, uphold him, and make his Arms strong.

And put my Sword in his hand.
I will furnish him with all military instruments, and sufficiency of power to
execute my judgments upon Egypt, and upon Pharaoh King thereof. God would make
the Sword fall out of his hand; but he would put one into Nebuchadnezzars hand.

But I will break Pharaohs Arms.
Let them be strong and brawnie, I will break them as wood bones, earthen
vessels are wont to be broken; he is proud, confident, and thinks himself able
to withstand the King of Babylon, but by him will I break all his forces, and
so break them, that

He shall groan before him, with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.
The Hebrew runs thus, He shall cry with Cries being deadly wounded before him.
Piscator looking to the former words, I will break Pharaohs Arms, renders them
thus, that he may groan before him, as a man groans being deadly wounded: When
a man is Chalal, thrust through or deadly wounded, he fetches deep sighs and
groans; and Pharaoh should be so afflicted, with the King of Babylons
prevailing against him, that he should greatly mourn and groan. Noak notes such
crying, sighing, groaning as men make when they are wounded unto death.

Verse. 25. But I will strengthen the Arms of the King of Babylon, and the Arms
of Pharaoh shall fall down, etc.
In this verse and the last there is little but what was said before; the
Prophet repeats the same things, that so he might awaken the Egyptians to
consider what dreadful desolations were coming upon them, and beat off the Jews
from seeking help at their hands whose destruction was so certainly determined
by the Lord.

And he shall stretch it out upon the Land of Egypt.
This stretching out may either refer to the stroke; as when men will strike
strong and deadly strokes, they stretch out their arms that the stroke may be
with more force upon the party to be smitten; or it may note the extent of the
Sword, it should be stretched out upon the whole Land of Egypt; Wars should
consume the whole Nation.

First, observe;

Men in affliction strictly observe how the time passes away, they mind the
years, months, and days. Ezekiel was a Captive in Babylon, and he kept account
of the time; in the Eleventh year, the first month, and seventh day of it, that
was of their Captivity; he slipped not a day but observed it, and what fell out;
then the word of the Lord came unto him. Afflictions make good Chronologers.

Secondly, observe;

The Lord makes good his word he had said by the mouth of David, Psalm. 37.17.
The arms of the wicked shall be broken, and here he says, I have broken the
Arms of Pharaoh King of Egypt; he was a wicked King, and God broke his Arms.
Kings who have great forces, great wealth, numerous Cities, and strong Navies,
if they be wicked, they and all they have are no more to God then one single
man, whose Arms God can easily break, for he has a mighty Arm, Psalm. 89.13.
And when he makes it bare, then it breaks Kings and Kingdoms, Arms and Armies
in pieces; it was his Arm that brake the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian and Roman
Empires, which were all wicked. He break the Arm of Moab, Jer. 48.25. He will
break the Arm of Antichrist, and of all the Princes of the Earth which help him.

Thirdly, observe;

God sometimes so wounds Princes and States, as that their wounds are
incurable. I have broken the Arm of Pharaoh, and lo, it shall not be bound up
to be healed; all the State-Chyrurgeons and Physicians could not set the bone
again, and heal the wound; much art and industry was used, many plasters
applied, but all to no purpose, for God had said, it shall not be healed, Jer.
46.11. In vain shall they use many Medicines, for they shall not be cured; its
spoken of this Pharaoh, and the wound he had received. If God deny once to cure
the wounds, he makes those wounds prove deadly; not all the Balm in Gilead will
cure them, not all the wisdom, riches, strength of Egypt, could make Pharaoh
whole again. If the Lord himself do not bind up when he breaks, heal where he
wounds, nothing but death and dissolution follows.

Fourthly, observe;

Its a dreadful thing to have the Lord declare himself to be an enemy to a
King, to a State, to any; Behold, I am against Pharaoh, therefore what was
broken could not be healed, and what was whole should be broken, he should be
more and more disabled; his Princes became fools, his wise Counselors brutish,
a perverse and seducing Spirit was in the midst of them; and Egypt was as
women, fearful and weak like women, Isai. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. God being
against Pharaoh, all his Councels, Enterprises, were blasted, all his forces
broken, all his Cities made desolate, and all his people consumed or carried
into Captivity; better he had had all the Princes of the world against him then
God, for whomsoever he is against, must be ruined.

Fifthly, observe;

The flourishing and perishing of Kings, Kingdoms, and Armies, is from the
Lord. I will strengthen the Arms of the King of Babylon, and put my Sword in
his hand, but I will break Pharaohs Arms, and they shall fall down. One of
these great Kings should prosper, his Kingdom flourish, his forces stand and
conquer; the other should perish, his Kingdom be laid waste, and all his forces
broken and scattered. What King, State, or Army soever God is with, he will
strengthen, uphold; what King, State, or Army soever he is against, he will
break, ruin, and bring to nothing, whatever their Strength, Wealth, or
Councels are.

Sixthly, observe;

Tyrannical wicked Kings often come to very sad ends: he shall groan before him
with the groanings of a deadly wounded man. Herodotus says he was strangled by
the Egyptians which had revolted from him to Amasis. The Holy Scripture tells
you what ends Adonibezek, Athaliah, Jezebel, Ahab, and Senacherib came unto.
Pilate who put Christ to death, was deposed, banished, and at last slew himself
at Lions in France. Of Thirty two Emperors who persecuted the Christians,
scarce any of them dyed a natural death; some were poisoned, some killed by the
Soldiers, some sentenced by the Senate, and some slew themselves: Galerius had
such a Loathsome disease, as that he could not endure the stink of it, but slew
himself to avoid it. Vid. Fox Act. Mon. vol. 1. page 40, 41.

Seventhly, observe;

God is the Author of Wars, he sets one Tyrant against another, and gives
Commission how far they shall proceed. I will put my Sword into the hand of the
King of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.
Nebuchadnezzar was a great Tyrant, and God set him upon Pharaoh another great
Tyrant, and ordered him how far he should go, even over all Egypt. Tyrants
cannot stir till God move them; the Sword is his; if he will not put it into
their hands, they cannot take it up, and when he has put it into their hand,
they cannot go one foot further then he has appointed them.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 1, 2.
And it came to pass in the Eleventh year, in the Third month, in the First day
of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh King of Egypt, and to his multitude, Whom art
thou like in thy greatness?


THis Chapter, as the two former, is a Prophecy against the King of Egypt, and
in it you have these parts;

First, the Chronology of the Prophecy, ver. 1.

Secondly, the occasion of it, viz. His Pride and confidence in his greatness,
ver. 2.

Thirdly, a confirmation of his ruin, set out by an example a majori ad minus,
from the Third verse to the Eighteenth, wherein is notably described the Glory
of Assyria, her sin and fall thereupon.

Fourthly, the Application of all to Pharaoh, verse. 18.

Verse. 1. In the Eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the
month.
The Prophet had not Prophesies given in every month, it was a month and
Twenty-four days from the last Prophecy to this, which was one month and eight
or nine days before the destruction of Jerusalem, and in the Eleventh year of
their Captivity, the Third month, and First day of the month. The Hebrew for
First day of the Month, is, una mensis, one of the month is an Hebraisme common
in the Scripture, as in Genesis 1.5. The Evening and the Morning were one day, so
is the Hebrew, that is the first day, Luke 24.1. (...) upon one of the week,
that is the First day of the week.

Verse. 2. Speak unto Pharaoh King of Egypt, and to his multitude.
Pharaoh was a great King, and had a great Multitude of Men, Horses, and
Chariots, and conceited himself greater then he was; but how great soever he
were in realitie or conceit, God orders a Prophet to speak to him, and to
demand a question of him. The Prophet was in Babylon, Pharaoh in Egypt, and
how he could speak to him, appears not. Its impossible that he should undertake
so long a journey as it is from Babylon to Egypt. Its more consonant to truth,
that he penned this Prophecy, and sent it unto him by one means or other.

Whom art thou like in thy greatness?
This was the Question Ezekiel must propound to him, and it was an upbraiding
question, taxing him for his pride, arrogancy and vain confidences. He had
like most Kings many Flatterers, who flattered him into a conceit that he was
greater then other Kings, yea so great in power, that he might encounter God
himself. The Lord therefore thought meet to take down his Spirit by this
question, Whom art thou like in thy greatness? what like unto me? thou art so
far from that, as that thou art not comparable to some mortal men. What say
thou to the King of Assyria? art thou greater, art thou stronger then he? no,
he went far beyond thee in Power, Dignity and Greatness, yet for his pride,
arrogancy and confidences in what he had, he was utterly destroyed; and
think thou who art inferior, to stand and avoid the Judgments of God when
they come? thou deceivest thy self.

First, observe;

Kings are prone to be lifted up with and confide in their greatness. Pharaoh
sweld with his honor and multitude, putting too much confidence therein, Chap.
29.3. he is called the great Dragon, and he lay secure in the midst of his
Rivers, saying, my River is mine own, and I have made it for my self; he was
proud and confident, thinking none greater then himself. Nebuchadnezzar was
lifted up with his greatness, Dan. 4.30. so was Sennacherib, Isa. 37.11, 12,
13. And not only wicked Kings, but good ones have been overtaken with this
evil. David numbers the people, and was too proud of, and confident in his
Multitudes, 1 Chronicles. 21. Princes have many things to puff up their Spirits, but
God knows how to bring them down.

Secondly, observe;

God will have them told of their Sins, and taxed for them: Go speak unto
Pharaoh, and say whom art thou like in thy greatness? Thou proud Tyrant thou
shall fall, though thou be great, strong, there is a greater then thy self, and
one stronger then thou art, who has sent a Prophet to tell thee of thy pride
and arrogancy, and to foretell thee of thy destruction. Kings are no more to
God then the meanest peasants; if they sin they shall hear of it, and smart for
it.

Verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Behold, the Assyrian was a Cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a
shadowing shroud, and of an high stature, and his top was among the thick
boughs.

The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her rivers running
round about his plants, and sent out her little Rivers unto all the trees of
the Field.

Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field, and his
boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of the multitude
of waters, when he shot forth.

All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs and under his branches
did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow
dwelt all great Nations.

Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches: for his root
was by great waters.

The Cedars in the Garden of God could not hide him, the Firre-trees were not
like his boughs, and the Chestnut Trees were not like his branches; not any
Tree in the Garden of God was like unto him in his beauty.

I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches, so that all the Trees
of Eden, that were in the Garden of God, envied him.


IN these seven Verses is set forth the power of the King of Assyria, who is
compared here unto a Cedar, which is described

First, from its place, it was in Lebanon, ver. 3.

Secondly, from its beauty, it had fair branches, ver. 3. and was fair in
greatness and length, ver. 7.

Thirdly, from the benefit of it, it was a shaddowing shroud, Fowls, Beasts,
Men, were advantaged by it, ver. 3, 6.

Fourthly, from the height of it, it was very high, ver. 3. higher then all the
trees of the field, ver. 5.

Fifthly, from the thickness, he had thick boughs, ver. 3.

Sixthly, from the cause of all these, viz. the Rivers and Waters he was
planted by, ver. 4, 5, 7.

Seventhly, from his transcendencie above all other Trees in the Field or
Garden, ver. 5, 8, 9.

Verse. 3. Behold the Assyrian.
Some would have Pharaoh and the Egyptians to be understood by the Assyrian,
and produce Isai. 52.4. for it, where its said, my people went down aforetime
into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause,
that was Pharaoh and the Egyptians, says A lapide; but Interpreters generally
understand Sennacherib or Nebuchadnezzar, and their people. By the Assyrian
therefore, here is meant the King of Assyria, whom diverse Expositors make to
be Esarhaddon, the third Son of Sennacherib, of whom see Isa. 37.38. He was
King of Assure, Ezra 4.2. called also the great and noble Asnappar, ver. 10. He
was King of Assyria and Babylonia, says Usher in his Chronology. Lavater
makes him only King of Assyria, Page 107.
for he says Ben-Merodach the Governor of Babylon, observing that his two
Brethren who slew their Father, viz. Adramelech and Sharezer lying in wait to
dispossess Esarhaddon of the Kingdom, he made war upon him, overcame him, and
so rejoyned the Assyrian Kingdom to the Babylonian. Whether, him, Sennacherib
or Nebuchadnezzar, it was a King of Assyria, who was great and powerful.

A Cedar in Lebanon.
That is, as a Cedar in Lebanon. Lebanon was a great and large Mountain in
Canaan, full of Cedars; and this King of Assyria is likened unto the chiefest
of them.

With fair Branches.
These Branches were not his Sons and Nobles, but the several Provinces
belonged unto the Kingdom of Assyria, over which his Princes and Nobles did
reign. Himself was the Cedar, these the Branches or Arms.

And with a shadowing shroud.
The word for shroud, is Chorash, which Montanus renders Caedua Sylva. Buxtorf
says its Virgultum densum and implexum faciendae umbrae commodum, shoots,
sprouts, so thick and entangled together, as that they make it shadowie. The
Septuagint has the words thus, (...) thick in the covering; this Tree did
afford cover and shade to others.

Of an high stature, his top was among the thick bows.
The King intended Ezekiel. 17.6. was like a Vine of low stature; but this King
was like a Cedar of high stature, glorious, great, and renowned, so high that
(...), his top was in the midst of the clouds, like the tree Dan. 4.20. whose
height reached to Heaven.

Verse. 4. The waters made him great.
Some Trees prosper best in dry places, some by the waters side; the moisture
they draw thence makes them to spread and flourish, Psalm. 1.3. The Tree being
here Metaphorical, so are the waters; waters signify sometimes afflictions,
Psalm. 32.6. sometimes wholesome and good doctrine, Isai. 55.1. sometimes
people, Rev. 17.15. here riches, power, victories, and such things quibus
augenter and splendescunt imperia. The Assyrian wealth, Provinces, Victories,
were as water to his Roots, and made him great.

The deep set him up on high, with her Rivers running round about his plants.
His vast Treasure, like a deep not to be drawn dry, raised him to such an
height, as waters do a Cedar; He did abound with plenty of all things: As
Plants which have rivers running round about them, do grow and spread, so did
the King of Assyria, and his. His riches and greatness were like an Ocean, and
the Provinces as so many Rivers brought in wealth continually, which supplied
them and others.

And sent out her little rivers unto all the trees of the field.
Some Commodities, some parts of the Assyrian Treasure were derived to other
Nations, Princes, and People; or his own Subjects had some share with him in
his wealth and greatness; all at home, and many abroad, which were the Trees of
the field, gained by the Assyrian waters.

Verse. 5. Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field.
There were diverse Trees in the field which were high, many Kings and Princes
who were great, but the Assyrian was the highest, the greatest Cedar and
Monarchy then in the world; His waters exceeded theirs, and they derived
moisture from him.

His boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long.
The boughs and branches of this metaphorical tree, were the Provinces and
Countries belonged to the Assyrian Monarchy, which were many, and extended
far, even to Media Eastward, to Mesopotomia Westward, to Armenia minor
Northward, and to Susiana Southward.

Because of the multitude of waters; when he shot forth.
Where there is much water and moisture at the root of a Tree, there the
branches and boughs do shoot forth faster and further then where its wanting:
The Assyrian having multitude of waters, viz. Treasure, enlarged his Empire and
borders thereby.

Verse. 6. All the Fowls of heaven made their Nests in his boughs.
By Fowls of Heaven some understand the Nobles and great Ones; they built them
habitations in his Provinces and Dominions, which they peaceably enjoyed, as
Fowls do their Nests in the boughs of high trees.

And under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young.
By Beast of the field A lapide intends the vulgar and more barbarous sort of
people. The sense is, that all kinds of people, noble and ignoble, rich or
poor, weak or strong, were in safety, and multiplied under his protection, as
birds and beasts do in and under a great Tree.

In this verse and the former be three words, which signify Boughs and
Branches. The first is Sargnaphah, which signifies a heap or thicket of boughs.
The second is, Saiph or Sagniph, which notes a top bough. The third is (...)
parah or porah from (...) to adorn, because boughs are ornamenta arboris, the
glory and beautifying of the Tree.

Under his shadow dwelt all great Nations.
Either they were under his Authority or his Protection; many great Nations
were commanded by the Assyrian, and others put themselves under his protection.

Verse. 7. Thus was he fair in his greatness.
The Hebrew is vaiijph, Pulchrum fuit in magnitudine suae, he was a goodly
thing in his greatness. The Septuagint (...) he was beauty in his height and
greatness, not only beautiful but beauty; greatness and height make things
goodly and fair.

And in the length of his branches.
Here is another word for Br^nches dalijoth, which is from dalah to draw,
because they draw juice from the Roots, or because they move upwards, and so
the word dalah also signifies. The Branches of this tree were the Provinces, as
before, which extended far, and added to the greatness and glory of the tree.

For his Root was by great waters.
These words correspond with those in the Fourth Verse, the waters made him
great. When a tree is fixed in the earth where there is no want of moisture, it
grows, it spreads, it becomes great and lovely: So this King being planted
among great waters, in the midst of much wealth and power, grew, spread, and
became fair in his greatness.

Verse. 8. The Cedars in the Garden of God, could not hide him.
The highest Cedars that were in any Garden, or in Paradise it self, did not
exceed this Cedar, and so obscure the glory of it; but this Kingdom for the
wealth, strength, and greatness of it, went beyond all others, and was for
admiration.

The Firr-trees were not like his boughs.
Firr-trees are tall and stately, yet none of the Firr-trees were comparable to
the boughs of this tree. The Kingdoms of other Princes were not like to the
Provinces of Assyria.

And the Chesnut-trees were not like his branches.
The Chesnut-tree is lower then the Firr-tree, but more branchie and spreading;
yet none of the Chesnut-trees did equalize any branch of the Assyrian tree.

Not any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty.
The Hebrew is, every Tree in the Garden of God was not like to him in his
beauty; that is, no tree therein, no tree in Paradise, no tree in the whole
earth did equalize this Metaphorical Assyrian tree in the bulk, arms, branches
or beauty of it.

Verse. 9. I have made him beautiful in the multitude of his boughs.
A Tree is much beautified that has abundance of boughs shooting out from it;
the more boughs, the more beauty: This tree wanted not for boughs; it had many
Provinces, and every one added to its beauty.

So that all the Trees of Eden, that were in the Garden of God, envied him.
When other Trees, that is, Princes, who were seated in pleasant, rich and
fruitful places, saw how much the King of Assyria exceeded them in power,
wealth, glory, and greatness, they envied him.

First, observe;

Its the Lord who makes Kingdoms and Kings great, and differences them from
others. The Assyrian was a Cedar in Lebanon, exceeding all others in beauty,
branches, height and thickness; and how came he to be so? ver. 9. I have made
him fair. Whatever virtue, glory, excellency inward or outward, any Trees, any
Princes have, its all from the Lord. All Solomon's greatness and wisdom was from
him, 1 Kin. 4.29, 30, 31.

Secondly, observe;

That as Trees have need of moisture and waters to make them grow and flourish,
so States and Princes have need of money to uphold their greatness; they must
have Revenues come flowing in like Rivers, else they will soon wither. The
waters made him great, the deep set him up on high, the Rivers run round about
his plants; he had multitude of waters, his Root was by great waters, the
Assyrian had great means which maintained his glory and greatness; so Solomon
had great means, otherwise he could not have lived at that height he did, 1
Kin. 4.22, 23, 26, 27, 28. Chap. 10.14, 21, 22, 23.

Thirdly, observe;

Princes, Monarchs, States, ought to protect those are their Subjects, and to
communicate good unto them. This Cedar in Lebanon was a shadowing shroud, all
the Fowls of Heaven made their nests in his boughs, under his branches did all
the Beasts of the Field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all
great Nations: All sorts had protection from the King of Assyria; and not only
so, but those waters watered him were sent out unto all the Trees of the field;
he hoarded not up his wealth, but it passed up and down for the good of all.
Isai. 49.23. Its said of the Church, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, thy
Nourishers; that is, they shall communicate good things unto thee, as a Nurse
does milk unto the Child; not only does she protect the child from harm, but
see it want nothing that is good for it.

Fourthly, observe;

Excellency, greatness, transcendencie beget Envy. This Assyrian Cedar
excelled all the Cedars in the Garden of God; none of the Firr-trees,
Chesnut-trees, or any other did equalize him, he out stripped all the Trees in
bulk, in height, in branches, in beauty, and what then? all the Trees of Eden,
that were in the Garden of God, envied him. Envy is against Superiors, and
Contempt is of Inferiors. When Daniel was made chief of the Presidents and
Princes, then they envied him, and sought occasion to ruin him, Dan. 6. Its a
grief springing up from another man's prosperity; Power, Honor, Strength,
Riches, Greatness, are the causes and occasions of it; There is always a
malignance goes along with it, taking pleasure in hurting, though it gain
nothing thereby. Envy is most prejudicial to the party it dwells in, for its
the rottenness of the bones, Prove. 14.30. It eats out the marrow and moisture
of them, and makes them putrify. Hence say the Hebrews, oculus malus ingredi
facit hominem in sepulchrum, Buxtorf. florilegium Heb.
an envious eye brings a man to the grave.

Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, because thou have lifted up thy self in
height, and he has shot up his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is
lifted up in his height.

I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the Heathen:
he shall surely deal with him, I have driven him out for his wickedness.

And strangers, the terrible of the Nations have cut him off, and have left
him: upon the mountains, and in all the valleys his branches are fallen, and
his boughs are broken by all the Rivers of the land, and all the people of the
earth are gone down from his shadow, and have left him.

Upon his ruin shall all the Fowls of the Heaven remain, and all the Beasts of
the field shall be upon his branches.

To the end that none of all the Trees by the waters exalt themselves for their
height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither their trees
stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they are all delivered unto
death, to the neither parts of the Earth, in the midst of the children of men,
with them that go down to the pit.

Thus says the Lord God, In the day when he went down to the Grave, I caused a
mourning, I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the floods thereof; and
the great waters were s^^^^^ and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the
trees of the field fainted for him.

I made the Nations to shake at the sound of his fall when I cast him down to
hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the trees of Eden, the choice
and best of Lebanon, all that drink water* shall be comforted in the nether
parts of the earth.

They also went down into hell with him, unto them that be slain with the
Sword, and they that were his Arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of
the Heathen.


HAving set forth the greatness and Glory of the King of Assyria in the former
Verses, under the Allegory of a Tree, here he comes to show the cutting down
and destruction of this Tree, with the causes, events, and end thereof:

Verse. 10. Because thou have lifted up thy self in height.
These words are an Apostrophe to the King of Egypt, as Junius and Piscator
observe. Here is a sudden interruption and turning of the Speech unto Pharaoh,
who was proud and haughty like the Assyrian; God by this gives him a hint to
look to himself, and so turns again to the Assyrian.

And he has shot up his top among the thick boughs.
He, that is the King of Assyria, he was grown very high, and so high, that
his heart was lifted up in his height, propter altitudinem suam, says
Piscator, by reason of his height; his height heigthned his Spirit, he thought
himself to have aliquod numinis in him, and fit to be worshipped.

Verse. 11. I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of
the heathen.
The Hebrew is future, I will deliver him, and so Munster reads it: For the
better understanding of these words, we must know that the Kingdom of Assyria
and Chaldaea were distinct. The Metropolis of Chaldaea was Babylon; the
Metropolis of the Assyrian was Ninive: the ten Tribes were carried away by the
Assyrians; the other two Tribes by the Chaldaeans. Dissentions arising between
these two, God delivered the King of Assyria into the hands of the King of
Chaldaea, who was Nebuchadnezzar as Expositors say, and is here called the
mighty one of the Heathen; he subdued all Assyria, and made that and Chaldaea
one Empire, and afterward the people were called sometimes Assyrians,
sometimes Babylonians, sometimes Chaldaeans. Polanus and others interpret these
words of Esarhaddon, who after Sennacherib was King of Assyria, Isa. 37.38.
Whom God delivered into the hand of Berodach-baladan, or Merodach-baladan being
then King of Babylon, Isa. 39.1. 2 Kin. 20.12. Who is here called the mighty
One of the Hethen; the Hebrew is be ia d el goijm, into the hand of the God of
the Nations, so Montanus renders the words; now whether Berodach-baladan were
such a God or mighty One of the Heathen is doubted, because he was but
Praefectus Babyloniae.

He shall surely deal with him.
In Hebrew its he shall by doing do with him, that is celeriter and absque
sudore, says Chrolampadius, he shall without difficulty or delay deal with
him, he shall deal with him according to his own mind, do what he lift unto
him, he shall take away his life and kingdom from him. This and the former word
is future put for preter Tenses, which is usual among the Hebrews.

I have driven him out for his wickedness.
The word for to drive out is gerash, which notes not only a simple ejection, a
bare driving out, but a disgrace ^^ one, such a casting or driving out as is
with disgrace; as when a wife is divorced, she is judged unworthy of Bed, Board
or Cohabitation, Genesis 3.24. God drove out the man, that was with disgrace: and
so here, I have driven him out with disgrace for his wickedness.

Verse. 12. And strangers, the terrible of the Nations have cut him off, and
have left him.
Here he shows the ruin and downfall of the Cedar which was so high, and
extended its boughs so far; strangers, the terrible of the Nations, that is the
Chaldaeans, who were cruel and merciless, Jer. 6.23. they cut him off, the King
of Assyria, and left him, not affording the honor due to a dead King.

Upon all the Mountains and in all the Valleys his branches are fallen, and his
boughs are broken by all the Rivers of the land.
When great trees are cut or blown down, then the branches or arms are broken
and pulled off. When the King of Assyria was slain, his Princes, Nobles,
Provinces and people, all suffered with him; some were slain upon the
Mountains, some upon the Valleys, and by the Rivers, all the land over there
were dead and slain persons.

And all the people of the earth are gone down from his shadow, and have left
him.
Those which formerly were his Confederates, and depended much upon him for
Counsel and help, seeing him ruined by the Chaldaeans, they fell off and would
not assist him; or diverse of his own, seeing how things went with him, deserted
him.

Verse. 13. Upon his ruin shall all the Fowls of the heaven remain, and all the
beasts of the field shall be upon his branches.
When a Tree is pulled up or cut down, the fruit, leaves, and branches gone,
there remains the body or Trunk deformed and spoiled of its beauty and glory,
that is the ruin; so here the King of Assyria being taken and slain, his Crown,
Glory, and Greatness laid in the dust, his dead body was the ruin; and now the
Fowls of Heaven, the Nobles and great Ones of Chaldaea, and all the Beasts of
the field, the meaner sort, made a Prey of him and his; him they scorned and
vilified, and what was his they seized upon: Lavater says his body lay
unburied, that Crows, Ravens, Vultures, and such like Flesh-Fowls fed upon it.

Verse. 14. To the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves
for their height, neither shoot up their top etc.
This too sets out the end of Gods heavy Judgments upon the King of Assyria;
that other trees seeing Gods dealings with that high Cedar for its pride and
loftiness, they might take heed of exalting themselves. Men grown great, are
apt to grow proud. Trees by the waters, that is, men abounding with wealth,
honor, greatness, and such things as may puff up; trees by waters grow high,
and men in the midst of great means, are in great danger to do so.

Neither their Trees stand up in their height, all that drink water.
The Margent has it, or stand upon themselves for their height, and so the
sense is plain, that none of the Trees should exalt themselves, or stand upon
themselves, their own strength, wealth, and greatness, they should not rest in
themselves, please themselves. If we take the words as they are in the verse,
the sense is much the same, neither their trees stand up in their height, all
that drink water; that is, Let none that have means, despise others that are
inferior, or let them not stand up in their height; it will be but for a
season, and they must be cut down.

For they are all delivered unto death to the nether parts of the earth, in the
midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.
All the Assyrians were delivered up to the Chaldaeans to be slain by them, or
all the Princes, Nobles and great Ones, they shall dye, go down into the earth
among the meanest, where no difference will be made; therefore rich Ones, great
Ones should not exalt themselves above others, or stand upon their height.

First, Observe:

Pride and wickedness causes God to bring dreadful judgments upon Kings and
their Kingdoms.

Because the King of Assyria's heart was lifted up in his height, therefore God
delivered him into the hand of a mighty enemy, and drove him out for his
wickedness. When Princes are in the seat of honor, have great means coming
in, then they look big, begin to Deifie themselves, to do what they list, not
minding him who exalted them, but confiding in their own strength, power and
greatness, which makes way for their speedy ruin. Solomon tells us that a man
shall not be established by wickedness, Pro: 12.13. Kings by their wicked
pollices and practices cannot establish themselves, their wickedness
overth^owes them, their pride provokes God against them; Da: 4.25. Its good for
Kings and others to be humble in the midst of their enjoyments, and the greater
abundance that they do possess, Qui humili est an mo dignus est honor, and
Divinitas quiescit super eo. Buxtorph:
to carry it still the more humbly; for he that is of an humble mind is worthy
of honor, and has God dwelling with him.

Secondly, Observe;

God has instruments for the doing of his work, whatever it be, and such
instruments as will do it to purpose.

He had an Assyrian Cedar to cut down which was very great, whose top was in
the Clouds, whose Boughs extended very far, in whose branches the Fowls did
make their Nests, and under whose shadow dwelt all great Nations; and now who
shall dare to meddle with this Cedar? Yes the Lord had One that durst attempt
and do it, he had a mighty One of the Heathens, a God of the Nations, into
whose hand he delivered the great Cedar, and he in doing did unto him all the
mind of God, he cut him down and laid him low. Let Trees be deeply rooted,
grown exceeding great and high, yet God has Hewers to hew down such Trees,
Dan. 4.14.

Thirdly, Observe;

When great Trees are cut d^wn, many other Trees suffer with them; When Kings
fall, they break and undo many.

When the King of Assyria was cut off, his Nobles and great Ones, yea all sorts
suffered by him; Upon the Mountains, and in all the Valleys, his Branches are
fallen, his Boughs are broken, and all the people of the Earth are gone down
from his shadow. All his Provinces, Princes, People, met with hard things. When
Zedekiah was taken and carried away captive, did not the Princes, Nobles, and
People suffer grievous things; see 2 Kings 25. Jer: 52. In our days we have
seen many suffer by the fall of the King.

Fourthly, Observe;

Neither Princes, Nobles, nor other People can tell who shall enjoy their
wealth.

The King of Assyria had great revenues, the Assyrians were well watered, a rich
people; but who got all their wealth? The Chaldaeans, strangers, the terrible
of the Nations, upon his ruin shall all the Fowls of the Heaven remain, and
all the Beasts of the field shall be upon his Branches; Little did the
Assyrians dream that the Chaldaeans should have their Jewels, Gold, Silver,
Plate, Linen, Habitations, and Lands. Many hord and heap up for their enemies:
Many men are rich, well fraught, like Ships at Sea, but whose hands their
wealth may fall into they know not. David calls it a vanity, and its a deep
excessive vanity, that men disquiet themselves in heaping up riches, and cannot
tell who shall gather them, Psalm. 39.6. Whether their children or strangers,
friends or foes. Solomon was vexed to think he must leave all he had got or
done he knew not to whom, whether a wise man or a fool, Eccles: 2.18, 19.

Fifthly, Observe;

God does therefore destroy Kings and Kingdoms, that rich Ones, great Ones,
and all sorts may take heed of their sins, pride, wickedness, and
self-confidence.

God cuts off the great Cedar, the King of Assyria, to the end that none of all
the Trees by the waters exalt themselves for their height, nor stand upon
themselves for their height; let them not slight other Trees which are not by
the waters, that are not so Bulky, Branchy and Leavy as themselves, nor conceit
that their wealth and greatness will always last.

Verse. 15. In the day when he went down to the grave, I caused a mourning.
The word for Grave is Sheol, which among other things signifies the state of
the dead; as Gen: 37.35. says Jacob, I will go down into the Grave unto my
Son. By Grave, he meant, not Hell, nor the Grave in a proper sense, for he was
persuaded some wild Beasts had devoured him, but the state of the dead: and so
here, when this high Cedar was cut down, when the King of Assyria was slain,
and went down to the Grave; that is, the state of the Dead, I caused a
mourning; Then there was a sad change, trading ceased, barrenness came upon
all the Land, the Towns and Cities were not frequented.

I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the Floods thereof, and the great
waters were stayed.
If we take the words literally, the sense is, the Sea and Rivers seemed to
mourn at the destruction and fall of this Cedar, and so if you take the deep
floods and waters for his riches, abundance, and great revenues, they seemed
now to put on Sackcloath, their Lord and Master being dead, now there was no
more flowing of those waters. The deep, the Rivers and waters had contributed
to the greatness of the Cedar, and they were affected with his fall.

I caused Lebanon to mourn for him.
In the 3d verse the Assyrian was called a Cedar in Lebanon, and when this
Cedar fell, he made the rest of the Trees in Lebanon to put on black, the word
is, Akdin, which signifies to make dark, obscure, black; all the Trees in the
Assyrian Empire, or in that part of Lebanon which belonged thereunto, I caused
to be affected with the fall of this Cedar.

And all the Trees of the field fainted for him.
All other Kings, says Maldonate, not only Kings, but all sorts were involved
in this common calamity; they were so sensible of their sufferings thereby,
that they fainted, the word for fainting is (...) which signifies to cover for
grief, and Metaphorically to faint: When grief is great, then it causes
deliquium animae.

Verse. 16. I made the Nations to shake at the Sound of his fall.
When high and great Trees fall they make a great noise; and so did this King
when he fell, his own Subjects and other Nations were much troubled at his fall.

When I cast him down to Hell with them that descend into the pit.
In ver. 15. its said he went down to the Grave or Hell, and here, that God
cast him down to Hell, its the same word; God brought him from his height to
the state of the dead, he made him like those that were in the pit.

And all the Trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon; all that drink
water shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth.
Those Kings and others which were gone before into the pit, he speaks of as
living and watered Trees; when they should see this great Cedar cut down and
brought into the same condition with themselves, they should be comforted in
that state they were in; that is the common condition of great and small. The
Hebrew for choice and best of Lebanon, is, the Election and goodness of Lebanon.

Verse. 17. They also went down into Hell with him unto them that be slain with
the sword.
Those Trees before mentioned, their condition was like theirs who were slain
with the sword, and so was this Assyrians, he was cut off from all his glory
and greatness, and laid amongst the slain.

And they that were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the
Heathen.
His Princes, Nobles, Councillors, Soldiers and Confederates, these suffered
with him, and had some comfort that they had him with them in the Grave or in
Hell. The Septuagint, for those words were his arm, read (...), and his seed,
his posterity and friends were cut off with him.

First, Observe;

The greatest Princes and Powers in the world have their day to leave their
greatness, and go down to the dust.

In the day when he went down to the Grave. The King of Assyria had his day to
come down from all his height and glory, and to lie among the slain: some dye
natural, some violent deaths; be they great or small, dye they must; Its
appointed unto men once to dye, Heb: 9.27. And as some have their day to grow
high and great in the world, so their day to descend into the Grave, and be no
more in the eye of God then a stinking carcass.

Secondly, Observe;

When great Monarchs and Princes are cut off, the Lord fills all with mourning,
fainting, and shaking.

When the Assyrian went down to the Grave, the Lord caused a mourning, made
changes and alterations at Sea and Land, He made Lebanon to put on black, the
Trees of the field to faint, and Nations to quake at the sound of his fall; so
was it when the King of Tyrus was destroyed, Ezekiel: 26.15, 16. ch: 27.35. When
the gods of the earth are slain and dye like men, the earth and all other
creatures have a kind of sense thereof, and are affected at changes.

Thirdly, Observe;

When great Oppressors and Tyrants fall, it affords some kind of comfort to the
dead.

All the Trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water
shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth, etc. You have this
livelyly set forth, Isa. 14.9, 10. Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet
thee at thy coming, it stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief Ones
of the Earth, it has raised up from the Thrones all the Kings of the Nations.
All they shall speak and say unto thee, art thou also become weak as we? art
thou become like unto us? Whether this was Senacherib, Nebuchadnezzar or
Belshazzar, it matters not; whoever he was, he was a great Tyrannical Prince,
and when he fell the dead rejoiced at it, and comforted themselves that he was
become like unto them.

Verse. 18. To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the
Trees of Eden? yet shall thou be brought down with the Trees of Eden unto the
nether parts of the Earth: thou shall lie in the midst of the uncircumcised,
with them that be slain by the sword: this is Pharaoh and all his multitude,
says the Lord God.
This verse is the Application of the former example unto Pharaoh. The Protasis
was from the 3. verse hither; and in this 18. is the Apodosis: The same
Question is put here to Pharaoh, which was in the 2. verse. To whom art thou
like in glory and in greatness among the Trees of Eden? Look about Pharaoh,
thou see that thou art not like to the Assyrian in Lebanon, Well, who among
the Trees of Eden art thou like for glory and greatness? it may be thou
equallest some of them; be it so, yet thou must be brought down with them to
the nether parts of the earth, to the Grave, or to Hell; thou that art like
them in sinning, must be like them in suffering.

Thou shall lie in the midst of the uncircumcised.
In Cha. 28.10. It was said of the Prince of Tyrus, Thou shall dye the death of
the uncircumcised; that was without any hope of eternal life; and here it is
said of Pharaoh, Thou shall lie in the midst of those that are uncircumcised,
that is, He should lie in a hopeless and perishing condition of soul and body
for ever as those did who were not in Covenant with God.

This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the Lord God.
This is his condition, and the condition of his Princes, Nobles and People;
whatsoever thoughts he or they may have of themselves, this must be their end.

Observe;

God teaches men by the examples of others what they must look for,

Here by the Assyrian Cedar, the Egyptian Pharaoh is taught what to expect; He
being like the Assyrian in his sins, had no cause but to conclude that Assyrian
judgments would befall him: What, was he for his pride and wickedness driven
out, destroyed, brought down to the Grave, Hell, and an everlasting suffering?
so must I, my ways being the same with his; like sins call for like
judgments. As the Assyrian was set out for the instruction of Pharaoh, so God
sets up Pharaoh for the instruction of all Princes and People to the end of the
world, This is Pharaoh and all his multitude.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
And it came to pass in the Twelfth year, in the Twelfth month, in the First
day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of Egypt, and say unto
him, Thou art like a young Lion of the Nations, and thou art as a Whale in the
seas: and thou came forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy
feet, and fouledst their rivers.

Thus says the Lord God, I will therefore spread out my net over thee, with a
company of many people, and they shall bring thee up in my net.

Then will I leave thee upon the Land, I will cast thee forth upon the open
field, and will cause all the fowls of the Heavens to remain upon thee, and I
will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.

And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains; and fill the valleys with thy
height.

I will also water with thy blood the Land wherein thou swimmest, even to the
mountains, and the rivers shall be full of thee.

And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the Heaven, and make the stars
thereof dark: I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give
her Light.

All the bright lights of Heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness
upon thy Land, says the Lord God.

I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy destruction
among the Nations, into the Countries which thou have not known.

Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their Kings shall be horribly
afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them, and they shall
tremble at every moment; every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.


THis Chapter is of the nature of the three former, and contains in it two
Prophesies, both of them against Pharaoh and the Egyptians: The

1. Is from the beginning to the 17. verse.

2. From the 17. to the end of the Chapter.

In the first of these we have,

First, The time of the prophecy, verse. 1.

Secondly, The Tyranny and cruelty of Pharaoh, verse. 2. set out by way of
lamentation.

Thirdly, Gods judgments against him, declared in an allegorical way, ver: 3,
4, 5, 6.

Fourthly, The events thereupon, which are 1. Darkness, verse. 7, 8. 2.
Vexation, verse. 9. 3. Astonishment, fear and trembling.


Verse. 1. And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twel^th month, in
the first day of the month.
This was not in the time of Zedekiah, who reigned but eleven years; It was in
the twelfth year of Jehoiachims captivity, the twelfth month, and first day,
not long after the taking of Jerusalem and burning it with fire. The Lord gave
out this Prophecy then, that the Jews might be taken off from trusting in the
Egyptians, having cause sufficient to believe that Ezekiels prophesies against
them should be made good, as well as Jeremies against themselves, for it was
the same Spirit which breathed in them both, and that they might reap some
comfort after their sufferings, in considering God would deal so roundly with
the Egyptians who had deceived them.

Verse. 2. Take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of Egypt.
Take up a lamentable prophecy, declare what sad things are coming upon
Pharaoh; whether the Prophet were to lament for the destruction of Pharaoh and
the Egyptians is questionable, for he and they had oppressed others, deceived
the Jews, and these judgments of God coming upon them for their wickedness
were just and righteous, and so matter of rejoicing; yet because he was to
utter dreadful and lamentable things, rejoicing became him not, but he was to
be affected suitable to the matter delivered.

Thou art like a young Lion of the Nations.
Wherein Tyrannical Kings and Princes are like unto young Lions, has been
showed in the 19. Chapter. The meaning of these words, is, that look what a
Lion is among the beasts of the fields and woods, viz: terrible and cruel, the
same was Pharaoh among the Nations; Young Lions are fierce, and devour their
prey with greediness, so are young Tyrants.

And thou art as a Whale in the Seas.
In the 29. ch: ver. 3. Pharaoh is called Hattannim; the Dragon or Crocodile;
here Cattannim, as the Whale; its Tannim in both places, and signifies a
Dragon, Whale or Sea Monster; and such as a Whale is in the Seas, viz:
troublesome, dreadful and devouring; such was Pharaoh on the deeps; a Lion at
Land, a Whale at Sea; His Dominion was large, and wherever it was he minded
the prey.

And thou came forth with thy Rivers.
The Septuagint have it, (...) which the Vulgar following, render Ventelabas
cornu in fluminibus tuis, Thou did horn it in thy Rivers; the Whale spouts
waters so out at her Nostrils, that falling it makes a kind of horn; and
Pharaoh digging or cutting Rivers out of Nilus, they were winding like a Horn.
Those are for this sense Devine Tagach in the Text, from Nagach, which is to
strike with the Horn, or Lascivire cornu, and so Vatablus turns the word,
Lascivisti in fluminibus tuis, thou have tumbled up and down, and sported thy
self in thy Rivers and waters; Others derive the word Tagach from (...) which
is to come forth, or cause to come forth; thou did invite other Nations to
revolt from Nebuchadnezzar, or thou did come forth with thy people, and
trouble other Nations with invasions and wars.

And troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fowledst their rivers.
He troubled all at home, and all abroad; as the Whale or Crocodile troubles
the Seas and the Rivers, and lets not the Fish be quiet any where; they mud the
Rivers, make the waters boil; so did this Egyptian Pharaoh, he was like Nilus,
which had turbidas aquas, troublesome waters. He troubled the waters when he
constrained the people to leave their own Land, and to go up to Carchemish by
Euphrates, Jer. 46.2. and as they went they must needs fowl the Rivers, make
their comforts as dead and useless.

First, Observe;

That times of public calamities are specially to be noted.

Ezekiel sets down the year, month and day when the Lord told him what
dreadful things should befall Pharaoh and the Egyptians; In the twelfth year,
the twelfth month, the first day of the month, he must take up a lame^tation.
Gods judgments sometimes are lasting, and the duration of them cannot be
known, unless the beginning of them be taken notice of.

Secondly, Observe;

Lamentations for the sins and destructions of others, is from the Lord.

Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of Egypt. The Prophet took
it not up of himself, but at the command of the Lord. Chap. 19.1. God bid him
take up a lamentation for the Princes of Israel; Chap. 27.2. He is enjoined to
take up a lamentation for Tyrus; Chap: 28.12. He must take up one for the King
of Tyrus. Lamentations for Princes and states are at Gods appointment; Pro^hets
are to bewail the sins and ruins of Princes and their Kingdoms when God calls
them thereunto.

Thirdly, Observe;

The evil quallities and manners of men do make them like unto Beasts of the
field and fish of the Sea.

Thou art like a young Lion of the Nations. Pharoah's roaring and ravening, his
terribleness and cruelty, made him like a Lion. And thou art as a Whale in the
Seas: Pharoah's tumbling up and down, disquieting the people, and making a prey
of them as fishes, transformed him into a Whale or Sea Monster. Subtle persons
are termed Foxes, Luke 13.32. Lascivious persons are like pampered Horses,
Jer: 5.8. Oppressing Princes and Judges to Lions and evening Wolves, Z^ph: 3.3.
The wicked qualities of men do make them brutish. Solomon tells you in favor of
this truth, That the wickedness of those in the place of judgment made them
beasts, Eccl: 3.16.18.

Fourthly, Observe;

God has Prophets to tell the worst of Princes of their wickedness.

Pharaoh was a great King, terrible as a Lion, dreadful as a Whale, yet God
had an Ezekiel to send to him, and to tell him of his Tyranny and cruelty; Go
say unto Pharaoh, thou art as a young Lion of the Heathen, and as a Whale in
the Seas. God sent him to deal sharply with him, notwithstanding his greatness;
Prophets must not spare Princes when sent of God to reprove them.

Fifthly, Observe;

Wicked Kings are great troublers of their own, and others waters.

They trouble their own people, their own Kingdoms, and others also. Thou
came forth with thy Rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and
fowledst their rivers. Pharaoh was neither quiet in Egypt, nor would let others
be quiet; he sent out his Ambassadors to other Nations, which were as his
feet, they troubled the waters, the people, in drawing them into League with
Pharaoh, in causing them to raise forces to assist him, and so fowled their
Rivers, unsettled their peace, troubled their spirits and Countries; Whales are
not more troublesome to the Seas, Crocodiles to the Rivers of Egypt, Lions and
wild Beasts to the Land, than Tyrants are to their own Kingdoms, and those that
are near unto them. Ahab was a troubler of Israel, 1 Kings 18.18. and of Judah
also, in that he drew Jehosaephat and his people to join with him (2 Chr. 1.8.)
to go up to Ramoth Gilead, where it had like to have cost him his life. Solomon
tells us, He that is cruel will trouble his own flesh, Pro: 11.17. Tyrants are
cruel, and they do trouble their own flesh, their own Subjects, and people;
yea, and the Flesh of strangers, they make their own Rivers and others to be
muddy.

Verse. 3. I will therefore spread out my net over thee.
These words you had Chap: 17.20. and Chap. 12, 13. A Net is to catch Birds or
Fish. Here God represents the person of a Fisherman, and would spread out his
Net to take this Whale. The word for Net is Resheth, from Jarash, to possess,
retain, because a Net keeps what it catches, and ret^ some derive from
retinendo, from its holding and retaining. This Net with which God would catch
the Whale, must be a great Net, and so it was, for it was the Chaldaean Army,
which was great, strong and sufficient to spread over all the Rivers of Egypt.

With a company of many people.
When Lions or Whales are to be taken, multitudes of people get together; and
so here, multitudes of Chaldaeans came to take this Lion and Whale.

They shall bring thee up in my Net.
Thou lie in thy Rivers and deep waters, thinking thy self safe, without the
reach of any, but my Net shall be so thrown as to incompasse and catch thee,
and these Chaldaans shall draw thee up out of thy Nilus, yea, out of thine
Egypt.

Verse. 4. Then will I leave thee upon the Land, etc.
When this great Whale shall be drawn out of his waters and Country, God will
deal by him as Fishermen do by the Whale, drawn to the shore, they leave him
upon the dry ground in open view, exposed to the Fowls of Heaven and Beasts of
the Earth; they cut him in pieces, whereof some are carried away, others are
thrown here and there: so God dealt with Pharaoh, he brought him to open shame
and ruin; He made him and his wealth a prey to all sorts of people: Like unto
this verse is that you had Chap: 29.5.

Verse. 5. I will lay thy flesh upon the Mountains.
Thou or thy Soldiers being overcome, some of you will fly to the Mountains
for releef; but even there shall they be destitute of help, they shall be slain
on the Mountains.

And fill the Valleys with thy height.
I will make such a slaughter of thy men, as that they shall fill up the
Valleys; the bodies shall lie so thick one upon another as to make a height.
Munster interprets it of the swelling of the bodies; Dead bodies do swell much,
and increase height. The Vulgar read the words thus, Implebo colles tuos sanie
tuo, I will fill thy hills with the corruption flows from the dead bodies.

Verse. 6. I will also water with thy blood the Land wherein thou swimmest.
When Nilus overflowed, then Egypt was full of water, so that this Whale might
swim up and down in the same. God would cause such a destruction to be among
the Egyptians that there should be a River of blood which should water the
Land; hereby is set out the great abundance of blood that should be shed in
Egypt, the Land was made drunk with it.

Even to the Mountains; and the Rivers shall be full of thee.
Not only the lower places should be s^ll'd with the blood of the slain, but it
should reach to the Mountains, and run into the Rivers. Sanctius thinks this
not to be verified in Egypt, where were no Mountains, but in some other place
where the Egyptians were drawn out to fight.

First, Observe;

That because Kings keep not within their bounds, but are troublesome to their
own people and others, therefore the Lord destroys them and their Kingdoms.

Thou came forth with thy Rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet,
and fowledst their Rivers, I will therefore spread out my Net over thee. The
ruin of Princes and States are no casual things, they are effected by the
Counsel, Providence, and Power of God, punishing them most justly for their
sins.

Secondly, Observe;

God has his Nets to catch Whales and great Fish in.

I will spread out my Net over thee. Its not every Net will catch Whales and
great Fish, they will break ordinary Nets; but God has Nets to take them, he
wants not means to bring the mightiest unto punishment. Pharaoh was a Lion, a
Dragon, a Crocodile, a Whale, and God had a Net in the North, the Babylonish
Army, which he sent for, and caught this Egyptian Whale with. God had a Net to
catch chat old Whale and Sea Monster, who devoured so many of the Israelites
children; he made a Net of the Waters, and not only caught Pharaoh, but drowned
that Whale in the Red Sea.

Thirdly, Observe;

God designs the place of Tyrants suffering, and divides the spoil of them to
whom he pleases.

I will leave thee upon the Land, I will cast thee forth upon the open field, I
will cause all the Fowls of the Heaven to remain upon thee, and I will fill the
Beasts of the whole earth with thee. God drew this Whale out of his Waters,
unto the place where he and all the Fish adhered unto him were slain and made a
spoil to all sorts of people.

Fourthly, Observe;

When God is in a way of judgment with wicked Princes, sometimes he shows
exceeding great severity toward them and theirs.

I will lay thy flesh upon the Mountains, and fill the valleys with thy height.
Thou and thine shall be slain in all places, no safety in the Mountains or
Vallyes; I will also water with thy blood the Land wherein thou swimmest; their
blood should be so shed as to make the Land drunk with it: in Vatablus it is
inebriabo terram cruore sanguinis tui.

Verse. 7. And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the Heaven, and make the
stars thereof dark.
Here the Prophet comes to show the events of this dreadful and severe
judgment of God. When I shall put thee out, because to show in extinctione
tua: Cava or Caba notes such a putting out as is of fire or a Candle; when God
should extinguish Pharoahs life, then should there be no quiet, peace, joy,
safety, but altogether fighing, weeping, complaining, howling, and sad
lamentations; so great should be the grief and misery of the Egyptia^s, that
all things should seem dark unto them. In extreme sorrows visus deficit, and
persons think the day to be night, are destitute of counsel, and know-not which
way to turn them. Its usual in Scripture to set out times of mourning and
misery by such expressions as you have here, and in the following verse, as
Joel 3.15. Isai. 13.10. Mark 13.24, 25. Luke 21.25. Amos 8.9.

I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moon shall not give her light.
God has the power over the Clouds, and he can call them forth at his pleasure
to do him what service he please; he would keep the comfortable beams of the
Sun and Moon from them, they had darkness on every side, the very Heavens,
Sun, Moon and Stars hid their faces from them.

Verse. 8. All the bright lights of Heaven will I make dark over thee.
The Hebrew is all the lights of light; they should have no benefit by these
bright and shining lights of Heaven. Mourners use to cover their heads and
faces, and so the lights of Heaven are as darkness unto them, or they shall
seem affected with the sore judgments are upon thee. The Vulgar is, Omnia
luminaria Coeli merere faciam super te, I will make all the lights of Heaven to
mourn over thee; Septuagint, All the bright lights of Heaven, (...).

And set darkness upon thy Land.
Darkness is frequently in the word used for affliction and grief, a sad
condition, and God would set Egypt, yea, settle it under darkness, it should
be kept in a mourning and miserable condition.

Verse. 9. I will also vex the hearts of many people.
The word for to vex, is (...) Caass which signifies not only to move to anger,
but also to grieve; when people should hear how Pharaoh a great King was
conquered, and his Kingdom laid utterly wast, this would grieve and vex them,
and especially when they consider how great Nebuchadnezzar became hereby,
having all Egypt and the adjacent parts under him.

When I shall bring thy destruction among the Nations.
The word for thy destruction is Shibreca, Contritionem tuam, thy breaking; for
which the Septuagint has (...) thy captivity; The French Ta ruin Thy ruin.
The Nations thought Egypt impossible to be totally broken and ruined, being
fortifyed so with Cities, Rivers, and the Sea. The News of its destruction
would vex them to the heart.

Verse. 10. Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee.
When Gods dealings with Pharaoh, his severe judgments upon him and his, came
abroad among the people, they were amazed, not knowing what to think, speak or
do; When strange and dreadful things come suddenly to us they surprise our
judgments, and we are at a stand.

And their Kings shall be horribly afraid for thee.
The People should be amazed, and the Kings afraid, Chap. 30.4. The Sword shall
come upon Egypt, and great p^in shall be in Ethiopia, so in Lybia, Lydia and
Chub, they and their King should be horribly afraid. The word to fear is (...)
Saor which notes great fear, even such fear as is cum erectione pilorum, as
makes the hair to stand up; and the Word is double here, They shall fear with a
fear, be exceedingly afraid, for Nebuchadnezzars prevailing over Pharaoh. When
the great Whale is taken, the lesser fishes have cause to fear.

When I shall brandish my Sword before them.
The Hebrew is, Begnophphi Charbi, When I shall cause my Sword to fly before
them; that is, in military Language, When I shall brandish my Sword before
them. When Nebuchadnezzar came with his forces to Egypt, at the appointment of
God, and subdued it, then he brandished his sword before them.

And they shall tremble at every moment.
These words we had in the Chap. 26.16. where they were opened, they shall be
in a continued fear, trembling from day to day least Nebuchadnezzar should fall
upon them, and bring them to Pharoahs condition.

Every man for his own life in the day of thy fall.
When the Sword is abroad men's lives are at stake; and when it has shed so
much blood as to water a Land, to fill up valleys and make it reach to
mountains, who would not fear least his life and blood go next? When a great
King and Kingdom falls by the Sword, its matter sufficient to make
neighboring Kings and Kingdoms to fear themselves.

First, Observe;

Great Ones are lights in the world, and God extinguisheth those lights at his
pleasure.

When I shall put thee out. Princes and great Ones are examples which most
follow, Beacons upon a Hill, Suns in their Orbs, which many admire and follow,
though they light them downward toward the pit of darkness; These be such
great lights that men dare not snuff, reprove them, but God he extinguisheth
them; he lighted them up, and he puts them out.

Secondly, Observe;

When God puts out great lights, breaks the Candlesticks they stood in, that
is, destroys great Kings and their Kingdoms, then sad events do follow, then
the living and senseless creatures are troubled, Heaven and Earth affected,
those near, and those far off, disquieted. Dreadful judgments have dismal
consequents.

When God destroyed Pharaoh and his Army, laid waste Egypt, then darkness was
upon the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, then darkness was upon the Land, then
the hearts of many were vexed, then Kings were horribly afraid, and quaked
every moment for fear of their Kingdoms and lives. When Lions and Whales are
caught and killed, it makes the other Beasts and Fish to fear. When the high
Cedars fall, all the other Trees tremble.

Verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
For thus says the Lord God, The sword of the King of Babylon shall come upon
thee.

By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall, the terrible
of the Nations all of them; and they shall spoil the pomp of Egypt, and all the
multitude thereof shall be destroyed.

I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from besides the great waters,
neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts
trouble them.

Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their Rivers to run like Oil,
says the Lord God.

When I shall make the Land of Egypt desolate, and the Country shall be
destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all them that dwell
therein, then shall they know that I am the Lord.

This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the Daughters of the
Nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her, even for Egypt, and for
all her multitude, says the Lord God.


THese verses belong to the first prophecy in this Chapter, and they set out

First, The Instruments God used in executing the judgments threatened against
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, verse. 11, 12.

Secondly, The Facts of these Instruments, the King of Babylon and his Army,
ver: 12, 13.

Thirdly, The Events following; ver: 14, 15.

Fourthly, The Conclusion of the Prophecy, verse. 16.

Verse. 11. The Sword of the King of Babylon shall come upon thee.
I will stir up and bring the King of Babylon with a great army, who shall come
furnished with all Military preparations against thee, and cut thee off.

Verse. 12. By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall.
The word for mighty is Gibborim, and Gibbor signifies properly miles robustus
as fortis, says Drusius. The Septuagint have it here (...) by the sword of the
Giants; Egypt had multitudes, but they should fall by the power of these mighty
and Giant-like men.

The Terrible of the Nations all of them.
This expression, The terrible of the Nations, we had thrice before, Chap:
28.7. and 30.11. and 31, 12. Those men were most barbarous and bloody,
tyrannical and pestilent, should be employed in his work. The Septuagint calls
them (...) Pestes, such as were the plagues of the Country, such as went up
and down robbing, stealing, and murdering; the Vulgar is inexpugnabiles.

And they shall spoil the pomp of Egypt.
There is pomp in Titles, pomp in Buildings, pomp in feasting and furniture of
houses, pomp in apparel, pomp in funerals, pomp in worships, pomp in
multitudes of men, Horses and Charets, whatever the Egyptian pomp were, it
should be spoiled: Vatablus interprets their pomp to be their dignity or
beautiful things: Munster makes it Magnificentiam, their state and greatness:
Junius makes it the excellency of Egypt, that is, Kingly Majesty, with all the
glory and greatness attending the same.

Verse. 13. I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from besides the great
waters.
Egypt abounded with Cattle, especially Horses, which were serviceable for war
and other uses; those fed near to the Rivers cut out of Nilus to water the
Land: what Beasts soever they were, God by the Chaldaeans would destroy them,
and they should not be any longer nigh the many waters, so is the Hebrew.

Neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts
trouble them.
The destruction should be so great, that man and beast should be cut off, as
was said, Chap. 29.8. These often troubled the waters with their feet and hoofs,
the one with digging the other by trampling in them.

Verse. 14. Then will I make the waters deep, and cause their Rivers to run like
Oil.
Man and Beast being taken away, nothing shall trouble the waters, but they
shall be quiet, clear and smooth as Oil, The Hebrew word for to make deep is,
(...) Shakah to drowned, to sink, faciam ut profundum petunt, I will cause
their waters to go to the bottom; which Piscator interprets of the mud,
wherewith they had been troubled, that should sink, and the waters became pure.
The Septuagint, (...); I will make quiet their waters; When they are clean and
quiet, they run without noise, then they are like Oil: The waters of Egypt,
and of other Nations whom the Egyptians troubled.

Verse. 15. When I shall make the Land of Egypt clesolate, and the Countries
destitute.
He shows when the waters shall be pure and quiet, even when the Land is made
desolate; Hebrew is, a desolation: And all carried away with which the
Countries abounded; Hebrew is, shall be destitute of its fullness.

When I shall smite all them that dwell therein.
All were not smitten by the sword, and destroyed, but some were carried away
Captives, and that was a smiting.

Verse. 16. This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her.
This prophecy which I have delivered, is the lamentation wherewith Egypt
shall be lamented; not only I Ezekiel must lament for her, but all Nations
shall do it.

The Daughters of the Nations shall lament her, they shall lament for her.
The Cities and people of the Nations hearing of the dreadful judgments of God
upon Egypt, that that populous strong and flourishing Kingdom is brought to
utter ruin and desolation, they shall be affected therewith, and lament her
condition.

First, Observe;

God makes use of the King and People of one Nation, to execute his judgments
upon the King and People of another Nation.

The sword of the King of Babylon shall come upon thee, and by the swords of
the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall. Kings and their People are at
the dispose of God, to call out and employ where, and in what service he
pleases; he serves himself, fulfills his wills and counsels by Kings and great
Ones, overthrowing one Kingdom by another, laying all their pomp and glory in
the dust.

Secondly, Observe;

The sins of Kings and People cause God to execute his sore judgments, not
only upon themselves, but also upon the bruit creatures, and things inanimate.

God would not only destroy Pharaoh and his multitude, but the Beasts, the
Cities, and all the fulness of the Land; in the destruction of these, God
punished the owners.

Thirdly, Observe;

By the destruction of Tyrants and their Kingdoms, God quiets Nations; they by
their Power, Counsels, or Agents, trouble their own Kingdoms and others.

Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their Rivers te run like Oil:
when I shall make the Land of Egypt desolate, When Pharaoh and his were cut
off, they should trouble the waters no more at home nor abroad, all should be
quiet, peaceable, and oleo tranquillius.

Fourthly, Observe;

God in his wise providence so orders his judgments that they shall affect
others, and be had in remembrance.

This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her, the Daughters of the
Nation shall lament for her. Destruction of great Kings and Kingdoms, have
many thiags considerable in them; there is much of Gods power, justice, and
severity in the same, which God will have to be observed and remembered in the
world, Ezekiel. 19.14. When God destroyed the Princes of Israel, and laid the Land
of Judah waste; what then? This is a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation.

Verses 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of the month,
that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and
the Daughters of the famous Nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with
them that go down into the pit.

Whom do thou pass in beauty? go down, and he thou laid with the
uncircumcised.

They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword; she is
delivered to the sword; draw her and all her multitudes.

The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with
them that help him: they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the
sword.

Ashur is there, and all her company: his graves are about him: all of them
slain, fallen by the sword.

Whose Graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is round about
her Grave: all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the
land of the living.


AT this 17. verse begins the second prophecy and general part of the Chapter,
in which these things are considerable,

1. The Time of this Prophecy, verse. 17.

2. The Funeral of Egypt, with the solemnity thereof, which is commanded,
declared and confirmed, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. and so on to the 31.

3. The Conclusion of the prophecy, verse. 31, 32.

Verse. 17. In the twelfth year, the fifteenth day of the mouth.
It was in the twelfth year of their captivity, and the fifteenth day of the
twelfth month, as it is verse. 1. fourteen days after the former prophecy, and
upon the third Sabbath, as Junius observes; then came this Prophecy unto
Ezekiel.

Verse. 18. Wayl for the multitude of Egypt.
The word Nahah to lament signifies internal grief. The Prophet is bid not to
feign a grief, or a Funeral complaint, but to be real, to mourn or to
prophecy what mourning should be at the Funeral of Egypt.

Cast them down, even her, and the Daughters of the famous Nations.
The Prophet was to do this Prophetically, as Jeremy was to root out, pull
down, to destroy and cast down, Jerem. 1.10. He prophesied such things, and
thereupon was said to do them; and so Ezekiel was to prophecy the casting down
of Egypt, her King and People, and the Daughters of famous Nations, those that
did confederate with her, Cities or People; and because of this, he is said to
cast them down: its Gods work to cast down, to throw into the grave and pit,
but his Prophets declaring what shall be, are said to do the same.

Unto the nether parts of the Earth.
The Hebrew is, El Erez tachtijoth, in terram inferorum, into the Land of hell,
or into the lowest part of the earth.

Verse. 19. Whom do thou pass in beauty?
Egypt, thou think thy self more beautiful than other Nations; that thou
have some excellency beyond them; suppose thou had, that must not exempt thee
from the common condition of Nations; but thou have not any beauty, excellency
beyond them, nay, thou art short of them, therefore lay aside such thoughts;
they who were more beautiful and pleasant than thy self, they are gone down
into the pit; therefore

Go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.
Thou must not look for any privilege above other Nations; thou may conceit
thy counterfeit circumcision will advantage thee, Erant Egyptii circumcifi, ut
Herodotus in Euterpe docet, Junius,
but thou art deceived; away down to the Grave, and lie with the uncircumcised;
thy portion must be with the profanest. The word for be thou laid, signifies to
sleep also, and may be thus rendered, sleep with the uncircumcised.

Verse. 20. They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword.
They that were confederate with thee, and thou with them shall fall by the
Chaldaean sword which has commission to cut you all off, and to send you to
the state of those that formerly were slain by the sword; you think your self
invulnerable, but you shall find the points of the Chaldaeans swords be sharp,
and will enter.

She is delivered to the sword.
Egypt or the multitude of Egypt is delivered to the sword, appointed to be
slain. The Hebrew may be rendered thus, The sword is delivered, or given, viz:
into the hand of the Babylonian to destroy the Egyptian withal.

Draw her and all her multitude.
Draw her, Egypt and her People into the grave. The Babylonians slay her and
hers, the sword is in their hand, and then drag them into the pit. But these
and the former words may be taken otherwise; as to note out the stately Funeral
of Egypt; She is delivered to the Sword, or the Sword is laid under her head,
or by her side, to show that she was warlike: Draw her, and all her multitude;
Let her body, being put into a Chariot, be drawn in pomp and state, Vide-Junium.
like unto the bodies of great Ones.

First, Observe;

God made known his mind to his Prophets by degrees; something they had in one
year given out, somewhat in another year; sometimes in one month, sometimes in
another God spoke unto them.

Here in the twelfth year, the fifteenth day of the month, the word of the Lord
came unto Ezekiel: God had appeared to him the first day, and again the
fifteenth day.

Secondly, Observe;

There be seasons to mourn in, as well as to rejoice in.

Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt. The providence of God does not
act constantly in one way, but it makes changes and alterations, which afford
occasion to mourn and to laugh. When God carried the Jews into Babylon, there
they hung up their Harps and wept, Psalm. 137. and when he brought them back
again, it was with singing, Isa: 48.20.

Thirdly, Observe;

That at the appointment of God we may lament for the sins and ju^gements of
God upon the Churches enemies, secret or open.

The Egyptians were never real friends to the Jews, but were their secret, if
not their open enemies; and now when Gods hand was heavy upon them for their
sins, the Prophet is commanded to wail for them. When the Churches enemies
suffer, we are to rejoice, but if God calls to mourning for their sufferings,
we must do it.

Fourthly, Observe;

The greatest in the greatest Kingdoms have no cause to glory and lift up
themselves above others, seeing they must come to the common condition of all,
even to the Pit and Grave.

The King of Egypt, with his Princes, Nobles, and confederates of famous
Nations, must come down to the nether parts of the earth. Egypt was a potent
flourishing Kingdom, Pharaoh mighty, But whom do thou pass in beauty? Thy
beauty, glory, strength, wealth, greatness, are nothing, thou must go down and
lie with the uncircumcised: In a moment, at the beck of the Lord Kingdoms are
made desolate, Kings cast into the Grave, and all their pomp buried in the
dark; let none despise others, and exalt themselves.

Verse. 21. The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of
Hell.
Here and so on, the Prophet by a Figure called Prosopopaeia represents unto us
what entertainment Pharaoh should have among the dead; the Tyrants and great
men of the world, that were in the Grave or Hell before, shall speak unto him
and Congratulate his coming unto them in a taunting way; what Pharaoh, have
thou, who were so great and glorious, left the earth? art thou come to us weak
and wounded, stripped of all, and art become like us? thou art welcome to Hell,
and the condition we Tyrants are in; be not troubled, here are many great ones
before thee, both of the uncircumcised Nations, and also of the circumcised.

With them that help him.
They should speak to him and those were his helpers. Pharaoh had many helpers
to carry on his designs on earth, many Confederates, and they should be
welcomed to Hell also.

They are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
The Egyptians they are gone down to the Grave, they lie or sleep with the
uncircumcised, or are in no better condition then uncircumcised Ones are in,
being slain with the Sword. These words may be understood of other Nations.

Verse. 22. Ashur is there, and all her company.
Here the Prophet begins the enumeration of particular Nations, whose Kings and
People were gone to Hell beforehand, and would give entertainment to Pharaoh.
The first he mentions is Ashur; the Assyrian Monarch was the most ancient, of
great power and extent, and the King thereof was in Hell, and all the Assyrian
company, all his Attendants and Followers.

His Graves are about him.
The King of Assyria is gone down to the Grave, and so are his Princes, Nobles
and People which were slain by the sword; they are in their Graves near unto
him, round about him, and these will speak to Pharaoh at his coming into the
Grave or Hell.

Verse. 23. Whose Graves are set in the sides of the pit.
The Vulgar reads the words thus, whose Graves are in novissimis laci, in the
bottom of the lake; importing that they sell from the height of honor into the
depth of misery.

Which caused terror in the Land of the Living.
When the Assyrians were destroyed by the Chaldaean or Babylonish sword, it was
dreadful to those that were living; or thus, these Assyrians while they were in
the Land of the living, they caused terror, they were tyrannical, cruel, and
filled all with fear. Some restrain the Land of the Living only to Judaea,
because there the Jews only worshipped the living God, and those were right
amongst them were to enjoy the living God eternally; but we may take the Land
of the Living here in opposition to the state of the dead, and so other Lands
are included, yea all where be any living.

Verse. 24, 25.
There is Elam and all her multitude round about her Grave, all of them slain,
fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of
the earth, which caused their terror in the Land of the Living, yet have they
born their shame with them that go down to the Pit.

They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her multitude: her
Graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword:
though their terror was caused in the Land of the Living, yet have they born
their shame with them that go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them
that be slain.


The Elamites were the Persians and Medes, and what he said of Ashur, that he
now says of Elam. The King of the Medes and Persians with his multitude, who
living were terrible unto many, were now in Hell ready to give entertainment to
Pharaoh who was coming thither. Of Elam you may read Jer: 49.34. to the end of
the Chapter.

Verse. 24. Yet have they born their shame with them that go down to the pit.
They were tyrannical, and so a terror to others, but they were cut off by the
Scythians, says Polanius, and carried the shame of their tyranny and
wickedness with them, or they dyed ignominiously.

Verse. 25. They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
multitude.
When great Ones remove, preparations are made for them whither they remove; so
here, even in the Grave and Hell a bed was provided for Elam. In the bed in
darkness and rest, such was the Grave, Vault, or Sepulcher o^ Elam. In this
verse there is an Enallagie of Genders and Numbers.

Verses 26, 27, 28.
There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her Graves are round about
him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their
terror in the Land of the Living.

And they shall not lie with the mighty, that are fallen of the uncircumcised,
which are gone down to Hell with their weapons of war: and they have laid their
swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones,
though they were the terror of the mighty in the Land of the Living.

Yea, thou shall be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and shall lie
with them that are slain with the sword.


HEre the Prophet brings in a third kind of Examples, which are Meshech and
Tuball.

Verse. 26. There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude.
By Meshech, some Expositers understand the Scythians, others the Cappadocians;
and by Tubal, the Iberians and Albanians which were near together, and both of
them in the Eastern parts; All these may be understood: for the Scythians
passing through Cappadocia, Iberia, and Albania, had many of those Countries
joining with them, when they brake into Asia, between Pontus and the Caspian
Sea, and so plagued the Elamites; the Kings of these places were not yet slain,
and gone down to the pit, though the words import it done, because of the
certainty of it, but it was near at hand, and to be effected before the death
of Pharaoh, whom they were to speak unto at his coming down to the Grave.

Her Graves are round about him, etc.
The Graves of the men of each Country were round about the King of that
Country; they were people uncircumcised, out of Covenant with God, slain by
the sword, notwithstanding they were terrible to others.

Verse. 27. And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the
uncircumcised, which are gone down to Hell with their we^pons of war.
Among the Heathens and uncircumcised there were some mighty men which did
notable exploits, were famous in their generations, and dyed honorably in the
battle, or of their wounds; these had pompous and great Funerals, Cum armis
sepeliebantur, ut significaretu^ eos, Vsque ad Mortem, and usque ad Sepulchrum,
arma non abjeisse: Bab: Salum.
and were buried with their armor; they dyed honorably, and their honor went
with them to the Grave, but these should not be reckoned or laid amongst them.

And they have laid their swords under their heads.
When Soldiers of note dyed, the custom was to honor them with laying their
swords under their heads, or by their heads; and not only so, but they used to
bury them with their Arms. Lavater tells us that Gyraldus in a book he has
written of Sepulchers and several Rites of burying, says, he saw Arms and
Boots found in old Monuments or Sepulchers.

But their iniquities shall be upon their bones.
By iniquities is meant the punishment of iniquities: Their bones shall be
scattered upon the earth for their tyranny and cruelty which they have
exercised, and be exposed to the Beasts and Fowls for a prey; so their
iniquities shall be upon their bones: O^ thus, they had their swords and arms
go down with them to the Grave, instruments of cruelty and blood, signifying
that they carried their bloody and tyrannical dispositions with them. And their
iniquities shall be upon their bones: They shall suffer now they are dead and
gone a full recompense of reward for all their sins; or thus, they lived
wickedly, and dyed cowardly, and an ill name shall they leave behind them,
cursed shall be their memory.

Verse. 28. Yea, thou shall be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and
shall lie with them that are slain with the sword.
Some interpret this verse of Meshech and Tubal, that they should be broken in
pieces, but rather it is the application of the former examples instanced in,
viz: Meshech and Tubal, unto Pharaoh, Thou shall be broken, and become a
Companion of the uncircumcised, suffering such things as they do: Thou shall be
equal to them in punishment, who have not been behind them in sin.

Verse. 29. There is Edom, her Kings and all her Princes, which with their might
are laid by them that were slain by the Sword: they shall lie with the
uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.
Esau the son of Isaac was called Edom, who gave that name to the Country
called Idumaea, which had many Kings and Princes; they were circumcised being
the posterity of Abraham, but notwithstanding their circumcision, being wicked
they obtained nothing thereby, neither that, not their might and power, stood
them in any stead, but they went down to the pit, and had the portion of
uncircumcised ones. Here the Prophet answers an Objection which the Egy^^ans
might make, which was this, We are circumcised, and that are like the Jews, an
holy people, differing from the Na^^re, and therefore we lock for some
privilege thereby, and cannot be persuaded that our condition shall be like
unto the uncircumcised Nations: Yes, says the Prophet, your condition will not
differ at all from theirs; for the Kings and all the Princes of Idumaea, who
came of the Jewish race, and had circumcision upon better grounds then you had
it, they are dead, gone to the grave, and laid among the uncircumcised.

Verse. 30. There be the Princes of the North all of them, and all the
Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain, with their terror they are
ashamed of their might, and they lie uncircumcised with them that be slain by
the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit.
The word for Princes in Hebrew is, Nesichim, Men anointed with oil; so Kings
and Princes were. These Princes of the North were not the Babylonians, whom God
used to execute his pleasure upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians; but the Tyrians,
those of Damascus and Syria, together with the Zydonians. The Princes of those
places were North to Egypt, and being men of might, they were a terror unto
others; but their might could not preserve them from death, they were therefore
ashamed of their might, and are laid with the uncircumcised in the pit.

First, Observe;

That Tyrants in Hell are glad when other Tyrants like themselves come thither.

The strong among the mighty shall speak unto him (...) of the midst of Hell.
When some great man comes to Court, there is rising, complementing, and
welcoming of him thi^ne; so when great Tyrants come to the Court of Hell, there
be those rejoice at it, and congratulate their coming.

Secondly, Observe;

No humane power can defend a man against death, or keep him out of the pit.

Princes have the greatest power, yet that prevailed not; the strong and mighty
who were terrors to others, were no terrors to death, who came and plucked
them out of their Armies, Thrones, Castles, Greatness, and sent them down to
the dead. Ashur is there and all her company; There is Elam and all her
multitude; There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude; There is Edom, her
Kings, and all her Princes; There be the Princes of the North all of them, and
all the Zidonians. None of them all could exempt themselves from that
condition; it is not policy, power, or greatness can do it; for the most
wise, most powerful, and most great God has said, Eccles. 8.8. There is no
man has power over the Spirit to retain the Spirit, neither has he power in
the day of Death; and there is no discharge in that war, neither shall
wickedness deliver those that are given to it. Kings are strong, but death is
stronger than they: Kings may make war with men and conquer, or conclude peace;
but its not so with death: if they send out all their forces, death fears them
not, but will slay them every one; if they send men to treat and make a peace,
it will not be granted, there is no discharge in that war; death will have the
bones and carcasses of Princes to gnaw upon, as well as the meanest; those that
have been terrors, made a great noise in the world, death has tamed and
quieted them.

Thirdly, Observe;

The greatest and most g^ the wrong way, and have the portion of Gods enemies.

Kings and Princes of Countries with their companyes and multitudes go to Hell,
and lie with the uncircumcised. Ashur, Elam, Meshech, Tubal, Edom, with their
Kings and people, All the Princes of the North, with the Zidonians, and those
that belonged to them went thither, and had the reward of the uncircumcised, of
such as God owned not for his people, but dealt withal as enemies. Some there
be that dye the death of the righteous, Numb. 23.10. that dye in faith, Heb:
11.13. and in the Lord, Rev: 14.13. and these are blessed, their death is
precious in the eyes of the Lord, Psalm. 116.15. but as for others, they dye in
their sins, and are accursed.

Fourthly, Observe;

Mighty men who have ruffled it in the world, been dreadful unto others, and
go down to the Grave in pomp, or not, shall afterward bear-their shame and sin.

The mighty Ones of Ashur, of Elam, of Meshech, Tubal, Edom, those of the North
and Zidon, who were a terror in the Land of the living; some of them were
buried in pomp, they went down to Hell with their weapons of war, and they had
their swords laid under their heads; others had no Funerals, or no pomp at
them, but they all did bear their shame, and their iniquities were upon their
bones; they lived wickedly, oppressed grievously, played the Devils on the
earth, they bear their shame, and God punished them for their iniquities.
Tyrants are feared and honored as gods while they live, but being dead, their
names do stink, and their torments are terrible, Potens potenter punientur.
proportioned to the power they have abused, and mischief done by them.

Fifthly, Observe;

External privileges profit not Princes nor People unless they be Godly,
they must perish like those that want those privileges.

The Edomites were circumcised, which was a great privilege in Paul's account,
Phil. 35. a sign of the Covenant between God and his people, Gen: 17.11. But
because they and their Princes were wicked, circumcision profited them not,
they were laid with the uncircumcised, they had no more favor from the hand of
the Lord, then his worst enemies, then those that were out of covenant, and
open enemies unto him. Let men take heed how they rest upon their privileges
and professions, it is not Baptism, being in a Church, enjoying of Ordinances,
having of gifts, high notions, and admirable expressions, will advantage men or
women at last; unless they be really Godly a thousand such privileges will do
them no good; Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature.

Verses 31, 32.
Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his multitude, even
Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, says the Lord God.

For I have caused my terror in the Land of the living: and he shall be laid
in the midst of the uncircumcised, with them that are slain with the sword,
even Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the Lord God.


IN these two verses is the conclusion of this Prophecy, Lamentation, or
Funeral of Pharaoh and the Egyptians; which is the comfort he shall have
amongst those mighty men and Princes before mentioned; and this is in the 31.
verse: And then the end of Gods judgments upon Kings and People, verse. 32.

Verse. 31. Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted.
When Pharaoh shall come to Hell or the Grave, and see what Kings, Princes, and
multitudes of people are there suffering such things as himself must, this
shall comfort him that he has such companions, and so many: To lose his life,
kingdom, and people, were sad things, bitter afflictions, but when he saw
others had done so before him, and they as great as himself, this was as a
Cordial unto him.

Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword.
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came shortly after this prophecy against him
and the Egyptians, and made a great slaughter amongst them, cutting off man and
beast from the Land, as was said, Chap. 29.11.

Verse. 32. For I have caused my terror in the Land of the Living.
Junius reads the words, when I shall put my terror; Montanus, because I have
put my breaking in the Land of the Living; a Preter Tense for a Future. The
sense is this, when I shall cut off Pharaoh and his army by the Babylonish
sword, this judgment of mine upon them, will cause terror in the Nations that
are living, they will be afraid of my judgments. Pharaoh made them afraid by
his wars, and I shall make them afraid by my judgments.

First, Observe;

The comfort that wicked ones have after death in Hell is poor comfort, its
imaginary comfort rather then real,

What comfort is it to see many in Prison, in torment, suffering proportionable
punishment for their iniquities. Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be
comforted; he shall see the Kings of several Countries there, the great Tyrants
of the world, and shall be punished like unto them; his comfort was in conceit,
but his punishment in reallity. Polanus calls it Crudele solatium, Cruel
Comfort. For a King to be in Fire and Brimstone with other Kings, People to be
weeping and gnashing of their tee h with others is cold and cruel comfort. Many
flatter themselves, that if they dogo to hell, they shall have companions
there, which will be some ease, but it rather will aggravate their misery to
hear their dreadful howling and yellings, their cursing one another, that ever
they knew each other.

Secondly; Observe;

God cuts off Kings and Nations by his just judgments, that he might strike
fear into the living, cause them to cease from sin, and learn righteousness.

When Pharaoh and all his Army were slain by the sword, then the Lord sent his
terror in the Land of the living, then the Nations far and nigh trembled at
the severe judgments of the Lord. Such judgments are awakening things, and
call aloud to the Inhabitants of the earth to repent and reform their ways.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, Speak to the
children of thy people, and say unto them, when I bring the sword upon a Land,
if the people of the Land take a man of their Coasts, and set him for their
watchman:

If when he sees the sword come upon the Land, he blow the Trumpet, and warn
the people.

Then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not warning, if
the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.

He heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took not warning, his blood shall be
upon him: but he that takes warning, shall deliver his soul.

But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and the
people be not warned: if the sword come and take any person from among them, he
is taken away in his iniquity: but his blood will I require at the watchmans
hand.


OUR Prophet having finished his prophecy against the Nations in eight
Chapters, from the 24. to this 33. which was the second General part of his
whole prophecy; comes here again to prophecy unto the Jews, and begins the
third General part of his prophecy, which extends to the end of the 39.
Chapter.

In this Chapter are these things laid down: 1. A Renovation of the Prophets
call to his Office, with the Description thereof, from the 1. verse to the 10.
2. A Confirmation of the Prophet against the calumnies of the Jews, from the
10. to the 21. 3. A Denunciation of judgment against those that were not
smitten at the taking of Jerusalem, from the 21. to the 30. 4. A Reproof of
those that were captives in Babylon for their hypocrisy and covetousness, from
the 30. verse. to the end.


Verse. 1. Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Verse. 2. Son of man, speak unto the children of thy people.


Ezekiel being taken off by the Lord from prophesying to the Jews, Ch 24.27. he
was employed two years and upwards in prophesying to other Nations, as appears
by comparing Ch: 24.1. with Chapter 32.1. and having done with them, here he is
Co^mission'd again to prophecy to the Jews; Son of man, speak unto thy people;
cease now to speak any more to the Nations which are strangers to thee, and
speak to thine own people, to the Jews which are of the same root, stock and
kindred with thy self. The Hebrew is to the sons of thy people. Its observable
God says not to the children of my people, or to the Jews, but to thy people;
God did disown them, they were so stubborn and disobedient that he would not
acknowledge them for his: Often in this prophecy they are called Ezekiels
people, Chap: 3.11. Chap: 13.17. and four times in this Chapter, in this 2.
verse. the 12.17. and 30. in all these verses its the children of thy people.
When the Jews sinned that grievous sin in making the Calf, God disowned them,
and said to Moses, Go get thee down, for thy people have corrupted themselves,
Exodus: 32.7. Sin makes breaches between the nearest relations, and causes God to
disown his own people, and his own institutions, Isa. 1.14. The new Moons, and
the appointed Feasts my soul hates.

When I bring the sword upon a Land.
By sword is meant war and the evils do attend it, as Chap. 6.3. and 14.17. and
29.8. and 30.4. and 32.11. The Hebrew is thus, A Land when I shall bring upon
it the sword; here is a Nominative Case, viz: Erez put absolute; and Sanctius
says, when a Pronoun follows, that Nominative must be put in the place and
Case of the Pronoun, as our translation has done, saying, I will bring a sword
(not upon it, but) upon the Land. Land is not put for Judaea, but indefinitely
for any Land.

If the people of the Land take a man of their Coasts, and set him for their
watchman.
When a Land is in danger of being invaded, the peoples care is to chose out
one or other to set him in some eminent place for a watchman. Montanus and the
Vulgar render the word Mikzehem, de novissimis suis, They take one of the
lowest and meanest rank; but Katzah notes the border and extreme part of a
Land, or any other thing: Its better as our translation has it, a man of their
Coasts or borders, where the enemy was like to make his first approach.

A watchman.
Tzopheh is from Tzaphah, which is accurately to observe, to open the eyes, and
fixedly to behold an object, and take special notice thereof; so is a watchman
to do: 2 Samuel 13.34. The young man that kept the watch, lift up his eyes and
looked, and behold there came much people. He did not barely look, but lift up
his eyes and looked, he made an accurate observation. So 2 Samuel 18.24. The
watchman went up to the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lift up his eyes,
and looked, and behold, a man running alone; he put forth himself to the utmost
to make a discovery, his eyes were intent upon it.

Verse. 3. If when he sees the sword come upon the Land, etc.
This verse sets out the office of the watchman; which is, 1. To look
diligently about him, whether there be any danger approaching, any enemy near
at hand, coming to invade or make attempts against the Land. 2. If so, he is to
blow the Trumpet presently, and to give warning thereof, stirring up all to
procure public safety.


He blow the Trumpet.
The Hebrew word to blow, is (...) Takah, which signifies to fasten, but when
its joined with the word Manus, it notes to strike the hand or strike hands,
when with the word Shophar, a Trumpet, it signifies to blow, as 2 Samuel: 2.28.
Joab blew a Trumpet; so 1 Samuel 13.3. Saul blew the Trumpet, and Joel 2.1. Blow
the Trumpet in Zion. Trumpets of old were made of the horns of Beasts, of
Brass, and Silver.

And warn the people.
The blowing of the Trumpet was a warning to the people to look to themselves;
but this warning was not only by the voice of the Trumpet, but also by the
voice of the watchman; for having blown the Trumpet upon the discovery and
approach of an enemy, the watchman was to shift for his life and liberty, by
returning to his people, and so to call upon them to provide for public
safety. The word in Hebrew for warning, is Zahar, which signifies to shine,
illuminate, and metaphorically to warn; because when a man is warned, he is
instructed, and has light given in unto him.

Verse. 4. Then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not
warning; if the sword come and take him away.
Many are so taken up with the world, that though they hear of danger at hand,
yet they will not hear, but venture so long that they are caught, the sword
comes and takes them away. The Hebrew is, he that hearing hears.

His blood shall be upon his own head.
He has no cause to blame the watchman, he blew the Trumpet and warned him,
the fault is in himself, that he took not the warning, that he made not haste
to secure his own life, he is guilty of his own death, and has voluntarily
brought it upon himself, the whole fault is his own; that is the meaning of
this phrase, His blood shall be upon him, or, upon his own head, which is
frequent in Scripture, Josh. 2.19. It shall be, that whosoever goes out of the
doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we
will be guiltless; that is, he shall be guilty of his own death, not we; 1
Kings 2.37. On the day thou go out, and passest over the Brook Kidron, thou
shall surely dye; thy blood shall be upon thine own head, thou shall be the
cause of thine own death, not I, said Solomon to Shimei.

Verse. 5. He heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took not warning; his blood
shall be upon him.
Here the reason is given why he is guilty of his own death; because he was
within the sound of the Trumpet, he heard it, that proclaimed the danger was at
hand; but he was secure minding his profit or pleasure, and took not warning.

But he that takes warning shall deliver his soul.
He that gives heed to the blowing of the Trumpet, and presently hastens into
the City, or flies for his life, he shall deliver his soul from the hands of
the enemies coming, he shall be safe; the word for to deliver, is from Malat,
which signifies fuga sibi Consulere, to provide for ones self by flight, says
Avenarius; he does so deliver his soul, that is himself, for soul here is put
by a Synecdoche for a man's self.

Verse. 6. But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and
the people be not warned.
All watchmen are not faithfuil, some are sleepy and careless, they see not the
sword coming; some are perfidious, they see it coming but blow not the Trumpet,
they warn not the people; and what then?

If the sword come and take away any person from among them.
That is, if any man being not warned by the watchman shall be surprised and
cut off, as frequently in such cases it is, his blood will lie upon the
watchman. The Hebrew for any person, is a soul, if the sword come and take a
soul from them.

He is taken away in his iniquity.
He is found in his sin and is cut off for his sin; most Interpreters render
the words propter iniquitatem suam, for his iniquity: He was wicked, and for
his wickedness justly cut off.

But his blood will I require at the watchmans hand.
Here is the punishment laid down of an unfaithful watchman; through his
sleepiness, negligence, or treachery, a soul is taken away, a man is slain by
the adversary, who if the watchman had given warning, might have lived, and
therefore because he did not, he is guilty of the man's blood, and must answer
for it, at his hands will God require it.

Verse. 7, 8, 9.
So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel:
therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.

When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely dye; if thou do
not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall dye in his
iniquity: but his blood will I require at thine hand.

Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it: if he do
not turn from his way, he shall dye in his iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy soul.


IN these words the Lord applies the former similie of a political watchman
unto the Prophet; So thou, O son of man, etc. and these 3 verses are the same
with the 17, 18, and 19. verses of the 3. Chapter of this prophecy.

Verse. 7. I have set thee a watchman.
I have given thee to be a watchman unto the house of Israel, that thou
should look about, search the Scriptures, find out what is evil, sinful,
and what is the punishment due thereunto, what wrath God has revealed from
Heaven against all unrighteousness, and tell the people thereof.

Therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth.
Thou must not speak of thine own head, or out of thine own hearr, but thou
must take all up from me; either what I have given out by Moses and other
Prophets already, or what I shall give out immediately to thy self. Thus
Habakkuk did, Chapter 2.1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the Tower,
and will watch to see what he will say unto me. He would have the word from
Gods mouth.

And warn them from me.
Thou must not warn them in thine own name, but in my name, whose Prophet thou
art, whose words thou have received, and who has empowered thee to tell men of
their sins and dangers.

Verse. 8. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely dye.
Where God says so is hard to find in all the book of God. You have not O
wicked man, thou shall surely dye; but in generals there is that is equivalent;
as, the soul that sins shall dye; The wicked shall be turned into Hell; Upon
the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and Brimstone, and an horrible tempest;
And the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of
men. These and such other places are Tantamount.

If thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way.
When the watchman sees a wicked man in a wicked way, as in a way of
drunkenness, whoredom, idolatry, oppression, or any profanesse, he is to warn
him, and tell him of the danger of his ways; if he through fear or favor,
incogitancy or carelessness, neglect to do it, the danger is great.

That wicked man shall dye in his iniquity.
The wicked man might object and say, Why should I dye? I was never warned by
the watchman, he saw me daily living in such courses; and had he told me the
danger of them, I should have considered my ways and turned from them. This
Objection is answered; Thou art a wicked man, thou have lived in iniquity, and
now thou shall dye in, and for thine iniquity; the light of Nature, the
dictates of thy Conscience, the example of others, might have taught thee to
have done otherwise: though the Prophet have neglected his duty, thou shall
suffer for thy sins, and he for his.

His blood will I require at thy hand.
I set thee to be a watchman over him to observe his ways, to tell him of his
sins, to invite and provoke him to repentance by promises of mercy, and
threatening of my judgments, that so he might have been saved; but because thou
wast unfaithful, and did not thy duty, he is lost, and his blood will I
require at thy hands, and recompense it upon thine head.

Verse. 9. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it.
If thou be faithful in thy place and tell the wicked of his sins, calling upon
him to turn from them unto me the living God; if this has been thy care and
practice, thou have done well.

He shall dye in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.
What ever befalls him, death temporal, or death eternal, thou have freed thy
self, and shall nor be responsive for him at all, his blood shall be upon his
own head, and not upon thine.

First, Observe;

Wars come not upon any people casually, but by the providence of God.

When I bring the sword upon a Land. Its God calls out the sword, and causes
it to come; he is the Lord of Hosts, and Commissions Armies to make invasions
where he please.

Secondly, Observe;

In case of common danger, the people have liberty and power to set up a
political Officer, for their good and safety.

When the sword is coming upon the Land, if the people of the Land take a man
of their Coasts, and set him up for their watchman. God expects they should do
it, and approves of it done; they do not their duty, unless they do it; they
must not stay till those in authority do it, the Land may be invaded, many lose
their lives upon that account: but its their privilege, and in their power,
presently to appoint a man who may discover danger and give them notice of it.
Every man is a part of the whole, and when that is endangered, every one is to
put forth himself to the utmost for security thereof; Suprema lex est salus
populi.

Thirdly, Observe;

That in the Ecclesiastic State its Gods Prerogative to set up Offices and
Officers.

Son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel. He might not
set himself a watchman, nor the people set him to be one; 1 Cor. 12.28. God
has set some in the Church: first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets; thirdly,
Teachers; after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, government,
diversity of tongues. In the Political state, men may make what Offices and
Officers they please; but in the Ecclesiastic State its not so: Man must not
meddle; God only is the Author of all Offices in the Church extraordinary or
ordinary, and no man ought to come into any of them, without Commission and
Direction from God; true Ministers are to be called by the Church according to
Gods will, and not by the will of a State. The making of Ministers is
Church-work, and not State-work.

Fourthly, Observe;

Those that are called to office by men or God, in State or Church, they are
watchmen.

They must have eyes in their heads, lift up their eyes and look about them
most diligently and conscientiously, least any mischief come to the one or the
other; They are to be men of understanding, especially the spiritual watchman,
his lips must preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7. He is set to watch, sleepiness and
drowsinesse do not become him; there is great danger therein, Math: 13.25.
While men slept the enemy came and sowed tares; Whilst the watchmen slept, the
Devil and his Instruments took the opportunity and advantage to sow Tares,
Error, Heresies and Damnable Doctrines. Isa. 56.10. you may see what watchmen
the Lord had in Isaiahs time. His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant,
they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to
s^umber. The State and Church watchmen were such: therefore idolatry, murder,
oppression and profanesse abounded amongst them; they sought themselves and
their ease, not the State or Churches good. Watchmen should not be for
themselves, but for the public good, enduring any hardship rather then the
Public should be endangered; they must not shrink at wind or weather, but
bare the cold of the night, and the heat of the day, watching always. Isa.
21.11. Watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the night? The watchman
was at his work in the night, as well as in the day.

Fifthly, Observe;

God has a special care of his Church and People, being exposed to many
dangers.

I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel. Where watchmen are,
dangers are supposed. There be Church-Robbers abroad, that would rob it of the
Scriptures, of Ordinances, Officers, of Christ, and of Heaven it self. There
be those who would bring in damnable Heresies, as of old, 2 Pet. 1.1. Yea the
Church is apt of it self to breed Vipers, Acts 20.30. Thorns, Briars, Weeds,
Nettles, do grow up in Gods Gardens: What Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, are
not revived in our days? Are they not grown up to that height and strength, as
to threaten and endanger the foundation? If ever the Church is as a Lilly among
Thorns, as a Lamb among Wolves and Lions that seek to tare in pieces and
devour, it is now. Truth goes with a scratch't face every where, and is so
scratched and disfigured that many know her not; she has many enemies, few
friends, and cannot dwell quiet in Sion it self; erroneous Opinions are ready
to assault her in her own house: there is need therefore of watchmen to
discover and prevent dangers; and God has manifested his care of his Church
and Truth, that he has given watchmen for the preservation of them, and left
it upon Record that himself is the watchman of his Vineyard, Isa. 27.3. Least
any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. The fire of Contention, the floods
of Iniquity, and winds of strange Doctrine cannot harm Gods Vineyard, he is the
Keeper thereof.

Sixthly, Observe;

What Gifts or Graces soever Prophets and men in Ecclesiastical places have,
they must depend upon God for more, and receive from him before they give out
to others.

No Prophet, no Apostle, ever had such a sufficiency of light, knowledge, or
grace, as to stand in need of no more. God had set Ezekiel to be a watchman to
the house of Israel, he had heard much from God, the Spirit entered into him, he
had eaten the roll, and yet he must attend the Lord, therefore thou shall hear
the word at my mouth; even therefore because he was Gods Prophet, he was to
hear the word at his mouth, not to trust to what he had, not to give out of his
own, but constantly to look unto the Lord, to hearken what he would say, and
then what he said to make that known unto others. Gods Prophets, Gods Ministers
must speak his words, deliver his message; There is a Majesty, an Efficacy in
his words, which are not in the words of men, Heb. 4.12. The words of false
Prophets were chafe without virtue, but the words of true Prophets were wheat,
full of virtue, for they were the words of God, Jer: 23.28.

Seventhly, Observe;

That as its the duty of watchmen to foresee danger, so to forewarn the people
of it.

The State-watchman ought to do both, and so the Church-watchman. The one when
he sees the sword to come, is to blow the Trumpet and warn the people, that
they secure their lives; the other when he sees men's lives are wicked, tending
to the destruction of their souls, when he sees Error, Heresies, coming to
infect and endanger the souls of men, he is to blow the Trumpet of the Lord,
and to warn them that they take heed of the one, and desist from the other;
Isa: 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my
people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Isaiah was a
watchman to the house of Jacob, and he foresaw they were in danger of being
ruined and carried into captivity; and what must he do in this case? be silent,
no, Cry aloud, make them to hear, spare not thy lungs, thy strength, lift up
thy voice like a Trumpet, louder and louder, make all the house of Jacob to
hear it; and show my people their transgressions, present unto them the Nature
and danger of them, let them not rest or sleep, but tell them of their sins in
public, in private, solicit, importune them to cease from their evil ways,
and to secure their souls. It Is not enough for a spiritual watchman to warn his
people once or twice in a year, of the dangerous evils their sins will bring
upon them, but he must do it frequently, constantly; this warning must be
daily: let the persons be of what rank soever, if they live in ways of
wickedness, which may hazard their souls; the watchman must tell them of their
sins and danger, admonish them seriously, reprove them sharply, and threaten
them with death eternal, if they persevere in their ways.

Eighthly, Observe;

That Prophets, Ministers, and Watchmen in Sion, are to act in the name and
authority of God.

Thou shall warn them from me. They must let them know that God has sent them,
that they speak from him, not from themselves, not their own words; and this is
likelyest to make way for the message they bring, of what kind soever. Here the
Prophet was to warn them, to tell them of their sins, and the danger of them;
and who would not receive an admonition from God, when it comes in his name,
backed with his authority, when God in it seeks our good, the freedom of us
from death and damnation, the bringing of us unto glory and salvation, and
especially when the soul of the watchman lies at stake for the sinner, if he
do not admonish the sinner. Can any sinner be so obstinate as not to consider,
relent, and return, when God shall send one in his name unto him, and the
Prophet shall say, Sir, I come from God unto you, and my life is at stake for
you, if I tell you not of your sins, I am a lost man: give me leave therefore
to deal plainly with you; you are covetous, unclean, proud, froward, ignorant,
unbelieving, having a form of Godl nesse without the power, and unless you
take another course, and serve the living God otherwise the you do, you will
perish soul and body eternally; but if y^u will hearken, I will show you the
good and right way, the way everlasting, which will make you blessed for ever.
When a watchman comes and deals thus with a sinner, has he cause to be angry?
No, he has cause to fall down, and say, Of a truth God is in you, and with
you, I thank you for your counsel, and seasonable admonitions, and through the
grace of God I will improve them, and turn to that God who is so gracious, and
would have sinners come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved.

Ninthly, Observe;

The Lord knows who are wicked.

When I say to the wicked man. The world calls them wicked who are righteous,
and those righteous who are wicked; but it is not so with the Lord, he knows
who is an hypocrite, who is covetous, who is a liar, a formalist, an enemy to
grace and holiness; Known unto the Lord are all his works, Acts 15.18. And he
knows who are his, 2 Timothy: 2.19. and who are not his; there is not one Goat in
the world, but the Lord knows him, not a Wolf, or Lion, but he takes notice of
them: he knew the house of Israel better then Ezekiel who dwelt amongst them;
whom he said was wicked, was so indeed. It matters not much what the world
says of men, it called Paul a Babbler, Acts 17.18. An Heretic, Acts 24.14. A
Pestilent Fellow, verse. 5. But what said God of him? Acts 9.15. He is a chosen
Vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the
children of Israel. Jobs friends and the Devil said, Job was an hypocrite; but
God said, He was a perfect man, fearing God, and eschewing evil, Job 1.1. That
men are what God, who cannot lie, who cannot be deceived, pronounces them to
be; if he in his word do call a ^an for an hypocrite, an unbeliever, covetous,
proud, etc. he is so.

Tenthly, Observe;

The Power of life and death is in the hand of the Lord.

When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely dye. God has
authority over the lives of men, and can pronounce a sentence of death upon
them at his pleasure. He Commissioned Saul to smite Amalek, to slay man and
woman, infant and suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass, 1 Samuel 15.3. When
Ahab let Benhadad go, a man that God had appointed to destruction, therefore
says he, Thy life shall go for his, and thy people for his people, 1 Kings
20.42. The power of life and death God challenges to himself, Deuteronomy. 32.39. I
kill, and I make alive, I wound, I heal, neither is there any that can deliver
out of mine hand. By this argument he proves himself to be God, and its none
but God that kills, or gives life, Psalm. 68.20. Unto God the Lord belong the
issues from death. The Hebrew is Lammaneth Totzaoth, Exitus ad mortem, the
goings out to death; its God that turns the key, and lets out the breath, its
he puts a period to the life of the Creature; would any live? let them fear the
Lord, and depart from evil; for The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, Prove:
10.27. Moses uses this argument to persuade them to love, obey, and cleave to
the Lord, He is thy life, and length of thy days, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Men have their
lives from God, and he draws the thread of them out to what length he please;
and therefore men should love, fear, obey and cleave to that God, if they do
not, he will cut the thread of their lives asunder; Prove. 10.27. The years of
the wicked shall be shortened; by one sickness, judgment or other, their days
and years shall be shortened, of what they might have been.

Eleventhly, Observe;

Those watchmen that are unfaithful in their places, and do not tell the
people of their sins and danger, their account will be dreadful.

If thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, his blood will I
require at thy hand. If a political watchman be unfaithful, so that a man
perish by the sword without warning, his blood lies upon the watchmans head;
and if the Ecclesiastical watchman be unfaithful, and do not warn the wicked
upon what pretense soever, the blood of that wicked man, dying in his sins,
will be required of the watchman, it lies upon his head, and he must answer for
it: the case of this latter watchman will be more dangerous then of the former;
because the one is to answer for the life of a man, the other for the soul of a
man, which is of great price. Let lazy, sleepy, perfidious watchmen look to it,
they suffer men to perish through their default, and their blood, lives, souls,
stand engaged for the some.

Twelfthly, Observe;

The failing of the watchman will not excuse or privilege the wicked man.

If thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall
dye in his iniquity. Though he be not told that he is in a wrong way, though he
pretend ignorance, that will not serve turn, he shall dye in his iniquity,
warned or unwarn'd; the watchman has not done his duty, what then? must this
exempt the wicked man from punishment? No, he has not done his duty, he should
have minded and studied the Law of God, walked according to that, and have made
it a Lamp unto his feet, and a light unto his paths, Psalm. 119.105. But his
neglect of his duty, and ignorance, rather will aggravate, then extenuate his
fault; the Law was near unto him, and he might have known what was forbidden,
and so have avoided the same.

Thirteenthly, Observe;

Those that regard not the warning of the watchmen, they bring certain
destruction upon themselves.

Whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not warning, his blood
shall be upon his own head; If the enemy cut off that man, he himself is guilty
of his own death, not the political watchman: And so in the Church State; if
the wicked man be warned of his way, and turn not from it, he shall dye in his
iniquity, his blood lies at his own door, upon his own head, the watchman is
free.

Fourteenthly, Observe;

There is great necessity that the watchmen deal faithfully, and tell the
people of their danger and sin.

Their souls, their blood lie at stake upon it; if they be not faithful, their
lives, their souls go for it. Those watchmen that are silent, are cruel,
bloody, and soul-murthering men, they murder the souls of the people, and
their own souls also; those that speak, that cry aloud, that tell the people
thoroughly of their sins, not fearing their frowns, nor respecting their
favors, that so if it be possible, they may save their souls; these are the
most faithful watchmen. Many wonder that the spiritual watchmen are so zealous,
particular, that they open the nature of sin so much, threaten such terrible
judgments of God against sinners, and preach damnation unto them, that they
are so frequent in such ways; but cease to wonder, their souls are in jeopardy
if they do it not. If a man's whole estate were in hazard if he did not tell
such a man that he were a liar, a drunkard, and would he forfeit his estate
through silence? No, he would tell him of his sins again and again. The
watchmans soul lies at pawn, and he forfeits that if he should not tell
sinners of their sins, and warn them to turn from them: Hence was it that Paul
said, Necessity is laid upon me, and we unto me if I preach not the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.16. he preached, and warned sinners night and day, Acts 20.31.

Lastly, Observe;

That the watchmen warning the people, and the people taking warning, they do
both secure themselves:

If the wat^hman Politic^l or Spi^itual blow the Trumpet, warn the ^^ople, he
shall deliver his own soul; if the people take wa^ning, they deliver their
souls. Safety lies in warning, and it harkening to wa^ning; let not the
watchmen of God be sleepy or silent, but warn the people constantly, that so
they may save themselves and others.

Verses 10, 11.
Therefore, O thou Son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, Thus ye speak,
saying, if our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in
them, how should we then live?

Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways; for why will ye dye, O house of Israel?


HEre begins the second General part of the Chapter, which is a confirmation
of the Prophet against those Calumnies the Jews made against the truth and
justice of God.

The first is in the 10. verse. The second in the 17. and 20. verses.
The Calumny they raised against the truth of God was this; in the 5. verse
its said, he that takes warning when the watchman gives it, shall deliver his
soul; this said the Jews, had not truth in it; for Chap. 24.23. The Prophet had
told them they should pine away for their iniquities, therefore there was no
hope for them, though they took warning at the watchmans mouth; we are
appointed to destruction, and its in vain to mind what the watchman says. This
is answered in the 11. verse. But to open the words.

Verse. 10. Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel.
God had set Ezekiel to be a watchman unto the house of Israel, to observe
their sins and tell them thereof; and here he commands him to do his duty,
speak unto the house of Israel, thus; The house of Israel was not now the 10
Tribes, but the 2 Tribes left of the 10.

If our transgressions and our sins be upon us.
Jerusalem being now taken, or upon the taking, the Jews were more sensible of
their sins, and so felt the weight of them in that sad judgment was upon them,
or coming upon them. By transgressions and sins, not only the guilt, but the
punishment of them is meant; they had felt much in the time of Jerusalems
siedge, and more now in the taking of it: God visited their iniquities upon
their heads.

And we pine away in them.
When Gods hand is upon persons for their sins, they consume and moulder away;
the pain and anguish they are under melts their fat, eats up their strength,
and brings them to skin and bone. Nemakkim it is from Muk, or Makak, which is
to grow lean, to become feeble, to be dissolved in Mareorem, into corruption or
rottenness.

How should we then live?
The Jews seeing Jerusalem now in the enemies hand, and themselves going into
captivity, speak desparingly; saying, We are like never to see good day, but
must pine away under the judgments that are upon us; how should we then live?
its in vain to warn us, and tell us of repenting and turning to the Lord, we
must dye in the condition we are in.

Verse. 11. Say unto them, As I live says the Lord God.
This oath of God has been spoken of, Chap. 16.48. and Ch: 5. verse. 11. Its
the oath which God most uses. Life is the most precious of all things, and that
God swares by; as sure as I live, or am the living God, it is true which I say;
or, let me not be the living God, if I speak false: you think I am a hard
Master, that you shall pine away in your sins, and find no mercy, though you
should repent and return; you are greatly deceived: As I live, says the Lord,
etc. He swares not by a truth that was question, Numb. 14.11. Nor by his
Omnipotency, for that was doubted of, Ps. 78.19. but by his life which was
never in questioned. The Learned observe, that when this word Chai is referred
to God, so that himself swares, or men swear by him, its written with Patach
under it, as here and in other places; but when it is referred to men, then its
written Chai with Tzere, as Gen: 42.15. (...) By the life of Pharaoh, or as
sure as Pharaoh lives; So in 2 Samuel 11.11. You have them both together; in 1 Samuel 20.3. Chai Jehovah vechei, Naph shecha, As the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives.

I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that etc.
The Septuagint reads the words, (...), I will not; The Vulgar is Nolo mortem
impit, I am unwilling the wicked should dye; the French ie u'appette point; I
covet not, am not greedy of the death of the wicked; Junius, Si delector, If I
delight in the death of the wicked; Vatablus, Piscator, Non delector, I delight
not in the death of the wicked; or I am not delighted therewith. Montanus has
it, Si volam in morte impii, If I shall will in the death of the wicked, for so
runs the Hebrew, Im Echphotz bemoth Harashang. The word Chaphetz signifies to
desire, love, delight in a thing, as Gen: 34.19. Shechem delighted in Dinah; he
desired her, loved her, and took delight in her. Chophetz notes the highest
delight and content that can be taken, Psalm. 16.3. in whom is Col Cheph-Zi, all
my delight, that is, my greatest delight. Now here its said, God has not
pleasure in the death of the wicked; This is not an absolute negative, denying
God wholly to have delight in death, or in the death of sinful wicked man, or
of any sinful man; for God took delight in the destruction of Pharaoh and his
Host in the red Sea, which Moses shows, saying, Exodus: 15.1. He has triumphed
gloriously; the Horse and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea. God sent Saul
to smite Amaleck, utterly to destroy him and all his, when Agag was spared with
the best of the sheep and oxen? was he not wrath with him? 1 Samuel 15.3.11.23.
When Jehu cut off Ahabs house what said the Lord? Because thou have done well
in executing that which is right in my eyes, and have done unto the house of
Ahab according to all that was in mine heart; thy children of the fourth
Generation shall sit on the Throne of Israel, 2 Kings 10.30. The destruction of
Ahabs house was pleasing to God, he commended he rewarded it. And that God
takes no pleasure in the destruction of a sinful wicked man, is contrary to
these Texts, Deuteronomy. 28.63. Prove. 1.26, 27. Isa. 1.24. Jer: 14.12. The words they
are not to be taken as an absolute negative, but comparatively, thus, I have
pleasure in the turning of the wicked from his ways, rather then in his death,
or its more pleasing to me, that a wicked man should turn and live, then that
he should continue and dye. Such an expression is that in 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ
sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; Not absolutely not to
baptize, but rather to preach, then to baptize; he had more pleasure in my
preaching, then in my baptizing: and so here, Let me not live, if I have so
much pleasure in the death of a sinner, as in his turning from his sin.

By Death here some understand eternal Death, and it cannot be otherwise,
says Quistorpius; for he speaks of that death, which may be avoided by
repentance and turning to God; but temporal death cannot be avoided, either by
the penitent or impenitent. But to him that well considers this place, it will
appear that here its spoken of a temporal and violent death; for verse. 3. He
speaks of the sword coming upon a Land. They were at this time either straightly
besiedged, or newly taken by Nebuchadnezzars forces, and complained that their
sins were upon them, provoking God to destroy them, that they pined away, and
there was no hope for them of life, though they should repent them of their
iniquities; this God answers unto, and tells them if they turn from their evil
ways, there is hope they shall live, for repentance prevents and removes
judgments that are destructive: The Ninivites by their repentance prevented
the destruction of themselves, and their City; at David's repentance the plague
was stayed; Ahabs humbling himself prevented Gods bringing the evil in his
days. So that its true of natural death, that cannot be avoided by penitency
or impenitency, but a violent death may, a death by sword, by famine, by
plague, by wild beasts may. 2 Chro: 7.14. If my people which are called by my
name shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways, then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
w^ll heal their Land. Had he spoken of eternal death, it had been no answer to
the Jews objection: Lavater tells us, that by Death is meant Malum, and by Life
Bonum; Men by their sins bring sad calamities and judgments upon themselves,
they cause God to punish them with variety of evils which he has no pleasure
in, nor they cause to complain of, Lament. 3.33, 39. He had rather they should
turn from their sins and live comfortably.

But that the wicked turn from his way and live.
The word for wicked, is Rashang, which the Septuagint renders (...), the
irreligious, lewd, ungodly man, here wicked, wicked in opinions, wicked in
practice, troublesome to God and man, running the wrong way. The word for way
signi ies a path which leads from place to place, and men walk in it:
Metaphorically its applied to the customs, manners, actions, religions and
lives of men, Jer. 16.2. Pro: 1.19. Prove: 21.2. of this before Chap. 16.61. The
sense lies thus, As I live, I delight not in the death of the wicked, but if
the wicked turn from his way and live, or shall live; that is, according to
what I have prescribed in my word, I shall delight in this; or thus, If he turn
from his sinful way, that he may live, and live comfortably, I shall delight
in it.

Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways.
Here is an earnest exhortation of them unto repentance, setting out the mercy
and goodness of God, who was ready and willing to pardon them, upon their
turning from their evil ways. The doubling of the word notes the earnest and
real intention of God in it. The sum and substance of the words, is to show,
that if sinners repent of their former wickedness he will forgive them, and
take pleasure in them. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways. If ye pine away
under my judgments, the fault is yours, you turn not from your idolatries,
oppressions, perjuries, and profanations of my Sabbaths and Ordinances, these
are ways of death; but if ye would hearken to my ways, and turn unto them,
they are ways of life. Of turning has been spoken, Chap. 14.6. The Septuagint
is (...), Turn you by turning, turn thoroughly from your evil ways.

For why will ye dye O house of Israel?
Ye are the Nation I took and brought out of Egypt by a strong hand, Deuteronomy:
4.34. Ye are the people that entered into Covenant with me, and avouched me to
be your God. Deuteronomy. 26.17. and I you to be my peculiar people, verse. 18. ye are
they upon whom I have bestowed great privileges, holy Ordinances, to whom I
have showed mercy and truth, Ps. 76.1, 2. Ps. 98.3. ye are the people I have
taken most delight in of all people under Heaven, whom I have most honored,
done most for, and made the greatest promises unto, Jer. 31.33, 34. Chap:
33.8.14. Why therefore have you left me, and my ways, and fallen into ways of
death? why do you wound and stab your selves? if you have no regard to me, yet
pity your selves; cease from those ways will be your death: Why will ye dye O
house of Israel? Is it not better to live in my ways, then to dye in your own?

First, Observe:

The guilt and punishment of sin are heavy and consuming things.

Our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and we pine away in them. Guilt
alone is a great burden; A stone (says Solomon Prove: 27.3.) is heavy, and the
sand weighty; but a fools wrath is heavier then them both; and guilt is heavier
then them all. A wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. What is guilt then
with punishment, but a consuming, a devouring thing? When David had sinned, and
Gods hand was upon him, what says he? Psalm. 38.3. There is no soundness in my
flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because
of my sin. Mine iniquities are gone over my head^; as an heavy burden they are
too heavy for me, v. 4. I am feeble and soar broken, I have roared by reason of
the disquietnesse of my heart, v. 8. Gods hand and his own guilt did eat up his
spirit, and bring him to the gates of death; this made him to say ( Psalm.
39.11.) When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a moth. The word for beauty notes that is
desirable in man; whatever is desirable, that melts away when God does visit
man for sin: A little touch of a man's hand crusheth the wings, and hazards the
life of the moth; a little touch of Gods hand where guilt is, marrs the beauty,
strength and desireables of man.

Secondly, Observe:

Sinners under sad judgments are apt to despond, yea to despair.

If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how
should we then live? They had greatly sinned against God, stood it out against
his Prophets threatening judgments; and now the judgments were come upon them,
their hearts sunk within them, and they conclude there is no mercy for them;
our sins are great, Gods judgments heavy upon us, he is resolved now upon our
destruction, and what course soever we shall take, all is in vain. What these
said in Judaea, the like said they in Babylon, Ezekiel. 37.11. Our bones are
dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. We are like the
bones in a Grave, that have all the marrow dried out of them; or like a branch
of a Tree cut off, and all the sap dried out of it; there is no hope we should
ever live, go to Jerusalem, and grow there again into a Church or State. Not
only the wicked, but even a Godly man may be in a desponding, yea a desparing
condition, as David himself, Psalm. 31.22. I said in my have, I am cut off from
before thine eyes; Thou will never look upon, or favor me more. So Asaph,
Psalm. 77.7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more? is
his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has he
forgotten to be gracious? etc. What sad expostulations were these of a good man?

Thirdly, Observe;

The cavills, objections, and unbelief of sinners, put God unto his oath.

As I live says the Lord, its not so as you fancy, I have told you that if you
turn from your evil ways, you shall live; that I have no pleasure in the death
of a sinner, Ezekiel: 18.21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 31, 32. But ye believe not my word,
ye cavil against it, and say, ye shall pine away in your sins, that what
course soever ye take, ye shall not live. Men are backward to believe the word
of God, and deal worse with God, then with man; they will give credit to an
honest man upon his word, but not to God; yea, how many do believe the Devils
suggestions and delusions, who is the father of lies, and will not believe the
word of God; and what a harsh thing is it, that men will not attribute so much
to God as to the Devil? Eve took the Devils bare word in Paradise, she put not
him to his oath, when he said, ye shall not dye, your eyes shall be opened, and
ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil: She believed him presently. But
men will not take Gods bare word, they put him to his oath, As I live, says
the Lord. Its a great thing for God to speak, but more for him to swear; he
that made the world with a word, is not believed upon his word, he must take
his oath upon it; so that it stands God in more to be believed in the world,
then it did to make the world; his single word sufficed for the one, his oath
was required for the other: O beatos nos quorum causa Deus jurat; O miserr imos
si nec juranti Domino credimus. Tertul: Si non credimus promittenti Deo, and
credamus juranti Deo. Jerome;
And here appears the great goodness of God, that for the good of man will
please to take an oath: O happy we for whose sake God swears; O most unhappy
we, if we believe not God swearing. Having therefore Gods word and oath, let us
believe firmly, and stagger no more.

Fourthly, Observe;

Sinners in what condition soever they be, have no cause to despond or despair
of mercy, so that they turn from their evil ways.

Let them be great sinners, old sinners, sinners under judgments, ready to be
destroyed and cut off by the hands of enemies, as these were, yet if they turn
from their sins, there is hope of mercy for them: For,

First, God takes pleasure rather in their conversion and salvation, then in
their death and destruction; I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked-turn from his way and live. If a State say to a company of its
Subjects, who are Traitors, and upon traiterous designs, I have no pleasure in
your ways which lead unto death, but my pleasure is that you turn from them
and live; is not here a large door of hope opened unto them, whatever their
Treasons be?

Secondly, Least men being deeply guilty, should suspect the reallity of God
herein (for guilt is full of jealousies) the Lord swears to it, and that by
his life, which is the most unquestionable thing of all (for none doubts
whether he be the living God) As I live says the Lord; I have no pleasure,
etc. So that here is (...) and (...) Gods word and oath, two sufficient bonds
to secure it.

Thirdly, Here is Gods command and earnest desire of their turning, Turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways. When a man's servant is abroad in some dangerous
design, and his Master commands him again and again to leave it off, and come
home to him; or if the servant be in a deep water, and the Master sees he will
be drowned if he come not back again, he calls to him, and commands him to
return; is not this an argument that he seeks his good, and would have him safe.

Fourthly, God sets the strongest arguments before them that can be thought of,
life and death. If ye go on, there is no hope of mercy, you must dye; if you
will turn, here is life, ye shall live, here is great mercy. They are not left
unto uncertainties, whether they shall have life or no; but life is propounded
and offered unto them, and where that is promised there is a wide door of mercy
opened; God is troubled at it, that sinners forsake mercy and embrace it not:
Why will ye dye? Why will ye not turn from your evil ways unto me the living
God? Am I so ill a God? Have I dealt so unkindly with you, as that you will not
come unto me; testify against me, tell me wherein. Like that in Micah 6.3. O
my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearyed thee?
testify against me. If there be any such thing lie in the way, I am ready to
remove it.

Fifthly, Observe;

The nature of true repentance lies in turning.

Turn ye, turn ye. God at first made man upright, with his face toward
himself, but he sought out inventions, and turned away from God to the
creature, which was a madness, to leave an universal, everlasting, and
satisfying good, for a particular fading, and an unsatisfying good; this
madness is in the hearts of all men, Eccl: 9.3.
till they come to repenting and turning again unto God, and setting him in his
right posture to behold the Lord. This turning must be from his evil ways;
Turn ye from your evil ways, and from all of them, Ezekiel. 14.6. Chap.
18.21.31. Else its no turning; if the heart be toward any one sin, lust,
creature, or evil way, its not turned; his back is toward God and not his
face; he prefers a creature, a lust before God.

Sixthly, Observe;

Sinners are the Authors of their own destruction.

Why will ye dye? They went on in their idolatry, profaness, oppressions,
pollutions of Sabbaths, etc. and so brought judgment upon themselves; 2 Chronicles:
36.16. They mocked the Messengers of God, despised his word, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy; therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldaeans, who slew
their young men with the sword in the house of the Sanctuary, and had no
compassion on the young man, or maiden, etc. So in Christ's days, he would have
kept Jerusalem from destruction, but Jerusalem her self would not, she brought
it upon her self, Matthew. 23.37. The Corinthians abuse of the Supper brought
judgment upon them, 1 Cor. 11.30. And the false Teachers brought swift
destruction upon themselves, 2 Pet. 1.1.

Verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The
righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his
transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby
in the day that he turns from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be
able to live for his righteousness in the day that he sins.

When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live: if he trust to
his own righteousness, and commit iniquity; all his righteousness shall not
be remembered, but for his iniquity that he has committed, he shall dye for it.

Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely dye: if he turn from his
sin, and do that which is lawful and right;

If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the
statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall
not dye.

None of his sins that he has committed, shall be mentioned unto him: he has
done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.


THese words do explain and confirm what God had said in the 11 verse. and that
by way of contraries: 1. He sets a righteous man before them, and bids the
Prophet tell them, That if a righteous man turn from his righteousness, and
become wicked, his righteousness will not benefit him, but his wickedness
will bring judgment upon him: 2. He sets a wicked man before them, and bids
the Prophet tell them, That if he turn from his wickedness, that shall not
prejudice him, he shall not fall thereby, but he shall live.

Here is nothing in these verses of Gods decrees of life or death, of salvation
or condemnation, and men's being under them. Its said whilst they are righteous
they are under the decree of life and salvation, and when they cease from their
righteousness, they are under the decree of death and condemnation; and so if a
man be righteous one day, and wicked another, and that interchangeably all
days of his life, he does daily pass from under one decree to another,
forward and backward; I find no foundation in the words for such a conceit;
they hold out Gods dealings with men here in this world, according to the
conditions he finds them in; if they be just and righteous he will bless them;
if they be unjust and wicked he will punish them; the one shall live
comfortably, the other shall be cut off by some judgment; here is nothing
pointing at the decrees of God.

Verse. 12. The righteousness of the righteous.
What righteous man is here meant the 15. verse informs us, viz. a man legally
righteous, such a man as restores the pledge, gives again what he has robbed,
and walks in the statutes of life without committing iniquity; If a wicked man
did these things, he was righteous; its therefore a righteousness of the
Covenant of works, not the righteousness of faith, here spoken of; a moral,
not a Gospel righteousness, which the 13. verse is clear for, calling it his
own righteousness.

Shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression.
The word for transgression is Poshang, which signifies sin, scienter and
contumaciter commissum, presumptuous and wilful sin, rebellion, apostasy;
Sometimes it is taken for any sin, or failing, as Lament: 1.22. Do unto them as
thou have done unto me, for all my transgressions. Jeremiah had no great sins
against light, he did not rebel against God; his transgressions were such as
are the ordinary failings of men, so its used, Job 13.23. And the Septuagint
has it (...), In the day he shall err. Let him have done never so much good,
and continued long in so doing, that shall not deliver him in the day of his
erring, transgressing, failing. Had Adam stood many days, months, years, and
then eat of the forbidden fruit, all his righteousness would not have
delivered him; and so here under the Covenant of works, there is no deliverance
upon any failing. But rather it notes here some grievous sin and way of
wickedness, which exposes unto, and hastens Gods judgments.

As for the wickedness of the wicked he shall not fall thereby, in the day
that he turns from his wickedness.
Let the wickedness of the wicked be great, of what kind soever, against God
and man, idolatry, profaness, oppression, etc. it shall not bring destruction
upon him, make him to fall and perish; when he repents of it, turns fom it, and
walks in those ways that are contrary thereunto, then his former sins shall
not be imputed to him, nor the judgments deserved executed upon him. As the
righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him when he sins, so the
wickedness of the wicked shall not damnifie him when he turns. Here is a
Nominative Case put absolute, the wickedness of the wicked.

Neither shall the righteous be able to live for his righteousness in the day
that he sins.
His righteousness shall not uphold him, do him any good, when he falls into
sin, his sin will be the death of him, and his righteousness, he cannot live in
it, or for it.

Verse. 13. When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live: if he
trust to his own righteousness.
Here the case of the righteous man is further amplified and ex^ounded; let me
make him a promise of life, and say; That in living, he shall live, (so the
Hebrew is) yet if he trust to his righteousness and commit sin, he shall not
live. When men have a Legal righteousness, they are apt to trust in it, to
think it makes them acceptable to God, that it will answer Justice for their
sins, divert wrath, procure favor, and so presume to take liberty, and please
the flesh in many things; but their righteousness will not stand them in stead.

And commit iniquity.
Of this see Chap. 3.20. and Chap. 18.24. where much has been said of this
expressions, The will, affections, and heart are in committing iniquity, it is
making a trade of sin, such men are workers of iniquity. Pharisees had a legal
righteousness, but they devoured widows houses, made Proselytes, and them
twofold more the children of the Devil then themselves, Matthew. 23.14, 15.
These committed iniquity.

All his righteousness shall not be remembered.
That is, none of his righteous deeds shall be so had in remembrance, as to
have any acceptance or reward, they shall be laid by and forgotten; instead
thereof, he shall have judgment for his wickedness, that shall be remembered
and rewarded.

But for his iniquity that he has committed, he shall dye for it.
The reward of his iniquity is death: either he shall pine away under some
stroke of God, which is Mors minor, a lesser kind of death; or he shall be cut
off by some judgment which is a death indeed, a death with a witness.

Verse. 14. Again, when I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye: if he turn
from his sin, etc.
In this verse. and the two following, the case of the wicked man is further
explained; as the promise to the righteous was with condition, so the
threatening of the wicked is with exception, He shall surely dye, unless he
repent and turn, and testify the reallity of the same, by doing that which is
lawful and right, Or as it is in the Hebrew, By doing judgment and justice,
by giving unto God and man what is prescribed: of these words see Chap. 18.5.

Verse. 15. If the wicked restore the pledge.
Pignus est quod propter rem credi tam datur, cujus possessionem solum ad
tempus consequitor creditor, sed dominium penes debitorem est.
A Pledge is something pawned for a thing borrowed, the possession whereof for
the present is in the hand of the Lender, but the right is belonging to the
Borrower. Chabol is from Chabal, to bind, because Pledges are strong Bonds and
Obligations. Poor people were often necessitated to pawn their garments, Beds,
Cattle, and Utensils, which wicked men would keep and make their advantage of,
which they ought not to have done, Deuteronomy: 24.10, 11, 12, 13. Therefore its said
here, If the wicked restore the pledge; if he be merciful to those that be
poor and afflicted.

Give again that he had robbed.
Robbers seldom make restitution of what they get by violence. The word Gazal
signifies to spoil a man of what is his, Vi and aperte, as Highway Robbers do,
and also any violent wresting, and forcing men's right out of their hands: Now
if the wicked did make restitution of what he had so gotten, and

Walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity.
The statutes of life are the statutes of God, which being exactly kept, afford
life to the keepers of them, Ezekiel: 20.13. They walked not in my statutes, and
they despised my judgments; which if a man do, he shall even live in them, or
live by them; as its Levit: 18.5. If a man walk in these from day to day, and
keep them perfectly, committing no iniquity; what then?

He shall surely live, he shall not dye.
This and the like promises are legal, and made to legal righteousness, and
clearly evince that the Prophet speaks of a legal righteous man. The Gospel
says not, that a just man shall live by doing, but that the just shall live by
faith, and that the law is not of faith. If men could keep the Law, do what it
requires they should live by it; but (except Christ) none ever did, and so none
was ever justified by the Law, Gal: 3.10, 11, 12. If a man could be found that
walked in the Statutes of life without sinning, he should surely live, and live
as comfortably as Adam did in Paradise, and should not dye.

Verse. 16. None of his sins that he has committed shall be mentioned unto him.
The Hebrew is, all his sins which he has committed, shall n t be mentioned
unto him; that is, None of his sins shall be imputed or charged upon him: Vid.
Chap: 18.22.

He has done that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live.
The Life here spoken of, cannot be eternal life; because 1. A man's turning
from his former wicked ways, and making restitution to men for wrongs done, is
no satisfaction to the justice of God for the breach of his Laws: And 2. No man
can so keep the law or statutes of life, as thereby to obtain life eternal.
Here is no mention of Christ, or faith in him, without which eternal life
cannot be had; I conceive its meant of a temporal life; he that ceases from his
wicked ways, that lives honestly, doing lawful and right things, he shall not
have cause to complain, as the Jews did, That they pined away under their
iniquities; but he should live in living, as the Hebrew is, and that is, he
should live a very comfortable life.

First, Observe;

There is a righteousness will not profit a man when he has most need.

When a man sins, then he has most need of righteousness to cover his sin, to
prevent judgment; but then his own righteousness, a legal righteousness, a
duty righteousness will stand him in no stead; The righteousness of the
righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression; he shall not
be able to live in the day that he sins. Let us therefore look after an
Evangelicall righteousness, for Christ has told us, That except our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew: 5.20. They had a legal, a
duty, an own-righteousnesse but they had not the righteousness of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith; and that is only the righteousness
will stand in stead against all sin, and let us into Heaven.

Secondly, Observe;

Its perseverance will Crown men's undertakings, and make them acceptable.

Its not enough to begin well, unless we go on; if men be righteous, and give
over their righteousness, falling to iniquity; as those that are legally
righteous may, they lose their former righteousness, and fall under judgment:
If a righteous man commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered but for his iniquity which he has committed he shall dye.

Thirdly, Observe,

Men are apt to rest upon a legal righteousness.

If he trust in his own righteousness. When men restore the pledge, make
restitution for what they have gotten wrongfully, walk in the statutes of life,
do that which is lawful and right, they are very prone to trust in this their
own righteousness; so did the Pharisees, Luke 18.11, 12. so did Paul while he
was a Pharisee, Romans 7.9. but being become a true Christian, and having
obtained the righteousness of faith, he had no confidence in the flesh, Phil.
3.3. but his whole confidence was in Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, Observe;

Let the wickedness of men be what it will, if they turn from the same, it
shall not prejudice them, but they shall live a comfortable life.

As for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day
that he turns from his wickedness. If he turn from his sin, and do that
which is lawful and right, his sins shall not be mentioned unto him, he shall
surely live, he shall live in living; others by reason of their iniquities are
dead in living, they have no comfort in their lives, but pine away. Its men's
sins which make times evil, and lives uncomfortable; Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14. What
man is he that desires life, and loves days that he may see good? Keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do
good. This is the way to live long and comfortably. Righteousness exalts
Nations, Familyes and Persons.

Fifthly, Observe;

Gods statutes punctually kept afford life: he who walks in the statutes of
life without committing iniquity, shall surely live.

Deuteronomy. 4.1. Hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes, and unto the ^dgements which
I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and ^in and possess the Land.
He speaks of a temporal life here; ^ut in Matthew: 19.17. of an eternal life; if
thou will enter into ife, keep the Commandments. The young man spoke of
eternal life, and Christ bids him keep the Commandments if he would have that;
showing, that if a man could personally and perfectly keep the Commands of God,
he should have eternal life.

Verses 17, 18, 19, 20.
Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: but as
for them, their way is not equal.

When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, he
shall even dye thereby.

But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall live thereby.

Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal: O ye house of Israel, I will
judge you every one after his ways.


THe Prophet having vindicated the truth of God which the Jews calumniated, he
comes now to vindicate the justice which they likewise impeached, saying, his
proceedings were not equal; and that he does in these verses.

Verse. 17. The way of the Lord is not equal.
The Septuagint is (...), The way of the Lord is not right. The French
translation is La voye du Seigneur n'est point bieu reiglee, The way of the
Lord is not well regulated, or ordered; others thus, Negant aequum and justum
esse quod facit Dominus, Thy people deny that to be equal and just which the
Lord does: They say, he governs the world unrighteously, and does not
administer justice indifferently to all men, but has persons in respect, and
punishes one for another; this was that they charged God withal.

But as for them, their way is not equal.
Here is answer to that unjust charge they charged God withal, and its by way
of recrimination, that they charged upon the Lord, is recharged upon
themselves; you say, The Lords ways are not equal, but he says, your ways
are not equal, just, right, or well ordered. Your Prophets have conspired
against me, and devoured souls; your Priests have violated my Law, and
profaned my holy things; your Princes have been ravenous wolves to shed blood,
and to destroy souls for dishonest gain: The People of the Land have used
oppression, exercised robbery, have vexed the poor and needy, yea, oppressed
the stranger wrongfully, Ezekiel: 22.25, 26, 27, 29. And now whose ways are not
equal, yours or mine? Of these words see what has been said Chap. 18.25.

Verse. 18. When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, he shall surely dye.
You charge me that I respect persons and punish one for another, the son for
the father; but its not so: and in this ver: and the next, the Lord does
clearly free himself from that imputation, hereby showing what his dealings are
with a righteous man whatever he be, father or son, Prince or Subject; if he
turn from his righteousness, (and fall to wicked and vile practices) he shall
surely dye; God will judge him for his wickedness, and bring some judgment
upon him, and there is no injustice in that: if men turn Traitors to a State,
its justice in that state to cut them off.

Verse. 19. But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall live thereby.
Here also the Lord vindicates himself by showing what his proceedings are with
a man that turns from his wickedness, and does amend his life, by doing what is
lawful and right; that man whatever he be shall be spared, he shall live and
enjoy blessings from God, it shall go well with the man that turns to God, and
ill with him that turns from God and does evil. Now if so, what injustice is
there in God? what is the evil of his ways? Let them both speak and declare
wherein God wrongs either of them, if they can.

Verse. 20. Yet ye say, the way of the Lord is not equal.
Having made it evident by clear demonstration, that his ways are equal, and
that by two instances; viz: one of the righteous, and the other of the wicked;
he here upbraids them for their stubbornness and impudency, persisting in their
perverse opinion, and saying, Yet the way of the Lord is not equal; they might
as well have said, the sun was dark, and the night was day.

O ye house of Israel, I will judge ye, every one after his ways.
Seeing ye are so wicked, perverse in your judgments as to condemn my ways,
and sentence them to be unequal, I will call every one of you to account for
this evil way of yours, and the rest of your evil ways, and will judge you
accordingly; this is the conclusion the Lord draws up upon the premises.

First, Observe;

Wicked men are apt to complain of, and carp at the ways of God.

They said the way of the Lord is not equal. Job 21.15. What is the Allmighty
that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him?
We get nothing by his service, by calling on his name, he is a hard Master, he
regards not our labor or prayers. These were of the same spirit with them in
Malachie's days, who blushed not to say, Its in vain to serve God; and what
profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, that we have walked mournfully
before the Lord of Hoasts? Mal. 3.14. We were told that no service was like
unto the Lords, that thos^ that did mourn for their sins, and walk in his
ways, should be blessed and live comfortably, but we find no such thing: we
have tried him, and find that he regards, exalts, and blesses those that never
minded him or his ways, verse. 15. therefore Its in vain to serve him. In the
5. of Jeremy is a notable instance to this purpose, verse. 11, 12, 13. The house
of Israel, and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me,
says the Lord. They have belyed the Lord, and said, it is not he, neither
shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine: And the
Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them. They said God had no
reason to threaten them with sword or famine, they deserved no such judgment
at his hands; and therefore the Prophets that prophesied such things, were not
sent of God, his word was not in them, they brought windy doctrines of their
own, and should together with their doctrines, become wind; evil shall not
come upon us, but upon them. When Christ was on earth, how did the Scribes and
Pharisees carp at him, his ways, and doctrine? see Matthew: 12.22. John 5.10.18.
Chap. 8.48. Cha: 10.32, 33. In our days do not men carp at the Scriptures,
Ordinances, Providence and dispensations of God? Such is the pride and
arrogance of man, that he dares blame and condemn the ways and things of God.

Secondly, Observe;

Men have no cause to complain of, or cavil against the ways of God.

For,

First, His ways are equal, just, righteous, however they appear to men; he
is God, and cannot do unjust things; He is light, and in him is no darkness at
all, 1 John 1.5. Just and true are his ways, Rev: 15.3. He is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. The just Lord is in the
midst of the City, he will not do iniquity, Zeph: 3.5. Shall not the judge of
all the earth do right? Gen: 18.25. Yes, though men do wickedly, God will not.
Habak: 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity; he cannot look on it to approve it, much less to act it.

Secondly, Our ways are unequal; and shall the guilty complain of the
innocent? Had the Sodomites any cause to complain of God, who were so wicked?
Had the old world which was so corrupt, cause to cry out of Heaven which was
pure? No man has just ground to quarrel against Gods dispensations, when
himself walks unevenly before God, and his paths are crooked. If just men sin
and step aside; Eccl: 7.20. What do wicked men? they are altogether out of the
way, Ps. 14.3. They do no good, their lives are a constant sinning, or a
continued sin, and should God punish him daily for so doing, he had no just
cause to fault the Lord; Lament: 3.39. Wherefore does a l ving man complain, a
man for the punishment of his sins?

Thirdly, Upon comparing of his dealings with the righteous falling to commit
iniquity, and the wicked turning from iniquity, it appears to all unprejudiced
men who are not blinded with iniquity; the one is punished for his apostasy,
the other is pardoned upon his repentance; judgment is the portion of the one,
and mercy the portion of the other. If God should punish the repenting wicked
man, and spare the apostatized righteous man, then there were cause of
complaint; but its contrary, therefore his ways are equal, and there is no
cause to complain of them.

Fourthly, God has power over the sons of men, they are his family, and he may
exercise Discipline in his family; the house of Israel, the Jews were Gods
house, he Master of that family, and when any sinned in it, he had power to
correct them, or turn them out of doors, and who should fault him? it is not
childrens duty to complain of their Parents, nor for servants to complain of
their Lord and Master.

Fifthly, Complaints in this kind will do us no good, they will harm us rather,
for God is judge, yea the highest judge, and will not only judge us for our
other evil ways, but for this very way of charging him to be unjust, and
cavilling at his dispensations; he will judge every one after his ways,
neither great nor small can avoid his judgment. Let us all therefore take
heed how we fault the ways of God, how strange or grievous soever they appear
or be unto us.

Thirdly, Observe:

When men have once taken up prejudice against God and his ways, its not easy
to be removed.

The Jews had drunk in this conceit, Chap. 18. That the ways of God were not
equal; and much of that Chapter is spent in proving the contrary, to extirpate
that mis-conceit; but it took not effect, they let pass Gods Arguments,
whereby he cleared himself, and carried along with them their prejudice against
him and his ways, as appears in this Chap: verse. 17. and 20. Yet ye say, The
way of the Lord is not equal. When weeds are gotten into the ground, and
rooted there, its not easy to cleanse that ground from them; when errors,
delusions, corrupt opinions, and prejudice against the truth, are gotten into
the head or heart, its not an easy thing to get them out. Many wonder that
Ministers should not convince unlearned and weak men of their errors, and take
them off from their opinions and prejudices, but they should consider some men
will not be convinced, either by God or man. These here were not convinced by
God; nor the Pharisees by Christ, John 15.6, 7. and 10. Chap: nor the Athenians
by Paul, Acts 17.

Verses 21, 22.
And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month,
in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem, came
unto me, saying, The City is smitten.

Now the hand of the Lord was upon me in the evening, before he that was escaped
came; and had opened my mouth until he came to me in the morning, and my mouth
was opened, and I was no more dumb.


HEre the 3 general part of the Chapter takes place, and is a denunciation of
judgment against those that escaped as the destruction of Jerusalem; from the
21. verse. to the 30. and this is set out or amplified, 1. From the time and
occasion of it, verse. 21. 2. From the efficient cause, verse. 22. 3. From the
moving causes, verse. 24, 25, 26. 4. From the final cause, which is in the 29.
verse.


Verse. 21. In the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the
fifth day of the month.
How long this was after the taking and smiting of Jerusalem will appear by
comparing Jerem. 52.5, 6, 7. with this verse. In the eleventh year of Zedekiah,
in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the City was broken up. The
captivity of the Jews began with Zedekiahs reign; for that time he was made
King, Jehoiachin was carried away captive into Babylon, 2 Kings 24. Now this
was in the twelfth year of the captivity, the tenth month, in the fifth day of
it, so that it was a year and six months wanting four days before this tidings
of Jerusalems being smitten, came to Ezekiel.

One that had escaped out of Jerusalem, came unto me, saying,
Many perished in Jerusalem by the famine and plague in the time of the Siedge,
many were slain at the taking of it, yet some escaped, and its probable they
hid themselves in holes, woods, among the mountains, or fled to Egypt; one of
which, after so long a time as a year, five months, and sixteen days, came to
Ezekiel, and told him The City was smitten; its without question he and others
had heard something of Jerusalems condition before, but no certainty.

The City is smitten.
The word for smitten, is from Nacah, which notes so to smite, as not to miss,
it was certainly smitten; The Septuagint is (...) The City is taken; The Vulgar
Vastata est civitas, The City is laid waste, Broken up, as in Jerem: 52.7. This
was sad News he brought, that Jerusalem that famous City, that City of God was
destroyed.

Verse. 22. Now the hand of the Lord was upon me.
This expression we had in the 1. Chap: 3. and Chap: 3.14. The hand of the Lord
was strong upon me. And here by the hand of the Lord is meant, Vis Prophetica,
or Afflatus Propheticus, Prophetical breathings of Gods Spirit were upon the
Prophet, whereby he was enabled to speak freely and boldly concerning the state
of the Jews in Judaea, that had escaped; God informed the Prophet how things
were at Jerusalem before the Messenger came.

In the evening before he that was escaped came.
The evening was the beginning of the day among the Jews, and so of much
esteem, and God then by his Spirit, visited the Prophet.

And had opened my mouth until he came to me in the morning.
In the 24. Chap: God had told the Prophet, that one should escape and bring
him tidings of things at Jerusalem, and that in that day, his mouth should be
opened, and here its made good. The opening of the mouth implies 1. Materiam
loquendi, Matter of speaking. 2. Libertatem loquendi, Freedom of speaking. 3.
Occasionem loquendi, Opportunity of speaking.


All these concurred here, he had matter given in to speak unto those that were
escaped, and flattered themselves they should live and recover their losses; he
had freedom, Jerusalem being smitten, boldly to maintain what he had formerly
prophesied against Jerusalem, and occasion Ministered unto him, from the man's
coming.

The word (...) ad fer until were better rendered, when and so Sa: in his notes
upon the place, has it donec procum, says he. There was a sweet harmony and
correspondency between what the Prophet received from the Spirit of God, and
that which this Messenger faithfully related unto him.

My mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb.
After this he was so filled with the Prophetical Spirit, that he was silent no
more, but prophesied freely and frequently unto them.

First, Observe;

Gods people are sometimes under long afflictions.

In the twelfth year of our captivity. They had endured many miseries in a
foreign Land amongst a barbarous people twelve years, Numb: 20.15. We dwelt in
Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians vexed us and our Fathers; Egypt was an
house of bondage and vexation unto them, and when they were brought out God
threatened them, that if they would not observe all the words of his Law to do
them, and fear his glorious name, he would make their plagues great, and of
long continuance, Deuteronomy. 28.59. And this captivity of theirs was so long, that
they thought God had forgotten them, Lament: 5.20. Wherefore do thou forget
us for ever, and forsake us so long time? Seventy years time they lay in
Babylon, which was no better then an iron furnace; Ezekiel, Daniel, and other
Godly Ones were in this condition.

Secondly, Observe;

That when utter dessolation comes upon places, and Gods judgments are severe,
yet some have their lives for a prey.

One that had escaped came, Ezekiel: 9.5. The slaughtermen are commanded to show
no pity, but to slay utterly; old and young, both maids little children and
women, only the marked ones they must not touch; its probable this man that
escaped was one of the marked Ones, for he had a special care to come and
inform Ezekiel what had befallen them and the City, that so he might bear
witness both to the truth of Jeremies and Ezekiels prophesies; had he been a
wicked man, he would hardly have come to the Prophet into Babylon; but whoever
he was, he escaped famine, plague and sword, which cut off thousands of others.

Thirdly, Observe;

Ancient, renowned and privileged Cities have their periods and dissolutions.

Jerusalem was very ancient; there is mention of it in Joshuah's days, Josh:
15.8. She was famous throughout the earth, called the Gates of the People, for
the resort unto her, Ezekiel: 26.2, She had choice privileges, she was the holy
City, Isa: 48.32. The City of the Lord of Hoasts, Psalm. 48.8. The City of
Solemnities, Isa. 33.20. The valley of Vision, Isa. 22.1. The perfection of
beauty, Lament: 2.15. The City judged by all to be impregnable, Lament: 4.12.
But whatever Jerusalem was, here is the conclusion, Jerusalem is smitten, broken
in pieces, and laid utterly waste; Kings, Princes, Nobles, Counselors,
Judges, Prophets, Priests, People, all were smitten. In Rev: 8.12. its said,
The Sun, Moon and Stars were smitten, a third part of them; but here the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and Orbs they were in, were wholly smitten, O what darkness
was then upon the face of the Jewish earth? All created, and artificial glory
is subject to smiting; let not your hearts be taken with Sun, Moon, or Stars,
with Cities and the glory of them, etc.

Fourthly, Observe;

The faithfulness of God in performing what he foretells and promises.

Chap. 24.26, 27. It was hinted to the Prophet, that one should escape the fury
of the Babylonians, and bring the news of Jerusalems destruction, and that,
That day his mouth should be opened, and he should speak; and is it not here
fulfilled punctually? that day the party escaped came with that sad News of
Jerusalems being smitten, was the mouth of the Prophet opened; and mark how
forward God is to make good what he promises, He opened not his mouth at the
end of the day, but the evening before the man came, which was the beginning of
their day, he came in the morning by what time the Prophet might be up, but God
had been with the Prophet before. Exodus: 12.41. Let us learn to be faithful,
and perform to a day what we promise, rather be beforehand with men, then
behind with them.

Fifthly, Observe;

God is pleased sometimes to confirm the truths delivered by his servants, by
witness and signs.

Here was a witness came from Jerusalem to assure the Prophet and others, that
what had been prophesied against Jerusalem was true and made good; here was
sign upon sign, he was as dumb before, and now his mouth was opened, which was
a confirmation to him and others likewise. Isa. 44.20. He confirms the word
of his servant, and performs the counsels of his Messengers. Many would not
believe Ezekiel, not Jeremy, touching the destruction of Jerusalem, but God
confirmed their words.

Sixthly, Observe;

Liberty to speak the things of God is from the Spirit of God.

No man can prophecy or declare the things of the Lord, unless the Spirit of
God breath upon him, and open his mouth; The hand of the Lord was upon me, and
opened my mouth, and I was no more dumb. He had great freedom and boldness of
speech, when the Spirit of God came upon him, that filled him with Sanctuary
water, and made the waters flow strongly; before the Spirit waters them
Prophets are dry, before that speaks they are dumb, but when the hand of the
Lord is upon them, then they cannot but speak and distill Heavenly dews, or
pour out great rains; 2 Cor: 6.11. O ye Corinthians, Our mouth is open unto
you, our heart is enlarged. The Spirit had filled his heart with divine things,
and his mouth was open freely and boldly to communicate the same unto them.

Verses 23, 24, 25, 26.
Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of the Land of Israel, speak,
saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the Land: but we are many, the Land
is given us for inheritance.

Wherefore say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Ye eat with the blood, and
lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood; and shall ye possess the
Land?

Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his
neighbors wife; and shall ye possess the Land?


THese words contain the causes, that occasioned and moved God to denounce
judgment against the Jews; who escaped the Babylonish sword when Jerusalem was
smitten. The cause occasioning God to threaten them with destruction, was their
vain confidence that they should possess the Land still, verse. 24. The causes
moving God to destroy them, were their sins, which are mentioned, verse. 25, 26.

Verse. 23. Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying.
When the hand of the Lord was upon him, when the Spirit of prophecy was upon
him, then the word of the Lord came unto him: the Spirit brings the word of God
unto men; Prophets spoke as they were inspired by the Spirit of God, not of
their own heads; Ezekiel would rather be silent and dumb, then speak from
himself.

Verse. 24. They that inhabit those wastes of the Land of Israel.
Nebuchadnezzar having been a year and half (as appears by 2 Kings 25.1, 2, 3.
Jerem: 52.4, 5, 6.) before Jerusalem with a great army of the worst of men,
Ezekiel: 7.24. the Land of Israel o^ Judah, (for Israel here is put for Judah)
could not but be greatly spoiled and laid waste; when once the Temple and City
were burnt and ruined, then was the Land as a wilderness: Zephany calls that
day A day of wastnesse and desolation, Chap. 1.15. And Jeremy says, The Land
was then a desolate Wilderness, Chap: 12.10. Some were left by Nebuzaradan to
inhabit the waste and desolate places of the Land, Jer. 39, 10. He left some
poor people, gave them Vineyards and Fields to labor in, and live upon; and
Gedaliah being made Governor, many flocked unto him, who had hid themselves in
woods, holes, among the mountains, and fled to neighboring Countries for
security, Jer: 40. 2 Kings 25.22, 23.

Speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the Land.
The Land of Canaan was promised to Abraham and his seed, Gen: 12.7. Chap:
15.18. and 26.4. Abraham did not inherit it personally, he had not so much as
one foot of ground in it, Acts 7.4, 5. He dwelt in it, Gen: 13.12. but had no
inheritance in it; therefore they here were mistaken to say, He was one, and he
inherited the Land. Abraham was one, yea one that believed, one that feared,
loved, and obeyed God, yet for his oneness had he not the Land; God gave him
the Land, having an eye to his faith and obedience, Genesis 15.6, 7. Chap. 22.16,
17, 18.

But we are many, the Land is given us for inheritance.
This was the argument with which they flattered themselves, who were now
remaining in Judaea, that they should still possess the Land, and recover
themselves again; The Land (said they) was given us for inheritance, who are
many, as well as Abraham who was one; if he enjoyed it being but one, shall not
we much more being many, and being his Seed? what reason has God to cast us
out of that inheritance he gave our father, and us his children? He will not do
it, we shall dwell here, grow up quickly being many, and recover our former
liberty and glory. But these men deceived themselves by this foolish reasoning;
for God did not give Canaan to Abraham because he was one, and so principium
numeri, but propter foedus, because of the Covenant which he made with him,
Gen: 15.18. Chap: 17.7, 8. which Covenant Abraham kept, living by faith in God,
and bringing forth fruits suitable thereunto, which themselves did not; For had
they been the children of Abraham, they would have done the works of Abraham,
as Christ said, John 8.39. But you may see what their works were in the two
verses following this we are speaking of. Besides they had forgotten what God
had threatened against those he gave the Land unto, if they did forsake and
disobey him, Deuteronomy. 28.63. Chap: 30.18. God told them they should not prolong
their days, but perish or be plucked off the Land. Little reason had they also
to argue that they should be spared and possess the Land, because they were
many, for that as Junius well observes, A greater number then they who had
possessed the Land were cut off, or removed out of the Land.

Verse. 25. Wherefore say unto them, thus says the Lord God.
Their vain confidence provoked the Lord, and therefore here he commissions the
Prophet to tell them what he judged of them and their sayings. His thoughts
were far differing from theirs; and Ezekiel must declare the Lords, not his own
thoughts unto them. And 1. He charges them with their sinful practices. 2.
Denies them the possession of the Land.


Ye eat with the blood.
It was commanded before the Law was given, That they should not eat blood,
Gen: 9.4. Levit: 19.26. That is, neither blood let out from the flesh, nor
blood with the flesh; one reason is given, Levit. 17.14. Ye shall eat the blood
of no manner of flesh, for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof; The
Hebrew is Nephesh, the soul of all flesh is the blood thereof. Nephesh is put
sometime for the whole man, as Gen: 46.26. All the souls of the house of Jacob,
that is, all the persons; sometimes for the more noble part of man, viz: the
reasonable soul, Mat. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul; Sometimes for the affections, as Deuteronomy: 6.5. Thou shall
love the Lord with all thy heart, and with all thy soul; Sometimes for the
life, as Isa: 53.12. He has poured out his soul unto death, that was his life,
John 10.15. and so its rendered and to be taken in the place cited; the life of
all flesh is the blood thereof; blood properly is not the life or soul of
flesh, but the life or soul is said to be in the blood, or blood, Propter
spiritus vitales and animales, qui animae organa, and virtutis ejus vehicula
sunt, and sanguine evaporant. Another reason why they might not eat blood,
Duet. in Gen: cap. 9.4.
is in the 11. verse. of that Chap. I have given it to you upon the Altar, to
make an atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that makes an atonement
for the soul. The blood being to be offered upon the Altar represented the
blood of Christ, which was to be shed for the remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28.
and therefore not to be eaten. A third reason was, that they might not be
cruel and bloody minded, but might in a special manner take heed of shedding
man's blood, which is the ground of the prohibition, Gen: 9.4, 5. But they
minded neither the prohibition it self, nor the reasons of it, they did eat
with the blood, that is, they did eat the flesh with the blood in it, or they
did eat the blood drawn out from the flesh.

Some make question in these days, whether they may eat blood, and the ground
of it is from Acts 15.29. where its ordered that Christians should abstain from
blood and things strangled; But those that scruple eating of blood, do not
scruple the eating of things strangled, as Fowls and Rabbits; and there is as
much reason for that as the other; as for the thing it self, I shall only say
what Christ says ( Matthew. 15.11.) Not that which goes into the mouth defiles
a man, but that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles a man. And Paul
Titus 1.15. Unto the pure, all things are pure. And 1 Timothy 4.4. Every creature
of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.

And lift up your eyes toward your idols.
Idolatry was forbidden in the Law with great severity, Deuteronomy: 17.2, 3, 4, 5.
Exodus: 22.20. Chap: 20.4, 5. yet these Jews minded idols and affected them. Of
lifting up the eyes to Idols, see Chap. 18.6. it notes adoration of them, and
expectation of help from them.

And shed blood.
Shedding of blood was a grievous sin; and here it may be understood either of
their oppressing innocent ones, taking away their lives illegally, or else of
their children which they offered to Molech, which was forbidden unto them,
Levit. 18.21. of which bloody sacrifices was spoken, Ezekiel: 16.20, 21.

And shall ye possess the Land?
This is a stinging interrogation, intimating that whoever possessed it, they
should not. What do you look to possess the Land that do such things, that are
so impious and profane? Did I not cast Heathens for their wickedness out of
the Land you are in? and do you think to continue in it that have exceeded them
in wickedness? Ezekiel: 5.6. No, no, the Land is not for you; Abraham did not
such things, you are not his seed, therefore you shall not inherit the Land.

Verse. 26. Ye stand upon your sword.
Not you are in arms to defend your selves against Babylonians, but you trust
in your strength, are ready for spoil, violence, and shedding of innocent
blood. When any offended them in word or deed, they meditated revenge, and
labored by the sword to right themselves, there was no place for justice, but
the Land was full of bloody crimes, Ezekiel: 7.23.

Ye work abomination.
Of Abominations, and what sins are so called, was spoken, Chap: 5. verse. 9.
Chap: 18. verse. 12, 13. In the 3. Observation: Ye do that is detestable and
loathsome to the very senses.

And ye defile every one his neighbors wife.
Adultery was a grievous sin, and punishable with death, Levit. 20.10. Deuteronomy.
22.22. yet this sin was frequent amongst them, Jer: 5.7, 8. Cap. 7.9. and 9.2.
That honorable state of marriage was abused, and the bed defiled, and it was a
common and universal practice amongst them, every one defiled his neighbors
wife.

And shall ye possess the Land?
Do ye trust in your swords, violate all justice, shed innocent blood, do
abominable things, defile your neighbors wives, and yet presume you shall
possess the Land? O impudent creatures, brazen-faced sinners, what vain
persuasions have you taken up? its madness for you to dream of possessing the
Land; rather then such as ye shall inherit it, it shall lie desolate without
inhabitant. The word here for to possess is Jarash, which is a word contrariae
significationis, that signifies contrary things, as to possess and dispossess.
Josh: 23.5. The Lord shall drive them from out of your sight, and ye shall
possess their Land: Here Jarash signifies to drive out and to possess: when
the Lord says, Shall ye possess the Land? his meaning is, they shall be
dispossessed of it, and driven out of it.

First, Observe;

Men in great misery, under grievous afflictions, are apt to flatter and
deceive themselves with one vain confidence or other.

These Jews were conquered by the Babylonians, had their City, Temple, Strong
holds, and pleasant places, all laid waste; they were a company of poor people
that inhabited the wastes of the Land, yet they flattered themselves with this
conceit, that they should inherit and possess the Land; and why? there was a
number, a multitude of them; Abraham was one, and he inherited the Land; we are
many, and its given to us? Their afflicted condition might have wrought other
apprehensions in them, and made them see and say, All the chief Ones of the
Land are cut off, or carried away captives, the Land is fallen into
Nebuchadnezzars hands, we are his servants and slaves left to Till the Land and
dress the Vineyards, that so a revenue may be raised for him; but as for our
selves, we are like to be miserable all our days, yea, and our posterity after
us; but their thoughts were otherwise, they looked to inherit the Land, and be
great Ones in it because of their number. Men in straits, and out of straits,
make lies their refuge, which prove their ruin, Isa: 28.15, 17, 18. Jer: 7.4.
and 14.15. Chap: 27.14, 15, 16, 17.

Secondly, Observe;

Expectation of Promises to be performed unto us, not performing the conditions
required, is foolish and vain.

The Land is given us for inheritance, the Lord has promised us that we shall
inherit the Land; they minded the promise, but forgot the condition, which was,
That they should keep his judgments, Levit: 25.18. Walk in his statutes,
Levit: 26.3, 4, 5, 6. then they should be blessed in the Land, and dwell safely
in it. Yea, they were to observe all the statutes and judgments of the Lord,
Deuteronomy: 11.31, 32. and if they did not, the Lord threatened to cast them out of
his sight, Jer: 17.15. and out of the Land, Jer: 16.13. These things they
forgot, catching hold of the promise, saying, The land is given us for
inheritance. Its madness and folly to look that God should perform what he
has promised, when we perform not the condition of the promise. When God
promises a thing conditionally, the condition must be performed, else the Lord
is not obliged; 2 Chro: 7.14. If my people which are called by my name, shall
humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways;
then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their
land: Had they performed the conditions here required, their Land had been
healed, and not laid waste.

Thirdly, Observe;

The way multitudes go, is no argument for the rightnesse and warrantableness
of that way.

These Jews were absolutely mistaken, yet they were many, the most judged the
same thing, and went the same way. The greatest part of people every where
mistake, cry peace, peace, when war and death are at the doors. The old world
could not justify its way, because all walked in it, except Noah and two or
three more: its not safe to be of the multitudes mind, and to tread in their
steps; For broad is the way that leads unto destruction, and many there be go
in thereat. Argumentum turpissimum est turba.
The Prophet counseled the Jews, Ezekiel: 20.18. not to walk in the statutes of
their Fathers, nor to observe their judgments, but to walk in the Lords
statutes and judgments, and to do them; better be alone in Gods way, then be
with multitudes in a false way.

Fourthly, Observe;

The true children of Abraham may be known by their works.

These Jews stuck upon this much, that they were Abraham's seed: Abraham was
one, and we are many; We come from his loins, and the Land was given to his
seed for an inheritance, and who should inherit it, but we who are his seed,
and so the right heirs unto it? If it be true which you assert, you shall
inherit the Land, if you be the seed and heirs of Abraham it shall be so; but
come let us try that by your works, (says God) Ye eat with the blood, and lift
up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood; ye stand upon your sword, work
abomination, and defile every one his neighbors wife; And are these the works
of Abraham? he did no such things; were you the children of Abraham, ye would
do the works of Abraham, keep the Covenant as he did, ye would fear, honor,
love and obey me, deal justly, live chastely, and do good in your Generation:
These things you do not, therefore you are not his children, his heirs, have no
right to the Land.

Verses 27, 28, 29.
Say thou thus unto them, Thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely they that
are in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field
will I give to the beasts to be devoured: and they that be in the forts and in
the caves, shall dye of the pestilence.

For I will lay the Land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength shall
cease: and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, that none shall pass
through.

Then shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have laid the Land most
desolate, because of all their abominations which they have committed.


IN the 27. and 28. verses, the judgments threatened are particularly mentioned.

1. The sword for those in the wastes. 2. The devouring beast for those in the
fields. 3. The plague for those in the forts and caves. 4. Desolation for the
land and mountains. 5. Cessation of strength, and the pomp of it. All these
confirmed with an oath.
Verse. 27. As I live.
The vain confidence of these Jews so provoked God, that he swears they shall
not inhabit the Land, and that by his life, As sure as I am the living God, ye
that are so guilty of such great sins, and so unlike unto Abraham, shall be
rooted out and destroyed.

Surely they that are in the wastes shall fall die the sword.
After the destruction of Jerusalem many got into other Cities and Towns, which
had been plundered, fired and spoiled, thinking that there would be safety for
them; but God would cause some to search those places, and sheath their swords
in the bowels of the Jews hid in them. The Hebrew for by the sword, is
Bachereb, in the sword, but here is by.

Him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured.
Some in this time of common calamity kept in the open fields, or in the face
of the fields, as the Hebrew is, fearing to venture into any Town or City, and
so promised to themselves security there; but the fields were no shelter unto
them, God had Lions, Bears, Wolves, and such wild beasts, which found them
out, teared them in pieces, and devoured them.

They that be in the forts and in the caves, shall dye of the pestilence.
Some were got into strong forts, others were hid in caves of the earth where
none could find them, or come at them; these seemed to be out of all danger,
but the pestilence and famine could reach them there. In that Land were forts,
rocks, holes to hide men in, Isa: 2.13. 1 Samuel: 13.6. Josh: 10.16. 1 Samuel: 24.3.
Judges 6.2.

Verse. 28. For I will lay the land most desolate.
Canaan was a land abounded with all good things, it flowed with milk honey,
and was the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel: 20.6. Yet this Land would God lay most
desolate; Shemamah Vmeshammah, desolation, desolation, it should be a
wilderness, extremely desolate.

The pomp of her strength shall cease.
In the 7. Chapter 24. verse. we had these words, I will also make the pomp of
the strong to cease: and Chap: 30.18. The pomp of her strength shall cease. The
Land shall be so battered, wasted, consumed, that she shall no more trust in
any strength of hers. Junius refers it to the Ark or Sanctuary, called the
excellency of their strength, Chap: 24.21.

The mountain of Israel shall be desolate, that none shall pass through.
The Land of Israel was full of mountains which were not barren, but some for
Pasture, some for Vines, some for Cedars, and other Trees, and some for Cattle;
when they were so, many paths were made to the mountains, and they were
frequently visited, but they should be desolate, without Cattle, Trees, Vines,
or any to pass by or through them; none should come over the mountains, to
worship at Jerusalem.

Verse. 29. Then shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have laid the land
most desolate, because of all their abominations which they have committed.
Here the final cause of Gods destroying them and their Land is pointed out,
and that is the glory of God in their acknowledging his just proceedings;
before they said His ways were not equal, but now they should acknowledge the
equity of his ways, and that they had deserved such things.

First, Observe;

When God is resolved upon punishing a people, there is no place or refuge to
secure them from his strokes and judgments.

Here were men got into waste places, into open fields, into forts and caves,
yet none of these secured them; the Lord had sworn to destroy them, and the
sword finds out those in the waste and ruinous places; the wild beasts finding
others in the open fields, devour them; and those were got into the forts, and
hid in caves, the pestilence and famine consumed; they thought to fly and hide
themselves from the vengeance of God, but it could not be; had they gone down
to the bottom of the Sea, yea, down to Hell, God would have met with them
there, Amos 9.2, 3, 4. No Town, no Fort, no Field, no Cave can protect that
person whom God pursues; if men and beasts cannot come at him, God has the
Arrows of famine and pestilence to shoot into his sides and liver. Let us take
heed how we offend God, and provoke him to set upon our destruction; there is
no place, person, or privilege, can protect us from his stroke; let us get
into Christ, hide our selves in him, in the clefts of that rock, then we shall
be safe, whatsoever storms are abroad.

Secondly, Observe;

Its men's sins which lay Lands waste, and bring remarkable judgments upon
them.

Canaan was laid desolate, the pomp of her strength ceased, the mountains had
none to pass by or over them; yea, The Land was laid most desolate, and why?
because of all their abominations, Their sins exceeded the sins of the
Heathens, and they had answerable judgments; their manifold abominations
brought manifold judgments. They had the best Land in the world, and should
have been the best people, but they degenerated and provoked God so by their
abominations, that he made their plagues wonderful great, and of long
continuance, Deuteronomy: 28.59. Seaventy years did they suffer, and the Land also,
which suffering they brought upon themselves and the Land, as the Lord tells
them, Zech: 7.14. They laid the pleasant Land desolate; they by their
abominations did it, they caused the Temple to be burnt, the testimonies of
divine presence to be removed, the Cities, fields and mountains to be desolate.

Thirdly, Observe;

By severe judgments God convinces men of the equity of his way, and causes
them to give glory to his name.

Then shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have laid the Land most
desolate, because of all, etc. Severe judgments awaken conscience, sharpen the
understanding, and cause men to search, judge and condemn themselves, and
withal to justify the Lord; they have influence into Heathens, Jer: 22.8, 9.
Many Nations shall pass by this City, and they shall say every man to his
neighbor, wherefore has the Lord done this unto this great City? Then they
shall answer, because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their God,
and worshipped other gods, and served them. Thus they justified God, and gave
him glory, when they saw his terrible judgments upon Jerusalem, and the Land
of Canaan.

Verses 30, 31.
Also thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking against
thee by the walls, and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another,
every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word
that comes forth from the Lord.

And they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness.


IN these verses and the rest to the end of the Chapter, is contained a reproof
or complaint of the captives in Babylon, for their detraction, hypocrisy, and
covetousness.

1. Their detraction in the 30. Verse. 2. Their hypocrisy in the end of the 30.
and most of the 31. 3. Their covetousness in the end of the 31.
Verse. 30. The children of thy people.
Its not the children of my people; God would not own them, they were so
wicked; but the children of thy people: Of these words before, verse. 2.

Still are speaking against thee by the walls, and in the doors of the houses.
To speak against God or man, is to detract from them, and disparage them; 2 Chronicles. 32.16. Senacherib by his servants spoke against the Lord, and against
Hezekiah, and that they said was detracting from the power of God, and truth of
what Hezekiah had said: Acts 28.22. As concerning this Sect we know that it is
every where spoken against; that is, its disparaged and condemned for a wicked
Sect. Numb: 12.1. Myriam and Aaron spoke against Moses, because of the
Ethiopian woman, and said, has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? has he
not also spoken by us? Their speaking against Moses was detracting from him: So
here their speaking against Ezekiel was to defame and disparage him; and this
they did openly and privately, by the walls where any met, and in their doors
where friends met. Some take the words thus, the children of thy people are
speaking of thee by the walls, and in their doors; they give thee good words,
and consult of coming to thee; but I conceive the former sense best.

And speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you,
and hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord.
Though they vilified the Prophet, yet now, one being come to him that had
escaped at the destruction of Jerusalem, they excite and stir up one the other
to go to the Prophet, and hear what he had to say. The smiting of Jerusalem was
a great affliction unto them, and they hoped to hear somewhat from him to
refresh and comfort them, especially seeing that he had spent three years in
speaking against the Nations, and said nothing unto them.

Verse. 31. And they come unto thee as the people comes.
They flocked to the Prophet in Troops, as people use to do to public places
for religion or pleasure, they hasten thither, crowd in, take up all places,
and sit in expectation to hear somewhat that may please, or to catch somewhat
they may carp at, and make advantage of, which some Expositers affirm to be the
end of their coming here. The Hebrew for as the people comes, is, according to
the coming or entrance of the people; some come for to hear notions and
novelties, some to scoff, some to censure; few come upon right grounds, or for
right ends.

They sit before thee as my people.
They carry it before thee as my people, they hearken to what thou say, and
make as if they would not loose one truth, but lay up all, and do as my people
ought to do, viz: practice what they hear; they seem before thee to be Saints,
the people of God, as those that would learn righteousness.

They hear thy words, but they will not do them.
They took pains to hear the Prophet, they came to his house, as Chap: 8.1.
Chap. 14.1. It was not likely that they had public places of meeting; the
Babylonians did not favor them so much as to indulge them with such liberty;
wherever it was they heard the Prophet, they did not do what he said, they
obeyed not him, nor the Lord who sent him.

For with their mouth they show much love.
From the teeth outward they professed much kindness to the Prophet, they gave
him smooth and good words. The Hebrew for much love, is (...) Agavim, from
(...) Agat, which signifies to be much in love with one, to be taken with the
sight, hearing, or company of one; and Agavim is amatoria; they make as if they
were deeply in love, much affected with the sight and hearing of thee, when it
was not so; here was their hypocrisy. The Septuagint has these words thus,
(...), because there was a lie in their mouth; they dissembled with the
Prophet. Arias Montanus renders the word Agavim, subsannationes, which is
mockings, with bending the Brows, and snuffing the Nose; the Vulgar is to that
purpose, in canticum oris sui vertunt illos, they turn thy words into a song,
they jeer at what thou say; so that translation Vatablus follows, Cantiones
edunt ore suo, that is, (says he) Rident doctrinam tuam, they laugh at thy
doctrine; The French likewise is of this nature, Itz en font une chauson de
plaisanterie de leur bouche, they make scoffing songs with their mouth.

The word for show is (...) Osim, from (...) Asah, which usually signifies to
do, to effect, to perfect, but here has a differing signification, viz. to
show, declare, or profess; and so Polanus tells that the word in Matthew. 12.33.
is to be taken, either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the
tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt; for the Tree is known by his fruits. Look
upon the works which I have done, and by them profess, declare what I am; if I
have done evil works, declare me and my works to be evil; if I have done
good, declare me and my works to be good, for such as the Tree is, such is the
fruit.

But their heart goes after their covetousness.
They looked upon the Prophet and listened to his words, but their hearts looked
another way. The word for Covetousness is Bitzha, from Batzha, to wound, break,
damnifie, and metaphorically to be covetous, given to get and gain, intimating
that covetous men do wound, break, damnifie themselves and others. The
Septuagint have these words thus, (...). Their heart goes after their
pollutions: Covetousness is a defiling thing. The Greek word for Covetousness
is (...), a desire of having more; not simply of having more; but more then God
allows us, when we go beyond the bounds he has set us, which bounds are in 1 Timothy 6.8. and Heb: 13.5. If we be not content with food, raiment, and such
things as we have, but let out our desires to more, we are covetous. They being
in captivity, having little in respect of what they once had in their own Land,
they were not contented with what they had, but let out their minds and hearts
to more, and so were covetous.

First, Observe;

Its the portion of Gods servants to be ill spoken of, and that from time to
time, by those they live amongst, and do good unto.

The children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls, and in
the doors of their houses. They had spoken ill of Ezekiel before, they did it
still, openly and secretly. David met with such a portion from many, Psalm. 41.
All that hate me whisper together against me; Psalm: 69.12. They that sit in the
Gate speak against me; Psalm: 109.2. The mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of
the deceitful are opened against me, they have spoken against me with a lying
tongue; Psalm. 119.23. Princes also did sit and speak against me. Great and
small, publicly and privately, did defame David. Jeremy escaped not the lash
of the tongue, Chap: 18.18. Come let us smite him with the tongue. Paul that
precious servant of Christ, how was he spoken against? he says, He was made as
the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor: 4.13. Look
what filth is washed out of, or rust scoured off from Pots, and thrown out of
doors, such was Paul and his name made. Its the basest Office to set our
tongues on work to detract from the worth of any; if there be evil in men, our
charity should cover it, if virtue, our wisdom should commend it. It Is a
Devilish sin to speak evil of others; he first brought this sin into the world
by speaking evil of God, Genesis 3.4, 5, and too many are like unto him, in
speaking ill of the servants of God, but we must steel our selves to pass
through bad report; 2 Cor: 6.8. Rom: 3.8.

Secondly, Observe;

Whatever wicked men speak against the Prophets and servants of God, he knows
and takes notice of the same.

Son of man, They speak against thee by the walls, and in the doors of their
houses. Let them speak openly or secretly, God hears them; when they said,
Come, let us devise devices against Jeremy, come let us smite him with the
tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words, Chap: 18.18. God heard
them; and revealed to Jeremy what they said. There is not a word spoken by any,
but the Lord is privy to it, and not only words, but thoughts also, Isa. 59.7.
Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity. Let us look narrowly to our hearts and
tongues, for God knows the thoughts of the one, and the words of the other.

Thirdly, Observe;

How religiously and cunningly soever hypocrites do carry it, their hypocrisy
is known to God, and shall be discovered.

Hypocrisy is a doing or speaking that to God or men, wherein the heart and
spirit of a man is not. Those men pretended religiously, they call upon one
another to hear what word the Lord gave out to the Prophet, and they come,
being excited one by another, and sit before the Prophet as Gods people, they
attended to what he said, as if they meant punctually to observe the same; but
they did not do what he said, their hearts were not in the business: what
worshipping was this of God to give him an ear, and the world their heart? So
to speak against the Prophet behind his back, and to speak fair, show much love
to his face, was not this hypocrisy? did they not carry it religiously toward
God, and cunningly toward the Prophet? However they carried it, the Lord saw
their hypocrisy, and discovered the same. The Scribes and Pharisees wore long
robes, made long prayers, and under pretense of them devoured widows houses,
but the Lord Christ knew their hypocrisy, and made it known, though
religiously and craftily carried, Matthew: 23.

Fourthly, Observe;

Many hearers pretend much love and kindness to the Prophets, and yet behind
their backs afford them not a good word.

When these Jews came to the Prophets house they showed much love with their
mouths; but when they were by the walls, and at their own doors, they showed as
much ill will with their mouths, they spoke against him, they slandered him,
they disgraced him, out of the same mouth came bitter and sweet. The Jews and
Herodians pretended much love to Christ, and said, Master, we know that thou
art true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any
man: for thou regardest not the persons of men; tell us therefore what think
thou, is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or no? Matthew: 22.16, 17, 18. Here
they showed much kindness with their mouths, when there was gall and bitterness
in their hearts.

Fifthly, Observe;

When men draw near to God in any duty of his worship, he principally looks
which way the heart stands, whether that be real and toward him.

Their heart (says God) goes after their covetousness; It went not after the
word, after God himself, Isa: 29. This people draw near me with their mouth,
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me.
When their bodies were in the Temple, their hearts were in their shops; when
their lips were speaking to God, their hearts were conversing with the
creatures: Gods eye was upon their hearts. The heart is the principal part in
man, and its the principal thing God aims at, Prove: 23.26. My son give me
thine heart; not thy hatt, thy hand, thy tongue, thy foot, but thine heart;
Whatever he has without the heart is nothing, but having the heart, he has
all, whatever is wanting; let the eye be wanting, a man is blind; let the leg
be wanting, a man is lame; let the whole body be wanting, a man is sick; yet if
God have the heart he has all. Delilah had Sampsons bodily presence, yet that
sufficed her not, because she thought she had not his heart, Judge: 16.15. How
can thou say I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? God has no love
from us, nothing of us, when our hearts are not with him.

Sixthly, Observe;

Men have carnal hearts in spiritual duties.

These men were hearing Ezekiel prophecy, and whilst they were hearing their
hearts went after their covetousness; the word was in their ears, and the world
in their hearts. Ezekiel tells them of the things of God, and they mind the
things of the earth. To be earthly minded at any time is blameable, Phil: 3.19.
but to be so in spiritual things is grievous, its a despising, a debasing of
them; when the things of God, of Christ, Heaven, Salvation, Life, Grace and
Glory are presented unto us, which should take up our thoughts abundantly,
affect our hearts powerfully, for us then to mind the dust, sticks, straws and
pebbles on the earth, to have our hearts upon them, this is Zimmah, a great
wickedness, horrible ingratitude, Rom: 8.6. To be carnally minded is death; it
argues a dead soul, it tends unto death, and ends in eternal death.

Seventhly, Observe;

Covetousness is a sin adheres to Professors.

These that came to hear the Prophet, and sat before him as the people of God,
their hearts went after their covetousness, they had hearts exercised with
covetous practices, as it is in 2 Pet: 2.14. The Pharisees made profession of
religion, they were hearers of Christ, but the Text says, they were covetous,
Luke 16.14. Judas an Apostle and follower of Christ, had a covetous heart, and
sold his Master for 30 pieces of silver, Mat: 26.15. Demas forsook Paul, having
loved the present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. While he was with Paul, his heart was in
the world. John seeing this evil incident to Christians disswades them from
the love of the world, by a strong argument, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world; if any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him. He does not know God to be his father, and love
him as a Father, that loves the world; he may think, say, and swear that he
loves the Father, but the Spirit of truth says, The love of the Father is not
in him. Let Christians therefore take heed of this sin, for besides that it
argues the love of God is not in us, it choaks the seed of Gods word, which
should beget grace in us, Matthew: 13.22. it makes us idolaters, Ephesians: 5.5. yea
Covetous^esse unfits us for Church communion, 1 Cor: 5.11. it shuts us out of
Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. it exposes us to wrath, Col. 3.5, 6. to Gods hatred, Psalm.
10.3. to a curse, 2 Pet. 2.14.

Verses 32, 33.
And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do
them not.

And when this comes to pass, (lo, it will come) then shall they know that a
Prophet has been among them.


Verse. 32. Thou art unto them as a very lovely song.
THe Hebrew is Ceshir agavim, sunt canticum amantium, as a song of Lovers; so
the word is rendered, Jerem: 4.30. Thy lovers will despise thee, its the same
word: Lovers have delightful songs to please their ears and pass away time; so
the Prophets preaching was delightful unto them to hear, but as in music and
singing, there is nothing comes of it when done, so they heard the Prophet, but
nothing came of their hearing. The Septuagint has it (...), as the voice of a
Psaltery, which was an instrument to sing unto. The French is Comme une chauson
de plaisanterie, as a song of jesting or scurrility, which greatly affect
carnal hearts. Some render the words eris illis canticum subsannatorum, thou will be to them a song of scoffers, that is, however they seem to be greatly
pleased and affected with thy prophesying, yet in their hearts they laugh at
thee and deride thee.

Of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument.
When one both plays well, and sings sweetly, that music of all others is
most taking, affects the ear, and stirs the spirits; so Ezekiels voice was
pleasing to them, and he handled his matter well, they were, or seemed to be
stirred and affected with what he delivered. The Hebrew for can play well on an
instrument, is Vmetib naggen; which Montanus renders, Been scientis pulsare, of
one that knows well how to play; Nagan signifies to play upon a musical
instrument, and also to sing to it.

For they hear thy words, but they do them not.
Some heard not at all, those that heard rested in what they heard, or abused
it, jeering and scoffing at the Prophet as a pleasant Songster, they were not
doers of what was taught them, They received not the truth with love, they
mingled it not with faith, they yielded not obedience to it, which things do
make a Doer of the word, 2 Thessalonians: 2.10. Heb: 4.2. Rom: 5.17.

Verse. 33. When this comes to pass (lo, it will come)
When the judgments threatened shall be made good, viz: That those in the
wastes shall fall by the sword, and those in the open fields shall be devoured
by the beasts, they in the forts and caves shall dye of the famine and
pestilence, when the Land and mountains shall be laid most desolate, which
things will certainly come to pass whatever thoughts they have, or false
Prophets say to the contrary; for I have determined these things against them,
commissioned thee to declare them, and I being omnipotent will in due time
accomplish them.

Then shall they know that a Prophet has been among them.
The execution of what is threatened shall convince them, and make them say, we
were deceived about Ezekiel, he spoke not out of ill will to us, or of his own
head, but he was sent to denounce the judgments of God against us for our
sins, which he faithfully did, and we now feel the weight of them, and find he
was a Prophet, not a Songster, that his matter had dread in it, and was not to
be sported withal.

First, Observe;

That men may be much affected with hearing the Prophets and Preachers of God,
and yet be vile hypocrites, very wicked.

These men that flocked to hear Ezekiel, and unto whom he was as a very lovely
song, as a song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument, they were backbiters and covetous; there was none in Babylon
pleased them like Ezekiel, they said, Come, come let us go and hear Ezekiel;
they were as much taken with him, as any are with music, with pleasant voices,
tunes and songs, which oftentimes ravish the hearers; yet they were unsound at
heart, the word did them no good, they amended not their lives, they parted not
with their lusts. In Christ's time, the people flocked to hear him, were
affected with him, Mark 12.37. The common people heard him gladly; and Chap:
14.43. Judas and a great multitude with him, came to take Christ, and laid
hands on him, verse. 46. and Chap: 15. verse. 8.13, 14. The multitude cried,
Crucify, crucify him. Many of them that heard him gladly before, were much
affected with his Heavenly Doctrine, now cried out crucify him, and so showed
what vile hypocrites they were. In our days some Preachers are as a pleasant
song to some persons; they are affected with their voice, notions, gestures,
expressions, matter, arguments, stories; they sigh, they weep sometimes, and
are ravished at other times, they never heard such a man, such a Sermon, such
things, and yet are not changed in their hearts, reformed in their tongues or
lives, but are notorious hypocrites.

Secondly, Observe;

When people hear the Preacher, and do not practice what is taught, the word is
no more to them then a song, or a fit of music, nor the Preacher more then a
Musician or Fiddler unto them.

Thou art unto them as a lovely song of one that can play well on an
instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not. These words are a
proof and reason of the former. Should we tell people, You esteem the word
preached no more then an idle, amorous, witty, scurrilous song, nor the
Preacher any more then he that sings such a song, they would think themselves
much wronged; but it is so in Gods account, when they hear the Preacher, and do
not practice what they hear: A fit of music affects for the present, but
quickly passes away, and both the music and the man are forgotten; so is it
here, people are affected somewhat at a Sermon, but Sermon and Preacher are
quickly forgotten.

Thirdly, Observe;

Hearing of the word is good, but not to be rested in.

They are not blamed for hearing, that is a duty belongs to all; James 5.19.
But they rested in their hearing; they made not the word a Lamp unto their
feet, and a light unto their paths, as David did, Psalm. 119.105. They did not
meditate on it, digest it, turn it in succum and sanguinem, into good
nourishment, that so they might express the virtue of it in their lives; they
heard the word, and that was all; of such that is verified, Matthew: 13.13.
Hearing they hear not. The word has no influence into them, impression upon
them, expression from them; they are no better then those that never heard;
they are like men that observe wind and tide, but never make a voyage. 2 Timothy:
3.7. There were women ever learning, but never attained to the knowledge of the
truth; and many are ever hearing, and never come to practice. Luke 13.26. Thou
have taught in our streets. They had heard Christ, rested in their hearing, and
that was their undoing.

Fourthly, Observe;

God expects men should be not only hearers, but doers also of his word.

They hear thy words, but they do them not. Hearing alone pleases not God; he
gave not his word to be heard only, but to be heard and practiced; they are
good hearers qui verba vertunt in opera, who turn words into actions, James
1.22. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
He tells them they deal fallaciously, they baffle and delude themselves, not
others, if they hear the word, and do it not; though there be power in the word
to save your souls, yet if ye be not doers of it, ye deceive your selves, and
will lose your souls; Matthew: 7.26, 27. Every one that hears these sayings of
mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his
house upon the sand, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it. He
that hears Christ's Heavenly Doctrine and does not practice it, is not built
upon the rock, but upon the sand; and when the trial comes, will be deceived
of his expectation, his house will down, his soul will be lost. It is not
hearing, it is not crying, Lord, Lord, that will open a door for a man to enter
into Heaven by; verse. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Not any one which goes no further: But he
that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. My father (says Christ)
has made known his will; he would have men do his will, and then he will open
unto them, and let them into Heaven. Its not men's hearing or saying, but their
doing what they hear, which pleads stronglyest for their entrance into Heaven.
Many men commend the Preacher, the Word with their tongues, but disgrace both
with their lives: The best commenders of the Preachers and their doctrine are
men's lives, when they are doers of the word; Matthew: 25.21. Its well done thou
good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy masters joy: Not well heard, or
well said, but well done. Let us see to it, that we be not hearers only, but
doers of the word. Rev: 22.14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of life, and may ^nter in through the gates
into the City.

Fifthly, Observe;

The judgments threatened by the Prophets of God, shall certainly take place.

When this comes to pass (lo, it will come.) He means the sword, wild
beasts, pestilence, utter desolation, which were threatened: It seemed somewhat
unlikely, that after a war, a few poor people left in wastes, holes, caves,
forts, woods, and fields, should be cut off; but the Lord had said it, and he
did effect it. How improbable or impossible soever things appear to us, what
God threatens by his Prophets to do (without repentance intervene) he will
accomplish.

Sixthly, Observe;

Whatever the thoughts of wicked ones are for the present of the Prophets, the
time will come when they shall have other kind of thoughts of them.

When this comes to pass, then shall they know, etc. When the sword, wild
beasts, pestilence, utter desolation are upon them and the Land, when they are
in straits, in the jaws of death, then they will have other apprehensions of
Ezekiel then now they have: Ezekiel at present is a lovely song, like a man
that has a pleasant voice, some affect him, some scoff at him, others censure
him; but when death is before them, then their thoughts will alter, then they
will say, Ezekiel told us of these things that are come upon us, and how to
avoid them, he called upon us to consider our ways, to turn from all our
iniquities, and to provide for our souls; we then slighted him, only gave him
the hearing of what he said, but now we see he was a Prophet of God, delivered
weighty things, and we were fools that we hearkened not unto him, doing what he
said. When young men, who despise all the Preachers say against whoredom and
wanton courses, come to be in years, find their flesh and bodies to be
consumed, then will they have other thoughts of them and what they preached,
then will they say, How have we hated instruction, and our hearts despised
reproof? we obeyed not the voice of our Teachers, nor inclined our ears to them
that instructed us, Prove. 5.11, 12, 13. There were Prophets amongst us, who
sought our good, who tendered mercy and many precious truths unto us, but we
were so blinded with our lusts, so conceited of our own ways, that we rejected
them, and whatever they tendered us.

Seventhly, Observe;

The Prophets will be witnesses at last against disobedient hearers.

They shall know that a Prophet has been amongst them. They heard Ezekiel, but
did not what he said; his person, his doctrine, did at last bear witness
against them. Wherever the Lord sets a faithful preacher, who takes pains
among the people, declaring the mind of God unto them, and they do not practice
what they are taught, that Preacher will rise up in judgment against them; his
doctrine, his prayers, tears, drops of sweat, his life, his sufferings,
reproaches, death, will all be witnesses against them. If the rust of men's
silver and gold will be witnesses against them, and eat their flesh like fire,
James 5.3. because they let their silver and gold lie by them, and did not
improve the same for public good, and in charitable uses, how much more will
the truths of God which the Preachers have commended unto them, (being
neglected, and not improved to the good of the hearers and others) bear witness
against them, and eat their flesh, yea, their souls like fire? Thousands who
have flocked after Ministers to hear them, will find those Ministers witnesses
against them, because they heard them only, and never did what they heard. What
a multitude of witnesses will London and England have against them at the
latter day? All the Godly faithful Ministers whose doctrine has been heard,
but never obeyed.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, prophecy against the shepherds of Israel, prophecy and say unto
them, Thus says the Lord God unto the Shepherds, Woe be to the Shepherds of
Israel, that do feed themselves: should not the Shepherds feed the flock?

Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the Wool, ye kill them that are fed,
but ye feed not the flock.

The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost;
but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.

And they were scattered because there is no Shepherd: and they became meat to
all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.

My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my
flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek
after them.


EZekiel having reproved and threatened the judgments of God against the people
for their sins, he comes in this Chapter to deal with the Governors and Rulers
of them, through whose default they became so wicked, and suffered the
Babylonish yoke. In this Chapter are these things considerable.

1. A reproof of the Shepherds, and judgment threatened against them, in the
first 10 verses. 2. Gods care of, and comfortable provision for his flock, from
the 10. verse. to the 23. 3. A sweet Prophecy of Christ and his Kingdom, under
the figure of David, from the 23. verse. to the end.
Verse. 1. The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying.
These words we have often had; by them the Prophet declares himself to be a
true Prophet: false ones spoke of their own heads, they had no word from God,
they deluded the people with lying words; but Ezekiel had a word from God, and
that word he commended to the people.

Verse. 2. Prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel.
The Shepherds of Israel were the chief Rulers, both Political and
Ecclesiastical, Princes, Magistrates, Prophets, Priests, and Levites. Isa.
44.28. Cyrus is called a Shepherd; and Zech: 11.17. those in the Church are
called Shepherds, Jer: 25.34. Howl ye Shepherds and cry, wallow your selves in
ashes ye principal of the flock; that is, as the flock is considered
Politically and Ecclesiastically, ye are the Shepherds, the principal thereof;
howl ye, etc. They are called Shepherds because they are to govern, protect,
provide for, and to feed them.

Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel.
Herein general judgment is threatened against these Shepherds, Woe be to them.
This word is a Comprehensive word, and includes variety of evils in it, not
some one, but diverse sad judgments should come upon them. The word for
Shepherds is (...) Rohe, from (...) Rahah to feed, and metaphorically to
govern, teach, and so to feed men.

That do feed themselves, shoold not the Shepherds feed the flock?
Here was their sin, they fed themselves, not the flock; those are Shepherds in
State or Church, are set up for the good of the people, to benefit and
advantage them, not to seek themselves, to draw from the people what they can
to make themselves great; they should be content with their allowance, and lay
out themselves fully and wholly for the good of them that are committed to
their trust. This interrogation, Should not the Shepherds feed the flock? Sets
out the hainousness of their sin, and the indignation of God against it; What
you Shepherds, and not feed the flock? you pervert the course of nature, and
violate the order which God has set, and that is intolerable, he will visit
severely for it.

The word for Flock, is Tzon, which signifies a multitude of Sheep or Goats.
The Septuagint render it (...), Sheep, and in a metaphorical sense its put for
the people, Zech: 9.16. Micah 7.14. People are resembled unto Sheep.

First, Sheep are foolish, silly creatures, not like Foxes, Lions, Lybards,
which are subtle and crafty; so are people for the generality of them. Jerem:
5.21. Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding, which have
eyes and see not, which have ears and hear not. They had no ears to hearken
unto the word of God, no eyes to see the hand of God, no understanding to
discern the mind and dealings of God; so Deuteronomy: 32.28. They are a Nation void of
counsel, neither is there any understanding in them; they act like foolish
silly people that know nothing of God.

Secondly, Sheep are apt to go astray, 1 Samuel: 1.7.20. David left the Sheep with
a Keeper; he knew they would wander, had they not a Keeper: so people are apt
to stray from that that is just and equal, to turn aside from the ways of
God. Isa: 53.6. All we like Sheep are gone astray; and Jerem: 2.13. My people
have forsaken me the fountain of living waters; that is, They have forsaken me
their Shepherd, who provided all good things for them.

Thirdly, When one Sheep goes out of the way, many follow, run after that one;
so it is with the multitude. 2 Samuel: 20.1, 2. One Sheba the son of Bichri, a
Benjamite, blew a Trumpet, saying, We have no part in David, neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse; every man to his Tents O Israel. So every man
of Israel went up from after David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri. Here
was a Ram led all Israel into rebellion. So Theudas stepped out of the way, and
presently 400 others joined themselves unto him; And Judas of Galilee drew much
people after him, Acts 5.36, 37.

Omnino sese praebent proedam hominibus and bestiu.
Fourthly, Sheep are exposed to much danger, they are a prey to Dogs, Lions,
Wolves, Foxes, Bears, and such wild Beasts; so are the people exposed to
spoil, and to be preyed upon by the great Ones: Zeph: 3.3. Jerusalems Princes
within her are roaring Lions, her Judges are evening Wolves; they preyed upon
the poor people: Jerem: 50.17. Israel is a scattered Sheep, the Lions have
driven him away: first the King of Assyria has devoured him, and last this
Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon has broken his bones.

Fifthly, They are subject to many diseases, and apt to infect one another. Its
observed that of all creatures a man, an Horse, and a Sheep are subject unto
most diseases, and quickly does one Sheep communicate his infection unto
another; so people are subject to many distempers, seditions, insurrections,
rebellions, errors, heresies, superstition, idolatry, and what not? Ezekiel: 2.3.
The children of Israel are a rebellious Nation; Jer: 6.28. They are all
grievous revolters, they walk with slanders; they are brass and iron, they are
all corrupters; one infected another. Jer: 5.23. This people has a revolting
and a rebellious heart: The disease was come to their hearts. Isa. 1.4. Ah
sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evill-doers, children
that are corrupters; They corrupted one another with evil opinions and
practices.

Verse. 3. Ye eat the fat, ye cloth you with the Wool.
The Septuagint, Vulgar, and French have it, Ye eat the milk: The Hebrew word
is Chelef, which signifies fat, because its made of Milkine fatness; what they
feed upon has a fatty milkiness in it which turns to fat. The word for Milk is
Chalof, and that for fat Chalef, which also notes the principal of every thing.
By these expressions of eating the fat, and clothing themselves with the Wool,
the Prophet taxes the covetousness of the Princes, Priests, and false
Prophets, who pretended the public good, but were intent upon their own
profit and pleasure; they were not content with what stipends were allowed
them, but devised ways and means to draw the wealth of the people into their
own Coffers, which is here called the fat and the wool. The word for wool is
Tzemer, which notes all sorts of wool, even Cotton wool which grows upon Trees;
Had they any wool upon their backs (as our Proverb is) these Governors would
fleece them of it.

Ye kill them that are fed; but ye feed not the flock.
The Hebrew for the first words is ye Sacrifice the thick; Haberiah is from
Bara, to create, and (...) Bari, is far, flesh, because a Sheep becomes fat and
fleshy by a kind of creation, there is the power of God put forth in it; and
when men grow wealthy it is by the power of God; Deuteronomy: 8.17, 18. Its not men's
power, and the might of their hands, that gives them their wealth, but it is
the Lord gives power to get wealth. The false Prophets killed their souls with
lies, with corrupt doctrines; and the Magistrates found out ways to cut off
them, were rich for their estates: thus they sought themselves, but fed not the
flock. The Princes and Rulers did not maintain justice, preserve the innocent,
relieve the oppressed, nor the Priests and Prophets teach them sound and
wholesome doctrine.

Verse. 4. The diseased have ye not strengthened.
Here be five particulars in this verse, concerning the Sheep which the
Shepherds should have minded, but neglecting them all are severely taxed for
them. The first is, they were diseased; Sheep are liable to various diseases,
faintings, weaknesses. Montanus renders the word Hannocheloth, languentes,
those languish and are feeble; those languished in their estates or spirits,
were not strengthened, those wanted bread for their bodies, and for their souls,
were not looked after. The Septuagint is (...), The weak ye have not
strengthened; and the French is Vous n'anet point Comforte' celle quiestoit
affloiblie, You have not comforted that which was made feeble.

Neithea have ye healed that which was sick.
A Sheep may be diseased, yet not be sick; that is sick, Cui totum corpus
dolet, when the whole body is pained, says Lavater; the whole body is so
distempered that the members of it cannot perform their Offices. There were
many among the Jews who were sick in their estates and spirits, and could not
perform the duties of their general or particular callings, who had none to
heal them. This was the second thing.

Neither have ye bound up that which was broken.
The third thing is brokenness; some Sheep had their flesh torn by Dogs, or
Bushes, their legs and other bones about them, broken, or put out of joint;
diverse amongst them had broken estates, broken spirits, and none bound them up.
The word Chabash signifies binding as men are bound in prison, binding as men
bind packs to horses, binding as men are bound by laws to obey or suffer,
binding of ornaments to the head, and binding up of wounds to cure and heal
them, as here.

Neither have ye brought again that which was driven away.
Here is the fourth thing, concerns the Sheep, some were driven away. Storms,
Dogs, Wolves, and other wild beasts often times cause the Sheep to run this way,
and that way, to fall into ditches and pits, which if looked after, might be
preserved and reduced. The wars and other evils forced many Jews to fly
into other Countries, and none in Place did think of them, that they might be
brought back.

Neither have ye sought that which was lost.
Sheep being wandering creatures are oftentimes lost, Luke 15.4. Among the Jews
there were some had stragled from the rest, and were lost, lost through corrupt
opinions and practices; they left the ways of God, and wandered in bypath
which led to utter destruction; such a losing the word (...) signifies. They
were not sought after, they did not make diligent enquiry, and search after
them (...), say the Septuagint, Non summo studio quaerebant, they did not seek
earnestly after them.

But with force and cruelty have they ruled them.
They dealt not as Patres patriae, Fathers of their Country, but as Tyrants
which are Pestes humani generis, the very plagues of the earth, they dealt not
as Shepherds with their Sheep, but as cruel Taskmasters over Servants. The
word for ruling is (...) Radah which notes such ruling as a Master does
exercise over a Servant, rigorous ruling, therefore the Jews were forbid to
rule over a poor brother; Levit: 25.43. Thou shall not rule over him with
rigor. Here they ruled with rigor, they put forth their power to the breaking
and ruin of the people, they were rough and cruel in their government. The
Septuagint is (...), ye weary, wear out, yea, murder the strong with vexation
and labor.

Verse. 5. And they were scattered, because there is no Shepherd.
The Shepherds being either negligent or tyrannical, the Sheep were scattered;
through default of their Political Shepherds they were scattered into waste
places, into the open fields, into forts and caves, Chap. 33.27. and into other
Countries. Had Zedekiah and the Nobles been faithful to God, to Nebuchadnezzar
and the People, ruling as he and they should have done, the People had not been
so scattered; and through default of their Ecclesiastical Shepherds, they fell
into errors, superstitions and idolatrous practices; Justice, Laws and
Religion being laid aside, there was nothing remained but confusion, disorder
and dispersion. The Hebrew is, They were scattered without a Shepherd; which
may be taken thus, Being scattered they had no Shepherd; or thus, they were
scattered because, or for that they had no Shepherd; that is, no faithful
Shepherd; this is the better sense, and so the Septuagint speaks, (...), for
that they had no Shepherds, that is, no such shepherds as cared for their good
civilly or spiritually.

And they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.
When the Sheep are scattered into Caves, Woods, upon Mountains and Hills, they
become a prey to Dogs, Swine, Wild Beasts; so the Jews being scattered into
several parts of the world, were exposed to the injuries of strangers, and a
prey unto them.

Verse. 6. My sheep wandered through all the Mountains, and upon every high Hill.
They went from Mountain to Mountain, and from Hill to Hill, and set up Altars,
Jer: 2.20. Upon every high Hill, and under every green Tree thou wanderest,
playing the Harlot; so Jer: 3.6. Or they were forced to fly to the Mountains
and Hills, in the time of war and danger, which their Rulers brought upon them.

Yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did seek
or search after them.
The Hebrew is upon all the faces of the earth; every Country has a several
face in a Metaphorical sense, as one man has from another; Egypt had one face,
Babylon another; the Countries about Judaea their distinct faces or
superficies, now they were scattered abroad upon them all, and none did search
or seek them. Here be two words signifying the same thing, Bikkesh and Daresh;
the first signifies to seek or search, summo studio; the second, summo judicio.

First, Observe;

Those that are set over the people in Church or State are Shepherds, and ought
to be like unto them toward their flocks.

They should govern them gently, protect them constantly, provide for them
carefully, and feed them faithfully, and seek their good diligently, God who is
the great Shepherd does so; Isa: 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a
Shepherd: he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young. Isa: 27.3. Least any hurt it
(that is, his Vineyard, his People) I the Lord will keep it night and day;
Psalm. 23.1.2. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. He provided green
pastures and still waters for him, and for all his; Jer: 5.7. He fed them to
the full. He gave them David for a Shepherd, to feed Jacob his people, and
Israel his inheritance, and he fed them according to the integrity of his
heart, Psalm. 78.71, 72. he sought their good, Micah 6.5. he turned curses into
blessings for them, Deuteronomy: 23.5. here was a good Shepherd; Magistrates and
Ministers should be like unto God in all these.

Secondly, Observe;

Few of those that are over Gods flock in Church or State, do prove such as
they ought to be.

The Political Rulers were wicked, and the Ecclesiastical Rulers were such
also; They are called Shepherds, but they did not the office or work of
Shepherds, they were generally naught; The Shepherds of Israel did not feed the
flock, Ezekiel: 22.25, 26, 27, 28. you may see what the Prophets, Priests, and
Princes were, not a true Shepherd amongst them.

Thirdly, Observe;

See here the true Characters of wicked Shepherds in Church or State; and they
are three.

First, They feed themselves; they were covetous, self-seekers, they did eat
the fat, cloth themselves with the wool, and killed them that were fed, full
of fat and flesh, they made a prey of the rich and wealthy. The political
Shepherds were selfish and covetous, Micah 3.1, 2, 3. Hear, O heads of Jacob,
and ye Princes of the house of Israel; is it not for you to know judgment? who
hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck off their skin from off them, and
their flesh from off their bones; who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay
their skin from off them, and they brake their bones and chop them in pieces,
as for the pot. Look how Butchers deal with Oxen and Sheep, killing, slaying,
chopping in pieces, breaking their bones, selling some, and eating other parts,
and whatever they do is for their own interest; so deal these State-Butchers
with the people. The Ecclesiastical Shepherds were selfish and covetous; Isa:
56.11. speaking of the watchmen, he says, They are greedy dogs which can never
have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to
their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. Ones gain come from
one quarter, a seconds from another quarter, a thirds from a third, and their
eyes were upon their gain and nothing else; Micah 3.11. The Heads of Jerusalem
judge for reward, the Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine
for money: Thus all sought themselves, and thereby declared what they were.

Secondly, They fed not the flock. A good Shepherds care and delight is to feed
his flock, and manifest it by strengthening the weak, by healing the sick, by
binding up the broken, by bringing back what is gone astray, and by seeking up
what is lost; these Shepherds did none of these things. The State Shepherds
neglected the flock, the Church Shepherds did so, the weak were not
strengthened, etc.

Thirdly, Harsh and cruel usage of the flock; With force and cruelty have ye
ruled them. These Shepherds did not distinguish between the weak and strong,
the sound and sick, and so rule them wisely, gently, compassionately, but they
were rough, rigid, bitter and cruel unto them. The political Shepherds shut up
the doors of the Temple, and would not let them come in to sacrifice or worship
there, 2 Chronicles: 28.24. They compelled the people to serve idols, 2 Kings 21.11.
They revolted from under Nebuchadnezzar, and so brought wars and heavy taxes
upon the people, Ezekiel: 17.15. The Princes in the midst of Jerusalem were like
Wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest
gain, Ezekiel: 22.27. The Ecclesiastical Shepherds also ruled after their own
wills; the Prophets were roaring Lions ravening the prey, they devoured souls,
they took the treasure and precious things, they made many widows in the midst
of Jerusalem; the Priests violated the Law of God, and so wronged the people,
Ezekiel: 22.25, 26. The Prophets and Priests conspired together to tyrannize over
the people, who were so accustomed to it, that they were content to have it so,
Jerem: 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bare rule by their
means, and my people love to have it so. The word for bearing rule is i jrdu,
which imports rigorous dealing; they took too much upon them, which you may see
Jerem: 26.8. The Priests and the Prophets took Jeremy, saying, thou shall
surely dye: They were bitter enemies to Jeremy, and those believed his
prophesies. Jer: 50.6. My people has been lost sheep, their Shepherds have
caused them to go astray, etc.

Fourthly, Observe;

Such is the condition of Gods flock here, that it has need of Shepherds to
look after it.

There be in it some diseased or infirm, some sick, some broken, some driven
away, some straggling and in danger of loosing. Gods sheep are subject to many
evils, distempers and dangers, to vain customs, Jer: 10.3. to bruising and
breaking, Jer. 6.14. to hunting like wild beasts, Ezekiel: 13.18. to beating and
grinding to pieces, Isa: 3.15. to devouring, Psalm. 14.4. to errors, heresies,
corrupt opinions and practices, Matthew. 24.5. 2 Pet. 2.2. to backsliding, Jer:
8.5. to mistakes and all sorts of evils, Isa: 5.20. Its mercy, yea great
mercy, that God has appointed Shepherds for his flock, Civil and Spiritual,
to provide for the weaknesses, maladies, and dangers of the soul, as well as of
the body. -- Where these be wicked, it goes ill with the flock; if they be
selfish, negligent, rigid in ruling, the flock will suffer much: O pray unto
God earnestly, that he would give us good Shepherds. There is a choice promise
or two in Jer: 23.4. I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them,
and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking.
And Jer: 3.15. I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall
feed you according to knowledge and understanding. These promises speaks of
good Shepherds for State and Church: Let us improve them, and press God for
the fulfilling of them.

Fifthly, Observe;

That wicked Magistrates and Ministers, in Gods account, are as no Magistrates,
no Ministers.

They were scattered because there is no shepherd. There were many Shepherds in
the State, and many in the Church, yet all these were as none, because they
were wicked, sought themselves, fed not the flock, but ruled with cruelty; when
Shepherds degenerate so far, as to be contrary to what they should be, then
they are as none before God. Such, in Zech. 11.17. are called idol shepherds;
idols are nothing, 1 Cor: 8.4. and so were they as nothing in the sight of God,
and when it is so, then the sheep are scattered.

Sixthly, Observe;

That as God eyes the great ones in State or Church, so he deals impartially
with them being wicked.

He observed what Magistrates and Ministers did in their places, and seeing
them selfish, negligent, cruel, he threatens them all; Woe to the Shepherds of
Israel; he saw they were all guilty of grievous sins, amended not after his
long-forbearing them, and therefore without respect denounces judgment against
them. God is greater then the greatest, and fears not the faces of Princes or
Prophets; let them have what pretenses they will to color their ways, the
Lord discernes them; let them be never so terrible unto men, the Lord will be a
terror unto them; let them continue in their wickedness never so long, at last
God will be avenged on them.

Verses 7, 8, 9, 10.
Therefore ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;

As I live, says the Lord God, surely because my flock became a prey, and my
flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd,
neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves,
and fed not my flock:

Therefore O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;

Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will
require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock,
neither shall the Shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my
flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.


THese verses set out the judgments threatened against the shepherds of Israel,
for their prementioned sins. In the words take 1. Gods particular Application
of himself to the shepherds, verse. 7, 9. 2. The certainty of their punishment,
verse. 8. As I live, etc. 3. A Repetition of their former sins, verse. 8. 4. A
Specification of their judgments or punishments, verse. 10.


Verse. 7. Therefore ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord.
These words are again in the 9. ver. and show the great indignation was in the
breast of God against these shepherds; O ye Princes, Priests, and Prophets,
seeing ye have done such things, and neglected what you should have done, hear
the word of the Lord, he is vehemently displeased with you, and can hold no
longer.

Verse. 8. As I live, says the Lord God, surely.
The Hebrew is I living, if not, the sense whereof is this, Let me not be the
living God, but be laid aside as some idol or false god, if I do not punish
these Shepherds which have dealt so with my flock.

Because my flock became a prey.
The word for prey is Baz which signifies spoiling, and such spoiling as is cum
conculcatione, and despectu direpti, Kirker.
with treading down, and despising the thing spoiled; they vilified the flock
of God, and spoiled them of what they had.

And my flock became meat to every beast of the field.
Wicked men are here called beasts, and beasts of the field, for that they
range up and down to get a prey, and when they have gotten it, tear and rend it
in pieces, as a Lion or Bear does a Lamb or sheep.

There was no Shepherd.
Not simply no shepherd, but no shepherd that did his duty, as the next words
show, Neither did my shepherds search for the flock; he says My shepherds,
because they were in Gods stead to look after his flock, but they fed
themselves, not the flock; they made Laws, imposed burdens, and found out
ways to enrich themselves, and impoverish the people.

Verse. 10. Behold I am against the shepherds.
In this verse the punishments of these shepherds are enumerated, and this is
the first, viz: Gods enmity against them; they being great Princes, Priests and
Prophets, kept all in such awe that none durst appear in word or action against
them, if any did, they were soon crushed; Wherefore says the Lord, Behold, I
am against the shepherds; I that am the Governor of Nations, the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and so the Dread Sovereign of Princes, Priests and Prophets;
even I that am Jehovah, that gave being to all creatures, and can take away all
again, am against them. The Hebrew is, Behold, I to the shepherds, that is, I
come to set my self against them; the Vulgar is, Behold, I am above them;
others have the words thus, Ecce, ego contra istos Pastores, Behold, I am
against these shepherds.

I will require my flock at their hand.
Not only will I have account of them, what is become of my flock, but I will
have recompense for every one that is wounded, weak, lost or slain; I will
require at your hand, limb for limb, blood for blood, and life for life. This
is the second punishment mentioned.

And cause them to cease from feeding the flock.
Here is a third punishment, and its no less then displacing of them; some were
cut off by the hand of justice, Jer: 52.10, 11, 24, 25, 26, 27. Lamen: 5.12.
Others were carried away captive, and held in chains and bonds, as Zedekiah,
Jechoniah, and many besides.

Neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more.
Here is a fourth punishment; they should be deprived of those opportunities
they had to enrich themselves: they made a prey of the flock, eating the fat,
clothing themselves with the wool, and killing those that were fed, they made
advantage of the flock, only seeking themselves, not the good of it, but they
should not do so any longer.

For I will deliver my flock from their mouth.
They have been feeding upon, and devouring my flock a long time; but now I
will do by them as a shepherd does by a Lamb in a Lions or Bears mouth, Amos
3.12. 1 Samuel: 17.34, 35. David delivered the Lamb: so God would pull his flock
out of these Lions and Bears mouths, which is a gracious promise of the
deliverance of his people.

That they may not be meat for them.
Being once delivered, they shall no more be spoiled and devoured by such
Tyrants as they were, but shall enjoy liberty and safety.

First, Observe;

When there are no faithful shepherds, the flock is a prey to all sorts of
beasts.

My flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no
shepherd. The Princes, Nobles, Priests, Prophets, and all their under Officers
made a prey of the flock. The flock was amongst wild beasts of all sorts, and
they did eat the Milk, sheer the Fleece, and devour the flesh of the Flock. No
State-Officers, no Church Officers were faithful unto the Flock, but all in
place and power made a prey of it; its the nature of Dogs, Foxes, Wolves,
Bears, Lions, and such Beasts, to suck the blood, crush the bones, and devour
the flesh of the Lambs and Sheep. Kings in Daniel 7.17. are called beasts; and
Rev: 13.1. there is mention made of a Beast which rose up out of the Sea,
having seven heads and ten horns; and of a beast rose up out of the earth,
which had two horns, like a Lamb, but spoke like a Dragon; these two Beasts
denote the Ecclesiastical and Political powers, and how they dealt with the
people, you may read in that Chapter. When Gods Flock is without faithful
shepherds, they are a spoil to Sea-Beasts and Land-Beasts, to all Beasts
whatsoever.

Secondly, Observe;

That the sins of Magistrates and Ministers in seeking themselves, neglecting
and wronging the flock, do greatly provoke God, bring certain and severe
judgments upon themselves.

Behold I am against the shepherds; I that am higher, stronger, greater then
them all, even I, and all my attributes are against them; I will call them to
account, and have satisfaction for all the wrong and violence they have done; I
will deprive them of their sweet Morsels, and throw them with shame out of
their places: These are severe judgments which God swears by no less th^n his
own life, that he will bring upon them; God commits great trust unto them, and
when they are unfaithful God visits severely for it; Jer: 25.34, 35, 36. Howl
ye shepherds, cry and wallow your selves in the ashes ye principal of the
Flock, for the days of your slaughter, and of your dispersions are
accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel. They should have no way
to flee or escape, cry and howl they might, their Pastures should be spoiled,
and themselves destroyed. The shepherds had been preserved like a pleasant
vessel in the hand of God, he esteemed them, but now being so vile they should
fall, be broken, and not esteemed at all. See Jer. 23.1, 2. Zech: 11.17. This
has been made good in our days, against the Political and Ecclesiastical
shepherds; have not our Princes, Nobles, Prelates and their Officers, for their
feeding themselves, not feeding the Flock, for their ruling them by force and
cruelty, have they not had God against them, been deprived of their fat, and
sweet morsels? have they not been turned out of their places, and suffered
justly for their demerits? The oppressions in State and Church were such, that
the Flock had perished, had not God appeared for it against those Lions and
Wolves; their sins were provoking, and drew the fury of God upon them.

Thirdly, Observe;

Those sheep that are under oppressing and devouring shepherds, God will
relieve and set at liberty.

I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.
Many years had his Flock been molested by wicked Princes, Priests and Prophets,
they had eaten up many of his Flock, and the rest were in danger of devouring,
but the Lord had a care of them, and pulled them out of their jaws; the poor
sheep could not withstand their violence, They were like young Lions among the
flocks, which go through, tread down, and tear them in pieces, and none can
deliver, Micah 5.8. But though the sheep had no man able to deliver them from
these Lyon-like shepherds, yet God was able to do it, and did it; he was a Lion
to these Lions, and tore them in pieces, rescuing his Flock. Its not long since
we were under such shepherds, who made us meat to their teeth, eating up our
Estates, Liberties and Lives, they oppressed and devoured us, and who durst
appear for us; if any did, they felt the jaws and claws of these Lions: but God
at last arose for us, and has driven away those shepherds, and delivered us
from being meat to their mouths.

Verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
For thus says the Lord God, behold, I, even I will both search my sheep, and
seek them out.

As a shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that
are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all
places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the Countries,
and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of
Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the Country.

I will feed them in a good Pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel
shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat Pasture
shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord God.

I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away,
and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was
sick: but I will destroy the fat and the strong, I will feed them with
judgment.


THese verses set before us Gods care and comfortable provision for his Flock,
which is the second general part of this Chapter; and they have in them,

First, Gracious promises.

1. A promise of seeking out the sheep, verse. 11, 12, 16. 2. A promise of
reducing them, verse. 13, 16. 3. A promise of feeding them being reduced, verse.
13, 14, 15. 4. A promise of healing the broken and the sick, ver. 16.
Secondly, A Declaration how God will deal with the fat and strong ones, verse:
16.

Verse. 11. Behold, I, even I will both search my sheep, and seek them out.
You think much to look after my sheep, but Behold, I, even I that am the great
shepherd, the great God, infinitely distanced from you, will both search and
seek them out. The word for search is Bikker, which the Septuagint renders
(...) I will require, it notes searching out what they had done with them, and
requiring them at their hand. Junius has it, Reposcam, and the French ie
redemanderay mes brebis, I will earnestly ask again my sheep, and seek them out
with understanding and judgment, so Darash signifies.

Verse. 12. As a shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his
sheep that are scattered; so will I seek, etc.
When some great storms by wind, rain, thunder, lightning, or wild Beasts,
have been in the field among the flock, and they are scattered here and there,
then the shepherd hastens to them, sees whether any be wanting, and if so,
seeks up and down till he finds them, and so brings them together again, which
is a great mercy to the scattered sheep, and as great a comfort to the
shepherd; so would God seek out his sheep that were scattered into several
places, and would deliver them: They had met with storms and wild Beasts,
which had divided and scattered them, and God like a choice shepherd would seek
them out, and have a special care of them.

In the cloudy and dark day.
The Hebrew is Beiom gnanan vagnaraphel, In the day of a cloud and of darkness,
thick darkness, so the word signifies. It was a day of a cloud, or a cloudy
day when the Chaldaean army besieged Jerusalem; then many were scattered and
driven into neighbor Nations: and it was a day of thick darkness when the
City was broken up, the Temple burnt, Zedekiah's eyes put out, the Princes and
Nobles put to death, many carried captive into Babylon, and the rest dispersed
into woods, caves, mountains and other places.

Verse. 13. And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the
Countries.
God finding his sheep scattered into several Nations, where they met with
hardships, he graciously promises to bring them out of those Nations, they
should not always be amongst their enemies, who were no better then wild
Beasts unto them. This has an aspect to Gods gathering his Elect out of the
several quarters of the world.

And will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of
Israel by the rivers.
Being gathered out of foreign Lands, God would bring them into their own
Land, viz: into Canaan, a Type of the Church; they should both possess their
Land, and be put into a Church condition again, and he would feed them with his
Word, Ordinances; and put them into a better State then ever. This refers to
the times of Christ and the Gospel; then especially did God gather his sheep
out of Babylon and bring them to Zion then did he feed them upon the mountains
of Israel by the Rivers. So that in this verse are three grand mercies; 1.
Eduction out of a miserable condition: 2. Introduction into a good condition;
3. Preservation in that good condition.

Verse. 14. I will feed them in a good Pastu^ and upon the high mountains of
^rael shall their fold be.
In this verse are two mercies more promised; 1. Good fat Pastures; 2. Rest,
both which are very needful for Flock. After their Reduction into Canaan, they
shall not ^ply have Pasture, but good Pasture, fat pasture, viz: the go^ word
of God, the Gospel, which is Milk, Wine, Bread, M row and Fatness; this feeds
hungry souls, and makes lean sheep fat: and as their pastures should be fat, so
their folds should be good; Sheep have their folds to rest in, and so are safe
from heat, cold, and other dangers. The Church is the fold for Gods sheep,
there they have rest and safety; the several Churches are the several folds,
where the sheep find rest and refreshing.

The Jews from this verse; as Sanctius reports, conclude that the Messiah is
not come, because that when Christ was on earth there was no gathering of the
Jews, nor feeding of them with such good pastures as were promised to be in the
time of the Messiah; Our Messiah, they say, was rather for the dissipating of
the Jews, then the congregating of them; he drove them into lean pastures, and
gave them no fat pastures, for after his coming they were scattered into all
parts of the world.

The gathering here spoken of, was not meant only of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles also; our Messiah made way for them, and gathered in them, and he
would have gathered the Jews to him, Matthew: 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? The Jews would not be gathered unto
Messiah, he would have gathered them, but they would not: they looked for a
Messiah in pomp and glory, that should have restored the Kingdom to the Jews,
and made them great in the world above other Nations; great places, riches and
honors were the fat pastures they minded: Christ did not feed his sheep with
such pastures, but with spiritual dainties, heavenly manna, divine truths,
promises and ordinances he did; their refusal of the Messiah, putting him to
death, and wishing his blood to be upon their heads, was the cause of those
heavy judgments that came upon them, and their dispersion thereupon; 1 Thessalonians:
2.15, 16.

Verse. 15. I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down.
Other shepherds have neither fed them, nor let them have rest, they have
wearied them and preyed upon them; but God would both feed them, and see that
they should have rest, he would cause them to lie down as sheep in their folds
lie down, and have rest; so God would order it, that his sheep should have rest
and refreshing in their folds, in the Congregations they are of.

Verse. 16. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, etc.
In the 4. verse, the neglect of the shepherds of Israel was set out, and here
God promises to supply their neglect, and do what they did not.

First, He will seek that which was lost, they did not so, those that were lost
they left them to perish; God is more mindful of his, he seeks them up, and
will not loose them; Hos. 2.23. I will say to them which were not my people,
Thou art my people. Saul was a blasphemer, a persecutor, an injurious Person,
in a lost condition, and the Lord sought him out, Acts 9.

Secondly, He will bring again that which was driven away. The Israelitish
shepherds did it not, but the God of Israel would do it. David was driven away
by Saul and Absalom, but the Lord brought him back again, 1 Samuel: 19. 2 Samuel: 15.
and 19. Cha:

Thirdly, He will bind up that which was broken. They minded not those that
were in such a condition, and needed binding up; the Lord did who is the good
shepherd, Isa: 61.1. He has sent me to bind up the broken hearted. When Peter
had broken himself by denying the Lord Christ so fearfully as he did, the Lord
bound up his wounds, and relieved him.

Fourthly, He will strengthen that which was sick and weak; they omitted it,
but the Lord regarded such and strengthened them, Ezekiel: 9. There were some sick
at heart, lamenting for the abominations done in the midst of Jerusalem, but
the Lord sent one to confirm them, and set a mark upon their foreheads.

First, Observe;

Gods flock being committed to the vigilance and care of Magistrates and
Ministers, he will enquire how they have discharged their trust, and require
his flock at their hands.

Behold, I will both require my sheep, and seek them out. I committed them to
your charge, I expected you should have had a special care of them, kept them
so that none should have been wanting or prejudiced any way, like good
shepherds, but you have not minded the safety and welfare of my Flock; some are
wanting, where are they? some are in a languishing and perishing condition, how
is it that they are so? give me an account of these things, I will bear it no
longer at your hands.

Secondly, Observe;

That Gods Flock does sometimes meet with storms, and such foul weather as
scatters them here and there.

They have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day: They had not all serene
and good days, but many cloudy days and days of darkness. In Manasseh's
time they had black and bloody days, which made a great scattering of the
sheep, 2 Chronicles: 33. So in Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin and Zedekiahs reign,
there were clouds, tempests, whirlewinds, from the South, North, and other
parts, from Egypt, Babylon, from Moab, Syria and Ammon, 2 Kings 23, 24, and 25.
Chap: which made at last a total dissipation of the Flock. Had not we dark and
cloudy days, which scattered the Flock of God into several Countries, in the
time of the late Princes and Prelates? had not Ireland a black day when the
massacre was there? and as it is with the Flock in general, so with particular
sheep and Lambs, they have cloudy and dark days wherein they find themselves
scattered.

Thirdly, Observe;

However others neglect the Flock, yet God is a vigilant, faithful, and tender
hearted shepherd over them.

God will seek out the sheep, deliver them from enemies, and bring them to
Sion; he will give them fat pastures, cause them to enjoy rest in good fields;
if any be broken, he will bind them up; if any be weak or sick, he will heal
and strengthen them; if any go astray, he will reduce them. David found the
Lord to be such a shepherd unto him, Psalm: 23.1, 2, 3. The Lord is my shepherd,
I shall not want. If I be hungry, he has green pastures for me; if I be
thirsty, he has still waters; if my soul droop, he restores it; if I know not
the way, he leads me in the paths of righteousness: O happy man, and happy
people, who have the Lord for their shepherd; and happy are those Magistrates
and Ministers, who are vigilant, faithful, and tender hearted shepherds over
the flock, doing to the same, as God himself does.

But I will destroy the fat and the strong.
Here God declares how he will deal with those that were injurious to others;
some amongst them were fat and strong, they were rich and potent. Men in place
and abounding in wealth are in Scripture language said to be fat, Psalm. 22.29.
Jerem: 46.21. and when they are fat they grow wanton, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Jesurun
waxed fat, and kicked; then they kick at God and his Ordinances, and at their
fellows which are lean; Amos. 4.1. The Kine of Bashan oppressed the poor, and
crushed the needy. In Gen: 41. The lean Kine did eat up the fat, but here the
fat did eat up the lean, and because they did so, the Lord would destroy them.
The Hebrew for destroy, is Shamad, which signifies so to destroy a thing Vt
ejus nihil reliquum maceat, as that there shall be no remainders thereof; God
would make a total abolition of them. The Septuagint mistaking the word Shamad
for Shamar, do render it (...), and so the Vulgar Custodiam, I will keep the
fat and the strong; that is, keep them in, and restrain them.

I will feed them with judgment.
Montanus says, I will feed them in judgment; Bemishphat, which the
Septuagint renders (...) with judgment. The words may import either Gods
judgments and plagues which he would bring upon the fat and strong, as Jer:
23.15. Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of
gall: or, Gods wisdom and judiciousness in feeding of his flock. Foolish
shepherds distinguish not between the weak and strong, the sick and sound, they
drive, they meat, they govern all alike; but a wise shepherd considers the
nature of his flock, what condition every sheep is in, what its capable of,
whether Milk or Strong meat, Oil or Wine, and so applies himself accordingly
to each: Thus would God do with them, Isa: 40.11. and so (1 Thessa: 2.7, 8,
11.) did Paul with them.

Verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
And as for you, O my flock, thus says the Lord God, Behold, I judge between
cattle and cattle, between the rams, and the he-goats.

Seems it a small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye
must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk
of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?

And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet: and
they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.

Therefore thus says the Lord God unto them, Behold, I, even I will judge
between the fat cattle, and between the lean cattle.

Because ye have thrust with side, and with shoulder, and pusht all the
diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad.

Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey, and I will
judge between cattle and cattle.


THese verses exemplify what was said in the latter end of the 16. verse.

1. Declaring how God would deal with the rich, who oppressed the poor, verse.
17, 20, 22. 2. Setting out the causes moving God thereunto; verse. 18, 19, 21.
Verse. 17. As for you, O^ my flock, thus says the Lord God.
Here is an Apostrophe, God turns his speech unto his flock, and shows himself
very sensible of their condition, breaking out into a pathetical exclamation: O
my flock, Thou art oppressed, and suffer hard things, which I see, am
sensible of, and will speedily remedy.

Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle.
I know the Cattle are not all of one nature; some are strong, and some are
weak; some are clean, and some unclean; and behold I take notice thereof, and
put a difference between one and the other. The word for cattle is Seh, which
signifies the small cattle, as Lambs and Kids; Tzon the greater sort of that
kind, as sheep and goats; and Bakar signifies Majora animalia, as Oxen, Asses,
and the like.

Between the Rams and the he-goats.
The word for Rams is from (...) because of their strength, they are very
strong creatures: The word for he-goats is Gnattud ^^, which notes the greater
goats, those which lead the flo^k, and metaphorically the Rulers and leaders of
the people, as Isa: 14.9. Col gnattu de eretz, all the great goats of the
earth, is the Hebrew; all the chief Ones of the earth says our Translation. By
Rams some understand the good, gentle, and meek ones; by he-goats, the vile,
wicked and unquiet ones. Diodate interprets Rams to be the violent, and Goats
the filthy ones. I conceive by Rams and He-goats are meant, the leaders of the
flock, the Rulers of the people which differed ingenio moribus factis, as
Polanus says; God would distinguish between the good and bad of these, and so
of the people which are set out by the name of Cattle, and deal with them
according to their ways and works, where by Cattle are meant the meaner and
poorer sort of people, by Rams and He-goats, the rich and great ones.

Verse. 18. Seems it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good Pastures.
Here again by way of Apostrophe God speaks to the Rams and He-goats, which had
good pastures, plenty of all things, great blessings, Milk, Honey, and fat of
the Land; they had the chief places, Lands, and fruits of the earth, they had
gotten all considerable in Church or State into their own hands; they lived
deliciously and oppressed others, which they thought to be nothing; but says
God, Seems it a small matter unto you? you deceive your selves, its a
grievous crime, and that you shall know.

But ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures?
Wanton Sheep when they are full, run up and down, treading upon the pastures,
so that they become uneatable, or less pleasant, and nourishing, being eaten;
so did the rich and great in State and Church, they corrupted justice, and the
word of God with their inventions and traditions, so that the people were not
fed, or fed with that which was unsavory and unprofitable: Or thus, they
troubled the poor, and suffered them not quietly to enjoy that little they had;
they were cruel to the Godly and poorer sort, though they had abundance,
serving their pride and lusts therewith; or having the principal of all things,
they slighted and vilified the rest.

And to have drunk of the deep Waters, but ye must foul the residue with your
feet?
The word for deep is (...) Mishkah, which properly is sedimentum, whatever
settles and goes down to the bottom; so that by a figure called Hyppallage,
Sedimentum aquarum, is put for aquas sedimenti, waters of settling, that is,
pure and clear waters, and so diverse Expositors render the words. Some cattle
when they have drunk, stamp and stir the mud in the waters, and so foul them
that others cannot drink thereof; so did these Rams and Goats, so mud and foul
the waters of the Sanctuary, and of the Civil state, that the City of God was
not made glad with them; there was no true justice, nor pure religion.

Verse. 19. And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your
feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.
By feet are expressed men's lusts, whereby they do defile things, Mark 9.45. If
thy foot offend thee, cut it off. Foot is not to be taken literally, but for
any lust that bears up a man's spirit for the present, and carries it up and
down, as the feet do the body; they out of will, humor, lust, mingled their
traditions with the word of God, and corrupted justice, so that the flock had
nothing pure in Church or State; they laid heavy burdens and taxes upon the
people, and the commodities the Lord gave, which troubled their spirits, and
sowered their comforts unto them. Such interpretations they gave of the Law, as
made it void and violated it, Ezekiel: 22.26.

Verse. 20. Therefore, etc. Behold, I even I will judge between the fat Cattle,
and between the lean Cattle.
Seeing ye deal thus with my Flock, says God, I, even I that am the great
shepherd, will distinguish and put a difference between Cattle and Cattle.
There be fat ones, and lean ones, the one does wrong and abuse the other; the
fat and strong carry it proudly, and arrogantly against the lean and weak,
which ought not to be: The Septuagint has it between the strong sheep, and the
weak sheep: The Chaldee is, Between the rich man, and the poor man. The word
for fat is Biriah, from Bara to create, because there is a creating power put
forth in making Cattle fat, and men rich.

Verse. 21. Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pusht all
the diseased with your horns, etc.
Here he describes the nature and manners of the fat Cattle; they being strong
were unkind, yea cruel toward the rest, and thrust them out of the fold, out
of the flock, and pastures also. The Noble men, the rich, and those in power
and place dealt sometimes cunningly, sometimes openly and violently with the
poorer sort, thrusting them out of their possessions, yea out of the Land;
Ezekiel: 11.15. There were those in Jerusalem said, Get ye far from the Lord; unto
us is this Land given in possession. Isa: 66.11. Their brethren hated them, and
cast them out. The word to push is Nagach, which signifies to push with the
horn, as Oxen and Rams do, Exodus: 21.29. Now besides this word is added
Bekarnechem, which intends the sense; you have pushed with your horns, you have
goared and hurt them greatly, you left not pushing at them till you had slain
them, or driven them quite away.

Verse. 21. Therefore I will save my flock.
Seeing men are so unkind and cruel to my flock, using all their Art and power
to do it mischief, therefore will I take care of it, and deliver it; their
sides, shoulders and horns shall harm it no more; I will judge between Cattle
and Cattle, I will bring judgment upon those that have entreated my flock so
ill, and it shall no longer be a prey unto them.

First, Observe;

All in Gods Flock are not good, they are not all of one sort; there are some
fat, some lean, some strong, some diseased; there be He-goats and Rams, as well
as others.

There were in Moses days them that said, All the Congregation is holy, every
one of them, Numb: 16.3. but they that said so, were unholy themselves,
He-goats and strong Rams. As it was with Jeremies figs, there were good and
bad, Jer: 24. so was it with the flock of God, there were good and bad in it;
there were Lions, Wolves, Goats and Swine mingled with the sheep, Jer: 7.9, 10.
Thieves, murderers, adulterers, perjured persons, and idolaters came to the
Temple with those that were innocent. In the waters are fish and frogs, in the
field wheat and tares, and in the Flock of God, goats and sheep.

Secondly, Observe;

Wicked men may have choice outward blessings, and that in abundance.

They had good pastures, and in such abundance as that they trod them down with
their feet; the fat and sweet of the Land was theirs, the best of all things,
places and preferments were in their hands; honor, power, wealth, they
abounded with. Nabal that stony-hearted-man was very great, he had three
thousand sheep, one thousand goats, 1 Samuel: 25.2. and Job tells you that wicked
men are mighty in power, Job 21.7. have houses full of good things, Job 22.18.
And David says, They are fat, yea, enclosed in their own fat, Psalm. 17.10.
They have the choicest of all things round about them. Ahab and Ahaz were both
very wicked, yet one was King of Israel, and the other King of Judah; though
all things come alike to all, yet usually wicked men have the fattest pastures,
for their portion is in this life, Psalm: 17.14.

Thirdly, Observe;

Wicked men being fat and full, in place and power, do abuse the blessings of
God, are disquieting and harmful unto others.

They are injurious to God, and those they dwell amongst: When their own turns
were served, they trod down the residue of the pastures, they fowled the
waters, they were unthankful for the best mercies, and made the rest unfit for
others; and this was not all, they thrust with their sides and shoulders, and
push't with their horns; their strength, wealth, honor, power, were all abused
to the dishonor of God, and prejudice of others. Thus was it of late amongst
us, the fat ones in State and Church did abuse the blessings God had given
them, corrupting justice and religion, disquieting the inhabitants of the Land
with their inventions, superstitions, oppressions, innovations, etc. And
because many would not bow to their wills, they thrust sorely at them with
their sides and shoulders, and pushed them so with their horns, that they drove
them out of the Land. Its hard in prosperity to carry it rightly toward God or
man.

Fourthly, Observe;

Though men think unthankfullnesse toward God, and uncharitableness toward
men, a small matter, yet it is not so in Gods account.

Seems it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye
must tread down, etc. Must my flock eat and drink that which is trodden down and
fouled? and do you think it a small matter? I tell you my thoughts are far
otherwise; its a provoking sin, calls for a weight of wrath, which when you
feel, ye will confess your sin was not little. Many deal untowardly with men
and God, and when they have so done, make slight of it, Isa: 7.13. Is it a
small thing for you to weary men; but will ye weary God also? They refused to
hear the Prophets, and to hear God, they wearied both with their delays,
shifts, and thought it a small matter; but God judged it not so, as the 16. and
17. verse. show. God blessed Jerusalem with choice and various mercies, and she
sacrificed her children unto idols; here she was unthankful to God,
unmercifull unto her own flesh, and thought it a matter of nothing; Ezekiel:
16.20. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter? Says God, Thou think so,
but I think they are crying sins, and will visit thee accordingly, ver: 38.

Fifthly, Observe;

God will distinguish between the oppressors and the oppressed, between the bad
and the good; he will punish the one, and deliver the other.

Behold, I, even I will judge between the fat Cattle and the lean; and because
the fat and strong ones thrust with their sides and shoulders, and pushed with
their horns, therefore God would feed them with judgment, (they should have
according to their deserts) and destroy them; but for the weak, diseased,
oppressed, he would save them. Rich men, and those that are great in the world,
being wicked, do unjust things, thrust hard at the people of God, keep them
under, cut them short, deprive them of their rights and liberties, yea, often
push them so with their horns, that they drive them out of all their
enjoyments; Jerem: 40.12. Chap: 43.5. Isa. 16.4. Let mine outcasts dwell with
thee Moab. The Goats and Rams had driven some of the ^lock, not only out of the
fold, but out of the field; this God beholds, and will recompense upon the
oppressors heads, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing
of the needy, now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from
him that puffs at him. Japiach lo from him that would ensnare him. Lot sighed
and groaned in Sodom; and when the Sodomites did puff at him, and seek to
ensnare him, the Lord arose and set him in safety, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8, 9. See Psalm:
37.37, 38, 39, 40. Did not the Lord of late make a distinction among us,
between Cattle and Cattle? has he not judged the fat and strong ones, punished
the Rams and He-goats, and provided for his Flock? some there be still, that
thrust with the side and shoulder, that push with their horns, with whom ere
long God will reckon, and without repentance he will destroy them.

Verse. 23, 24.
And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my
se^vant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd.

And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince among them, I
the Lord have spoken it.


HEre begins a sweet Prophecy of Christ and his Kingdom, with many benefits
which the Flock of God shall have therein.

1. An happy Condition under him and his government, verse. 23. 2. God to be
theirs, verse. 24. 3. A Covenant of peace, verse. 25. 4. Protection, verse. 25,
28. 5. Security, verse. 25, 27, 28. 6. Watering and fruitfulness, verse. 26, 27.
7. Freedom from enemies, verse. 27. and evils, ver: 29. 8. The presence of God,
verse. 30.
And I will set up one shepherd over them.
Some make this shepherd to be Zerubbabel, who came of the Race of David, and
brought the Jews out of Babylon, into their old pastures again, viz: into the
Land of Canaan, where they had their Temple, Worship, and Ordinances, as in
former days; but if we consult Chap: 37.24, 25. where he speaks of the same
person, you shall find things there incompetent to Zerubbabel, and must refer
unto Christ; and the things mentioned here, were not fulfilled in Zerubbabels
days. By Shepherd is meant the Lord Christ, who is frequently so called in
Scripture; as 1 Pet: 2.25. John 10.16. Zech: 13.7. Isa. 40.11. and not simply a
Shepherd; But

First, The true Shepherd, John 10.2. He that enters in by the door is the
Shepherd of the Sheep, that is the true shepherd, and discharges that trust
committed unto him most faithfully.

Secondly, The good shepherd, John 10.11, 14. Never any like him for goodness,
he laid down his life for his sheep, he knew them exactly, and was so
conversant with them that they knew his voice; he took not away from, but gave
fleeces unto his sheep, and supplied all their wants.

Thirdly, The great shepherd, yea that great shepherd of the sheep, Heb: 13.20.
He made the sheep, he owns the sheep; he has more and greater Flocks, then any
other shepherd in the world, he stands and feeds them in the strength of the
Lord, in the Majesty of the name of the Lord his God, Micah 5.4.

Fourthly, The chief shepherd, 1 Pet: 5.4. He sets all others over his flock,
and they are under him, 1 Cor: 12.28. Ephesians: 4.11. They are sheep, he is head of
the Church, Ephesians: 1.22. and their shepherd, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my shepherd,
says David, who was a Prophet and a King, both an Ecclesiastical and a
Political Shepherd.

Fifthly, One shepherd, as here: One either in opposition to the multitude they
had before, which wronged the Flock, Jer: 12.10. Many Pastors have destroyed my
Vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot; of which sort Christ speaks,
John 10.8. All that ever came before me are Thieves and Robbers. Or One, that
is, the first or only Shepherd, unto whom none is comparable, the only wise
shepherd that gave out living and effectual truth, Eccles 12.11. The words of
the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies,
which are given from one shepherd; that is, from Christ, the only shepherd; all
the Masters of Assemblies had their words from Christ, which ever did any souls
good.

This shepherd did not intrude himself into the office, but was called and sent
of God, I will set up; The Chaldee Paraphrase is, I will raise up one Governor
over them, and he shall govern them. This expression of setting up, is in the
New Testament set out by giving, John 3.16. by sending, Gal: 4.4. by sealing,
John 6.27.

And he shall feed them.
This word feed notes the whole office of a shepherd, which is briefly set out,
verse: 4. viz: Strengthening the diseased, or weak, healing the sick, binding up
the broken, bringing back that which was driven away, seeking up that which was
lost, and ruling gently. Others make these things the complete office of a
shepherd, viz: providing good and wholesome pastures for them, bringing back
those that go astray, keeping them from Wolves and wild Beasts, and healing
those which are ill affected; All these were found in Christ, Isa: 61.1, 2, 3.
Luke 4.18, 19. Isa: 40.11. Jer: 3.15. Isa: 27.3. Psalm. 23.1, 2. Micah 5.4. John
10.4.

The difference between this shepherd and all others.

First, He is an universal shepherd, all flocks are his. God says, Psalm.
50.10. The Cattle upon a thousand Hills are mine; and Christ says, The flocks
in a thousand Countries are mine; the Churches in Judaea, Galilee, and Samaria,
Acts 9.31. The Churches of Syria and Cilicia, Acts 15.41. The Churches in Asia,
Rev: 1.11. The Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor: 8.1. The Churches of Galatia, 1
Cor: 16.1. The Churches of the Gentiles, Rom: 16.4. are all called the Churches
of Christ, Rom: 16.16. They had their particular Pastors, Teachers, Elders, but
Christ was the universal Pastor; Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, Peter of
the Jews, but Christ was the Apostle and Shepherd of both, therefore says John
10.16. That he has other sheep which he must bring to his fold, meaning the
Gentiles.

Secondly, Christ is a shepherd that feeds them with such meat and drink, as
other Shepherds cannot, they may feed them with knowledge and understanding,
Jer: 3.15. but besides this Christ feeds them with his flesh and blood, John
6.51, 53, 54, 55. Math: 26.26, 28. he feeds them with his Spirit, John, 16.7.
Acts 8.15, 17.

Thirdly, He inables all other Shepherds to discharge the trust committed to
them. Those that are over his flocks, he gave them their gifts, their graces,
their power, they have nothing but what they received of him; therefore Isaiah,
Chap: 50.4. says, The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Isaiah who was one
of the Jewish shepherds, had all his wisdom, skill and power from the Lord
Christ: And when he sent out his twelve Apostles, Matthew: 10.8. he told them,
they had freely received, and must freely give; no Shepherds give ought to
Christ, he communicates all to them, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing;
but Christ could do all without them.

Fourthly, Christ is an abiding, an everlasting, unchangeable Shepherd. Other
Shepherds are flitting hither and thither, and at last dye and leave the Flock;
Christ does not so, he dyed for the Flock, but was brought again from the dead,
Heb: 13.20. and lives for ever, making intercession for his Flock, Heb: 7.25.
he stands on Mount Zion, Rev: 14.1. beholding and feeding them daily; he walks
in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, Rev: 2.1.

Fifthly, Christ knows which are Sheep, and which are Goats, John 10.3, 14, 26,
27. others do not.

Even my servant David.
Christ is here called David, and so in many other places, as Jer: 30.9. Hos.
3.5. Isa: 37.35. 2 Kings 19.34. Ezekiel: 37.24, 25. In all those places is Christ
called David, because he came of the seed of David according to the flesh; as
it is Rom: 1.3. and because David was a type of Christ: he might have said, My
servant Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, as Isa: 49.3. Thou art my servant, O Israel;
Christ is called Israel, because he was from the Israelitish Na^ion; but David
is named, because he was the first Godly King of all Israel and Judah, Vid:
Galat: l. 3. c. 25.
and so typed out Christ more eminently then his predecessors.

My servant, So Christ is called, Isa: 42.1. Chap: 52.13. Ezekiel: 37.24, 25. and
in other places. A servant is one who is under another, and who keeps and does
things commended to him by his Master; Christ as man, was under his Father, and
kept his commandments, John 15.10. He served him in taking man's nature upon
him, and doing his will in redeeming and saving man, Heb: 10.9. Matthew: 20.28.
John 13.16. Phil: 2.7.

He shall feed them, he shall be their shepherd.
He insists upon, and repeats the same thing again, to show the great care,
diligence, and intention of Christ in and upon his work of feeding the flock;
he shall make it his (...) his business to do it; others have made it their
work to fleece them, to scatter or devour them, but he shall so mind them, as
to make up what was wanting in others, and to do some singular thing for them;
he shall go in and out before them, and lay down his life for them.

Verse. 24. And I the Lord will be their God.
The Hebrew is, And I Jehovah will be to them for a God, or a God to them. The
French is, Mais moy qui suis Seigneur ie seray leur Dieu, But I who am the Lord
will be their God; though I give them Christ to be their shepherd, yet I will
be their God; I will not denude or divest my self of my right and power over
them, but I will still be their God: this sense is true, but I like it better
to take the words as we have them; And I the Lord will be their God, I will set
my son, or servant David over them to feed them, and I the Lord will be their
God, they shall find me a merciful and gracious God, they shall find me in
Christ my son, their Shepherd, reconciling them unto my self, not imputing
their trespasses unto them; I will be their God to pardon them, to take special
care of them, to deliver them, to comfort and counsel them in all their
straits and miseries, and to communicate choice mercies unto them. -- Of these
words before, Chap: 11.20.

And my servant David a Prince among them.
The words are to be read thus, My servant David shall be a Prince amongst
them: if we take the former words with them, its clear they ought to be read, I
will be their God, and my servant David shall be a Prince among them; so
Piscator reads the words, and so the French translation, Mon servit cur David
ser a^le Prince, au milieux d'eux, My servant David shall be a Prince in the
midst of them.

Whether this prophecy be fullfill'd is questionable; there is somewhat in the
Gospel may make us conceive it is, for Matthew: 2.2. its said, where is he that
is born King of the Jews? and Matthew: 21.5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion,
behold, thy King comes unto thee; Acts 5.31. God has exalted him to be a
Prince and a Savior: and Rev: 1.5. He is styled Prince of the Kings of the
earth; these Scriptures evince that Christ is a King, a Prince, but not that he
reigned as a Prince among them, for he professes that he came not to Reign but
to serve, Mat. 20.28. Phil. 2.7. and therefore washed his Disciples feet, John
13.12. and when they would make him a King, he would not, John 6.15. Christ
has appeared fully in his Priestly, and Prophetical Office, and has had the
honor of them; but he has not appeared in his Kingly Office, nor had the
honor of it; therefore its conceived this prophecy is not yet fulfilled, but
that the time is to come wherein he shall reign as a Prince and King in the
midst of his people, Luke 22.29, 30. I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my father
has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table, in my Kingdom.
The time is coming that Christ shall reign, and keep a Table like a Prince,
where his friends shall freely eat and drink; Christ speaks not this of his
spiritual Kingdom, which is now in the Churches and hearts of his people; nor
of his Kingdom of glory, for there is no eating or drinking; but of his
personal, humane Kingdom, as some term it; for Rev: 3.21. Christ has another
Throne to sit in, then his Fathers, in which at the present he does sit; Christ
has not possession of that Throne yet, when he has, his promise is, That
those that overcome shall sit with him therein. I shall have occasion in the
37. Chapter of our Prophet, to speak to this so controverted a point.

I the Lord have spoken it.
These words are as a seal to, and ratification of what went before. If you
make question of what is said, if you conceit these promises are too great and
good for you, or hard to be accomplished, know I the Lord, who am Jehovah, and
give being to all my promises, I have spoken it.

First, Observe;

The appointing of Offices in the Church belongs to God, not to man.

I will set up a shepherd over them; God appointed the office and the Officer.
1 Cor: 12.28. God has set some in the Church, 1. Apostles; 2. Prophets; 3.
Teachers. In the Romish Church are many Officers which God never appointed,
there be Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, etc. which places were
never appointed by God, and therefore have no blessing go along with them, but
serve for secular ends, even pomp and tyrannizing over the consciences of men.

Secondly, Observe;

Its a great mercy and happiness to that people, who have Christ for their
Shepherd.

The Lord does promise it here as a choice blessing unto them, to give them
Christ for their Shepherd. The mercies or blessings are diverse.

First, They shall be sure to be fed, He shall feed them; his heart will be
upon them, and take special care that they have wholesome and good food; verse.
14. I will feed them in a good Pasture, yea, in a fat pasture shall they feed;
they shall not want, but have the green pastures, and still waters, Psalm. 23.1,
2. yea he will feed them with his own Flesh, and give them his own blood to
drink.

Secondly, He will govern them with gentleness, and with skill; their former
Shepherds did thrust with the side and shoulder, and push with the horn; Christ
would not do so, he is likened to David who was meek and gentle, 1 Chronicles: 28.2.
Then David the King stood upon his feet, and said, hear me my brethren, and my
people: Here he expressed his disposition and affection to his people: so
Christ, he was a gentle, mild and meek Shepherd, Isa: 40.11. David was wise and
skillful, Psalm. 78.72. and Christ orders them by judgment; he judges between
Sheep and Sheep, and deals with them according to their ages, conditions and
capacities.

Thirdly, He will lead them in the right way; John 10.4. He goes before them,
and they follow him. Christ never is out of the way; and where he is the
leader, how can the Sheep go astray? Psalm: 23.3. He leads me in paths of
righteousness. Whoever follows Christ shall be found in a path of
righteousness; if we follow others, we may be lead into by-ways, therefore
says Paul, 1 Cor: 11.1. Be ye followers of me etc.

Fourthly, He will keep them so that none shall be lost, or miscarry; he is
vigilant and potent, he sees the wolves, and lions, when they are coming, and
suffers them not to destroy his Sheep or Lambs; John 10.27, 28. My sheep hear
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand. All the persecuting Emperors could not pluck one Sheep out of Christ's
hand: out of the hands of other shepherds its easy to pull them, but
impossible to pull them out of Christ's hand; he knows its his Fathers will,
that of all he has given him he should lose nothing, John 6.39. and Christ
will lose nothing.

Verse. 25. And I will make with them a Covevenant of peace, and will cause the
evil beasts to cease out of the Land: and they shall dwell safely in the
wilderness, and sleep in the woods.
The Lord proceeds here in mentioning more benefits which his Flock should have
in the Kingdom, and under the Government of Christ their Shepherd; and they
are three; Peace. Protection. Security.


I will make with them a Covenant of peace.
The Hebrew is, I will cut with them a Covenant of peace; the reason of which
phrase is this: When the Jews made Covenants, they used to take a Calf and cut
it in the midst, laying the two halves at a distance, and so passed between
them; this was their manner of covenanting, and hence came the expression of
cutting a Covenant, How the Heathens made their Covenants, see Piscat: in loc.
Maldon. in Jer. 34.18.
see Jerem: 34.18. to this God alludes when he says, I will cut, or strike a
Covenant with them; he did it by making Christ a sacrifice, by sheding his
blood, dividing his soul and body, who (Isa. 42.6.) is said to be the Covenant
of the people, that is, the Mediator of the Covenant between God and his people.

The word for Covenant is Berith; of which, and whence it comes has largely
been spoken, Ezekiel: 16.8. Its not a Covenant of works, but a Covenant of peace,
which some interpret of external peace, plenty and prosperity which they should
have: but the peace here meant reaches further then to outward, its a peace
concerns the soul, a peace procured by the blood of Christ, Col: 1.20. And
having made peace by the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to
himself. Hence as Christ is called the Covenant, so he is called our peace,
Ephesians: 2.14. He is our peace, who has made both one: He is the ground and
foundation of peace, between Jew and Gentile, between God and man; and the
Gospel upon this account is called the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. for Christ
preached peace unto them, Ephesians. 2.17. This peace is not like the peace of the
world, John 14.27. but its peace that quiets the conscience, passes
understanding, keeps the heart, and rules in the soul, Rom: 5.1. Phil: 4.7.
Col: 3.15. Where this peace is, neither death, nor Devil are feared, because
sin is remitted, 1 Cor: 15.55, 56, 57. Rom: 8.33, 34.

And will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the Land.
In the 70. years captivity, when Judaea was without inhabitant, wild beasts
might multiply therein; these God does promise to cause to cease, they should
be no more. But these evil beasts were rather false Teachers, and Tyrants,
wicked Political and Ecclesiastical Shepherds: God would order it so, that
these who were worse then Bears, Lions, Wolves and Foxes, should be no more;
and in stead of such, he would give them good Magistrates and Ministers, Jer:
23.4. I will set up shepherds over them, which shall feed them, and they shall
fear no more, nor be dismayed. There is another construction to be made of the
words; namely this, That God would cause the wild and beastly dispositions of
men to cease, and they should become meek and gentle, according to that in Isa:
11.6. where its said, That in the days of Christ, the Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid. Wolves and Leopards are
creatures most fierce and cruel, especially against Lambs and Kids, yet God
would so alter the nature of these, that they should live and lie down
together; he would make the most fierce, rugged, cruel men, to become mild and
sweet, and to converse with them that were for disposition Lambs and Kids.
Junius sense of the words is this, That the Lord would take away or restrain
every hurtful thing; he would not suffer his people to be infested, or if they
were, they should not be damnified by those infestations.

And they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.
These are proverbiall speeches, setting out the great security the Flock of
God should have under Christ: Where there are no wild beasts in the Wilderness
or the Woods, there the Sheep feed and rest without all fear, they are most
secure; and Gods people under the Gospel and Christ, have the greatest
security. The word for safely is Labetach, in fiducia, or Confidenter, as
Montanus renders it; that is, confidently, they shall be free from the fear of
all enemies both Corporal and Spiritual; Satan shall be cast into the
bottomless pit, Rev: 20.2, 3. and all other enemies brought to such a
condition, as that they should not cause fear, Jerem: 23.4. The Jews because
they see not such security for themselves any where, do therefore deny that
Messiah is come, for when he comes he shall make a Covenant of peace, and they
shall be in safety, even in Wildernesses and Woods, because there shall be no
enemies, no evil beasts to take away or hinder their peace. Though when the
Lord Christ the true Messiah came, there was an universal peace through the
world, it being at that time when the taxing was in Augustus days, Vid. Sanct:
in Isa. 2.4.
Luke 2. and though the wars after were not so much as before, yet I conceive
there is a time when this prophecy shall be more fully completed, for every
prophecy of Christ was not fullfilled when he came in the flesh, but many were
to be fullfill'd in after times, among which this was one. The Jews were
mistaken concerning Messiahs coming, but not much concerning this prophecy.

First, Observe;

The infinite goodness, kindness, and condescension of God, who will enter
into Covenant with sinners, with any of the children of men.

Does not the Scripture say, Verily, every man at his best estate is altogether
vanity? Psalm: 39.5. and why should the Lord who is an infinite excellency,
infinitely distanced from all creatures and vanity, enter into Covenant with
man? what did he see in these Jews or in the Gentiles to awaken, rouse, and
draw out his heart unto such a work? if stubbornness, ignorance, unbelief,
idolatry, oppression, and such like, might induce him thereunto, these abounded
both in Jew and Gentile; there was nothing but Gods own goodness, grace and
mercy, to cause him so to condescend, as to make a Covenant with man, and such
a Covenant as a Covenant of peace. This should

First, Raise up our spirits and hearts to admiration, that an infinite, holy,
glorious, and great God should mind, converse, and make Covenant with dust and
ashes; Psalm: 144.3. Lord (says David) what is man that thou take knowledge
of him? or the son of man that thou make account of him? David wondered that
God should take notice of, especially make account of so mean a thing as man
is, as himself was, though a King and Prophet.

Secondly, Indear us greatly unto him. When high Ones stoop unto those that are
low and mean, it gains much upon their hearts, and indeares them abundantly
unto them. When David condescended to Abigail to take her to wife, it affected
her greatly, and indeared her unto him not a little, as you may see 1 Samuel:
25.41.

Thirdly, Make us faithful unto God. Is he pleased to make a Covenant with man,
and shall not man be faithful unto him? a wife should not be unfaithful unto
her husband, and break Covenant with him, though he be but a little above her;
how much less should man break Covenant with God, who is so much above him.
God complains in Hosea 6.7. saying, They like Adam have transgressed the
Covenant; I condescended to Adam, and made a Covenant with him; yea, I
condescended to them, and made a Covenant with them, but they both proved
unfaithful, father and posterity, they transgressed the Covenant.

Fourthly, Cause us to be free and cheerful in our obedience unto God: When so
great a God shall so graciously condescend unto us, as to enter into Covenant
with us, and that a Covenant of peace, should it not make us run in his ways,
and serve him with gladness of heart?

Secondly, Observe;

That men through sin are at distance from, and enmity with God.

I will make a Covenant of peace with them. What needed a Covenant of peace, if
there had not been war between God and man? Man being apostatized from God
through Adams fall, lived in enmity to God, Rom: 8.7. The carnal mind is
enmity against God, for its not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be. Men by nature have carnal minds, oppose God, his Laws and ways, and
therefore Rom: 1.30. they are said to be haters of God; and in Psalm. 5.5. God
is said to hate them, Thou hate all workers of iniquity. There was such
hostility between God and man, as that there was no approach for man to God
without a Mediator, and such a Mediator as could make satisfaction to divine
justice, being offended; Col: 1.21. You that were sometimes alienated, and
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled. The
Colossians as well as others, were once at a great distance from God, and
enemies to God; and wherein lay their enmity? in their minds; and how did that
appear? by wicked works; they plotted, contrived, and did such things as
declared them to be enemies to God, and being so, they durst not appear before
God. But

Thirdly, Observe;

God by Christ has been pleased to take away this enmity, and to reconcile
sinners unto himself.

2 Cor: 5.18. All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ. Its Christ has paid the price of our redemption, he has satisfied his
justice fully, and delivered us from wrath to come, 1 Thessa. 1.10. Its by
Christ the Mediator that reconciliation is made; neither Angels nor men could
do that work, it was a work for one that had more worth in him, then all Angels
or men, Coloss: 1.19, 20. It pleased God that in him all fulness should
dwell, that so by him he might reconcile all things to himself, by him,
whether they be things in earth, or things in Heaven: By him is twice in the
verse that we may see by whom the enmity was taken away, and from whom the
reconciling virtue came, even from the Lord Christ, whose blood made the
atonement, Ephesians: 2.13, 14, 15, 16. How should this teach us to honor and
prize the Lord Christ, by whom so difficult, so great and glorious a work was
wrought?

Fourthly, Observe;

Those that are received to God by the mediation of Christ, shall be preserved
from all hurtful things, receive all good things needful, and enjoy much
security.

When men are in the Covenant of peace, then God will cause the evil beasts to
cease out of the Land, then no creatures, no enemies, no Devils shall do them
harm, Job 5.23. Pro: 16.7. Rom: 16.20. Then there will be a communication of
all good things needful, they shall dwell in the wilderness, there they shall
have blessings, so as they shall not be put to remove their dwellings for want,
Psalm. 34.9, 10. Psalm. 23.1. Psalm. 84.11. Then shall they dwell safely in the
wilderness, and sleep in the woods; nothing without or within shall create any
fear, or cause any solicitousness in them, they shall have perfect peace, and
be as in the suburbs of Heaven, Jer: 23.4.

Verses 26, 27.
And I will make them and the places round about my hill, a blessing; and I
will cause the shower to come down in his season: there shall be showers of
blessing.

And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her
increase, and they shall be safe in their Land, and shall know that I am the
Lord, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the
hand of those that served themselves of them.


IN these verses as in the former, the Lord promises sweet mercies unto his
people.

First, A blessing in general, verse. 26.

Secondly, Particular blessings, and they are these, 1. Seasonable showers from
Heaven, verse. 26. 2. Fruitfullnesse of the earth, and that both of the Trees
and Land, verse. 27. 3. Safety, ibid. 4. Acknowledgement of God, ibid. 5.
Freedom, ibid.


Thirdly, The time when all these shall be, ibid.

Verse. 26. I will make them and the places round about my hill, a blessing.
The Jews being in Babylon were for a proverb, a reproach, a taunt, and a
curse, Jer: 24.9. Chap: 25.18. Chap: 29.18. but God would roll away their
reproach, and make them a blessing. The Chaldee is erunt benedicti, they shall
be blessed; its usual in Scripture to put the Abstract for the Concrete, as
Gen: 12.2. Thou shall be a blessing, the Vulgar there is benedictus, thou shall
be blessed; take the word blessing here for the Concrete, and the sense is,
they shall be blessed with abundance and variety of blessings, they shall be
happy and prosperous in all things; but take the word as it is in the Abstract,
a blessing, the sense is, they shall be a blessing unto others, they shall be a
blessing unto the Nations, as they were a curse in the Nations, so they should
be a blessing unto them, Zech: 8.13. It shall come to pass, that as ye were a
curse among the Nations, O house of Judah, and house of Israel, so will I save
you, and ye shall be a blessing, that is, a blessing unto the Nations round
about them.

The word Hill, must be interpreted before we can well understand this place.
By Hill is meant Mount Sion where the Temple was, and Jerusalem, there God
recorded his Name, set up his Worship, and therefore says My Hill. Now these
were Types of Christ and the Church in his time; as the Jews therefore came out
of Babylon and other places to Mount Sion, to Jerusalem, and the Temple when
rebuilt, so to Christ and the Evangelicall Church. Gentiles flocked out of
several Nations, and so the Church and Members of it, were a blessing unto
them, as Mount Sion and the Inhabitants of it, together with them dwelt round
about it in Judaea or Canaan, were a blessing unto the Nations. The blessing
here, I conceive principally referrs to spiritual blessings; he spoke before of
a Covenant of peace wrought by Christ, and now of blessings they should have by
him; the Church under Christ should be blessed with all spiritual blessings,
according to that Ephesians. 1.3.

And I will cause the shower to come down in his season.
The word for Shower is Geshem, which notes a great and vehement rain, as
Kirker says, even such as shakes the earth: Most make it signify a strong
rain; but Ramban, a gentle rain; be it great or gentle, God would give them
rain in season. In Deuteronomy: 11.14. you read of the former rain, and the latter
rain; the former rain was in October, or September, which was upon the sowing
of their Corn, and this rain came moderately, Joel 2.23. That so the Corn might
swell with moisture, root, and grow: Lent descendebat ut semina terris
imprimerentur and imabuerenter humore ad gorminationem. Martin.
the latter rain was in the first month, as Joel 2.23: that which we call
March, though some others put it in May, and it was ut grana turpida redderet,
to make the ear full; their harvest was sooner then ours, their Country being
hotter. Under these showers Heavenly things are figured unto us, as in Deuteronomy:
32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew,
as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.
Here Heavenly Doctrine is likened unto rain, dew, showers; and in our Prophet
is set out by showers, Heavenly Doctrine, and influences of the Spirit, which
do make Gods people fruitful in all good works, as the rain does the earth and
trees, in all kind of Herbs, Corn and Fruit. In Christ's time there were many
such showers, he rained Heavenly ones often upon the people. In 2 Pet: 2.17. and
Jude 12. false teachers are said to be Wells without water, and Clouds without
rain; but Christ's Apostles were Wells full of water, and clouds full of rain,
and by those did Christ water diverse persons and places.

There shall be showers of blessing.
The Septuagint is (...), the rain of blessing, or blessed rain: Piscator
renders the words, Erunt pluviae largissime, there shall be plentiful rains.
They may be called showers of blessing, because they are from the blessed God,
have a blessing in them, and benefit them they fall upon; some rains are so
great, that they do much harm and little good: these should not be such, they
should be seasonable and moderate, they should have Heavenly Doctrines and
blessings seasonable, and as they were capable of them.

Verse. 27. And the Tree of the field shall yield her fruit.
After the Heavens have sent forth their showers, the Trees and earth do send
forth their fruit. Not only the Tree of the garden, but the Tree of the field,
being watered brings forth. The Hebrew for Tree is Etz, which signifies any
wood, and Synecdochically a Tree, because it is wood.

And the earth shall yield her increase.
When there have been seasonable rains, the earth has brought forth
abundantly, in some places thirty, in some sixty, in some a hundred fold. The
word for increase is Jebul, from Jabal to bring, because the earth does bring
profit to the owners thereof. By Tree and Earth we may understand the higher
and meaner sort of people, who under the Gospel and showrs of it should become
fruitful.

And they shall be safe in their Land.
In the 25. verse. its said, They shall dwell safely in the wilderness: and
here, They shall be safe in their Land; they should have safety every where,
and the words are repeated to show the certainty thereof.

When I have broken the bands of their yoke.
This yoke was the Babylonish captivity, which is called a yoke, Jerem: 30.8.
and it lay heavily upon them, Isa: 47.6. The bands of this yoke were the
Babylonish powers, Nebuchadrezzar, his Princes, and Officers; but God did break
the Babylonish Empire in pieces by Cyrus and Darius, and so took the yoke off
their necks, setting them at liberty. Yokes are burdensome, restrictive, and
reproachful; this breaking yokes and bands, and bringing the Jews out of
Babylon, typed out the spiritual liberty of the Church in Christ's time, when
Antichristian bands and yokes should be broken, and people brought out of
spiritual Babylon.

And delivered them out of the hands of those that served themselves of them.
The Hebrew is, And shall deliver them out of the hands of them who made them
to serve: the Babylonians made the Jews to serve and work for them, being
captives among them; Exigebant servitutem ab ipsis, they exacted service of
them; their dealings with the Jews were like the Egyptians, who were cruel
taskmasters over them. (...) Avad says Lavater, saevitiem in aliquem exercere
significat tanquam in servam.

First, Observe;

Temporal and Spiritual blessings are from God; he makes people blessed, and
gives them what blessings he pleases.

I will make them and the places round about my hill, a blessing. Gen: 9.1. God
blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, be fruitful, multiply, and
replenish the earth: here God is the Author of temporal blessings, Gen: 12.2.
Of Abraham God said, I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou
shall be a blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him
that curses thee; and in thee shall all familyes of the earth be blessed: Here
God shows himself Author of temporal and spiritual blessings, its peculiar
unto God to bless. Balak was out when he said of Balaam, I wot that he whom
thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed, Numb: 22.6. No
its not in the power of any creature to bless or curse; men and Devils may
utter words of blessing or cursing, but they cannot make blessed or cursed; its
God who turns blessings into curses, Mal: 2.2. and curses into blessings,
Nehem: 13.2.

Secondly, Observe;

Others fair the better for the Churches sake.

I will make the places round about my hill, a blessing. On the Hill of Sion
was the Temple, the place where God recorded his Name, there were the solemn
assemblies, the divine ordinances, Gods presence; and all that were near in
Judaea, yea the Nations round about had some blessing and benefit thereby: they
heard of the God of Israel that he differed from all idol gods; they heard of
his Laws, that they were more righteous then the Laws of the Nations; they saw
his Sabbaths, how strictly they were kept; they heard of the Prophets that were
in Jerusalem and Israel; did not Naaman a Syrian get a blessing from Elisha, 2
Kings 5. The wisdom of Solomon had influence into all the places round about
Sion, yea into all the Countries far off; The Queen of Sheba heard thereof, and
it was a blessing unto her: from any Nation they might come to Sion, become
Proselites, and enjoy what mercies the Jews themselves enjoyed, Micah 4.1, 2.
In the last days it shall come to pass, that the Mountain of the house of the
Lord shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and it shall be exalted
above the hills, and people shall flow unto it and many Nations shall come and
say, Come, let us go up unto the Mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
Statutes; for the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. -- These things are spoken of Christ's times, when the Church should
be very eminent and conspicuous, like the highest of hills, when the Law of
faith and the Gospel should go out of Sion and Jerusalem, and be a blessing
unto all Nations.

Thirdly, Observe;

Gods blessings are seasonable; both temporal and spiritual are in due time.

I will cause the shower to come down in his season, when it shall be a
blessing, do much good; there shall be showers of blessing, Levit: 26.4. I will
give you rain in due season, and the Land shall yield her increase, and the
Trees of the field shall yield their fruit. Those rains are seasonable which
cause fruitfulness; those are unseasonable rains which hinder or destroy the
fruit of the Trees, and increase of the earth. The Lord observes times and
seasons to do sinners good, both for body and soul; Isa: 30.18. He waits that
he may be gracious, he waits for fit seasons wherein his mercies may come with
advantage and acceptance unto men; Isa. 55.10, 11. As the rain comes down, and
the snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and
makes it bring forth and bud, which is an argument it came in season, so shall
my word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it
shall accomplish that which I please, it shall prosper in the thing whereto I
sent it. God gives his word seasonably, as he does the rain, Tit: 1.3. God has
in due times manifested his word through preaching; the Original is (...), in
his own times, and those are the due times, the seasonablest times; Gal. 4.4.
When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman. Christ's birth was at the fullness of time, when it was most seasonable;
so his death, Rom: 5.6. (...), in due time, or according to the season, Christ
dyed for the ungodly: Psalm. 72.6. He shall come down like rain upon the mown
grass, as the showers that water the earth. As Solomon was to the people by
his wisdom and justice, like seasonable rains to the grass and earth; much
more is God and Christ so to the Church; what seasonable dews, droppings, and
influences of the Spirit has it from them, which make it to grow green and
flourish? Let us wait for his showers and influences, none can give them but
himself, and when he gives them its in season.

Fourthly, Observe

The end of Gods blessings is, that we may acknowledge and honor him for them.

I will cause the showers to come in season; I will make the Trees fruitful,
and the earth increase; I will make them safe in their Land, and they shall
know that I am the Lord. Gods blessings have something of God in them; they are
glasses, and show us his power, wisdom, goodness and loving kindness, each
of which oblige us to acknowledge him the Author of them, and to honor him
for them.

Fifthly, Observe

Gods people are sometimes in subjection and bondage to their enemies, who make
them to serve, and serve themselves of them.

The Jews were under the Babylonish yoke, they served and suffered hard things
under the Babylonians, Jer: 50.33. they were oppressed, held under, and put to
do servile things; God had told them by the mouth of Jeremy, chap. 17.4. that
they should serve their enemies, and their enemies made them to serve, and
advantaged themselves by their service, Lamen: 5.4, 5, 6. We have drunk our
water for money, our wood is sold unto us; they could neither have water nor
fire, unless they bought or earned the same with hard labor. Our necks are
under persecution, we labor and have no rest; this iron yoke of Captivity is
upon us, we labor and serve these Babylonians, and yet we have no rest; We
have not bread to satisfy our hunger. They made the young men grinders in the
mill, ver: 13. This was the condition of Gods people in Babylon under
Nebuchadrezzar, and Belshazzar their grand enemies; and such has been the
condition of Gods people since Christ's time, they have been often in subjection
and bondage to Antichrist, to Princes and Prelates, who have tyrannized over
their souls and bodies.

Sixthly, Observe

God has his time to set his at liberty, to bre ak te bands and yokes which
his are held in.

When I have broken, or shall break the bands of their yoke, and deliver them
out of the hands of those that made them to serve. The Jews found their bands
and yokes so strong, and fast tied about their necks, that they were without
hope of ever having them loosed or removed, Ezekiel: 37.11. Our hope is lost; this
captivity we shall never shake off, nor our posterity; and the Babylonians,
they held them fast and refused to let them go, Jer: 50.33. But when the
seventy years were expired, (when Gods time was come) he brake the yokes and
bands, he knocked them off, and set them at liberty; for ver: 34. Their Redeemer
is strong, the Lord of Hoasts is his name. Let enemies strength be great, let
their yokes be of iron which they put upon his peoples necks and let them be
tied on with the bands of humane Laws, yet God is stronger then they, he will
break Empires and Emperors in pieces, abrogate their Laws, loose the bands,
pull off the yokes, and set his people at liberty, he will thoroughly plead
their cause, give them and their Land rest, and disquiet the inhabitants of
Babylon. We were under Romish Antichristian yokes a long time, the bands of
which were loosened somewhat under Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, but
they were tying fast again by their Successors, and became so heavy that
multitudes of our brethren were glad to fly for the burdensomness of those
yoaks; others cried unto God to break them in pieces, and his time being come,
he has done it: our Antichristian bands, and Babylonish yokes are loosened and
knocked off our necks; let us take heed (least through the abuse of our liberty)
the Lord cast us into a worse and greater bondage then ever.

Seventhly, Observe

Eminent works of God do cause eminent knowledge of God.

And they shall know me, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and
delivered them ou^ ^f the hands of those that served themselves upon them. This
was an eminent work of God to bring them out of Babylon, and this bred eminent
knowledge of God in them, then they had large experience of Gods power,
faithfulness, and goodness unto them, that they said, The Lord lives which
brought up, and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the North
Country, and from all Countries whether the Lord had driven them, Jer. 23.8.
When their captivity was turned, then they had such apprehensions of God as
fiill'd their mouths with laughter, and their tongues with singing, Psalm.
126.1, 2, 3. then they said, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we
are glad.

Verse. 28. And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the
beasts of the Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall
make them afraid.
The Jews had often been a prey to the Heathen; the Egyptians, Amorites,
Moabites, Midianites, Philistims, Babylonians, and others had often spoiled and
served themselves of them, which the Lord laying to heart, does here graciously
promise, That they shall no more be a prey unto the Nations. The Hebrew word
for prey is Baz, from Bazaz to spoil, to pluck from; and the English word is
from praeda, which some make to be corpora rerum captarum, the bodies of things
taken; or thus, a prey is that which men get and devour, Praeda est quam alius
paedit cui non parata. Martinius.
for whom it was not prepared or intended, as Heb: 10.34. They took joyfully
the spoiling of their goods; their goods were not prepared or intended for
those that gat them. The word for spoiling is (...) which signifies a prey
because its violently gotten and taken.

Neither shall the beasts of the Land devour them.
The Land of Canaan was the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel: 20.6. yet was it not
without wild beasts which did tare and devour, 2 Kings 2.24. and 2 Kings
17.25. But now God would chain up the Bears and Lions, so that they should do
no harm. There is another sense to be made of the words, which is, that God
would so order the spirits of wicked Magistrates, false Prophets and vile
turbulent spirits, that they should not harm his flock; such men formerly had
eaten up many of Gods people, Ezekiel: 22.25, 27, 29.

But they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.
To dwell safely is a great mercy, to dwell so safely that none shall make
afraid, is extraordinary mercy. Men are subject unto fears, even the best of
men, and that several ways; when fire breaks out in a Town, when famine or
plague are in a City, when storms and tempests are abroad, when wars begin,
persecution, imprisonment, bannishment, and death are threatened, then fears
seize upon persons, and prevail too far with many: but here the Lord promises
that his shall be free from all fears, none shall make them afraid. The word
for making afraid is from Charad, which notes not a slight fear, but such as is
with trembling, outwardly manifested, and it arises either from inward
solicitousnesse of mind, or from apprehension of evil impending, and at hand.

Observe

Gods people are in the safest condition of any; they have promises of
protection and security from all their enemies, from those without, and those
within.

They shall no more be a prey to the Heathen; that is, those without, he
Nations abroad in the world: Neither shall the beasts of the Land devour them;
that is, none within, none of them among whom they dwell, not the Magistrates,
not the Prophets, nor the base and vile ones of the earth, none shall harm
them, none shall make them afraid, but they shall dwell safely: Not to be
harmed by the beasts of the Land, is mercy; but not so much as to be made
afraid by them, is greater mercy. None under Heaven are in so good a condition
for protection and safety, as Gods own people, Job 11.18, 19. Thou shall take
thy rest in safety: Also, thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid.
Job himself, and all he had, should be in safety, free from fear and danger.
Jer: 31.10. Hear the word of the Lord, O ye Nations, and declare it in the
Isles afar off, and say, he that has scattered Israel, will gather him, and
keep him as a Shepherd does his flock; Here the Lord makes Proclamation to the
Nations, and lays it upon them to make it known to others, that he would have
a special care of Israel, that is, his people, and keep them as a Shepherd does
his flock; he would not suffer the Wolves, Lions, Bears and Dogs to hurt them,
or make them afraid: Isa. 27.3. Least any hurt the Lords Vineyard, he will keep
it night and day; he will not slumber nor sleep, but always watch over it; his
care for his is the same in the night when wild beasts are abroad, as in the
day when they lie hid in their dens; Psalm. 31.20. Thou shall hide them in the
secret of thy presence from the pride of man; thou shall keep them secretly in
a pavillion from the strife of tongues. Gods people are hidden Ones, and so
secured from the harm of enemies hands and tongues.

Verse. 29. And I will raise up for them a plant of renown; and they shall no
more be consumed with hunger in the Land, neither bear the shame of the heathen
any more.
This verse speaks out the goodness of God unto his Flock abundantly, in
positive and negative mercies, he would raise up for it a plant, and that of
renown, and he would free it from hunger and shame.

And I will raise up for them.
The words may be read thus, For I will raise up for them, and so be a reason
of what went before, viz: They shall no more be a prey to the Nations, nor be
devoured by the beasts of the Land, but dwell safely without fear, for I will
raise up a plant of renown for them. Its true, the Hebrew Particle Vedoth,
sometime signifies for, as Psalm: 60.11. Give us help from trouble, for vain is
the help of man. Veshaveh is the word; Ve is there for; ^o Isa: 64.5. Behold
thou art wroth, for we have sinned: Ve is rendered for; But the Prophet here is
reckoning up variety of promises, mercies, and benefits, which the Lord makes
to, and would bestow upon his people; and therefore Ve or Va is here
Copulative, continuing the ceries of mercies and promises, And I will raise up:
You are like plants plucked up by the roots, scattered here and there like dry
branches; but I will raise up a plant for you, even a

Plant of renown.
The Hebrew is Mattah lesem, A plant for name; the Septuagint is (...), A plant
of peace; the Chaldee is Plantationem ut permaneant, A plantation that they may
remain; the Vulgar is germen nominatum, A noble sprigg or plant; Vatablus has
it, Plantulam celebri nomine, A plant of a famous name, that should bring glory
and renown unto them; Iren. says, Plantam ad celebritatem, A plant for fame;
Piscator turns the words thus, Plantam nobilem, A noble plant; Campadius and
Lavater are to this purpose, Plantationem, or plantam in nomen, A plant for
name or renown, as both the French and our Translation is. This Plant of renown
is by some Expositers interpreted to be the Christian Church gathered out of
all Nations, and planted in Christ, which Isa. 61.3. is called The planting of
the Lord; and Isa: 60.21. The branch of his planting. Others do expound it of
Christ; so does Jerome, Theodoret, and diverse later Expositers; we may take in
both, Christ and the Church which springs up out of him: but chiefly Christ is
presented to us by this plant of renown, which is the same with that in Jerem:
23.5. where its said, I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King
shall reign and prosper; he shows whom he means by that righteous branch, viz:
Christ, who was to be King, and to execute judgment and justice in the earth:
So here, the plant of renown is the righteous branch; God would raise the one
and the other. Hence Isa: 53.2. he is said, To grow up before him as a tender
plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. God planted him in Sion, and he came
from Joseph and Mary, who were like dry ground: and he is often called the
Branch, and Branch of righteousness, and Branch of the Lord, Zech: 3.8. Jerem:
33.15. and Isa: 4.2. In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious; or beauty and glory, as the Hebrew is. Its evident Christ is the
plant or branch, and not simply so, but a plant of renown; that which makes men
renowned, is something extraordinary; what is common extends not far, neither
procreates renownednesse; but when things are beyond, or above the common
course of things, then they spread and beget fame: now Christ had
extraordinaries, not a few.

First, His conception and birth were extraordinary, Isa. 7.14. Matthew: 1.18,
20. Luke 1.31, 32, 35.

Secondly, His gifts and graces were extraordinary, Isa: 11.2, 3. Luke 2.46,
47. John 1.14. Chap: 3.34. Coloss: 1.19. Chap: 2.3.

Thirdly, He did extraordinary things, and many of that kind; He took away the
sin of the world, John 1.29. He brake down the partition wall between Jew and
Gentile, and reconciled both to God, Ephesians: 2.14, 15, 16. He laid the
foundation, and built the Christian Church, Zech: 6.12. He brought in
everlasting righteousness: Dan: 9.24. Life and Immortality, 2 Timothy 1.10, He
did many miracles, John 3.2. Chap: 7.31. Chap. 9.16.32. Chap: 11.47. Chap:
12.37. He fullfilled all righteousness, Matthew: 3.15. He authorized and enabled
men to cast out Dev^lls, to cure all diseases, Matthew: 10.1. He revealed the
father, Matthew: 11.27. He forgave sins, Luke 5.20, 21. He foretold things to
come, Matthew: 24. He sent the Comforter, John 16.7. He did such works as never
any man did, John 15.24.

Fourthly, He suffered more then other men; his sufferings were extraordinary,
Isa: 53.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. Luke 22.44. so Matthew: 27. and Luke 23. He trod the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Allmighty God, Rev: 19.15. Paul's
sufferings made him famous, Phil: 1.13. much more Christ's.

Fifthly, He had extraordinary Titles, as Immanuel, Isa. 7.14. The stone of
Israel, Gen: 49.24. The Lord our Righteousness, Jer: 23.6. The power and
wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. The heir of all things, Heb: 1.2. King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, Revel: 59.16. The Light of the world, John 8.12. The glory
of Israel, Luke 2.32. The Prince of Life, Acts 3.15. Judge of quick and dead,
Acts 10.42. The Image of the invisible God, Col: 1.15. The Head over all
things, Ephesians: 1.22. The Lamb of God, John 1.29. The Mediator between God and
man, 1 Timothy 1.5. The Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. His name is wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, Isa:
9.6.

Sixthly, He had extraordinary honor: When he was brought into the world, God
commanded all the Angels to worship him, Heb. 1.6. He stirred up the spirits of
the wise men of the East, directing them by a star to come and worship him,
Mat. 2.11. When he was baptized Heaven was opened, the Spirit descended like a
Dove, and a voice from Heaven, said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased, Matthew: 3.16, 17. When he was transfigured, Moses and Elias appeared
unto him; and the same voice of the Father was heard again with some addition,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him; and he committed
all judgment to the Son, that so all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father, John 5.23.

Take this plant of renown for the Christian Church, and it is renowned for
that it is planted in Christ, Col: 2.7. Ephesians. 4.15. bears the name of Christ,
James 2, 7. is his Spouse, Rev: 21.9. John 3.29. under his Government, Ephesians:
5.24. freed from the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, Gal: 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. has
cleerer manifestations of Gods love in Christ, Ephesians: 2.7. extends further then
ever the Jewish Church did to the Gentiles, to all Nations, Isa: 54.1, 2, 3.
chap: 60.3. chap: 62.2. Rev: 21.24, 25. and had such miraculous effusion of the
Spirit, upon many of the members of it, Acts 2.3, 4. 1 Cor: 12.8, 9, 10. and is
the habitation of God, Ephesians. 2.22. visible, and irremoveable as Mount Sion,
Mich: 4.1, 2. Matthew: 16.18. The ground and pillar of truth, 1 Timothy: 3.15.

And they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the Land.
In Jacobs days, there was a great famine, and his family had been consumed,
if Egypt had not afforded releif. In David's days many suffered by the three
years famine then, 2 Samuel: 21.1. There was a sore famine in Ahabs days, 1 Kings
18.2. and questionless many perished with hunger in the siege of Jerusalem,
Lam: 4.9. and many who were scattered abroad, not having to satisfy their
hunger, became a prey to hunger it self. The promise here is, They shall no
more be consumed with hunger; they shall have plenty of all good things, there
shall be no corporal nor spiritual hunger, there Teachers had been removed into
corners, Isa: 30.20. There Prophets had been cut off, and were glad to be hid
in Caves, 1 Kings 18.4. but God would set up shepherds over them, which should
feed them, and they should not be lacking, Jerem: 23.4. Their eyes should see
them, Isa: 30.20. The word for consumed is Asuppe, from As^ph, which signifies
to gather together, to take away and to consume. In time of famine men get
together, consult how to relieve themselves, and when all means fail, the
famine consumes them, and takes them away. The Septuagint is (...), They shall
not be few in number, they shall have abundance and multiply.

Neither bear the shame of the heathen any more.
The Hebrew word for shame is Celemmah, which signifies reproach; the
Babylonians, and others where the Jews were scattered, did reproach them, and
said, Sing us one of the songs of Sion, Psalm. 137.3. You are the holy people,
have holy ordinances, and holy songs, sing us one of those songs; you thought
your selves safe in your holy City, that your God would protect you from all
the Nations; but where is your God? what is become of your City, Temple and
Confidences? are you not in our hands? are you not in bondage and captivity? ye
are servants unto us, and shall never be at liberty more; thus did they bear
the shame of the Heathen, they were a reproach, a proverb, a taunt, and a curse
in all places, Jer: 24.18. but God would set them at liberty, roll away their
reproach, and make them honorable; They should be a praise, Zeph: 3.19. At
that time I will undo all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth,
and gather her that was driven out, and I will get them praise and fame in
every Land, where they have been put to shame. And verse. 20. I will make you a
name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity.

First, Observe

The Lord Christ himself, his renown, and that the Church has by him, is from
the Lord.

I will raise up a plant of renown. Christ is called The Word, John 1.1. and
God made that Word flesh, verse. 14. He is called a Rod, a Branch, Isa. 11.1.
and God caused that Rod to come out of the stem of Jesse, and that Branch to
grow out of his roots. God planted Christ at first in the Virgins womb, and
from thence he grew up (through Gods wise disposing of things) to be a plant of
renown. And Luke 1.32. The Angel said to Mary, he shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord shall give him the Throne of his
Father David. This God performed, and so made him a man a plant of renown, he
gave Christ to the Church, he planted him in Sion, Isa: 28.16. and so all the
glory the Church had by him (which was, and is exceeding much) came originally
from the Lord; Christ is therefore called The gift of God, John 4.10.

Secondly, Observe

Christ is fruitful, and yields good fruit.

He is a plant of renown; were this plant barren, or did it bear evil fruit,
it could not be a plant of renown, it would be a plant of contempt. This plant
is that Tree of Life (Rev: 22.2.) which bare twelve manner of fruits, and
yielded her fruit every month. No barrenness at all was on this Tree, it had
plenty and variety of fruit, Summer and Winter, and the goodness of this fruit
the Church will tell you of, Cant: 2.3. I sat under his shadow with great
delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. If the shadow of this Tree was
very delightsome, certainly the fruit of this Tree was exceeding sweet: The man
sick of the Palsy found the sweet of this fruit, when Christ said unto him,
Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Mat: 9.2. Thousands can tell
you how sweet the fruit of this Tree has been to their tastes, to their souls;
Acts 10.38. He went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of
the Devil; those that labored and traveled, he said unto them, come unto me,
and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11.28. You shall rest under my Shadow, and be
refreshed by eating of my fruit. There must needs be excellency and sweetness
in the fruit of this plant, because all desire to have it, Hag: 2.7. He is the
desire of all Nations: let him be the desire of our souls, and let them feed
more upon the fruit this plant of renown bears, so shall we live, and live more
abundantly.

Thirdly, Observe

That the Church under Christ shall be freed from those evils it has formerly
been subject unto, and shall enjoy the contrary good.

I will raise up a plant of renown, and they shall no more be consumed with
hunger; they had been, but now they should have plenty, especially of spiritual
food, they thould know God from the least to the greatest, out of their bellies
should flow rivers of water: Neither should they bear the shame of the heathen
any more, they should not be under their reproach, but should be honorable:
God has promised to take away reproachful terms, Isa. 62.4. and to give
glorious titles to Zion, thou shall no more be called, Forsaken, desolate; but
thou shall be called Hephzi-bah, Beulah: yea, he has said, She shall have
abundance of glory, Isa: 66.11. Whether the Church has had such glory is
questionable: Christ was reproached himself when on earth, called a Samaritan,
a Seducer, a Devil, and what not? so the Christians in the Primitive times,
were said to be factious, infant-killers, etc. and to this day the Church of
Christ has layen under the reproach of Heathens and Antichrist; but the time
is coming that reproaches shall be wiped away, and the Church have abundance of
glory, Rev: 21.3, 4, 10, 11.

Verse. 30. Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and
that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, says the Lord God.
Here is a further blessing, viz: Conviction of the Heathens, that God is the
God of that flock that has suffered so much, and is with them: When God should
gather his flock out of the Countries where it was scattered, set up one
shepherd, even his servant David to be a Prince over it, make a Covenant of
peace with the same, set it at liberty from all enemies, cause it to be in
safety on all sides, take away its reproach, put honor upon it, and satisfy
it with blessings, temporal and spiritual; when these things were done, then
should they, that is, the Nations, know that the Lord their God was with them,
and thus should they know: By those gracious acts of God, and great mercies
bestowed upon the house of Israel, they should be convinced; as when God begun
the work in the Type, bringing them out of Babylon, the Heathens said, The Lord
has done great things for them, Psalm. 126.2. The Babylonians and others said,
God had cast off his people, exposed them to reproaches and cursing, that he
regarded them not, but had left them to be a prey to all the world; but when
they saw God appear so eminently for them, then they understood that God had
not left or cast off his people so, but that he was still their God, and they
his people.

The house of Israel.
The first mention of the house of Israel, is in Exodus: 16.31. and the last is
in Heb: 8.10. its most mentioned in our Prophet Ezekiel, well nigh as often as
in all the Holy Scriptures besides, if not more often. Gen: 32.28. tells you
how Jacobs name was turned into Israel, whence his sons and posterity were
called the house of Israel, and in process of time, not only those descended
from his loins were so called, but all that believed in the seed promised to
Jacob were Israelites, and the house of Israel. Its not here to be confined to
the Jews, but to extend to all believers.

First, Observe

God has a people in the world whom he does own, and afford his presence in a
special manner.

I the Lord their God am with them, and the house of Israel are my people. God
owned the Jews of old above all the people of the earth, Deuteronomy: 7.6. The Lord
thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people
upon the face of the earth. There were multitudes of Nations, all which, or any
of which he might have taken and left the Jews, but he chose only that Nation,
Deuteronomy: 10.15. and therefore says, Amos 3.1. You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth; that is, You only have I known to be your God, to be
with you, to be mine; others I have known, but not to be in Covenant with them,
not to afford them my special presence and favors, Levit: 26.11, 12. God did
dwell with, and walk amongst them: And as then God had the Jews, so now he has
the Christians for his people, whom he owns, and is present with, in a peculiar
manner, 2 Cor. 6.16, 18. Rev: 2.1. and Acts 18.9, 10. where you may see how God
was with Paul, encouraging him to preach, and upon what ground, For I have much
people in this City, it was in Corinth; Rev: 21.3. Behold, the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God. God dwells in the Christian
Church, and is with it to bestow variety of choice blessings upon it, and to
protect it.

Secondly, Observe

Sometimes Gods dealings with his people are so distinguishing, that Heathens
are convinced that they have God on their side, and enjoy special favors from
him.

Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they,
even the house of Israel, are my people. Thus, that is, by my dealings with
them, which are different from my dealings with others. Dan: 3. When God
preserved the three children in the fiery Furnace, and delivered them from that
Hell, then was Nebuchadnezzar mightily convinced, and said, Blessed be the God
of Shadraeh, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his
servants that trusted in him, and have changed the Kings word, and yielded
their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any God except their own
God. Therefore I make a Decree, that every People, Nation, and Language, which
speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall
be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is
no other god which can deliver after this sort, verse: 28, 29. So in Christ's
time, and the Apostles times, the miracles done by them in several places
convinced unbelievers, that God was with them. The great things done in our
days have made enemies to say, God has done great things for them.

Verse. 31. And ye my flock the flock of my pasture are men, and I am your God,
says the Lord God.
This ver. is the key to open what was said before: the Lord had spoken often of
his flock, and lest any should take the same literally, here he unfolds his
mind, and tells us plainly, his flock are men, not bruit creatures. The Hebrew
word for flock is twice, and ye my flock the flock of my pasture, Some read the
words in the Future, thus, Ye my flock of my pasture shall be men; hitherto ye
have been brutish, ye have favored the things of the earth, and followed after
carnal things, but henceforward ye shall be men cleaving to God and heavenly
things. We may take them as they are, and find that sense in them, which
Sanctius has: I have told you of great things, that my servant David shall be
your Shepherd, and a Prince among you, that ye shall dwell safely in
wildernesses, sleep in woods, and that none shall make you afraid; yea, I have
told you, that I will free you from bondage, shame, famine, and that I will
make you renowned, blessing you with variety and plenty of temporal and
spiritual good things: but you see not how these things can be accomplished,
you are men full of infirmities, shallow of understanding, apt to doubt and
make objections, but I am God, and your God, I have promised and will perform,
says Adonai, Jehovah; my word is truth, and my power shall give being to
whatsoever I have said. There is yet another sense of these words, ye the flock
of my pasture are men; that is, men called out of the world, men renewed by the
transforming of your minds, men walking in the Spirit, not after the flesh, men
given up to me and my ways, men dealing justly and honestly, men fearing God
and pursuing holiness, men of choice spirits and practices; this sense I
should approve of, but that the word for men is Adam, which rather imports men
with their frailties, then men with their excellencies.

My flock of my pasture.
God calls them the flock of his pasture, because he provided for them food for
their bodies and souls, as a Shepherd does provide pasture for his sheep; he
gave them Manna from Heaven in former days, and now he gives them his
Ordinances, his Word, the flesh and blood of his Son. Gods flock is different
from other Flocks, and has different pastures; they are of the world, and feed
upon the Acorns and Husks of the same; but Gods Flock is picked out of the
world, separate from it, and feeds on Heavenly dainties. --

I am your God.
This is a great and gracious word; what can the Lord say more then this to
any, I am your God? what can any desire more then to have God theirs? Psalm.
73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee, says Asaph: Let others desire what they will in Heaven or
earth, I desire nothing but God himself; Asaph knew that in having him for his
God, he should have all things. When the Lord says so, he does engage himself,
all his attributes, and whatsoever he has, unto the people or person he so
says.

First, Observe

God has a peculiar people on earth, which he owns and feeds.

Ye my flock, the flock of my pasture. God has elect, called, justified, and
adopted Ones, which make up his flock; see 1 Pet: 2.9, 10. Titus 2.14. and
Zech. 13.9. I will say it is my people. God has a people refined and tried in
the furnace of affliction, which he is not ashamed of, but owns openly; and
this people he provides for, Isa: 65.13. Behold, my servant; shall eat, but ye
shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty;
behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. Gods people shall
have meat and drink, and that with gladness, Acts 2.46. They have hidden Manna,
Rev: 2.17. They are fed by the Lamb, and drink of living Fountains of waters,
Rev: 7.17. They are a peculiar people, and have peculiar meat and drink.

Secondly, Observe

That of whomsoever Gods Flock does consist, yet they are weak and frail
creatures.

The Flock of my pasture are men. Noah, Lot, Abraham, Jacob, Job, David,
Jeremy, Peter, Paul, John, who were Worthies in Israel, yet had their
weaknesses, and showed themselves to be men; Can God prepare a Table in the
Wilderness? said the house of Israel; and Mary, whom all generations called
blessed, we may call an Adamite, the Daughter of Adam, for she showed her
weakness when she said, How can this be, seeing I know not a man? Luke 1.34.

Thirdly, Observe

The happiness and comfort of Gods flock, lies in having God to be their God,
and his manifestation of it.

Ye are men, feeble, helpless things, but I am your God, says the Lord;
whatsoever is defective in your selves is redundant in me; as there is nothing
but impotency and misery in you, so there is nothing but power, grace and
happiness in me; I have loved you freely, and taken you to be my flock, I have
given my self unto you, and all I have with my self, and this I make known unto
you.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying;

Son of man set thy face against Mount Seir, and prophecy against it.

And say unto it, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O Mount Seir, I am against
thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will make thee most
desolate.

I will lay thy Cities waste, and thou shall be desolate, and thou shall know
that I am the Lord.

Because thou have had a perpetual hatred, and have shed the blood of the
children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, in
the time that their iniquity had an end.


THE Lord having in the former Chapter laid down many precious promises for the
restoration, freedom, and comfort of his afflicted Flock; here he comes to
deal with the enemies of his Church: and in the Chapter are, 1. Threatenings of
punishments, verse. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15. 2. The sins moving God
thereunto, verse: 5, 10, 11, 12, 13. 3. The end of those threatenings and
punishments, verse. 4, 11, 15.


Verses 1, 2.
Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, set thy face against Mount Seir.


The Prophet received the word from, and was empowered by God to prophecy
against Mount Seir. Of setting the face toward, or against, was spoken before,
Chap: 20.46. Chap. 21.2. Chap: 25.2. where there is a prophecy against Moab
and Seir. He must turn himself another way, and speak boldly against Mount
Seir. that is, against Idumea, wherein Mount Seir was, between the Lake
Asphaltites and Egypt, where Esau and his posterity dwelt, Gen: 32.3. who were
called Edomites, or Idumeans.

Verse. 3. Behold, O Mount Seir, I am against thee.
Here is a sad message for Mount Seir, or rather the inhabitants of Idumea, who
by a Metonymie are understood thereby; they had God against them, and this
declared, Behold, I am against thee Idumea, I am against all thine inhabitants;
thou have not Israel against thee, but the God of Israel; I that formed Israel,
that formed thee, I that made all the world, and can annihilate it at my
pleasure, even I am against thee to infatuate thy Counsels, to weaken thy
Forces, to frustrate thine Enterprises, and to bring thee low.

I will stretch out mine hand against thee.
Stretching out the hand is sometimes in mercy, as Pro: 1.24. and sometimes in
judgment, as here, and Chap: 25.13. I will stretch out mine hand upon Edom,
and will cut off man and beast. This posture of the hand, imports vehement
displeasure in the party does it, and readiness to strike. God was very wroth
with these Idumeans, and would set his power on work to smite them with
destructive judgments.

I will make thee most desolate.
The Hebrew is Shemamah Vmeshammah, which Montanus renders desolation, and
solitariness. The Septuagint is (...), I will make thee a wilderness, and thou
shall be a wilderness. When the Hebrew is doubled that is instead of a
Superlative, here its desolation and desolation, which implies most
desolatenesse.

Verse. 4. I will lay thy Cities waste.
Idumea had many Cities, as Teman, Dedan, Bosra, Maresa, Rhinocorura, Raphia,
Gaza, Authedon, Ascalon and Azotus, all which God threatens to lay waste, Chap:
25.14. God said, He would lay his vengeance upon Edom, and this was made good
in the destruction of her Cities and people.

And thou shall be desolate.
God would by his judgments cut off man and beast, Chap: 25.13. and so made it
desolate to purpose: when there are neither men nor Cattle in a Land, how
desolate is it?

And thou shall know that I am the Lord.
When thy Cities are laid waste, when man and beast are cut off, then shall
thou know that I am against thee, and that I am the Lord Jehovah, who have done
such things.

Verse. 5. Because thou have had a perpetual hatred.
The Hebrew is for that there is to thee an hatred or enmity of old. This is
the first sin mentioned, which provoked God to proceed so severely against
them, viz: their ancient hatred to the Israelites, Gen: 27.41. Esau hated
Jacob, and purposed in his heart to slay him, because he had got the blessing.
This hatred descended to the posterity of Esau, against the posterity of Jacob,
and began in the womb of Rebecca, when the children strugled together, Gen:
25.22. The Edomites were ever enemies to the Israelites in their hearts, and
vented it as they had occasion. When the Babylonians took Jerusalem, they cried
Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof, Psalm. 137.7.

And have shed the blood of the children of Israel, by the force of the sword.
In the Hebrew its thus, and have poured out the children of Israel by the hand
of the sword. The Septuagint (...), Thou have sat down before the house of
Israel by deceit, or thou have laid wait for the house of Israel, by the hand
of the enemies sword. The Tigurine translation is Terruisti eos gladio, thou
have terrified them by the sword. The Vulgar is concluser is filios Israel in
manus gladii, Thou have shut up the sons of Israel into the hand of the sword;
thou stoppedst their flight, and so causedst them to fall by the enemies sword.
Junius, Fecisti ut diminuerentur Israelitae per gladium, By thy hatred thou
effectedst it, that the Israelites were diminished by the sword. Munster
differs somewhat from all these, says he, Traxeris filios Israel super
gladium, Thou have forced the Israelites upon the sword, thou camedst out
against them, and dravedst them back when they thought to escape by thy
borders. The word Nagar signifies to flow, to pour out, and in Hiphel to make
to flow; the sense is, Thou have slain the children of Israel, and have made
their blood to flow, or poured out their blood. That in Obadiah gives light to
this, verse. 14. Thou should not have stood in the cross way, to cut off
those of his that did escape, neither should thou have delivered up those of
his that did remain in the day of distress. When the Babylonians entered
Jerusalem some Jews got away, but the Edomites watched for them at a Cross
way, and there cut them off, and others they delivered up to be cut off: By the
hand of the sword, that is, the power of it.

In the time of their calamity.
Here is the aggravation of their sin, that they were cruel when they should
have been compassionate, Job 6.14. To him that is afflicted, pity should be
showed. The Edomites being brethren should have pityed the Israelites when they
suffered such hard things from the Babylonians; but they were without pity,
Amos 1.11. Edom did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all
pity. He was so far from pitying, that he was cruel, even cruelty it self, he
cast off all pity, puts on nothing but cruelty; they fled to them for succor,
and they destroyed them.

In the time that their iniquity had an end.
Here is another aggravation. Iniquity may be taken for sin or punishment; if
it be taken for sin, the sense runs thus, That the Edomites shed their blood,
when their sins were come to the height, and they put into a condition of
sinning so no more; now they should have showed them kindness, not have
exasperated them. If we take iniquity for punishment, the sense is, In the time
that they had their utmost punishment for their sin, when God dealt most
severely with them, when City and Temple were burnt, laid level with the
ground, when Church and State were wholly ruined, even thou did then shed
their blood, and dealedst cruelly with them.

First, Observe

The Prophets were ordered by God to prophecy for, or against whom he pleased.

Son of man, set thy face against Mount Seir, and prophecy against it. In the
Chapter before he had prophesied against the Shepherds of Israel, and for Gods
Flock; which he did by divine appointment; and here he is appointed to
prophecy against the Edomites, who were as Wolves to his Flock. The Prophets
spoke as they were moved by the Spirit, and unto whom they were directed by God.

Secondly, Observe

Those that are enemies to Gods people, have God an enemy unto them.

The Idumeans were enemies to the Jews, and God declares himself to be an enemy
unto them. Behold, O Mount Seir, I am against thee, and thou shall feel the
force of mine enmity, as thou have made my people feel the force of thy sword;
thou have stretched thy hand against them, and I will stretch out my hand
against thee; thou have cut them off, and I will cut thee off; I will lay thy
Cities waste, and make thee desolate. The effects of Gods enmity are dreadful;
woe to that Land, those Cities and People, whom he is against; see Ezekiel: 25.
and Chap: 26. and Isa: 66.14. its said, The hand of the Lord shall be known
toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. God will put a
difference between his people and his enemies, for the one he will put forth
his power for their good, and for the other he will let out his indignation for
their destruction.

Thirdly, Observe

God takes notice how the hearts of men stand toward his people, whether they
love them, or hate them.

Esau and his posterity hated Jacob and his posterity, and this the Lord noted;
not only does he observe what they do to his, but also what spirits they have
toward his, Esther 9.1. The Jews had rule over them that hated them. The Lord
regarded the spirits of the Babylonians, how malicious they were toward the
Jews.

Fourthly, Observe

The nature of hatred is lasting and destructive.

Thou have had a perpetual hatred, and have shed the blood of the children of
Israel. This hatred had lasted above 1200 years, it was an hatred of Ages, it
ran through Generation after Generation, and lasted from Esau's days, to the
Babylonish captivity; and notwithstanding it was so old, yet it had so much
spirit and life in it, as to shed the blood of Israelites. Hatred is
implacable, and seeks the utter extirpation of what it hates: Cain hated Abel,
and slew him; the Jews hated Christ, and they were restless till they had cut
him off from the Land of the living. David tells you, Psalm: 25.19. what is the
true nature of hatred, says he, They hate me with cruel hatred; not that any
hatred is gentle ( For the mercies of the wicked are cruel, Pro: 12.10.) but
all hatred is cruel and bloody; it would tear the party hated in pieces, and
shred him as herbs for the pot.

Fifthly, Observe

God is much incensed against them who deal harshly with his people, being in a
suffering condition.

These Edomites were bitter and bloody to the Israelites when they were in
great affliction, deprived of all their outward comforts, and fled for their
lives; they being Cognati faederati and vicini, should upon those accounts have
had pity on them, or if not on those respects, yet for that they were men, and
what befalls one condition of men, may befall another; but they showed them no
mercy, they shed their blood in the day of their calamity, and therefore God
was wroth, laid waste their Cities, and shed their blood, Obad: 10. For thy
violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be
cut off for ever. Thus God made good what he gave out by the mouth of Solomon,
Pro: 17.5. He that is glad at calamity, shall not be unpunished.

Verses 6, 7, 8, 9.
Therefore, as I live, says the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood, and
blood shall pursue thee: since thou have not hated blood, even blood shall
pursue thee.

Thus will I make Mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him that
passes out, and him that returns.

And I will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills, and in thy
valleys, and in all thy rivers shall they fall that are slain with the sword.

I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy Cities shall not return, and
ye shall know that I am the Lord.


IN these verses Gods proceeding against the Edomites, is more particularly
laid down.

1. Here is the destruction of themselves, verse. 6. and 8. 2. The desolation
and misery of their Country, verse. 7. and 9. 3. The confirmation of both these
by an oath, verse. 6.
Verse. 6. Therefore as I live, says the Lord God.
Of this divine oath has often been spoken; its used sometimes to confirm
promises, as Isa: 49.18, 19. but most frequently to confirm threatenings, which
are hardly believed. Seeing thou have been unbrotherlike, unnatural to the
Jews, in shedding of their blood, Therefore as I live, as sure as I am the
living God, I will prepare thee to blood; thou think thy self secure, and
that no mischief shall come upon thee; but let not me be the living God, if you
escape so.

I will prepare thee unto blood.
The Hebrew is, Because I will make thee unto blood, that is, I will fit thee,
prepare thee unto blood, I will order things so, that thy blood shall be shed;
Efficiam ut gladio cadas, Thou shall be cut off by the sword.

And blood shall pursue thee.
Gods oath we may refer to these words, and read the verse thus, As I live,
says the Lord God, because I will prepare thee unto blood, even blood shall
pursue thee. By blood here we may understand either the blood of the Jews which
they had shed, and cried for vengeance like the blood of Abel; or by blood may
be meant bloody men; those are thine enemies, they shall pursue thee, and shed
thy blood without pity.

Since thou have not hated blood.
The Hebrew is, im lo dam sanetha, si non sanguinem odio habueris, so Montanus.
Some make these words im lo to carry the form of an oath, thus, If thou do
not suffer for thy hatred of thy brethren, let me not be the true God. Several
ways men render these words; but Piscators, the French, and our translation
are most approveable, Because, or Since thou have not hated blood, or If thou
hate not blood. The Edomites did not hate shedding of blood, but were glad of
that opportunity they had to cut off the Jews, that so they might ingratiate
themselves with the Babylonians.

Verse. 7. Thus will I make Mount Seir most desolate.
Mount Seir is put for the Land of Idumea, which was a pleasant and fruitful
Land; but this would God make desolation, even desolation, that is, most
desolate, it should be void of inhabitants.

And cut off from it him that passes out, and him that returns.
God would do by Idumea, as men do by a Wood, cut down the great Trees, and the
lesser, even every Tree, and every Bush: so not only the great Ones in Idumea,
but the meaner sort, such as traveled from place to place to get a living,
those that carried out commodities, and those that brought them in, they should
all be cut off, there should be none left to tread in her paths.

Verse. 8. And I will fill his Mountains with his slain men.
Idumea had many mountains, which formerly were filled with sheep and oxen, but
now they should be filled with the carcasses of slain men, which shows the
greatness of the slaughter that should be made of the Idumeans: Such a
general destruction of them there should be, as that in all places the dead
should lie in the hills, in the valleys, and in the rivers; they fled to those
places to secure themselves from the Chaldaean Army, and there they slew them,
and made them meat for the Fowls of Heaven, and Fish in the waters.

Verse. 9. I will make thee perpetual desolations.
There is another Scripture speaking thus much, that Edom should not only be
desolate, but desolate for ever, as Jerem: 49.17, 18. it should be made like
Sodom and Gomorrah, none should abide or dwell there; Sodom and Gomorrah were
never built again, but the Cities of Edom were, as appears by Mal: 1.4. Jer:
27.7. All Nations shall serve Nebuchadnezzar and his son, and his sons son,
until the very time of his Land come, and then many Nations and great Kings
shall serve themselves of him. Edom was afterward possessed again, and the
Edomites so strong and malicious that they besieged the Israelites, 1 Maccabes
5.3. By perpetual therefore we must not understand Eternal, that which had no
end, but that which was for a long time, so the word Olam does usually
signify, and its rendered by some seculum, I will make thee desolationes
seculi, the desolations of an age, thirty, an hundred, or a thousand years, for
a long season thou shall be desolate, without Cities and inhabitants.

And thy Cities shall not return.
Not till after a long time, and then they shall not return unto that glory,
strength, and greatness which formerly they were in. After Cities and Countries
are once wasted, they attain not to their former condition often in many
Generations.

First, Observe

Bloody men frequently have bloody ends.

Idumea was cruel and bloody against the Israelites, there God prepared her for
blood, and said, Blood shall pursue thee, since thou have not hated blood: blood
calls for blood. The Babylonians were bloody and cruel to the Jews, and hear
what the Lord says, Jer: 51.36. I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for
thee, and verse. 40. I will bring them down like Lambs to the slaughter, like
Rams with He-goats. God would deal with them as Butchers do with such
creatures, they take away their lives and shed their blood, Hosea 1.4. I will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. He caused the seventy sons
of Ahab to be beheaded by the Rulers of Jezreel, 2 Kings 10.1.7. and this blood
did God avenge upon his house, 2 Samuel: 21. 1. Saul's house was bloody, he slew
the Gibeonites, and seven sons of his were put to death for it, verse: 6. and 9.
so God pursued blood with blood. In like manner was Joab dealt withal, he shed
innocent blood, and his blood was shed at the horns of the Altar, 1 Kings
2.29.31.

Secondly, Observe

When God does visit wicked ones for shedding of blood, he does it fully and
thoroughly.

God would make Mount Seir without inhabitant; those that went out, and those
that came in should be cut off. Such a slaughter would he make amongst them, as
that the Mountains, Hills, Valleys, and Rivers, should be filled with the slain
bodies. Isaiah speaking of Gods visiting the Edomites, Chap: 34.6, 7. says,
The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and
with the blood of Lambs and Goats, with the fat of the Kidneys of Rams: for the
Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the Land of Idumea:
And the Unicorns shall come down with them, and the Bullocks with the Bulls,
and their Land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with
fatness. Great and small, rich and poor, noble and ignoble should be cut off.

Thirdly, Observe

That according to the time of men's sinning, God does lengthen out his
judgments.

Edom had perpetual hatred, and God says, I will make thee perpetual
desolations. Edoms anger did tear perpetually, Amos 1.11. and Gods judgments
upon Edom had a perpetuity, Obadiah 10. she was cut off for ever. Those that
continue long in a course of sinning, God causes sometimes to lie long under
severe judgments; the Jews were seaventy years in captivity, they had lived
long in idolatry.

Verse. 10. Because thou have said, These two Nations, and these two Countries
shall be mine, and we will possess it, whereas the Lord was there.
The Idumeans had a fruitful Land of their own, that satisfied them not;
covetousness and desire of rule possessed them, they thought and said, the
whole Land of Judaea should become theirs: The Babylonians would root the Jews
wholly out, leave the Land, and so it would fall to their lot and possession.

These two Nations, and these two Countries.
When God brought the Jews out of Egypt into Canaan, they were one Nation, and
it one Land, and so continued till the rent made by Jeroboam, 1 Kings. 12. Then
ten Tribes falling off from Rehoboam, constituted a new Kingdom, and so the
people and Land were divided into two Nations, and two Countries; the one sort
were called Ephraim, the house of Israel, Samaritans, and their Country
Samaria; the other sort were called Jews, the house of David, and their
Country Judaea.

Shall be mine, and we will possess it.
Judaea and Samaria, says Edom, shall be mine, and we Edomites will possess
it, and make it one Land again as it was at first; none have so much right to
it as we, who are from the same stock, Isaac, and from the elder brother Esau,
whereas they were from Jacob; and seeing the Babylonians are come to cut them
off, we will join with them to secure our selves, and recover our right. When
the Temple and City were destroyed, the Jews carried into captivity, and the
Land made desolate, the neighboring Nations gaped for, and got what they could
of their Country, Jer: 49.1. Concerning the Ammonites, thus says the Lord,
Has Israel no sons? has he no heir? why then does their King inherit Gad, and
his people dwell in his Cities? Ammonites, Edomites, and others said, Come, let
us cut them off from being a Nation, and let us take to our selves the houses
of God in possession, Psalm. 83.4, 12.

Whereas the Lord was there.
The words may be read thus, Though the Lord be there; and so they set out the
arrogance and blasphemy of the Edomites, who said, They would possess the Land
though the Lord was there; he would not hinder them from coming in, sitting
down, and continuing in it or the word there may relate to the Edomites, the
Lord was there amongst them, when they said, These two Nations, and these two
Countries shall be mine, and we will possess it. He heard these words, and was
displeased at them, coming from pride and bitterness of spirit. Or Thirdly, the
words may be taken as we read them, and afford this sense, The Edomites have
presumed much, promised great matters to themselves, to have the whole Land of
Canaan in possession, whereas the Lord was there, and had that Land under his
patronage, reserving it for Temple-worship again, as it had had it formerly.
That Land was Domicilium Dei; The Habitation of God, who would not suffer the
bloody Edomites whatever thoughts they had, or attempts they should make to
inhabit that Land, and defile his holy Mountain with their idolatrous
sacrifices; though he did greatly afflict the Land, yet he did not wholly
desert it.

First, Observe

Wicked men, the enemies of Sion, do think and design to raise themselves by
the ruins and spoils thereof.

Edom said, These two Nations, and these two Countries shall be mine. Whatever
is left of the Jews I will have, if there be nothing but the very Land, I will
take that for a possession, so shall I enrich my self, enlarge my borders, and
become great. Such thoughts and hopes were once in Tyrus, she looked to be made
by the sufferings of Jerusalem, Ezekiel: 26.2. Tyrus said against Jerusalem, she
is broken that was the Gates of the people; she is turned unto me, I shall be
replenished, now she is laid waste. Tyrus expected that Jerusalem being ruined,
all the trading should come to her, that the great concourse of people
Jerusalem had, should enter her Gates, and tread her Streets. Obadiah tells us,
that the Edomites laid hands on the Jewish substance, in the day of their
calamity, verse. 13. They coveted their wealth, thirsted after their Land, and
sought to advance themselves by their ruins.

Secondly, Observe

The desires, hopes, and expectations of the wicked come to naught.

The Edomites coveted Canaan, hoped and waited for it, but the Lord was there,
and disappointed them; they were shortly after the destruction of Jerusalem
destroyed by the Babylonians, Jer: 27.3, 6. God had given them into
Nebuchadnezzars hand. David tells you, Psalm. 112.10. That the desire of the
wicked shall perish; and Solomon says, Prove: 10.28. That the expectation of
the wicked shall perish; they desire and expect the fulfilling of their
desires, but themselves, their desires, and expectations come to naught; in
Prove: 11.23. Solomon has a strange expression, its this, The expectation of
the wicked is wrath; Do men look for wrath? No, but the event of their
expectation is such, they meet with the wrath of God; these Edomites looked for
the Land of the Jews, and lost their own.

Thirdly, Observe

The Lord keeps and disposes of Lands as he pleases.

He was in Canaan, The Lord was there; he was patron of it, he kept it out of
the Edomites hands, he reserved it for his people again: Hence Obadiah ver: 17.
says, The house of Jacob shall possess their possessions. They shall come
again and inhabit their Country which God reserved for them, Jer. 49.1, 2.
When the ten Tribes were carried away, the Ammonites who dwelt near the Tribe
of Gad intruded into it, and the Cities of it; but see what God says in verse.
2. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will cause an Alarm of war to
be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites, and it shall be a desolate heap, and her
Daughters (that is, lesser Towns) shall be burnt with fire; then shall Israel
be heir unto them that were his heirs. Israel shall return out of captivity,
and possess his own Land and the Ammonites also, which for a season got part of
his.

Fourthly, Observe

Whatever the fate of a Land is, whatever calamities it lies under, yet the
Lord is not far from it, he is in it.

Judaea was laid waste, the Temple and Cities in it ruined, man and beast cut
off, enemies on all sides seeking to get it in whole or in part; and
notwithstanding it was in such a case, in such danger, The Lord was there. God
is said to dwell in darkness, Ps. 18.11. He made darkness his secret place.
Here was a Land of darkness, and God hid himself in it, he was there though
the Edomites saw him not. When Babylonians lay waste Sion, drive out the
inhabitants thereof, yet they cannot drive out God; he is in Sion, and will
abide in Sion. The Bear out of the wood, not long since was wasting, and the
wild beast of the field devouring, they drove many out of our Sion, but they
could not drive God out; he was here when the face of all things was lamentable.

Verse. 11. Therefore as I live, says the Lord God, I will even do according to
thine anger, and according to thine envy, which thou have used out of thy
hatred against them: and I will make my self known amongst them, when I have
judged thee.
In this and the two next verses, you have a further discovery of Mount Seirs
sins, and how God would deal with the inhabitants thereof, and all confirmed by
oath.

I will even do according to thine anger.
Thou have been angry with my people, yea angry unto death, and I will do
accordingly; not that God would be angry, but he would punish them severely for
their anger. Anger is not a boiling of the blood and spirits about the heart,
as some have made it, for that is rather an effect then the nature of it. Ira
est appetitio reddendi malum ei qui malum retulit; Its an inordinate desire of
returning evil to him, whom we conceive has wronged us.

And according to thine envy.
The Edomites envyed the Jews who prospered into a Kingdom, and grew renowned,
Ezekiel: 16.13, 14. The nature of envy is to grieve at the good of another man,
and to think it an evil to our selves, that we are exceeded by others in any
thing; Invidia est tristitia de bono alieno, aestimato ut malo proprio quatenus
per bonum alienum apprehendimus nos ab altero superci.
an envious man is afflicted, that any is equal to him, or above him.

Which thou have used out of thy hatred against them.
Hatred is an enmity of the appetite to things or persons, apprehended contrary
to its good and contentment. The Edomites looked at the Jews as enemies, as
contrary to their good and content, and so hated them. There is a twofold
hatred, or rather two degrees of hatred; the first is aversion, which only
flies from what is hated; we hate Toads, Serpents, and such venomous creatures,
and fly from them; the second is persecution, which pursues the thing hated to
destruction; the one respects the evil simply, the other the thing or person
in which the evil is apprehended to be; with this last kind or degree of
hatred were the Edomites infected, and so envying them sought their ruin.

And I will make my self known amongst them when I have judged thee.
I will execute judgment upon thee, deliver thee and thy wealth into the hands
of thine enemies, and my servants shall behold my glory in punishing thee, and
my mercy in delivering them; my people shall know what a God I am, when I have
visited you for your hatred, envy, and wrath against them, they shall find me a
God exercising mercy, as you have found me a God executing judgments; as I
have made my self known to you in my power and justice, so I will make my self
known to them in mercy and loving kindness.

First, Observe

One sinful affection sets others on work.

The Edomites hatred set their anger and envy on work. They used these out of
their hatred of the Jews, they hated them, and that hatred stirred up their
anger to do them harm, and their envy to persecute them unto death. The Apostle
says of love, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. It envies not, it is not easily provoked, it
thinks no evil: But hatred envies, is easily provoked, and thinks nothing but
evil, its a root of bitterness, and brings forth bitter fruit, it makes use of
other affections to accomplish its ends. Jealousy kindles anger, and casts
forth hatred; fear sets grief and despair on work. The affections are seated so
near one another in the heart, that if one move sinfully, the rest are ready to
stir and accompany the same. Let us look well to our affections, for they are
dangerous things, Solomon knew it, and therefore ( Prove: 4.23.) counsels us to
keep our hearts with all diligence.

Secondly, Observe

God will deal with men not only according to their evil actions, but
according to their evil affections also.

I will even do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy. Men are
convinced they must be responsive for evil actions, but not so for evil
affections: The Lord puts it out of doubt here, and swears to it, As I live
says the Lord God, I will even do according to thine anger, etc. Mat: 5.22. He
that is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of judgment;
Rev: 21.8. The fearful shall have their part in the Lake which burns with
fire and brimstone. Edoms rejoicing is mentioned Obad: 12. among the sins
caused God to cut her off; John 3.19. This is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness. God will deal with men for their
sinful fear, sinful joy, and sinful love, for sinful affections, as well as
sinful actions. Hence are we counseled to put away all bitterness, wrath and
anger, Ephesians. 4.31. To mortify inordinate affection, Coloss: 3.5.

Thirdly, Observe

After the insulting enemies of Sion are punished, God will show kindness unto
Sion, she shall have expressions of his love.

I will make my self known amongst them, that is those of Sion; after I have
judged thee, that is, the Edomites: they insulted over the Jews, and added
affliction to affliction, which the Lord visited them for, and then comforted
his afflicted people. The Babylonians were bitter enemies to the Jews, they
insulted over them, and said, Sing us one of the songs of Sion, Psalm: 137.3.
for which you may see how God would deal with them, Isa: 13. The Medes should
destroy them, and that without pity; and what then? Chap: 14.12, 3. The Lord
will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own
Land; they shall rule over their oppressors, and have rest from their sorrows.
After Sennacheribs Army was destroyed by the Angel of the Lord, which insulted
over the Jews, and spoke blasphemous things against God and Hezekiah, did not
God express love to Hezekiah, and in him to all the Jews, in granting him
fifteen years more unto his days? Isa: 37. and 38. When God had judged the
Egyptians, he brought forth the Jews, seated them in Canaan, and showed them
not a little kindness there, Acts 7.7.

Verses 12, 13.
And thou shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have heard all thy
blasphemies which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying,
They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied your
words against me: I have heard them.


THeir blasphemies against God and Israel are here set down, and the notice God
took of them.

Verse. 12. Thou shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have heard all thy
blasphemies.
The Hebrew is thus, Thou shall know that I the Lord have heard all thy
blasphemies. The Edomites spoke freely against the Jews, thinking God had cast
them off, and cared not for them; but when he should judge and punish them,
then they should be convinced that he had heard their blasphemies. The word for
blasphemy is Neatzah, from Naatz to despise, contemptuously to provoke. Kirker
says, its to provoke contumeliis convitiis and verbis maledicis, with
reproachful and cursed speeches; Junius has it, omnes irritationes tuas, all
thy provocations; the Septuagint, French, and others have it blasphemies.

Which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel.
By mountains of Israel, the Land and people of Israel are intended: that Land
was full of mountains, and among others there was the mountain of the Lord,
Psalm. 24.3. and they spoke against that mountain with the rest.

Saying, they are laid desolate.
Are these words so evil as that they should be judged blasphemy? its not to
be doubted but they said more, though it be not here expressed, Obad: verse. 12.
Edom spoke proudly in the day of Jerusalems distress: She insulted and gloryed
in the sufferings and desolations of the people and Land: Where is your Temple
and City, said they, that stood on Mount Sion? where are the Cattle that fed
upon the Mountains, and were for sacrifices? They are laid desolate; now where
will you have sacrifices? and whither will ye go to sacrifice? Thus they spoke
blasphemously.

They are given us to consume.
The Jews are now destroyed and gone into captivity, they shall never return to
take possession of these mountains again, they are now given to us to be a
prey; but who gave them they declare not; God did not give them unto the
Edomites, and no other could, for the Land was the Lords; they took the
Mountains of Israel, their covetous hearts would have them, verse. 10. and what
would they do with them? Consume them, says our Translation; but the Hebrew is
Leaclah, ad commedendum, to eat, that is, to bring them under our power, and to
make use of for our good.

Verse. 13. Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me.
Ye have magnified against me, says the Hebrew; you have spoken great words,
your mouth has been wide open against me, and has lift you up above me, or
against me: Obad: 12. is thus, Thou have magnified thy mouth, which is rendered,
Thou have spoken proudly: Qui impudenter obloquuntur alteri, and subsannant
illum jactando seipsos dicuntur magnificare os suum; Jer: 48.26. Moab magnified
against the Lord, that is, magnified his mouth against him by speaking arrogant
words; Ezekiel: 25.8. Moab said, Behold the house of Judah is like unto all the
Heathen. When men speak proudly, insolently against God or his people, they do
magnify with their mouths, or magnify their mouths.

And have multiplied their words against me.
They spoke much more then is expressed, They multiply words; The Hebrew word
for multiply here is (...) Athar, which signifies Verba fundere magna copia and
verba fortia, as in prayer; these Edomites did multiply words, words against
the Lord, and their words were stout against him.

I have heard them.
Though you thought me shut up in the Heavens, that I could not hear at so
great a distance, or that I minded not the affairs of the world, especially
what words one Nation speaks against another, yet says God, I have heard them.

First, Observe

The Lord takes notice of all the bitter reproachful, and provoking speeches
which wicked ones do utter against the Church and People of God.

I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou have spoken against the Mountains
of Israel. Whether Edom secretly muttered out, or openly vented her
blasphemies, The Lord heard them. Ammon said Aha, against Gods Sanctuary, when
it was profaned, and against the Land of Israel, when it was desolate, and
against the house of Judah when they went into captivity, Ezekiel: 25.3. And Moab
said, the house of Judah is like unto all the Heathen. When they said so, was
the Lord deaf? Zeph: 2.8. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings
of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified
themselves against their border. The Lord heard and remembered what they said,
and made it known to all Ages: so did he hear what Tyrus the Sea-City said
insultingly against Jerusalem, Ezekiel: 26.2. He took notice of the Letter that
Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe, and the rest of their companions
wrought against Jerusalem, Ezra 4.8. There is nothing said or thought against
the people of God, but he is privy to it, Lament: 3.61. says Jeremy, Thou have
heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me. God heard
not only what their wicked tongues spoke, but also what their vile hearts
imagined, yea all that they imagined; he hears imaginations.

Secondly, Observe

God will convince and make blasphemers know that he heard their blasphemies.

And thou shall know that I the Lord have heard all thy blasphemies. Men
blaspheme Heaven and Earth, they speak proudly against God, Christ, Scriptures,
Ordinances, and flatter themselves, that they shall never more hear of their
blasphemies, they think God minds them not; but God has times to make such
black mouthed wretches to know that he heard them, even all of them: when God
visited Edom with the sword, then they should know it; when death comes, or
judgment after death, then shall they know what they have said. If men must
give account of every idle word they speak, Matthew: 12.36. much more of reviling
and blasphemous words.

Thirdly, Observe

The revilings and blasphemies uttered against the people of God, God accounts
as spoken against himself.

The Edomites spoke against the Jews, and the mountains of Israel, but thus
says the Lord, With your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied
your words against me. Its my self you reproach and speak against, when you
deal so by my people. What Moab said against the house of Judah, Ezekiel: 25.8.
God says was against himself, Jerem. 48.26, 42. Moab has magnified himself
against the Lord. When the wicked spoke against Gods servants, truth and
Sanctuary, David says they reproached God, Psalm. 74.22. Arise, O God, plead
thine own cause, remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily: it was
God they reproached. As wicked men act against God when they act against his
people (2 Chro: 14.11. Numb. 16.3. with Numb: 27.3.) so they speak against God,
when they speak against his people; all the bitter reviling, and provoking
speeches they utter against them, God hears, reckons as vented against
himself, and will recompense into the bosoms of his enemies.

Verses 14, 15.
Thus says the Lord God, When the whole earth rejoices, I will make thee
desolate.

As thou did rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it
was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shall be desolate, O mount Seir, and
all Idumea, even all of it, and they shall know that I am the Lord.


IN this Conclusion of the Chapter, the Lord further declares his mind
concerning Idumea, and tells her she shall suffer when all others shall
rejoice; and why? because she rejoiced at the sufferings of the house of Israel.

Verse. 14. When the whole earth rejoices.
If we refer the word earth to the Land of Judaea, the sense may be this, When
I shall make that whole Land rejoice; or if we understand by earth, the other
parts of the world, the meaning is, When I shall bring my people out of
captivity, and cause the whole earth to rejoice thereat, then will I make thee
desolate: but Scriptures do hint it to us, that Edom was made desolate before
the return of the Jews from Babylon: Jerem: 25. and 27. Chap. tells us that
Edom was given to Nebuchadnezzar, and was to drink the Cup of Gods wrath like
other Nations; and sundry Expositers agree in this, That shortly after the
destruction of Jerusalem, Edom was laid desolate. Some other interpretation
therefore of the words, is to be looked out; we may refer earth to Idumea, and
then the sense will be this, As the whole Land of Idumea has rejoiced at the
desolation of the Israelites, so will I make it wholly desolate. The Hebrew
favors this interpretation, for it is thus, As the whole Earth or Land has
rejoiced in desolation, I will do unto thee. Piscator goes this way, and
says, Sicut laetatur tota ista terra, seil: Edomaea, As all this Land, namely
Idumea has rejoiced in desolation, so will I do unto thee O Idumea.

Verse. 15. As thou did rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel,
because it was desolate.
The Edomites when they saw the Temple burnt, Jerusalem made even with the
ground, and all the Land turned into a wilderness, they rejoiced at it, Obadiah
12. They of Edom rejoiced over the children of Judah, in the day of their
destruction: when they saw men and beasts cut off, the Godly Cities ruined, and
the pleasant Land laid waste, they laughed at it, and said Aha, so would we
have it.

The inheritance of the house of Israel.
This inheritance was the Land of Canaan, which God gave to Abraham, Gen: 15.7.
and to his seed, Exodus: 32.13. To Jacob and Israel did God give Canaan the lot
of their inheritance, Psalm. 105.11. And this Land was the Lords inheritance,
Exodus 15.17. He dwelt in it, and owned it for his Land; and when the wicked
invaded it, the Psalmist said, O God, the Heathen are come into thine
inheritance, Psalm. 79.1. and verse. 10. of this Chapter, its said The Lord was
there; It was both the Lords, and his peoples inheritance, and when it was made
desolate the Edomites were glad thereof.

So will I do unto thee.
Thou have rejoiced at the calamities of others, and others shall rejoice at
thy calamities; thou did insult and speak proudly when the inheritance of the
house of Israel was laid waste, and thou shall meet with such dealings when
thine inheritance shall be laid waste; thy Cities shall be destroyed, man and
beast shall be cut off, and the Nations shall be glad of it.

Thou shall be desolate O Mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it.
When sad judgments are upon Lands, some parts are spared, as Strong Holds,
great Cities, Port Towns, and the like, but so severely should the enemy deal
with Mount Seir, and Idumea; that nothing should be left, all even all should
be utterly ruined and made desolate.

First, Observe

The generality of people are apt to go the wrong way, to rejoice at the evil
of Gods people.

All Idumea rejoiced. The whole earth, the people of it from one end to another
were glad of the sad things befell the Jews; not some great Ones, not one
corner of the Land, but all the Edomites throughout the Land. Thus did the
Ammonites also, they generally concurred in the same sin, Ezekiel: 25.3. They
cried, Aha, against the Sanctuary, the Land of Israel, and house of Judah, when
they were profaned and laid waste. This was the practice of the Tyrians, they
all with one consent rejoiced at the sufferings of Jerusalem, Ezekiel: 26.2. When
the two Witnesses were slain, the inhabitants of the earth rejoiced over them,
made merry, and sent gifts one to another, Rev: 11.10. The greatest part of men
are disaffected toward the people of God, and when evil befalls them, they
are glad thereof.

Secondly, Observe

Men thirsting after what is others, do lose what is their own.

The Edomites said, These two Nations, and these two Countries shall be mine,
and we will possess it, verse. 10. and not long after they lost their own
Country, it was made desolate. Achan was not content with what he had, his
heart was upon the Babylonish garment, the two hundred shekels of silver, and
the wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, and by so doing he lost both estate
and life, Josh. 7. Pharoah-Necho was ambitious, he sought to enlarge himself,
Jerem: 46.2. but his Army was beaten, and afterward he lost his Country,
Ezekiel: 30. Many Princes coveting and attempting to enlarge their borders by
getting from others, have lost themselves and what they had. The Dog catching
at the shadow, lost what he had in his mouth; many waste and lose their estates
at Law, while they seek to get that which is other men's.

Thirdly, Observe

The Lord in due time repayes the same, or like things to wicked ones.

Edom rejoiced when the inheritance of the house of Israel was laid waste, and
God would lay Edom waste, make her desolate, and others should rejoice at her;
So will I do unto thee, thou shall be desolate, and meet with those that shall
laugh at thy calamity. In Obadiah's prophecy, where the carriage of Edom
toward the house of Jacob is fully set out, the Lord says plainly, As thou
have done, it shall be done unto thee. Nebuchadnezzar he spoiled many Nations,
and had his pleasure on them, and in due time he was spoiled by the Nations,
Jerem: 27.7. And all Nations shall serve him and his son, and his sons son,
until the very time of his Land come, and then many Nations and great Kings
shall serve themselves of him. Then they should do to him as he had done to
them, Jer. 50.15. Adonibezeck had his Thumbs and Toes cut off, as he had served
others, Judge. 1.7. Many in our days have met with that measure they measured
unto others, Prove: 26.27. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein, and he that
rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. He that intends or does mischief to
others, that mischief will fall upon himself, Psalm. 9.15. The Heathen are sunk
down in the pit that they made; in the net which they hid, is their own foot
taken. Here is Lex talionis, Vide Quistorpius in Jer: 50.15.
the just judgment of God upon evill-doers; all the enemies of Sion God will
meet with in due time, and return the same or like things into their bosoms.

Fourthly, Observe

It is Nations and Peoples own sins, that brings desolation upon them.

Edoms rejoicing at Jerusalems calamities, her anger, envy, and hatred, her
boasting and blasphemies caused God to lay her waste, and utterly waste, O
Mount Seir, thou shall be desolate, and all Idumea, even all of it. Had not
these sins preceded, that dreadful judgment had not followed; it was
wickedness brought in the flood upon the whole world, and its wickedness
brings desolating judgments upon any part of it: Who gave Jacob for a spoil,
and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned:
for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law,
therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle. It was Jacobs and Isreal's sin that exposed them to spoylers and
spoiling, Isa: 42.24, 25. God was not forward to this work, but would have had
them prevented it, Isa. 48.18, 19. O that thou had hearkened to my
Commandments; then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as
the waves of the Sea thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of
thy bowels, like the gravel thereof: his name should not have been cut off, nor
destroyed from before me.

Fifthly, Observe

Gods great design in punishing the enemies of his people, and of showing
kindness unto them, is to make known himself experimentally unto them.

When the wicked feel the weight of his power, strength of his wrath, severity
of his justice, they will acknowledge God, and God to be another kind of God
then they imagined; when he shall render to them the same or like things to
what they have done, they will be convinced of the equity of his ways; so when
Gods people taste of his loving kindnesses, partake of choice deliverances, and
find the sweetness of his dispensations toward them, then they say, Among the
gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, neither are there any works like
unto thy works, Psalm. 86.8.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Also, thou son of man, prophecy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye
mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God, Because the enemy had said against you, Alas, even
the ancient high places are ours in possession:

Therefore prophecy and say, Thus says the Lord God, Because they have made
you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession
unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers,
and are an infamy of the people:

Therefore ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God, Thus says
the Lord God to the mountains and to the hills, to the rivers and to the
valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the Cities that are forsaken, which
became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that are round about.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I
spoken against the residue of the heathen, and against all Idumea, which have
appointed my Land into their possession, with the joy of all their hearts, with
despitefull minds to cast it out for a prey.

Prophecy therefore concerning the Land of Israel, and say unto the mountains,
and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have born the
shame of the heathen.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, I have lifted up mine hand, surely the
heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.


THe Jews being deprived of their Comforts, carried into captivity, they
suffered hard things, and lay under great reproach among the Nations; whereupon
the Lord here in this Chapter does 1. Denounce judgment against the Heathen,
setting out the Causes moving him thereunto, from the 1. verse. to the end of
the 7. 2. Promise mercy to the Land of Israel, which is specified in several
particulars, from the beginning of the 8. verse. unto the 16. 3. Show the causes
why the Jews were driven out of their Country, from 6. verse. to the 21. 4. Set
out the ground of their restoration, from the 21. to the 25. 5. Multiply
promises of spiritual and temporal things upon them and their Land, from the
25. to the end.


Verse. 1. Thou son of man, prophecy unto the mountains of Israel.
In the former Chapter he prophesied against Mount Seir, in this he is to
prophecy to the mountains of Israel; against that he prophesied judgment,
unto these he prophesies mercies. These Mountains of Israel by a Synecdoche
are put for the whole Land of Judaea, and by a Metonomie for the people,
contained therein, or who had lived therein.

Hear the word of the Lord.
The Land mourned because the profane Nations had laid it waste, and taken
possession of it; the Lord therefore calls to the Land and People that had
inhabited it, to let them know that the one should not long, lie in so desolate
a condition, nor the other always be kept out by enemies from their
inheritance.

Verse. 2. Thus says the Lord God.
These words are in the 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. verses also. The Jews being cast
into so low a condition, might think God had forgotten them, and would leave
them to perish in the hands of their enemies; to take off such thoughts, he
commands the Prophet to say in 6 verses together, Thus says the Lord God. It
is not the voice of Ezekiel, but of Jehovah, who is affected with the insolency
of your enemies, and the grievous things you suffer.

Because the enemy had said against you, Aha.
The Hebrew word for enemy, is from Ajaf to bear ill will, to hate. This enemy
principally was the Edomite, who had a perpetual hatred against the Jews,
Ezekiel. 35.5. and the Ammonite who cried Aha, Ezekiel: 25.3. and entered upon the
Jews inheritance, Jerem: 49.1. with the Moabite who reproached the people of
God, Zeph: 2.8, 10. These and others were disaffected to the Jews, and hated
them, insulted in the day of their calamity, saying Aha. The Hebrew is Heach
which to Mercer is vox insultantis, and to others, vox provocatoria cum
contemptu, an insulting provoking scornful word.

The ancient high places are ours in possession.
Bamoth Olam, Excelsa Saculi, The ancient Mountains which have kept their
station and height i nal ages; Septuagint is (...), The everlasting solitudes;
Vulgar Altitudines sempiterna, The everlasting height; French is Les hauts
lieux du monde, The high places of the world. The Land of Israel had many high
Mountains, which being solitary and desolate, the enemy said, they are ours in
possession, we shall inherit them for ever. The Edomites being from Esau,
Jacobs elder brother; the Ammonites and Moabites from Lot, Abraham's brother,
they challenged the ancient high places of Israel for their possessions, called
Excelsa Saeculi, because God and his Worship had been there many years, and the
Land was promised the Jews for ever.

Because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side.
The enemies of the Jews were bitter and bloody, they stripped them of what they
had, and devoured them; they did eat them up. Shaaph signifies to draw in the
air, to suck it up, and metaphorically to swallow, to devour; they did not
like Caniball, eat the flesh of the Jews, but they dealt cruelly with them, not
in one place only, but on all sides, those that were their neighbors cut them
off and destroyed them round about.

That ye might be a possession unto the residue of the heathen.
So little did they care for the Church of God, his people, and their
inheritance, they rule over these few Jews that were left. This made Jeremy to
complain, Lamen: 5.2. Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to
aliens.

Ye are taken up in the lips of talkers.
In the Hebrew its thus, And ye have ascended upon the lip of the tongue, or,
ye are made to ascend, ye are the common talk of men, as we use to say, Table
talk; They were made a reproach, a proverb, a taunt, and a curse amongst the
people, according to what is written, Jer: 24.9. Junius and Piscator both have
it Traducti estis in labia Nationum, You are traduced and slandered through the
tongues of the Nations, they talk at large of you. The lip of the tongue is an
Hebraisme, noting a talkative person, as Job 11.2. A man of lips is the Hebrew,
that is, A man of talk; and Psalm. 140.11. Let not an evil speaker, in Hebrew a
man of tongue, such an one utters much evil, and falls under the denomination
of an evil speaker.

And are an infamy of the people.
The word Dibbah, infamy, is from Davaf, which signifies to speak, and to
relate the evils of others. The enemies of the Jews related what evils they
knew or heard of concerning them, and made them infamous. The Septuagint is
(...), a reproach or scorn to the Nations.

Verse. 4. Thus says the Lord God to the mountains and to the hills, to the
rivers and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the Cities that are
forsaken.
He mentioned the mountains of Israel before, and the ancient high places; here
he adds Hills, Rivers, Valleys, Wastes, Cities, to show that he would vindicate
the whole Land from the possession of the Nations, who did so greatly villifie
his Church and people.

Which became a prey and derision unto the residue of the heathen.
The Heathen did not only spoil and make a prey of Judaea, but also deride the
Jews, they scoffed at those that were left, and those were carried away. The
word for derision is (...) Laag, which notes deriding with scorn and contempt;
and therefore by the Septuagint is rendered (...), Conculcatio, they derided
them as worthy to be trodden under feet.

Verse. 5. Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue
of the heathen, etc.
The Hebrew for surely, is Im lo, which implies an oath, Si non or nisi,
unless I have spoken in the fire of my jealousy, let me not be God, let me
never be believed. To speak in the fire of jealousy is an Hebraisme, says
Pintus; Pro effundere verba cum stomacho, it notes hot displeasure, Psalm. 79.5.
Shall thy jealousy burn like fire? Here the Lords jealousy was on fire; he
was not only angry with the Heathen, but in a fiery jealousy, for jealousy
is more then anger, Deuteronomy: 29.20. Men in their jealousy are extremely moved and
carried out with heat and fury to be revenged on those they apprehend have done
them wrong; and so God after the manner of men is said to speak in the fire of
his jealousy against the Heathens, who had wronged him, his people, and the
Land.

Which have appointed my Land into their possession.
Judaea, says God, was my Land, I dwelt there, and set up my worship there, I
gave it my people for a possession; and though at present they be driven out
for their sins, yet I keep it for them, and none ought to meddle with, or
challenge that Land; how is it then that the Edomites and Heathens have
consulted and determined to take my Land into their possession? they are
resolved to rob me and my people of our right, to swallow up our inheritance.

With the joy of all their heart.
Joy is a dilatation of the heart from apprehension of good; these Heathens
apprehended it good that the Jews were cut off and carried away, that hereupon
the Land should be theirs; this filled them with joy, and made them attempt
with all their hearts, the possession of the Land.

With despitefull minds to cast it out for a prey.
The words in the Hebrew are thus, In contempt of mind; for expulsion of it for
a prey, so Montanus: Sheat signifies Depopulation, as well as contempt; and so
Junius has it, Cum depopulatione animosa, ut seeds expulsorum ejus fit
direptioni, with greedy depopulation; they were very earnest and violent in
depopulating the Land, that the seat of its expelled ones might be for a prey;
Piscator says, that its fields or suburbs might be for spoil. The people
being slain or carried away captive, the Edomites and others did with malicious
minds expose the Land to the spoil of any.

Verse. 6. Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy, and in my fury.
Here is an addition of fury to jealousy; fury is fervor ir^e, or fera ira,
heat of anger, or severe anger; fury is ira cum vehementia; when its given to
God, it notes the severe, holy, and just indignation of God.

Because ye have born the shame of the heathen.
The Heathens have reproached you, poured scorn and contempt upon you, made you
the filth of the world, Zeph: 2.8, 10. they so reproached them, that it
affected God himself; and Jeremy (Lam: 5.1.) was so pierced with the
reproachings of the Heathen, that he complains, and cries out, Remember, O
Lord, what is come upon us; consider, and behold our reproach. They jeered and
scoffed at them for their Temple, Worship, City, Mountains, Songs, yea, for
their God. Of bearing the shame of the Heathen, see Chap: 34.29.

Verse. 7. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, I have lifted up mine hand.
Lifting up the hand was a gesture used by men in taking of oaths, as Gen:
14.22. Abraham lifted up his hand unto the Lord, that was in swearing; and this
metaphorically is applied unto God, who when he swears is said to lift up his
hand, so that swearing and lifting up the hand are equivalent; Numb: 14.30.
Doubtless ye shall not come into the Land, concerning which I swear to make
you dwell therein. The Hebrew for I swear, is I lifted up my hand: So then,
Gods lifting up his hand here is his swearing, that he would make the Nations
bear their shame for reproaching his people.

Surely the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.
As sure as I am God, the Heathen which have made you a reproach, a proverb, a
taunt, and a curse, they shall be a reproach, a proverb, a taunt, and a curse;
they have made you infamous, and they shall be infamous; they have covered,
loaded you with shame, and they shall be covered and loaded with shame.

First, Observe

God has a special care of his Church when its in an afflicted condition.

The Jews were dispossessed of their Land, carried into captivity, made
infamous, and their Land u^^^ped by others; hereupon the Lord sends Ezekiel
unto them, to prophecy comfort unto them in the destruction of their enemies:
Son of man, prophecy unto the Mountains of Israel, and say, Hear the word of
the Lord. He has a terrible word for your enemies, a comfortable word for you;
threatenings for them, promises for you. Though men hated his people, yet God
himself pityed them; though men swallowed up their habitation, yet God would
restore it to them again; Jer: 30.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Wherefore do I see every man
with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travel, and all faces are turned
into paleness? Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it; it is even
the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. For it shall come
to pass in that day, says the Lord of Hoasts, that I will break his yoke from
off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve
themselves of him: but they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their
King, whom I will raise up unto them. Therefore fear thou not, O my servant
Jacob, says the Lord, neither be dismayed, O Israel; for lo, I will save thee
from afar, and thy seed from the Land of their captivity, and Jacob shall
return, and shall be in rest and quiet, and none shall make him afraid. The
Church was in great affliction, like a woman in travail; and here the Lord
showed his goodness toward it, and special care over it; he would break
Babylonish yokes and bonds, set it at liberty, restore it to the former, yea a
better condition, viz: such privileges, and security it never had.

Secondly, Observe

When Gods people are under affliction, their enemies are glad thereof, and
take advantage to disgrace them, and make a prey of what was theirs.

The Israelites suffered hard things by the Babylonians, upon this the enemies
cried Aha, they were glad at the heart, they talked their pleasures of them,
and made them the infamy of the people; they swallowed them up on every side,
and said, The Mountains of Israel are ours, and we will possess the ancient
high places. When Sion goes down, Babylon rejoices, the Heathens disgrace and
^^^^ure it, adding affliction to the afflicted; see Zeph: 2.8. Obad: 10.11, 12,
13, 14. All the enemies which heard of Sions trouble were glad, Lam: 1.21. They
reproached Sion and her children, Lament: 2.15, 16. and said, They shall no
more sojourn there, Lam: 4.15. Judaea shall never be repossessed by them, it
shall be ours.

Thirdly, Observe

That rejoicing at the sufferings of Gods people, disgracing and wronging of
them, does greatly offend the Lord.

Because the enemy cried Aha, defamed the Jews, arrogated the Land for their
possession; therefore the Lord spoke against them in the fire of his jealousy,
and in his fury; he was exceedingly wroth, and would deal severely with them:
it went to his heart, and inflamed his spirit, that his people who were so dear
unto him, should be derided, despitefully used, what was theirs made a prey of,
and that by Heathens, Jerem: 50.11, 12. Because ye were glad, because ye
rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the
Heifer at grass, and bellow as Bulls, your mother shall be sore confounded;
that is, the City Babylon, or the Land of Chaldaea, or both; because the
Babylonians had dealt so by the people of God and their Land, God would not
only confound them, but sorely confound them.

Fourthly, Observe

Those that make the people of God infamous, shall themselves be made infamous.

The Nations made the Jews the infamy of the people, they loaded them with
reproaches and shame; and God swears Surely the Heathen shall bear their
shame. Do you mock and hiss at my people? ye shall be mocked and hissed at? In
Lam: 2.15, 16. You have the carriage of all toward Jerusalem; they clapped their
hands, they hissed, they wagged their heads, they opened their mouths, and
gnashed their teeth, and said, Is this the City men call the perfection of
beauty? we have swallowed her up; this is the day we have looked for. In other
places you may observe how God returned their revilings upon their heads,
Jerem: 49.17. Edom shall be a desolation, every one that goes by it shall be
astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof. Nineveh was proud and
insulted, and God made her infamous: All that passed by hissed and wagged the
hand at her, Zeph. 2.15. Babylon had the same measure, Jer: 51.37. She was made
an hissing, without inhabitant, so Chap: 50.13. And Isaiah tells us the
insulting proverb which was used against the King and City of Babylon when they
were destroyed, Isa: 14.4. How has the oppressor ceased? the golden City
ceased?

Verses 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield
your fruit to my people of Israel, for they are at hand to come.

For behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and
sown.

And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it, and
the Cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded.

And I will multiply upon you man and beast, and they shall increase, and bring
fruit, and I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto
you then at your beginnings, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel, and they shall
possess thee, and thou shall be their inheritance, and thou shall no more
henceforth bereave them of men.

Thus says the Lord God, Because they say unto you, Thou Land devourest up
men, and have bereaved thy Nations;

Therefore thou shall devour men no more, neither bereave thy Nations any
more, says the Lord God.

Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the heathen any more,
neither shall thou bear the reproach of the people any more, neither shall thou
cause thy Nations to fall any more, says the Lord God.


THese eight verses are the 2d. general part of the Chapter, containing rich
promises of favor and mercy unto the afflicted Jews; and they are 1.
Fruitfulness of their Country, verse. 8. 2. Return into it, ibid. 3. Gods
turning unto them, verse. 9. 4. Multiplication of men and beasts, ver. 10, 11.
5. Rebuilding of their Cities, waste places, and reinhabiting of them, verse:
10, 12. 6. Settling them in a better condition then ever, verse. 11. 7. Freedom
1. From destruction, verse. 12, 13, 14. 2. From the reprochings of enemies, v:
15.



Verse. 8. But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches.
In the time of Jerusalems siedge, the Land of Israel was much wasted, the
fruitful and useful Trees cut down, and during the Captivity, it was overrun
with Briars and Thorns, Isa: 5.6. Chap: 33.13. Yea, all the Land was so, Chap:
7. 24. But here Gods promise is, that the Mountains of Israel should be
fruitful, they should shoot forth their branches; Vines and other Trees full
of branches should be planted there, and thrive.

And yield your fruit to my people of Israel.
Strangers shall not eat your fruit as heretofore, but my people shall have the
benefit thereof. Israelites shall eat your fruit, not Edomites or Babylonians.

For they are at hand to come.
Here is the reason given why the Mountains and Land of Canaan should bring
forth and yield increase; it was because the time drew near of the Jews
returning out of captivity. In the Creation God did bid the earth bring forth,
prepared a Paradise for man, and then brought man into it; so here he takes
care that the Mountains and Countries should bring forth, for that his people
were to come into it. The Chaldee has it, Veniat dies redemptionis; and the
Septuagint (...): Seaventy years was but a little time unto God, some part of
which was expired, and the time hastened for their deliverance.

Verse. 9. For behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you.
God had formerly been against them, as appears Ezekiel: 5.8. Ch: 21.3. Ch: 15.7.
and they had found it so, being driven out of their own Land into Babylon,
where God tells them to their comfort, Behold, I am for you, and for the
Mountains of Israel which have been laid waste; I will turn unto you, and look
upon you in mercy.

Ye shall be tilled and sown.
Where Bushes, Nettles, and Briars grew before, there should be plowing,
sowing, and Corn in abundance.

Verse. 10. And I will multiply men upon you, etc.
This verse and the next further sets out the effect of Gods turning to the
Mountains, they should abound with men and beasts, the whole Land should be
possessed, the waste places builded, and the Cities inhabited, and both men and
beast should be fruitful.

All the house of Israel, even all of it.
When this was fulfilled does not appear: few of the 10 Tribes returned, and
not all of the other two.

Verse. 11. I will settle you after your old estates.
The Hebrew is, I will make you to dwell according to your antiquities, as you
dwelt in Joshuahs time, or as you were settled before your captivity; then you
had peace, plenty, and many accommodations, which you shall have again, and
more, for it follows;

And do better unto you then at your beginnings.
God had done great things for them formerly; they abounded so in riches,
stately buildings, wise, holy, and strong men, in famous victories, and in
plenty of all good things, that they exceeded all people; yet God promises here
to do better unto them then at the beginning. When this was made good is
greatly questioned: Some answer it thus, That when they first came into Canaan,
they were low, poor, and not in a capacity to build a Temple; but when they
returned out of Babylon, they went about and built a Temple: But this Temple
exceeded not the former Temple in greatness, richness, Ceremony; sanctity,
multitude of Priests or Prophets, Ezra. 3.12. Others say, That after their
return from their captivity, their bounds were more enlarged then ever before,
which they clear from Isa: 49.19, 20. Zach: 2.8, 9. And therein God did better
unto them then at the beginning. Others refer this promise to Christ's time,
wherein they had choicer mercies then ever, viz: The presence, doctrine, and
miracles of Christ, which made the glory of the latter Temple, greater then the
former; according to what Haggai had said, Chap. 2.9. But how if we could not
assign a time of Gods doing better unto them then at the beginning, that is
humane weakness; God is faithful, and what he says he does accomplish, it was
so.

Verse. 12. And thou shall no more henceforth bereave them of men.
He speaks of the Land of Canaan, which the Jews should possess, inherit, and
not be deprived of, that is, not for a long time. The words no more, must not
signify for ever, because the Jews were after a long time deprived of their
Land by the Romans.

Verse. 13. They say unto you, Thou Land devourest up men, and have bereaved thy
Nations.
This was a charge laid upon Canaan, that she devoured men, that she was
destructive to her own children; she was not so called because of her
fruitfulness, which caused men to surfeit, and so dye; but either in regard of
the civil wars were amongst the Heathens when they possessed it, which made
the spies ( Numb: 13.32.) say, Its a Land eats up the inhabitants thereof;
or, because that when the Jews possessed it, the Nations round about hating
them made incursions upon them often, and so destroyed multitudes of the
inhabitants; and when they besieged any place of note, as Samaria and
Jerusalem, the plague and famine consumed many: The famine was so sore, that
women eat their own children, 2 Kings 6.28, 29. Lament: 4.10. Fathers eat their
sons, and sons their fathers; Ezekiel: 5.10. And as it had vomited out the
Heathens before, ( Levit: 18.25, 28.) so it served the ten Tribes and other two
afterward.

Versi. 14. Therefore thou shall devour men no more, neither bereave thy
Nations any more.
Here God promises to take away that imputation, and to put them into such a
condition as that they should for a long season be free from sword, famine,
plague, and such straits as caused consumption of men. The words bereave thy
Nations any more, are in Hebrew, Nor cause thy Nations to fall any more; they
fell by several judgments, but now God being turned unto them, would maintain
them in peace, honor and safety.

Verse. 15. Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the heathen
any more.
They had often times been reproached by the Heathen; and born their shame, verse.
6. But now God in his wise providence would order things so, that heathens
should not revile them, but speak honorably of them, as Psalm: 126.2. The
heathen said, The Lord has done great things for them.

Neither shall thou bear the reproach of the heathen any more.
They reproached one another; the people mocked at the Prophets, 2 Chronicles:
36.16. Jer: 20.7. and children behaved themselves proudly and basely against
the ancient and the honorable, Isa: 3.5. but God would take away this evil
from them, and cause them to speak well one of another.

Neither shall thou cause the Nations to fall any more.
The Hebrew is, Thy Nations, Thou shall not expose thy people to ruin and
destruction, by famine, plague, or war. The sense of the whole verse is, That
God would turn those evils and curses they endured formerly, into blessings.

First, Observe

When God poures out contempt and shame upon the enemies of his people, he will
pour out blessings and mercies upon them.

The Heathens shall bear their shame, but ye, O Mountains of Israel, shall
shoot forth your branches, and ye shall have the former and latter rains, and
bring forth in abundance. Canaan was Gods Land, and he had a special eye to
that, and would honor it, when he stained the glory of other Nations.

Secondly, Observe

The fruitfullnesse of Mountains and Lands depends upon God; he makes them so
at his pleasure, by his command and blessing.

O Mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches and yield your
fruit: Men's wickedness move God to make Lands barren and desolate, Jer: 12.4.
but its his good pleasure and free grace that moves him to make a Land
fruitful, Acts. 19.17. Rain and fruitful seasons are the gift of God.

Thirdly, Observe

God is provident for his people when he removes them from place to place, he
will not have them to come into empty places.

The Mountains must shoot forth their branches, and the Land yield her fruit:
for the Jews were at hand to come. When Jacob went down to Egypt, with his
family, God provided the best of the Land for them, Gen: 47. When the Jews came
first to Canaan, it flowed with Milk and Honey, it abounded with all good
things needful for them.

Fourthly, Observe

When God is reconciled to a people, then he multiplyes blessings upon them,
then he makes their Land bring forth, and themselves and their Cattle to
increase.

I am for you, and will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown; I will
multiply upon you men and beasts, and they shall increase and bring fruit. Gods
favor has all blessings in the womb of it, and upon what Land or people
soever that falls, it will make them fruitful; when God is for a people, then
he comes unto them as the rain, as the former and latter rain, Hos: 6.3. He
has various and seasonable blessings for them, Zeph: 3.20. At that time will I
bring you again, even in the time that I gather you; for I will make you a name
and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity
before your eyes. When God turned back their captivity he was for them, and
turned unto them, they had his favor, and then he would bestow such blessings
upon them as would make them renowned among all people: See Jerem: 31.10, 11,
12, 13, 14.

Fifthly, Observe

Gods dealings with his people are best at last; they may have much kindness
and mercy in the morning, but they shall have more in the evening.

I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you then at
your beginnings. The Jews had the best wine at last; they had Milk and Honey
before, but the feast of fat things full of marrow, and of wines on the Lees
well refined, were at the latter end of their day given in; they had Christ and
the Gospel at last. Abraham had much of the world at first, and his Isaac
afterward. Job 42.12. God blessed the latter end of Job more then his
beginning. Simeon in his latter days saw Christ, and had him in his arms, Luke
2.

Sixthly, Observe

Wicked men do turn the judgments of God upon his Land and People, into a
reproach unto them.

Because God for the sins of his people laid the Land waste, and cut them off
by sore judgments, or removed them into captivity, therefore the Heathens
reproached Canaan, and said, Thou Land devourest men, and have bereaved thy
Nations. They called Emanuels Land a cursed and bloody Land, that did eat up
her own children; this was a great reproach to Heaven and Earth. Gods
judgments should have caused fear, and taught them to have learned
righteousness; For if God spared not the green Tree, what will become of the
dry Trees?

Seventhly, Observe

Such is the goodness of God, that he takes occasion from the wickedness of
his Peoples enemies, to do his People good.

Because the Heathens said, Thou Land devourest up men, and have bereaved thy
Nations: Because they reproached the Jews, and their Land thus; therefore says
God, Thou shall devour men no more, neither bereave thy Nations any more; I
will bless thee with peace, plenty and safety, there shall be no wars, no
famines, no plagues, nor other judgments to devour the people of the Land.

Eighthly, Observe

God in his time takes way the evils that are upon his People, and turns them
into blessings.

Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the Heathen any more,
neither shall thou bear the reproach of the people any more, neither shall thou
cause thy Nations to fall any more: These evils will I take away from thee, and
not only so, but I will bring in the contrary blessings; instead of shame and
reproach, thou shall have honor, praise, and renown; instead of destroying thy
people and Nations, thou shall multiply thy people, and have Nations to serve
thee, Isa: 60.12, 13, 14.

Verses 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own Land, they defiled it
by their own way, and by their doings: their way was before me as the
uncleanness of a removed woman.

Wherefore I poured my fury upon them, for the blood that they had shed upon
the Land, and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it.

And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the
Countries: according to their way, and according to their doings I judged them.

And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they profaned my
holy Name, when they said to them, These are the people of the Lord, and are
gone forth out of his Land.


MEn being apt to make perverse constructions of the judgments of God, and to
censure his ways to be unequal; here he gives account of his proceedings
toward his people, and shows the true grounds and causes, why he drove them
out of their Country; which are set down, 1. In general, verse: 17. amplified
by a similitude. 2. In particular, verse. 18. Blood and Idolatry, which are
repeated in general terms, verse: 19. 3. After these he shows what their
carriage was in their enemies Land, verse. 20.


Verse. 16. Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,
The Prophet having declared Gods jealousy and fury against the enemies of his
people, comforted them being in captivity with many choice promises; here he is
commissioned by the Lord to speak out the causes which moved God to cast them
into that condition.

Verse. 17. When the house of Israel dwelt in their own Land.
By house of Israel, understand not the two or ten Tribes, but the whole twelve
Tribes who possessed Canaan, which is called their own Land, because promised
and given unto them by God for their inheritance, Psalm. 105.10, 11.

They defiled it by their own way, and by their doings.
The Hebrew is In their own ways, and in their own doings; they followed their
own devices, inventions, desires, customs, manners, they did what was right in
their own eyes, and so defiled the Land. The French is, Par leurs maeurs, and
par leurs acts.

Their way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.
Their way was very loathsome before the Lord, he greatly abhorred their
manners and practices, as man does the filthiness and uncleanness of a woman;
Laborant is menstruo sanguine; A woman in that condition defiles all she
touches; see Levit: 15.19, 20, 21. and so to the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 18. Wherefore I poured my fury upon them.
They had committed heinous sins, and continued long in them without
repentance, is evident from the Lords fury: he is not in fury for small sins,
nor presently furious for great sins; but when men go on from day to day in
them, his anger grows hotter and hotter, and at last rises up into fury; and
this being increased, the Lord would not let it out in petty judgments, as it
were drop by drop, but pour it out in greater judgments, like as the Sea
poures out water when a breach is in the Banks, it poures out water with
violence, and drowns up all the adjacent Country.

For the blood that they had shed upon the Land.
They shed the blood of the Prophets, 2 Chronicles: 24.21. Matthew: 23.37. Of innocent
ones, 2 Kings 21.16. They had unjust and unnatural wars, 2 Chronicles: 28.9. and so
shed blood in abundance, Ezekiel: 7.23. They poured out blood upon the Land, and
God poured out fury upon them; its the same word in the Hebrew for shedding and
pouring out.

And for their idols wherewith they had polluted it.
They had many idols, the Land was full of them, Isa: 2.8. which they
worshipping defiled the Land. The word for idols, is Gillulim, which Junius
renders Dii stercorei, Dunghill gods; and Piscator, stercora, dunghils,
excrements, for that no dunghill or excrement of any creature does so defile a
Land, as idols and idolatry; hence idols are called abominations, Jer: 32.34.
Shames, Hos. 9.10. Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.17.

Verse. 19. And I scattered them among the heathen.
They had learned the manners of the Heathen, got their idols and served them;
and for it God scattered them among the heathens: they had heathenish spirits,
chosen heathenish gods, and so deserved to be driven into heathenish Countries.

And they were dispersed through the Countries.
The Hebrew word for disperse, is Sarah, which signifies to disperse by
fanning; God had fanned them out of their own Land, and dispersed them as
chafe before the wind into diverse Lands; they went from Country to Country,
yea, through whole Countries into Chaldaea.

According to their way, and according to their doings, I judged them.
Men might wonder God should deal so with his people, as to pour out his fury
upon them, drive them out of their own Land, and disperse them amongst
heathens, who were his and their enemies; this might carry a face of cruelty,
but the Lord clears himself, and shows the equity of his proceedings; I judged
them, that is, I dealt with, or punished them according to their ways and
doings; had they not deserved such hard things at my hands, I should not have
executed them; they drove me out of my Sanctuary, and far from it, Ezekiel: 8.6.
They cast me off, Jer: 2.13. and is it not equal that I should drive them out
of my Land, and cast them into foreign Lands? Let all the world judge.

Verse. 20. And when they entered unto the heathen whither they went, they
profaned my holy Name.
When the Jews came amongst the Heathen, they profaned his holy name: which is
done two ways; either formaliter, when men's own words or actions are profane,
prostituting the name of God to dishonor; or occasionaliter, when occasion is
given to others by their words and actions, to profane the holy Name of God; as
David by his sinful action with Bathsheba, gave occasion to the enemies of God
to blaspheme, 2 Samuel: 12.14. And this was the case here; for the Babylonians
said,

These are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his Land.
The Jews being under sad judgments of God, should have learned
righteousness; but they being neither affected with the honor of God, care of
their salvation, nor with fear of offending the heathens, persevered in their
wicked ways, and idolatrous practices, Ezekiel: 20.32. whereupon the Heathens
said, These are the people of the Lord. They boast of their God to be a holy,
omnipotent, and faithful God, but you may know what their God is by their
unholy practices; had he been omnipotent, as they say, he would have kept them
out of our hands, but he could not, which shows our gods are stronger than he;
or if he could, he would not; he was not faithful unto his people, as our gods
are unto us, They are gone forth out of his Land, whereas we abide in ours; had
their God been such as ours are, he would have protected them, and prevented
their casting out of his Land.

First, Observe

The wicked ways of men, especially those of blood and idolatry, are loathsome
unto God.

Their way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman; that is,
extreme loathsome. All sin is defiling, and so loathsome, abominable unto God,
who is holy, yea, holiness it self; but murder and idolatry are most
hateful, and most loathsome unto him; Psalm: 5.6. The bloody man is abhorred of
God, and he lets him not live out half his days, Psalm: 55.23. and Jer: 44.4.
The Lord calls idolatry, An abominable thing which he hates; he hates and
loathes it infinitely.

Secondly, Observe

Men by their own sinful doings, do bring evils, mischief and destruction
upon themselves.

When the house of Israel dwelt in their own Land, they defiled it by their own
way, and by their doings; wherefore I poured my fury upon them. Had they not
sinned, nor walked in evil ways, they had not met with fury; but because their
ways were wicked, bloody and idolatrous, therefore they had fury, and fury
poured out abundantly, their own evil doings brought destruction upon them;
Prove: 11.5. The wicked shall fall by his own wickedness: Jer: 2.19. Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee: Jerusalems own sin was her ruin. And David
tells us how God will deal with wicked men, Psalm: 94.23. He shall bring upon
them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their wickedness. Its ill
work wicked ones are about, they make Fetters for their own feet, and build
houses for to fall upon their own heads; so mischievous is the nature of sin,
that it damnifies and destroys the parents of it.

Thirdly, Observe

What judgments soever God brings upon sinners, he is just and righteous in so
doing.

God poured fury upon them, he drove them out of their own Country, he
scattered them up and down among heathens, whose language they understood not,
who were bitter and harsh toward them; and all this was not more, no not so
much as their sins deserved; According to their way, and their doings, I judged
them, says the Lord; I did them no wrong, they had not any cause to complain
of me, the fault was their own. Whatever Gods proceedings are with any Nation,
Family, or Person, he is righteous; for Psa^: 145.17. The Lord is righteous: in
all his ways, and holy in all his works, there is no spot cleaves to his hand,
or any action thereof.

Fourthly, Observe

Its a grievous provoking thing, when Gods people who profess his truth and
worship, give occasion to the enemies thereof to blaspheme and speak
reproachfully.

The Jews being among the Babylonians spoke and did such things as gave
occasion to them to blaspheme; When they entered unto the heathen, they
profaned my holy name: This was a great grief and provocation of God, that his
people being afflicted for their sins, yet should carry it so sinfully as to
give them advantage of dishonouring God, his Truths, Worship, and Servants;
Isa: 52.5. God complains that his name was blasphemed continually every day.
The Babylonians watched the Jews, and catched all advantages to profane the
name of the Lord; this was their daily language, These are the people of the
Lord, and are gone forth out of his Land; he could not, or would not keep them
out of our hands, he is a weak, unfaithful, unholy God, and his people are
like unto him. When David gave occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme, it brought forth sad effects, or rather had sad consequents, the
death of the child, and sword at his door for ever, 2 Samuel: 12. Those therefore
who profess the true Religion should be exceeding careful, wherever they be
come, that they walk answerable to the Religion they profess, that they avoid
all sin, and do good, that so the name of God may be glorified, and not
profaned or blasphemed.

Fifthly, Observe

Heathens and heathenish spirits are glad of occasions and advantages against
the true God, his ways and people.

The Babylonians said, These are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out
of his Land. They were glad they had matter to insult and blaspheme; what is
your God better then ours? ye do the things we do; and what is his Land better
then this Land? have not we Corn, Wine, and Oil, Milk and Honey, as well and as
much as you had in that Land? why is Canaan so cried up, and Jerusalem so
magnified? our Assyria and our City Babylon are as good, as excellent as they,
yea far beyond them.

Verses 21, 22, 23, 24.
But I had pity for mine holy Name, which the house of Israel had profaned
among the heathen, whither they went.

Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord God, I do not this
for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy Names sake, which ye have
profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.

And I will sanctify my great Name which was profaned among the heathen, which
ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the
Lord, says the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you, before their eyes.

For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all
Countries, and will bring you into your own Land.


THese verses contain the ground of the Jews restoration, which is the fourth
general part of the Chapter; they being in captivity, and sinning there
greatly, they caused the name of God to be profaned by the heathens, and so
deserving nothing but confusion, he pityed them, and for his names sake
delivered them; which name of God is set out by two adjuncts, or epithites.

1. Holy. 2. Great.
Verse. 21. But I had pity for my holy Name.
The Hebrew is, And I spared upon the Name of my holiness; that is, I spared
them upon the account of my holy Name; I would not suffer that to be profaned
so by the heathen, and therefore did deliver them. The Septuagint is (...), I
spared them for my holy Names sake, I had a tender respect unto my Name, which
being holy, I would not suffer to lie under heathenish oblequies.

Which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen whither they went.
God is styled in Scripture, The Holy One of Jacob, Isa: 29.23. The Holy One of
Israel, Psalm: 78.41. The Holy One, Isa: 40.23. And the Jews above all Nations
and People in the world should have had a special care of the name of their
God, that the holiness thereof might have been maintained; but they forgot God
in Babylon, did wickedly, and so gave occasion to the heathens to blaspheme his
holy Name.

Verse. 22. I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel.
They deserved not such a mercy at the hands of God, as reduction out of
Babylon into Canaan; they were defiled with blood and idolatry, which moved God
to cast them out of their Land, and scatter them among the heathen, but they
did nothing to incline God to show them the least favor; had they had
according to their deserts, they should never have been set at liberty, but
have perished utterly in their captivity: They might think, because they were
circumcised, came of David, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and were the only people
God had in the world, that therefore God would do much for their sakes; but to
take them off from such conceits, the Lord makes open profession, that what he
was about to do, was not for their sakes.

But for mine holy Names sake.
Gods name is sometimes put for himself, as Psalm. 33.21. We have trusted in his
holy Name; that is, in God himself: Sometimes its put for his power, Prove:
18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower; that is, his Omnipotence is such
a Tower: Sometimes its put for the Attributes and divine perfections of God,
Psalm. 8.1. O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! that is, How
excellent are thine Attributes! Sometimes its put for the fame and glory of
God, as 2 Samuel: 7.23. To make himself a name; that was, to make himself famous
and glorious. The two last may be understood here by name: the heathens said,
God was not wise, not faithful, not omnipotent, that would let his people go
into captivity, and become servants unto us; yea, its evident by his peoples
doings what a God he is; they are an unholy people, and he is an unholy God;
and so his fame and glory were eclipsed: therefore says God, For mine holy
Names sake, which ye have profaned among the Heathen, I will vindicate my name,
and make heathens know, and you know that I am a wise, a faithful, an
Allmighty, and holy God.

Verse. 23. And I will sanctify my great name.
I will vindicate my name from all aspersions laid upon it, and make it known
to Heathens, and to you O house of Israel, by punishing them for their idolatry
and other wickednesses, and by bringing you out of captivity, that I am a God
of power, wisdom, faithfulness and holiness. God sanctifies his name when
he clears it from disgrace and reproach cast thereupon, and makes it appear as
it is in it self, glorious and holy. Gods name has many Epithites given unto
it in the Word; its said to be glorious, Ps. 72.19. Excellent, Psalm. 148.13.
Dreadful, Mal. 1.14. Holy, verse. 21. of this Chapter; and here Great. God has
done great and wonderful things in the world, whereupon he has a great name,
not only in Israel, Psalm. 76.1. but all the world over, Psalm: 8.9. Many men
have had great names, yet nothing comparable to the name of the Lord.

Which was profaned among the Heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of
them.
The Jews being under the Babylonish yoke for their sins, did not humble
themselves before God, repent and turn from their wicked ways, that so Gods
name might have been sanctified among the Heathen; but they persisted in their
wicked ways, and were worse than the Heathens among whom they were scattered,
and so occasioned the Heathens to speak evil of their God, their Religion, and
Worship; and not only so, but themselves profaned Gods name, they rejected the
God of Israel and his ways, saying, We will be as the Heathen, as the familyes
of the Countries, to serve wood and stone, Ezekiel: 20.32. They made the God of
Israel like the heathen gods, and his ways like theirs; which was a great
profanation of him and his name.

And the heathens shall know that I am the Lord, says the Lord God, when I
shall be sanctified in you, before their eyes.
When the Lord should manifest his mercy toward them, and put forth his power
to bring them out of Babylon, then was he sanctified in the midst of them, then
he did vindicate his name from all aspersions, and made the Jews and
Babylonians know, that he was an holy, faithful, wise, merciful, and an
Allmighty God; he would make his name honorable before them all, which had
been profaned.

Verse. 24. For I will take you from among the Heathen.
The Heathen make full account you are theirs, that you shall never get out of
their borders, or return into your own Land; they think that their idol gods
are stronger then I, who am the God of Israel; but they shall find it
otherwise, for I will by a strong hand take you from among the heathen,

And gather you out of all Countries.
They were dispersed into diverse Countries, into the 127 Provinces that were
under Ahasuerus his government, Esther 3.8. and it seemed improbable that they
should ever be gathered out of so many Countries; but the Lord tells them for
their comfort, that he would gather them out of all Countries; no distance of
place, or difficulty in any place, should impede his Congregating of them.

And will bring you into your own Land.
After the seaventy years of their captivity were expired, the Lord set them at
liberty, and brought them back to the Land of Canaan, their own Land, because
they inherited it from their fathers, unto whom the Lord had given it. This was
a glorious and great work, viz: the bringing the Jews out of Babylon, and all
the Countries where they were scattered, into Canaan, and did prefigure the
salvation of the Church by Christ, and gathering of those that were his out of
all Nations unto it, according to what is in John 10.16. and John 11.52.

First, Observe

The name of the Lord is holy.

His Essence, his Will, his Attributes, his Works, his Word, are his Name: All
these set out God, make him known, and so are his name, even the name of his
holiness, or his holy name. There is no name under Heaven like unto the Lords;
its an holy name, and so glorious; a great name, and so dreadful. We should
sanctify the name of God; which is done by believing, Number. 20.12. When Moses
and Aaron did not believe God, they did not sanctify his name; but when men
believe Gods Word, then they sanctify his name. Its done also by fearing to
displease him, Isa: 8.13. Isa. 29.23. Its done also by acknowledging his name
to be holy, Math: 6.9. when men praise him.

Secondly, Observe

The profaning of Gods holy name, as it is a trouble unto him, so it sticks and
abides upon him.

Other provocations pass away, but this settles upon his spirit; see here what
hold it took, verse. 20. They profaned my holy Name; and verse. 21. The house of
Israel profaned my holy name among the heathen; verse. 22. Mine holy name which
ye have profaned among the heathen. Thrice the Lord mentions their profaning of
his name; yea, in the next verse, as if he could not shake this act of theirs
out of his mind, he mentions it twice more, My name which was profaned, which
ye have profaned. Gods name being holy is dear unto him, and the profaning of
it makes deep impressions in his heart.

Thirdly, Observe

Temporal mercies are not merited at Gods hands by men.

I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel. What was it God did not for
their sakes? viz: deliver them from their Babylonish bondage, and bring them
into their own Country; these were temporal mercies: and though there were
Godly men amongst them, as Ezekiel, Daniel, Mordecai, Ezra, Nehemiah, and
others, yet with all their prayers, fastings, suffering and holiness, they did
not merit these outward mercies; liberty, safety, plenty, possessions, are not
the merit or purchase of the creature, but the gift of God, 1 Timothy: 6.17. He
gives us all things richly to enjoy. Have men more or less of these outward
things, they are upon free gift, not any defert: and if we deserve not temporal
things, much less do, or can we deserve spiritual and eternal things, which
are of a transcendent nature; if we do not deserve an outward deliverance, an
earthly Canaan, how shall we deserve a spiritual deliverance, an Heavenly
Canaan? all things of that nature are free gifts, Luke 12.32. Rom: 6.23.

Fourthly, Observe

The good God does unto his Church, be it temporal or spiritual, is for his own
sake.

What I do (says God) I do it for mine holy names sake; there is nothing to
move me but my own name, that is holy, great, and glorious, and I will for my
names sake do much for my Church and People. That they were preserved in
Babylon, was for his holy names sake; that they were brought out of Babylon,
was for his holy names sake; that they were replanted in Canaan, was for his
holy names sake; that they had a Temple, Sacrifices, Priests, Prophets,
Ordinances again, was for his names sake: when they were near to destruction
often in former days, God wrought for his names sake, Ezekiel: 20. so Isa: 48.8,
9. Its not for the enemies sake, that God does preserve or deliver his people;
nor for their sakes, their prayers, tears, faith, obedience, holiness, that he
does great things for them, bestow great mercies upon them, but it is for his
own names sake. For man's sake God cursed the earth, Gen: 8.21. but its for his
names sake that he blesses it; the choicest mercies Gods people have, are for
his names sake; they have pardon of sin for his names sake, Psalm. 25.11. 1 John
2.12. Purging of sin for his names sake, Psalm: 79.9. Leading in the paths of
righteousness for his names sake, Psalm: 23.3. Quickening of their dead and dull
hearts for his names sake, Psa: 143.11. Though his people much offend him, yet
he forsakes them not for his great names sake, 1 Samuel: 12.22. The Lord does all
freely and for the honor of his name; let us then say with the Prophet,
Whatever we have, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the
glory. Not unto us who are thy creatures, not unto us who are Tools in thy
hand, but to thy name (which is the ground, root, and spring of all our
mercies) be the glory, all the glory, and that everlastingly.

Fifthly, Observe

God will not suffer his holy and great name always to lie under aspersions
and reproaches of men.

I will sanctify my holy and great name which was profaned among the heathen,
even in the midst of them. He will vindicate his honor and glory. Great men
when their names are blemished do stand upon it, and will vindicate them with
much cost and labor: so God, when wicked ones have profaned his name, and
darkened the glory thereof, will stand upon it, and do that which shall clear
his name before all his enemies. Goliath for many days defied the God of
Israel, and the Armies of Israel; but not long after the Lord vindicated his
holy and great name by stirring up and strengthening of David to take off his
head, 1 Samuel: 17.45, 51. When the King of Assyria and Rabshakeh blasphemed the
name of God, as they did, Isa: chap. 36. and 37. did not the Lord quickly send
an Angel and destroy their great Army of one hundred fourscore and five
thousand, and so by this stroke of his made his holy and great name glorious
and dreadful. He will scatter the smoke and venomous vapors, that ascend from
the tongues and lives of profane persons to hinder the beams of his glorious
name from shining, as the wind scatters clouds from before the Sun; and as by
destruction of his enemies, so by delivering of his servants.

Sixthly, Observe

When God does great things for his people, and they honor his name for them,
then very heathens will be convinced, acknowledge God, and give glory to his
name.

The heathen shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall be sanctified in you,
that is, in your deliverance before their eyes; then you will magnify my name,
and they will magnify my name which has been profaned; then they will see and
say that I am another kind of God then their idol gods are, that I am
omnipotent, faithful, holy, wise. Psalm. 126.2. When the Lord turned the
captivity of his people; as they said, The Lord has done great things for us;
so the heathens said, The Lord has done great things for them. So much of God
appeared in taking them out of Babylon, that Jewish and Babylonish Tongues were
constrained to speak out the power, truth and goodness of God.

Seventhly, Observe

Things difficult, and in the eye of man impossible, are facile to, and
feasible by the power of God.

The Jews were among the heathens, who by their Laws, power, and vigilance kept
them in great bondage; they were scattered into one hundred twenty and seven
Provinces, Esther 8.5. with Chap. 1^ 1. and so it seemed impossible that these
should be drawn out and carried to Canaan, which was so far off, especially for
them who were seated near India; but what says the Lord to this? I will take
you from among the heathen. He would but put forth his hand and lay hold of
them, saying, Come, go with me, and it should be done; he would gather them out
of all Countries, as an Hen gathers her Chickens that are dispersed up and down
among the Bushes, Trees, or Weeds in an Orchard: And as he carried them upon
Eagles wings from Egypt to Canaan, so would he bring them upon the same wings
from Babylon to Canaan. This work God is upon in these days of Christ, he is
bringing out of all Nations some unto Christ, and gathering them into
spiritual Canaan.

Verse. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean;
from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you.


WE are now come to the last general part of this Chapter; which consists in
the multiplication of promises, both Spiritual and Temporal, with the ground of
them.

The Spiritual are, 1. Remission of sins, verse. 25, 29, 33. 2. Regeneration,
verse. 26. 3. Sanctification, verse. 27. 4. Renovation of the Covenant between
God and them, verse. 28. 5. Repentance, verse. 31.


The Temporal are, 1. Repossession of their Land, verse. 28. 2. Plentiful
maintenance, verse. 29, 30. 3. Re-edifying of their Cities and waste places,
verse. 33, 35. 4. Increase of men, verse. 37, 38.


The ground of all these sweet and great promises is Gods free grace, not man's
desert, verse. 32.

Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you.
When they were called and come out of Babylon, then would the Lord sprinkle
clean water upon them. The Jews by water mean the abundance of outward things.
Some others interpret it of the water in baptism; but neither does abundance
of outward, nor the water of baptism cleanse from the pollution of idols: For
after their return from Babylon, Jason sent money for the sacrifice of
Hercules; he, Menelaus and others, fell to the customs of the Gentiles, desired
to be like them in all things, they set not by the honor of their Fathers, but
liked the glory of the Gentiles best of all, 2 Maccab. 4. And are not many
baptized ones amongst the Papists and others, idolaters? Some other sense of
the word therefore must we seek out. By water, the blood of Christ is intended,
say the best Expositors. Some make Grace the thing, but that is too general,
unless we limit it to the blood of Christ, which of Grace is given to wash
sinners with. These words, I will sprinkle clean water upon you, have some
allusion unto the waters mingled with the ashes of the red Cow, which being
sprinkled by a branch of Hyssope upon the unclean party, he was cleansed; and
this water was called The water of separation or purification for sin, Numb:
19.9. The Septuagint call it (...), The water of sprinkling; and so the 18. and
19. verses express it. This red Cow figured out Christ in his afflictions and
sufferings; and the water mingled with the ashes of it, the blood of Christ,
which from hence is called The blood of sprinkling, Heb: 12.24.

The water they used in sprinkling was clean water, running or spring water,
free from all filth; so the blood of Christ is pure, he was without sin, any
blemish, or spot, his blood was precious and pure, 1 Pet: 1.19. and here its
called clean water.

This sprinkling of clean water upon them, is the application of the blood of
Christ, by the Spirit of God: as the Priest was to take of the blood of the red
Heifer with his finger, and to sprinkle it; so God by the hand and finger of
his Spirit does take and sprinkle the blood of Christ, that is, apply the fruit
and benefit of it unto the hearts of men, 1 Cor: 6.11.

And ye shall be clean.
There be three things among other which water serves for, viz: to cool, to
nourish, to cleanse: 1. It quenches thirst caused by heat, and so cool; the
like does the blood of Christ, being drunk by faith, John 7.37. 2. It
nourishes and causes growth; and Christ's blood does the same, John 6.55. 3.
It cleanses, which is the use of it here mentioned, water washes away the
filth of garments, vessels, and persons; so the blood of Christ is a cleansing
thing, Heb: 9.13, 14. If the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an
He^fer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God? The argument is a minori ad majus; if the blood of typical
sacrifices could do that to the flesh for which they were appointed, much more
the blood of Christ the true sacrifice, will do that to the soul and conscience
for which it was appointed, viz: purge away the guilt of sin; otherwise the
honor and efficacy of the Type, should be greater than the honor and efficacy
of the Substance; which the Apostle denies when he tells us, Types were shadows
of good things to come, Heb: 10 1. This cleansing is the remission of their
sins through the blood of Christ, or the justifying of their persons, so as
they are before God without spot, or fault, Col. 1.14. Rom: 5.9. Rev: 14.5.
When sins are forgiven, the persons are clean in the fight of God.

From all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you.
They had State defilements, and Temple defilements, Family and Personal
filthinesses, Zeph: 3.3, 4. Micah 3.9, 10, 11. Ezekiel 22. Jer: 6.13. Chap:
7.9. Whatever their filthinesses were, God would cleanse them; and because
idolatry is a sin which exceedingly defiles and provokes the Lord to jealousy,
Exodus: 20.5. To fury, verse. 18. of this Chap: and they might apprehend there was
no mercy for them; therefore the Lord mentions the filthiness of idols, and
tells them He will cleanse them from that filthiness. Its not material water
washes from the filth of idolatry, but spiritual water.

First, Observe

When it pleases God to gather his people out of Babylon, and to bring them to
Sion, then he will multiply mercies upon them, and do for them great things.

I will gather you from among the heathen, out of all Countrey^, and bring you
into your own Land; and then will I sprinkle you with clean water, then will I
give you a new heart, then will I put my Spirit into you, then will I call for
the Corn, and multiply the fruit of the tree and increase of the field. After
great afflictions, God bestows great kindnesses; after sharp sufferings, he
gives solid comforts; Isa: 54.7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but
with great mercies will I gather thee. Berachamim gedolim. When God gathers his
out of Babylon, a state of confusion; that is mercy; and when he brings them
into Sion, to behold the order, beauty, and glory thereof, that is great mercy;
and God will not leave them there, but go on with them and heap great mercies
still upon them, see Isa: 49.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Jer. 32.37, 38, 39, 40, 41.

Secondly, Observe

Justification is a gracious act of God upon a sinner.

I will sprinkle clean water upon you. Its Gods prerogative to forgive, and
blot out sins, Mark 2.7. Isa: 43.25. and this he does freely, its an act of
grace and mercy, Rom: 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace. Now in this
act nothing is done in a sinner, there is no grace infused, no change made in
the heart by it, there be no (...) therein, its upon a sinner; justifying grace
is subjectively in God, objectively on man; for its a judicial act of God which
puts nothing into the creature, Rom: 3.22. Its upon all them that do believe.

Thirdly, Observe

The blood of Christ applied by the Spirit of God is efficatious to free
sinners from the guilt of their sins, and of all their sins, of what bind
soever they be.

I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean. Their sins were
great, very great, they were guilty of blood, oppressing the widow and
fatherless, of idolatry, of despising and profaning holy things, Ezekiel: 22.8.26.
They were under the guilt of all crying and notorious sins, Ezekiel: 16.47. worse
then Sodom or Samaria; then the Nations, Ezekiel: 5.7. yet the Lord would cleanse
them by the blood of Christ; there was virtue in that to cleanse them from
their old spots, from their deep guilt, yea, from all their guilt, they should
be clean from all their filthinesses. As water washes all the filth out of a
cloth, so does the blood of Christ all sin out of the soul, 1 John: 1.7. The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, the guilt of our thoughts,
words, acts, neglects; there is no sin defiles the conscience so, but the blood
of Christ will purge it away, Heb: 9.14. Chap: 1.3. Christ's blood is of great
virtue, it purges away all sin, and procures peace, Coloss: 1.20. So that being
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, as it is Rom: 5.9.

Fourthly, Observe

All sin defiles and makes guilty before God, yet some sins defile more then
others, and make more deeply guilty.

God would cleanse them from all their filthiness, from every sin that had
poluted them, and made them guilty; and from their idols which had made them
more deeply guilty: Idolatry has more guilt adhering to it, then many other
sins, that is a sin breaks Covenant with God, deposes God, and sets up an Idol
in his stead.

Verse 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh.


THis is another great promise, even a promise of Regeneration; and in it there
is considerable, 1. The party promising, I, I, I, I. 2. The things promised, 1.
A new heart. 2. A new spirit. 3. Removal of the stony heart. 4. An heart of
flesh.
3. The parties to whom the Lord will do these things, You, You, You. 4. The
manner of Gods doing these things, which is by giving, putting, and taking away.


A new heart also will I give you.
By heart in Scripture, is signified the judgment and understanding, Ephesians:
4.18. The will and affections, Prove: 23.26. and the conscience, 1 John 3.20.
all which are here comprehended in the word heart. New notes sometimes that
which is for substance new, totally new, as new ropes, Judges 16.11, 12. A new
wife, Deuteronomy: 24.5. New gods, Deuteronomy: 32.17. And sometimes that which is only for
quality new, as the new Moon, Isa: 66.23. From one new Moon to another; The
Moon is not new for substance, but renewed with light, new in regard of
quality; so New tongues, Mark 16.17. They had not their old Tongues plucked or
cut out of their mouths, and other new ones put in; but these Tongues they had
before, had new Languages put into them, new gifts and graces. Here then by A
new heart is not intended one new for substance or nature of it, but the same
heart altered for the qualities of it, renewed and endued with other qualities
then it had before; such qualities are wrought in the heart, that a man
thereupon is said to be regenerate or born again, John 3.3, 5, 6, 7. and to be
a new creature, Gal* 6.15.

This new heart lies not in those common gifts which many have, yet without
alteration in their hearts. Judas had a covetous, an earthly, an old heart,
notwithstanding those great gifts he had, He could cast out Devils, and heal
all manner of sicknesses, Matthew: 10.1, 4. And those Matthew: 7.22, 23. Who had
the gift of prophecy, of casting out Devils, and working wonders, had no new
hearts, for Christ sends them going for workers of iniquity; but it lies in
grace infused, which is a principle of light and life, supernatural and
permanent. Man since the fall of Adam is in a state of darkness and death,
Ephesians. 5.8. Chap: 2.5. and when grace is infused, that brings light and life
unto the heart; John 8.^2. its called The light of life; and when a blind heart
sees, a dead heart lives, there is a great and glorious alteration, so that it
is become a new heart, it has a new principle which is supernatural and
permanent, called The Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Divine to show the
supernaturalnesse of it, and Nature to show the permanency of it.

And a new spirit will I put within you.
These very words we had Ezekiel: 11.19. where they were largely opened: New
spirit there, was interpreted to be those excellent qualities and graces God
put into the soul, and showed upon what account they were called Spirit and
New. Here I conceive a new spirit is added Exegetically being the same with a
new heart.

This new heart, or new spirit causes the party in whom it is to look at God
as a Father, and so to honor him, Mal. 1.6. To love him, 1 John 5.1. To fear
him, 1 Pet. 1.17. To yield obedience to him, Rom: 6.17. 1 Pet: 1.14, 15.
Patiently to bear his chastisements, Heb: 12.6, 7, 8, 9. To eschew sin and work
righteousness, 1 John 5.18. Chap: 3.9, 10. To acknowledge how he has offended
him, Luke 15.18. To pray fervently unto him, Rom: 8.15. To be like unto him in
mercifullnesse and doing of good, Luke 6.36. To delight in his ways, and to
have communion with him, and his Son Christ, 1 John 1.3. To worship him in
spirit and truth, John 4.23. To be thankful always unto him for all things,
Ephesians. 5.20. To live nobly and spiritually, minding the things of Heaven, Rom:
8.5. 1 Pet: 1.14. John 3.6. 2 Cor: 5.16. And to love those that are regenerate,
1 John 5.1. and these doing so, God their Father has a special care of them,
and love unto them, Matthew. 6.26.32. Luke 11.13. Chap: 12.32.

Will I give you, will I put within you.
The new heart, and new spirit comes from God; he that to the Author of every
good and perfect gift, is the Author of the same: Now in the working of this
new heart, and new spirit, there be several Attributes of God set on work: As

First, His infinite mercy. That he should mind sinners, who have old, rotten,
filthy, hard, dead hearts within them, so at enmity with God, that they would
pull him out of Heaven had they power to do it; for God to mind such hearts and
spirits, and make them new so as to affect him and his ways, argues
unspeakable mercy, loving kindness superabundant. It was a time of love when
God saw Jerusalem in her blood, and said unto her live, Ezekiel: 10. It was
infinite love, infinite mercy for him to pity Jerusalem in such a case, and to
say so unto her: the same it is when God makes of an old heart a new heart, of
an old spirit a new spirit.

Secondly, Gods infinite power is employed in this work. The making of a dead
heart to live, a blind heart to see, an old heart and spirit to become new,
requires an omnipotent arm. By the preaching of the word men have great
convictions, strong resolutions, and are persuaded almost to be Christians; but
those convictions and resolutions dye away, and they never come altogether to
be Christians, altogether to be new hearted, and new spirited, till the Lord
put forth his allmighty power, and create new hearts and spirits in them; its a
work of creation, Psalm. 51.10. 2 Cor. 4.6. Ephesians. 2.10. And such hearts and
spirits are called new creatures, Gal: 6.15. 2 Cor: 5.17.

Thirdly, Infinite wisdom. The heart of man is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked; who can know it? Jer: 17.9. Its beyond the knowledge of
man; it has so many windings, turnings, pretenses, shifts, arguments, wiles,
depths, methods, as that none but God knows it; he being infinitely wise; can
answer all the objections, arguments, and subtle distinctions of the heart, so
that it shall be silent. Man's heart whilst its old, has the cunning of the
old Serpent in it, and pleads hard to keep its old principles, its old ungodly
lusts, its old ignorance, its old darkness, its old formal ways of worship,
its old fleshly confidences, its old delights and pleasures, its old company,
its old customs, its old aims and ends, which were self; it musters up many
arguments to defend these; and who can convince the heart of the evil of
these, and take it off from them, but God by his infinite wisdom? To make an
heart, or spirit, which has so many oldnesses in it, new, argues more skill
and wisdom then dwells in any creature.

Fourthly, His Infinite holiness and purity. When God takes an old heart which
is as dark as hell, as stinking as any Sepulcher, Math: 23.27. an old spirit
which is as unclean and loathsome as the Devils are; when he takes these, and
makes them new, he scatters darkness, abolisheth death, separating filthiness,
and instead thereof brings in marveilous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. A glorious life,
Ephesians. 4.18. And true holiness, verse. 24. which import that God is light
without darkness, life without possibility of dying, holiness without any
spot or imperfection. When the wind cleanses the air infected, pestilential
and stinking, it argues the wind is pure; when a vessel or house is noisome,
and one cleanses and sweetens them, as not enduring them in that condition, it
argues their cleanliness, and if they could make them new, it would argue it
much more; so here, God makes them new, He puts them into the fire that they
may be refined, and partake of his holiness, Heb: 12.10. Its Gods holy arm
which makes an unholy heart to become holy, and glorious in holiness.

The dignity and excellency of this new heart and new spirit, is worthy the
notice.

First, Its that does discriminate and difference a man from all others. They
that have old hearts, old spirits, and new hearts, new spirits, differ as much
from them, as light from darkness, life from death, and holiness from
filthiness: a man with a new heart, a new spirit, is a living man, whereas
others be dead, Ephesians. 2.1. He is a seeing man, whereas others be blind, 1 Jok:
5.20. 1 Cor: 2.14. He is pure, whereas others are filthy, 1 Pet. 2.9. Tit:
1.15. Hereby a man is differenced from all profane, civil, and moral men, from
all gifted men, from all hypocrites, what specious forms of religion and
holiness soever they have; whoever has a new spirit is distinguished from all
other spirits, yea from the Devils who are but unclean spirits.

Secondly, It does ennoble a man; A new heart and new spirit does not only
distinguish from others, but makes more excellent then others, Prove: 12.26. The
righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. Righteousness is one of the
qualities in the new heart, in the new spirit, Ephesians: 4.23, 24. and that
Nobilitates a man; such a one is born not of blood, that is, not of the Princes
and Nobles of the world, who stand upon their blood and greatness; nor of the
will of the flesh, that is, not in the ordinary way; nor of the will of man,
viz: not by education and School principles; but of God, John 1.13. He is
descended from the highest, the King of Kings, he is of the most Royal blood,
even the blood of God, Acts 20.28. Others are vile, but he is precious, Jerem:
15.19. 2 Pet. 1.1. He is partaker of the Divine Nature, and lives the life of
God, 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 4.18.

Thirdly, It fills them where it is with new joys. New things affect much;
when the Apostles had new tongues given them, they were greatly affected
therewith; and when men have new hearts, new spirits, they abound in joy: the
greater the mercy, the more full the joy; If when a sinner is converted, there
be joy in Heaven, what joy is in the sinners heart then? When Christ came to
Zacheus, and gave him a new heart, a new spirit, he was filled with joy, Luke
19. and new joys: Before his joy was to get money by any means, and treasure
it up; now his joy was to disperse, make satisfaction, and to give away, verse.
8, 9. His new heart begat in him new joys, and enabled him to joy in that he
could not do not think of before without sadness. So Paul, when he had a new
heart and spirit, he had new joys, fulness of them in those things he could
not rejoice in before, 2 Cor. 7.4. I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding
joyful in all our tribulations; and Chap: 12.10. He took pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses.
Here Is the excellency of a new heart and a new spirit, it fills with new joys
in God, in Christ, in the Promises, in the Saints, and inables us to rejoice
and glory in tribulations, Rom: 5.3.

Fourthly, It intitles us to diverse new and excellent things: As

First, To the New Covenant: When a man has a new heart and a new spirit, he
has an interest in the New Covenant, Jer: 31.31, 33. The law of sin, and
principles of Satan and the wo^ld, were writ in the old heart, and old spirit,
and so the party was under the Covenant with death and hell, Isa: 28.15. but in
the new heart is written, the Law of God, the Law of faith, Rom: 3.27. Heb:
8.10. and so they are under the New Covenant which is called Grace, Rom: 6.14.

Secondly, To New Names: Where there is newness of heart and spirit, there they
are sealed in their foreheads with new Names; their Title is New Creatures, 2
Cor. 5.17. The Seed of Abraham, Isa. 41.8. Servants of Righteousness, Romans
6.18. Children of Light, John 12.36. Conquerours, Rom: 8.37. Gods workmanship,
Ephesians. 2.10. Kings and Priests, Rev: 1.6. Temples of God, 1 Cor: 3.16. The
glory of God, Isa. 4.5. New born Babes, 1 Pet: 2.2. His Saints, Psalm. 149.9.
Vessels of Gold and Silver, 2 Timothy 2.20. Wise Virgins, Matthew: 25. Heirs of
Salvation, Heb: 1.14.

Thirdly, To a New Lord and Master: When their hearts were old Satan was their
Sovereign, They walked according to the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy:
2.26. His lusts they did execute, John 8.44. But having new hearts, they have a
new Lord, a new Master, and that is the Lord Christ, Phil: 1.1. Paul a servant
of Christ: He had a new heart, and now he had a new Master, which was Christ,
he would serve Satan no longer, but Christ, who dyed for sinners, that they
might live unto him, 2 Cor. 5.15. When the hearts and spirits of men are new,
they are dead to their old Masters, and have new, Rom: 7.4. Christ is the
Husband and Head of every one renewed by his grace, he is Lord and Master of
all such, 1 Cor. 7.22. Matthew: 23.8.

Fourthly, To a New Guard; Such have a Guard of Angels about them: before, as
they were without God, so without the protection of his Angels, exposed to all
dangers; but having new hearts and new spirits, being new creatures they have a
multitude of the Heavenly Host, not only to praise God for their new birth as
they did at Christ's birth, Luke 2.13. but to attend and protect them, Heb:
1.14. Are not the Angels ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be heirs of salvation? and none shall be such, but those that have
new hearts and new spirits, for flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor: 15.50.

Fifthly, To New Alliance this change is wrought in them: Blasphemers,
Idolaters, Adulterers, Drunkards, Murderers, Liars, Unbelievers, Hypocrites,
and all profane ones, they the very Devils themselves, John 8.44. But when they
have new hearts and new spirits, then they have new kindred; as a man that
marries a woman, all her kindred becomes his; so here, all that have new hearts
and spirits are his kindred who has a new heart, he is allied unto them all,
Math: 23.8. All ye are brethren. All the Saints throughout the earth, how
great, how learned, how rich, how gifted or gracious soever they be, are all
brethren; yea, the Angels are brethren unto those that have new hearts, Rev.
19.10.22.9. and that which is beyond all, Christ himself is their Brother and
Father; Math. 12.49, 50. Heb: 2.12, 13.

Sixthly, To the New Mansions in the City made without hands, John 14.2. says
Christ, In my Fathers house are many Mansions, and I go to prepare a place for
you; You have right and title to them, ye have new hearts, ye believe in God,
verse. 1. and I go to prepare and fit places for you in those Mansions.

Fifthly, The excellency of a new heart is this, That it sets an high price
upon the things of God, and a low price upon the things of the world, how
goodly soever they appear; whereas before the things of the world were
magnified, and the things of God slighted. When Paul had another heart, and
another spirit then before, then he had no confidence in the flesh, then he did
not value his great privileges, he counted them and all things but loss for
Christ, they did damnifie him rather then advantage him, and therefore looked
upon them as dung (...), things of no worth, chafe, dirt, excrements in
respect of Christ, his righteousness, and knowledge of him, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
all which had an excellency, and were so prized by Paul, that he was willing to
lay down his life for them, Acts 21.13. When Simon Magus offered the Apostles
money for to have power to give the Holy Spirit, by laying on of hands, Peter
in his own name, and in the name of the rest, said, Thy money perish with thee;
we value not bags of gold and silver, but the things of God, Acts 8.19, 20.
When the Conjurers had the Devils cast out of them, and new hearts given them,
they brought forth their books which they had highly valued, and burnt them
before all men, and so many they burnt as came to fifty thousand pieces of
silver, Acts 19.19. and instead of these, they prized the books of Moses, the
Prophets, and Apostles. A new heart sees excellency in spiritual things, and
says, It cannot over value them, but for other things it puts them under its
feet.

Sixthly, Its excellent in that it does really make God its end and aims at his
glory in its operations; before self was all, now God is all. Acts 20.23, 24.
Paul was told by the Spirit of God, that bonds and afflictions did abide him
every where, that his life was in danger; now had not Paul been a man of a new
heart and spirit, he would have shifted for himself, and let the preaching of
the Gospel have fallen; but being such an one, what says he? None of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so I may finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry, I have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God: That was Paul's end to make known the
grace of God in the Gospel toward poor sinners, that so they partaking of that
grace might give glory to God, and God be glorified by him. God and his glory
were so in his eye, that he gave out a rule for all Christians to eye and mind
God and his glory in all things, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Seventhly, Its the principle of eternal life and happiness: When God puts
life, light, and grace into the heart, and so makes it new, he has begun our
admission into Heaven and happiness; this new heart and spirit are the water
springs up into everlasting life, John 4.14. They are the Eagles wings will
carry you not only up to Heaven, but into Heaven.

Concerning this new heart and new spirit, there be diverse mistakes; many think
they have the same, when they have it not. There be several things which cause
men to judge so.

First, Outward Reformation. When men cease from their former lewd courses,
when they give over their drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, lying, oppression,
and other scandalous practices, they think themselves, and are reputed of
others to be new men, and so to have new hearts; but know, A man may have
escaped the pollutions of the world, have changed his manners, yet retain his
old heart: a Swine may be washed; and yet reserve her Swinish nature: Herod
reformed in many things, yet had an unreformed heart, Mark 6.20. Luke 3.20.
Chap. 9.9. The Scribes and Pharisees were whited Sepulchers, they had
beautiful outsides, they appeared righteous unto men, but what were their
hearts? were they not full of hypocrisy and iniquity? Matthew: 23.27, 28. Shame
among men, fear of punishment, death, hell, terrors of conscience,
afflictions, strength of reason, and hope of profits and reward, may make a man
reform his life and manners, his heart being still naught; a man formerly
deboist and wicked may become a new man, and yet not have a new heart.

Secondly, Moral virtues cause many to be deceived about this new heart:
because they are temperate, just, prudent, faithful to their friends, true in
their speeches, patient under afflictions, seek the public good, not their
own interest, are chaste, and courteous unto all, they thereupon conclude that
they have the new heart and new spirit here spoken of; but all these are no
more then were found in heathens; Scipio, Aristides, Cato, Aemilius, Lepidus,
Lucretia, and others, excelled in moral virtues. The Roman faith was in great
esteem in all the world, because the Romans kept their word, and made good
whatever they promised. Many Heathens excelled in morallities, and did virtuous
actions for virtues sake, yet they had no new hearts or spirits, they knew not
what regeneration was, they were strangers to the Life of God and Faith, they
attained to what they had by their own industry, and what they did was not done
according to the mind of God in his Word, and so referring to his glory; they
sought their own glory in all.

Thirdly, A form of godliness. When men have left their old ways of sin, and
taken up a way, or form of godliness which is new to them, they imagine
themselves to be new, and to have new hearts; they read, pray, hear, meditate
and worship God with their hearts, which they never did before, and hence they
ground a newness in their hearts. The Jews have a form of godliness at this
day, yet are they cast off of God and numbered amongst unbelievers, Rom: 11.20.
Such was their godliness, as persecuted true godliness, Acts. 13.50. 1 Thessalonians:
2.15. The Heathens had forms of godliness; Plato taught men not to sleep
without repentance for their sins; Hermes instructed them to pray earnestly
unto God, and continually for repentance to call upon him in the day, and not
to forget him in the night; they worshipped by nature, those were no gods,
Treatise of Moral Philosophy.
Gal. 4.8. Forms of worship they had, though they worshipped blindly; Socrates
saw further then the most of them, who said, God must be worshipped only that
way which he has appointed; yet neither Socrates, nor the rest of the Heathens
had new hearts. Christians have forms of godliness, yet all among them have
not new hearts; among Papists and Protestants are many religious, but few
pious, they have the form of godliness, but not the power: Painted fire is not
true fire, and all that worship God do not worship him in newness of spirit;
the most do worship him with old hearts.

Fourthly, Some are deceived upon this ground, that they have the Law in their
hearts, approve of truth, make conscience of their ways, have peace within,
and so determine their hearts are new. But here is a great mistake, the Law is
in men's hearts by nature, Rom: 2.14, 15. The Gentiles which had not the Law,
did by nature the things of the Law, and so showed the work of the Law written
in their hearts. When they did ill their consciences did accuse them, and when
they did well they did excuse them, and so they had peace; here was nothing
supernatural: where there is a new heart, a new spirit, there is something
supernatural; men have not these by descent from their parents, but they are
given, they are put in by God, I will give you a new heart, and I will put
within you a new spirit. The Law that all men have in their hearts is by virtue
of Creation, not of the new Covenant, that is another Law, Jer: 31.33. which is
from grace, not from nature; where this Law is written, the heart is new, and
so does not only approve of truth in general, but knows and approves of truth
as it is in Christ, Ephesians: 4.21. and as it is according to godliness. Truth in a
new heart provokes unto Godliness, and makes conscientious toward God and
men, Acts 24.16. Looking at Christ for peace, Rom: 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, the conscience being purged from dead works by
the blood of Christ: Men have sound peace in their new hearts; Its false peace
which men of old hearts have, they bribe their consciences with doing
something, and that is their peace.

Fifthly, New Relations make some to fancy they have new hearts and new
spirits; they are under Church privileges, they are Citizens of Sion,
inhabitants of Jerusalem, in relation to Christ and his Ordinances, this may
be, and yet without newness of heart or spirit; Relations make not alterations
in men's hearts. Simon Magus was baptized, stood in relation to Christ and the
Gospel, yet his heart was the same it was before, Acts 8. The Jews gloried they
were the seed of Abraham, John 8.33. Yet they were of their father the Devil,
verse. 44. and had bloody hearts, verse. 40. seeking to kill Christ, Rom: 2.28,
29. Outward privileges may be, as Circumcision of the flesh, where there is no
Circumcision of the heart; and Paul tells us, Gal: 6.15. That Circumcision nor
uncircumcision avail any thing, but a new creature; they may be where the new
creature is not; himself had many privileges, Phil. 3. when he was far from
newness of heart.

Sixthly, Gifts, They breed mistakes in diverse persons: those that have choice
and great gifts persuade themselves they have new hearts and spirits, that they
are gracious and good; but there is a vast difference between gifts and grace.

1. Gifts make not a man a Christian: Heathens had great gifts, as Tully,
Seneca, Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch; Its grace makes a Christian; the Gentiles
were not Christians, and so not acceptable to God, till they were sanctified by
the Holy Spirit, Rom: 15.16. They may make a man an useful man, not a good man,
Acts 11.24. Its faith and the graces of the Spirit make a good man.

2. All gifts do seldom or never meet in one man, but graces do, they are the
fruits of the Spirit, and grow all in a new heart, John 1.16. Of his fulness
have we all received, and grace for grace. Graces go together, not Gifts.

3. A man may have Gifts and not be saved. Judas had gifts, yet was a son of
perdition: The beast came up out of the earth had miraculous Gifts, and the
false Prophets also, and notwithstanding their Gifts, they were both cast into
the Lake of fire burning with Brimstone, Rev: 13.11, 13, 14. Chap. 19.20. But
he that has a new heart and new spirit has grace, and so shall be saved, John
3.6. 2 Cor. 3.17. He that is born of the Spirit, is a new creature, he has
grace, and shall be saved, Acts 15.11.

Seventhly, Activeness. Some men growing active for God and the public,
Zealous against corrupt practices in Church or State, gather from hence that
they have new hearts and spirits; they were not so before, and how can it be
that such new operations and activeness should be in them, and from them, and
they not be men of new hearts? When men are called to public employments,
they may have other hearts then they had before, yet not such a new heart as is
here spoken off. Saul had another heart, (1 Samuel: 10.9.) when anointed to be
King, yet not a new heart. Credit, profit, and conscience misinformed may make
men zealous and active, when they have no other then their old hearts. Paul
before his conversion was very active and exceedingly zealous of the Traditions
of his fathers, Gal: 1.13, 14. How active are Jesuits? how zealous are Papists
and many others? and that from erroneousness of their consciences, not newness
of their spirits.

First, Observe

Men's hearts and spirits by nature are old, they are degenerated from that
innocence, simplicity, and purity, Adam was created in, they are corrupted ever
since he eat of the forbidden fruit.

Psalm. 14.1. Men are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none
that does good; Psalm. 53.3. Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether
become filthy; there is none that does good, no not one. Such as their hearts
are, such are their actions; old hearts have answerable operations, Psalm: 58.3.
They go astray as soon as they be born. They brought corrupt hearts and natures
with them into the world, and their first actings were against God, truth,
ju^^^ce, and holiness; men by nature have hearts full of old things, 2 Cor.
5.17. Old things are not passed away, but abide: Old principles, old lusts, old
desires, old thoughts, old reasonings, old enmityes, old confidences, old
hardness, old deceitfulness, old frowardness, and old naughtiness, are all
found in men's hearts till they are made new, Genesis 6.5. Math: 15.19.

Secondly, Observe

A new heart, a new spirit, is not from the power or will of man, but from the
grace of God.

A new heart will I give you, a new spirit will I put into you. God bade them (
Ezekiel: 18.31.) make themselves new hearts, and new spirits, but they were not
able to do it, he promises therefore to do it for them. Its Gods way in his
holy Word to command and call for that at the hands of men, which he intends to
give and work, as Phil: 2.12. Work out your own salvation; and in the next
verse its said, Its God which works in you, both to will and to do: Isa:
1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean; Ezekiel: 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean: Deuteronomy: 10.16. Circumcise the foreskin of your heart,
they could not do it, therefore ( Deuteronomy. 30.6.) the Lord thy God will circumcise
thine heart. These Scriptures evince, that it is the Lord himself who performs
what he commands; its not man's will or power which produces the new heart, its
the gracious and mighty hand of God which effects it; and when he will work who
shall let it? shall man's will? yes, if God did only propound arguments,
command, exhort, invite, encourage, threaten, it might, but God does promise to
do the thing, To give a new heart, to put in a new spirit; and should the
liberty of man's will hinder it, how should God be faithful? but rather then he
will be found unfaithful, he will overpower the corrupt wills of men, and make
them flexible to his will. The efficacy of grace depends not upon man's will,
embracing, or refusing what is tendered, but on the good pleasure and power of
God, Phil: 2.13. When it pleases God to put forth his power the wo^^ shall be
done, the new heart and new spirit shall be wrought in the man, notwithstanding
all the oldnesses therein.

And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh.
In Chap: 11. verse. 19. the words are, I will take the stony heart out of their
flesh; and here they are, I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh.
Much was spoken of them there; something I shall speak now.

The stony heart.
The Hebrew is, The heart of stone, that is, the heart which in a spiritual
sense is like a stone.

First, A stone is senseless, it feels or perceives nothing; and so is a stony
heart, Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past feeling; they were so accustomed to sin,
that they felt not any evil in sin; Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati.
Zech: 14.4. we read of a Mountain that cleav'd in sunder at the presence of
Christ; but the hearts of the Jews were so stony that they were not at all
affected at the presence or voice of Christ.

Secondly, A stone is hard and impenetrable, a Knife, a Sword, a Nail, will not
enter into it; so a stony heart is so hard that the Word of God has no
entrance into it, Psalm. 119.130. The entrance of thy Words gives light; when
it enters into the heart it does so; but though the Word be of a sharp and
piercing nature, yet it enters not into a stony heart, its impenetrable, Zech:
7.11. They refused to hearken, and pulled away their shoulder, and stopped
their ears that they should not hear; yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant
stone: No truths, no arguments, no invitations, no prayers, no tears, no
mercies, no threats, no judgments, do conquer or prevail with it; neither
wind, rain, thunder, lightning, sunshine, heat, cold, do change the nature of
a Rock.

Thirdly, A stone is unpolished and inept for building and other uses, till it
be hewn, sawn, and brought into some other form; so a stony heart is an heart
unpolished, unfit to lie in any part of Gods building, or for any service of
his, till it be polished, hewn, sawn, hammered, and brought into some other
frame. As a stone cannot change it self, no more can a stony heart. The Devil
knew that the stones, Matthew. 4.3. could not turn themselves into bread,
therefore says to Christ, Command that they be made bread. He knew they might
be made bread meet to eat; and so stony hearts, though they cannot make
themselves fleshy, yet they may be made fleshy, they may be brought to another
form, and so be fit for spiritual employments and uses.

Fourthly, A stone does resist and repel what falls upon it; stones do often
break the instruments strikes them, and force them back, there is a resisting
in them; so in stony hearts there is much resistancie, Luke 4.28, 29. All they
in the Synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, rose up
and thrust him out of the City, and led him unto the brow of the hill, that
they might cast him down headlong. Their flinty, rocky hearts resisted and
rejected all the precious truths Christ had delivered, and made them fall fowl
upon him, and seek to spill his blood; 2 Timothy: 3.8. As Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith. They were men of stony hearts resisting the
faith, Acts 7.51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist etc.

Fifthly, A stone is heavy, Prove: 27.3. and its motion is downwards, its earth
hardened, and its whole tendency is to the earth; so a stony heart is heavy,
earthy, and tends downwards altogether, Ezekiel: 20.16. Their heart went after
their idols; Ezekiel: 33.31. Their heart goes after their covetousness; and
Hosea 4.8. They set their heart on their iniquity. Men are born with the stone
in their hearts, and naturally they mind earthly things, Phil: 3.19. Their
motion is downward, John 3.31. He that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks
of the earth; his thoughts, his words, his motions, are all that way. The
things of Heaven are burdensome to a stony heart, that cannot move upwards.

Sixthly, Stones keep their places, and are immovable, Eccl. 10.9. Whosoever
removes stones shall be hurt therewith. Great stones, mountains, rocks, abide
fixed, and its dangerous to meddle with them; so stony hearts keep their
stonynesse, they are immovable; what opinions, principles, conclusions soever
they have taken in, though false and corrupt, they are tenacious of, and
obstinate in, Judges 2.19. They ceased not from their own doings, nor from
their stubborn ways. God sold them into the hands of enemies where they
suffered grievous things, God raised them up Deliverers, who set them at
liberty; yet they ceased not from their own ways, they were immovable from
their own opinions, corrupt principles and dangerous tenets; men are so
self-conceited, self-willed, that they are like rocks, not to be stirred.

Seventhly, Stones are dry, and have no moisture in them at all. Take a Rock
there is no water in it, take any stone its dry, all stones are dry and barren;
so stony hearts they have no moisture of grace in them, they are all dry and
barren, the waters of life are not found in them. The woman of Samaria had a
stony heart, and how dry, how barren was it? not a good word came out of it
toward Christ; John 4. Whilst the Gentiles were without God and Christ in the
world, they had stony hearts, and so were barren and fruitless, Isa: 54.1.
Wheresoever is a stony heart there is no melting, no mourning, no tears.

Eighthly, Stones are cold; 1 Samuel: 25.37. its said, Nabals heart dyed within
him, and he became as a stone, that is, cold and senseless; so stony hearts
are cold, there is no spiritual heat in them; though the word be as fire, yet
it heats them not. Men of stony hearts are frigid in the things of God, they
contend not for the truth, they reprove not wickedness in others, they stand
not for the interest of Christ, they are not zealous for God, and his glory,
they put not their hands to his work, they mind not the conversion of sinners,
they are indifferent how things of that nature go. A stony heart is a dead
heart, and as it has no life nor motion in it, so no warmth in it; like the
Shunammites son, 2 Kings 4.34. till Elisha came and stretched forth himself
upon it, there was neither life nor warmth in it; and till Gods Spirit come and
stretch forth its virtue and power upon a stony heart, it has neither life nor
warmth in it. Thus you see wherein a stony heart resembles a Stone or Rock.

Quest: What is the evil of an hard heart?

Answ: 1. It is ever unthankful; mercies, kindnesses, do not affect it, and
how then can it be thankful? Some verbal thankfulness may be in an hard
hearted man, but in his heart, in his life, there is nothing. Pour Wine, Oil,
the Spirits and Quintessence of any thing upon a stone, its lost, the stone is
not at all the better for it, not affected with it; so a stony heart, let the
choicest mercies of Heaven or Earth be presented to it, they are lost, that
heart is unthankful: and whereas we should be thankful in every thing, 1 Thessalonians: 5.18. such an one is thankful in nothing, and makes the times
perilous, 2 Timothy: 3.2.

Answ: 2. It grows worse and worse, harder and harder every day, nothing stops
it from proceeding on in its wicked ways. The Jews were a stony hearted
people, and what says the Lord to them? Isa: 1.5. Why should ye be stricken
any more? ye will revolt more and more. Threatening judgments did not stop or
turn them from their wickedness. Pharaoh saw the wonderful judgments of God,
ten plagues were upon him and his Land, and yet his heart grew harder and
harder. They that came to take Christ went backward and fell to the ground when
Christ said, I am he; they saw also a miracle wrought by Christ, in restoring
to Malchus his ear which Peter had cut off, yet being stony hearted they
proceeded to take Christ, to bind him and carry him to the High Priests, John
18.6.10, 11, 12, 13.

Answ. 3. It causes a man to walk contrary to his profession. Those that are
Christians, profess Christ and the Gospel, they have in Baptism given up
themselves to him, and obliged themselves to walk according to Gospel Rules;
now whence is it that they profess one thing, and practice another, that they
profess Christianity, and walk as Heathens, or worse then Heathens; whoredom,
drunkenness, covetousness, lying, pride, swearing, theft, murder, witchery,
contention, slander, oppression, etc. are they not as frequent among
Christians, as ever they were among Heathens? Paul writing to the Ephesians
exhorted them not to walk as other Gentiles, in the vanity of their minds,
having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart, who
being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. It was the hardness of the heathen Gentiles
hearts, which made them walk so; and when Christian Gentiles walk so, its from
the hardness of their hearts; we are of the Gentiles, and notwithstanding our
Christianity, we walk contrary to Christ and the Gospel, which is from the
stonyness of our hearts, keeping out the power, and this is a grievous evil,
we profess Christ and the Gospel verbally, and deny both really, and so cause
our holy profession, and the Lord Jesus Christ to be blasphemed, Rom: 2.24.
James 2.7.

Answ. 4. Its a spiritual judgment, which is worse then all other diseases,
then all other judgments; a blind eye, a deaf ear, a dumb tongue, a palsy
hand, a gouty leg, a leprous head, the stone in the kidneys or bladder, are
nothing to the stone in the heart, no plague is like that plague; those four
sore judgments mentioned Ezekiel. 14.21. are not so ill as the stone in the heart;
men are sensible of those, and tremble at them, but the stonyness of their
hearts, they neither feel nor fear, by reason of it. Can there be a more
dreadful judgment upon a man then to be given up of God to hardness of heart,
Psalm. 81.11, 12. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none
of me, so I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their
own inventions. They were stubborn, and God punished their stubbornness with
stonynesse.

Answ. 5. It pleases it self in the ways of wickedness, Prove: 10.23. It is a
sport to a fool to do mischief; and Chap: 14.9. Fools make a mock of sin;
Fools, that is, wicked men, whose hearts are hardened, who know not the nature
of sin, who feel not the weight of sin, they slight sin, they sport themselves
with sin, they rejoice to do evil, Prove: 2.14. They count it pleasure to riot
in the day time, 2 Pet: 2.13. There is no sin but men of stony hearts take
delight in, some in one, some in another, and if they can or cannot commit
wickedness themselves, they take pleasure in them that can, Rom: 1.32.

Answ: 6. Its the seat of Satan, he dwells in it. A stony heart is the Devils
Castle, Ephesians. 2.2. He is in, and works in the children of disobedience; In
their hearts he has strong holds, keeps possession, and rules them at his
pleasure, they are his Subjects. God dwells in a broken heart, Isa. 57.15. but
the Devil in a stony heart.

Answ: 7. That man that has a stony heart increases his own woe daily, Rom:
2.5. Thou after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath; that is, thou causest God to treasure up
more severe punishment for thee daily; thou sinnest more and more daily, and
God heats the furnace hotter and hotter daily.

I will take away.
The word is in Hiphil, and signifies thus much, I will cause to depart, or I
will make to remove, cause to be gone. Montanus renders it amovebo, I will
remove it. God does this

First, By inlightning the blind heart to see, Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ephesians:
4.18. Chap: 5.8.

Secondly, By inlivening the dead and senseless heart to feel its stonynesse.
When breath and life entered into the dry bones, they were sensible, Ezekiel: 37.
and when God breaths upon a stony heart it lives, and is sensible. What an
Adamantine heart was in Paul, who took pleasure in vexing, imprisoning, and
murdering of the Saints; but when Christ breathed upon him, and put life into
him, he then became sensible of his hard heartedness, Acts 9.

Thirdly, By the warmth of his Spirit, and moisture of his grace, love and
mercy, he melts the stony heart. Some fire will melt brass and iron, and some
waters dissolve any stone; such is the fire of Gods Spirit, there is not any
iron or brazen heart but that can melt it; such is the water of life, there is
not any stony heart but that will dissolve it; there is an omnipotent power in
the Spirit and grace of God to turn Mil-stones into wax, and Rocks into
streams; it was verified in Paul, who feeling the mighty power of Gods Spirit
and grace in his heart had the milstonyness and rockynesse thereof removed, for
presently he cried out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? and fell to weeping
and praying.

Out of your flesh.
By flesh here is not meant corrupt nature, as Gal: 5.13. but by it is meant
man, I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, that is, out of you.

First, Observe

The hearts of men as they are in themselves are stony, even stones, senseless
of sin, unyieldable to truth, inept for spiritual employments, repelling and
rejecting the counsel of God, moving down wards, and minding earthly things,
immovable from their tenets, cold and barren.

Such are all men's hearts naturally, and the hardness of them is much increased
by actual and customary sins; when men consent to evil thoughts and lusts in
their hearts, vent them by actings, and reiterate the same day after day, they
make their hearts more and more hard, as the hand is by working, and the foot
by walking; Jer: 5.3. They have made their faces harder than a rock, they have
refused to return. If their faces were hardened like rocks, what were their
hearts? Zechariah tells you, They made their hearts as an Adamant stone, Zech.
7.12. which exceeds other stones in hardness; and not some few of them had
done so, but even all of them, Ezekiel: 3.7. All the house of Israel are impudent
and hard-hearted; all of them had faces of rock, and hearts of Adamant.

Secondly, Observe

Its the prerogative of God who has dominion over the heart, to alter the
heart.

I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh. They could not change
their own hearts, they were not able to get the stone out of them, nor the
Prophets who were their spiritual Physicians: Kidney-stones, and
Bladder-stones men may remove, heart-stones none can remove but God; men cannot
remove Mountains or Rocks, but the Lord can, he has an arm of strength, his
Word is a Word of power, when he commands, it is done; though a stony heart can
stand it out against men, yet it cannot stand it out against God; he fetched
water out of a Rock, and God can make the hardest rocky heart in the world to
melt, repent, and send forth floods of water. Mary Magdalen had an impudent
face, and a hard heart, but when God dealt with her he took away the hardness
of her heart, and impudency of her face, she sat and wept at the feet of
Christ, Luke 7.38. The Lord can turn wildernesses into standing waters, and dry
ground into water-springs, Psalm. 107.35.

Thirdly, Observe

Its a great mercy to have the stonynesse of the heart removed.

The removal of any evil from the body of man is mercy, as blindness from the
eye, deafness from the ear, lameness from the leg, weakness from the stomach;
much more then the removal of spiritual evil, and that from the heart.
Stonynesse of heart is the greatest plague, evil, which can befall it, and for
God to take that away, to cure it, is a rich, a wonderful great mercy, its a
mercy of the new Covenant, its more then Gods delivering Daniel from the Lions
Den, Jonas from the Whales belly, or the 3 children from the fiery Furnace;
they should have been saved had they died in those conditions, but the man that
dies with an hard heart perishes for ever.

And I will give you an heart of flesh.
The heart of flesh is opposed to the stony heart, and it implies several
things which are considerable: As

First, Softness, tenderness; a stony heart is hard, but an heart of flesh is
tender and soft. The Scripture speaks of a soft tongue, Prove: 25.15. and of a
soft heart, Job 23.16. that is, an heart free from stonynesse and obduration.
Some flesh is brawny and hard, some very tender, as the flesh of those
mentioned Deuteronomy: 28.56. The heart of flesh is an heart like the tenderest flesh,
even the flesh of a child newborn.

Secondly, Sensibleness. Some flesh is so hardened as that it feels nothing, and
some is so tender its sensible of the least touch. The drunkards flesh felt not
the stripes when he was beaten, Pro: 3.35. but Josiahs heart was sensible of
the anger of God, when he heard the Law only read, 2 Chr: 34. Christ's heart was
tender and sensible of our infirmities, he was touched with the feeling of
them, Heb: 4.15. the least infirmity he was affected with, for he had an heart
of flesh, an heart without any stonyness at all in it, and where an heart of
flesh is, its sensible of the least sin, the least dishonor to God; vain
thoughts, risings of corruption, extravagancy of affections, all sins are
burdensome to it; the man of such an heart has his senses exercised to discern
between good and evil, Heb: 5.14.

Thirdly, Meltingness. A stony heart never melts, but an heart of flesh is of a
melting nature. Josiahs heart was not only affected with the Law read, but
melted also into tears, 2 Kings 22.19. His heart was tender, and he humbled
himself before the Lord. So David, Psalm. 22.14. My heart is like wax, it is
melted in the midst of my bowels; how did it melt after Nathan had told him of
his sin! Psalm: 51. so after his numbering of the people, 2 Samuel: 24.17. Peter's
heart was of this nature, for after Christ looked upon him, he went out and
wept bitterly, Luke 22.62. Such were their hearts, Ezekiel: 9.4. who sighed and
cried for all the abominations which were done in the midst of Jerusalem. An
heart of flesh melts and mourns that God is dishonored by others, but most of
all that he has been dishonored by him in whom it is; that man that has an
heart of flesh sheds most tears for the wrongs himself has done unto God, Luke
15.18, 19.

Fourthly, Teachablenesse. A stony heart is indocible, inflexible, it repels
and keeps out truths, but an heart of flesh admits and receives truths, it is
yielding and teachable. When Lydiacs hard heart was turned into flesh, Acts
16.14. she attended unto the things which were spoken by the Apostle, she
received them, and believed them; she was a good Scholar, and constrained her
Teachers to come and abide at her house, that she might learn more of them,
verse. 15. Paul no sooner had his heart of stone made flesh, but he manifested a
teachablenesse in himself, Acts 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? I am a
blind Pharisee, and have been all my days out of the way; I desire now to
learn, and to be taught of thee whom I ignorantly blasphemed. David shut not
his eyes against the light, as many hard-hearted persons do, he prayed, That
the Lord would open his eyes that he might behold wondrous things out of the
Law; He was often begging of God to teach him, O teach me the way of thy
statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end, Psalm. 119.18.33. He was willing to
see, to hear, and to do, Psalm: 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power. When the stony heart is removed, and an heart of flesh put in the
room of it, that is a day of power, and then the people so hearted are willing
to hear the Lord speak, to understand his counsels, and to resolve their wills
into Gods, so that his will is theirs.

Cor carneum quod ante ad alterius arbitratum fingitur.
Fifthly, Obedientialnesse. A stony heart is refractory, contradictory,
disobedient, but a fleshy heart is yielding and obediential, it is Cor sequari,
an heart which follows God, as Elisha followed Elijah, virtue went out of the
mantle and constrained him to do so, and the virtue gone out from God into an
heart of flesh prevails with it, and causes it to follow God, to yield
obedience unto him. Caleb had another spirit then the rest of the Jews had, and
he followed the Lord fully, Numb: 14.24. His spirit was not obstinate but
obediential, and wherever this heart of flesh is, it is so far from being
contentious against the truth, or withholding the truth in unrighteousness, as
that it obeys the truth heartily, Rom: 6.17.

The Excellency of a tender heart.
First, Its the Mansion of Gods holy Spirit. When the heart is tender and
fleshy, God puts in his holy Spirit into it, as in the next verse appears. The
Spirit it self is a tender thing, and takes no content in an hard heart, Isa:
57.15. Its in the heart of humble and contrite ones that the Spirit dwells. The
Corinthians were babes in Christ, very tender, and they were Temples of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.1.16. How excellent is a tender heart that the Spirit of
Grace, Heb: 10.29. the Spirit of Glory, 1 Pet: 4.14. should take it up for its
habitation? It was there before as an Agent, not as an Inhabitant.

Secondly, It cannot endure the dishonor of God; its much affected, yea
afflicted thereat. When Rabshakeh blasphemed and reviled the God of Israel, how
was Hezekiah afflicted at it? He rent his clothes, covered himself with
sackcloath, and went into the house of the Lord, sends for Isaiah, begs his
prayers, spreads the blasphemers Letter he had received before the Lord, and
cried unto him for help to vindicate his own name, 2 Kings 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Hezekiah had a tender heart, and herein was the excellency
of it, he was deeply affected with the dishonor of God. David's heart was
touched thoroughly when men violated the Law of God, and dishonored his name,
Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water run down mine eyes because they keep not thy
Law. None of his own afflictions, his persecution by Saul, his expulsion by
Absalom, did draw so many tears from him as the dishonor of Gods name, that
made his tender heart like a Fountain which sends forth Rivers; the heathens
who had hard hearts said of their heathenish King, Its not meet for us to see
the Kings dishonor, Ezra 4.14. And can Christians see the dishonor of the God
of Heaven? Those that have hearts of flesh cannot endure to see it, if they
cannot help the same, they will mourn, and mourn abundantly for it.

Thirdly, Its a strong defense against all sin; it quickly feels the nature of
sin, and so flies from it. Touch tender flesh with a Needle or Pin, it endures
not the same, it cries out against, and removes them. Some bodies are so
delicate that they feel every wind, every little distemper, and so fortify
themselves against them; and some hearts are so tender that corruption or the
Devil cannot stir but they discern, feel, and find them, and so set themselves
against them. When Joseph's Mistress tempted him to folly, his heart startled at
it, and caused his tongue to say, How can I do this, and sin against God? Gen:
39.9. A tender heart sticks at the appearance of evil, and will not venture
there: Abraham would not take any thing of the spoil recovered, but returned
all into the hands of the King of Sodom, least he should say, I have made
Abraham rich, Gen: 14.23. This was an excellent frame of spirit; and proceeded
from the tenderness of his heart, such tenderness Antidotes a man against the
poison of sin. Jobs heart was flesh, not stone, and not his Friends, Wife or
Devil could draw him to commit sin; his heart was sensible of his sons sinning,
and on their behalf he offered sacrifice continually, Job 1.5. and that
tenderness preserved him from sinning. David's heart smote him when he cut off
but the lap of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel: 24.5.

Fourthly, Its active for God. When Paul's heart was turned into flesh,
presently says he, Lord what will thou have me to do? I am now ready to do
ought for thee, Acts 9.6. And straight way he preached Christ in the
Synagogues, verse. 20. Josiah was of a tender heart, and he acted notably for
God, he destroyed the groves, altars, high places, images out of Judah and
Jerusalem, and other places, he repaired the Temple, he caused the Law to be
read, the people to enter into Covenant with God, he kept a most solemn
Passover, such as had not been from Samuels days before, 2 Chronicles: 34. and 35.
Chap: A hard heart is active against God, and a soft heart is active for God.
Manasseh through the hardness of his heart, did more wickedly then any, 2 Chronicles: 33. And David through the tenderness of his heart, fulfilled all the
wills of God, Acts 13.22. He durst not neglect any duty the Lord called for,
nor do it remisly when he went about it.

What are the mistakes about a tender heart?
First, There is a legal tenderness which arises from apprehension of Gods
Sovereignty and Justice, and his wrath due unto men for sin, and their sinful
practices, whereupon they humble themselves, mourn, sigh, weep, pray, and so
manifest some tenderness of heart; such I conceive was the tenderness of
Manasseh's heart, when he was among thorns, bound in fetters, and in
affliction, then he besought the Lord, humbled himself greatly, and prayed, 2 Chronicles: 33.11, 12, 13. Such tenderness had Judas who repented of what he had
done, saying, He had sinned in betraying innocent blood, Mat: 27.3, 4. Terrors
of conscience put him upon it: This legal tenderness is not that here meant. For

1. Apprehensions of Gods power, justice, wrath, fear of death and hell, do
never melt the heart. The Law, judgments of God, considerations of death and
hell may break the stony heart into many pieces, yet every piece remain a
stone, retain its hardness: when you break a Millstone or Rock into pieces with
an hammer or pick-axe, though broken, yet there is no true softness in them.

2. Legal tenderness never loves God, it loves it self, and seeks it self; but
Evangelical or Spiritual tenderness carries out the heart to God and Christ.
Peter having hardened his heart by denial of the Lord Jesus once, twice, and
thrice, and then being softened again by a look of Christ upon him, Luke 22.61,
62. he loved him dearly, and that it might be known, Christ asked him the
question, Simon, love thou me more than these? he says not, Peter do thou
love me? but do thou love me more than these? I know these love me much, how
stands thy heart to me? his answer was, Yea, I love thee, and more than these
do love thee, and thou know it. A tender heart is strongly in love with
Christ. Paul after his heart was regenerate and softened, he was so in love with
Christ, that he wishes Anathema Maranatha to that man which loves not the Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor: 15.22.

Secondly, There is a natural fleshliness or tenderness which is much in
women, and sometimes also in men; as when Joseph made himself known unto his
brethren, he wept, it was from a natural tenderness in him, Genesis 45.1, 2. Some
are by nature very tender and pittyfull; such tenderness is not what our
Prophet aims at. For

1. This natural tenderness is born with men, they bring it with them into the
world; the other is a gift, I will give you an heart of flesh; the one is of
nature, the other of grace; Parents procreate the one, God creates the other;
the one is from constitution, the other from regeneration.

2. Where there is a natural tenderness it is flexible both ways, to good and
evil. Rehoboam who was a wicked King, having a tender heart, 2 Chronicles: 13.7. he
was for evil and for good, he hearkened to the young men's ill counsel at one
time, and to Shemaiah's good counsel another time, 1 Kings 12.14, 24. he was
easily drawn this way and that way, like some in the Apostles time who were
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. They were children,
they had a natural tenderness in them, and bowed to sound and corrupt
doctrine; but a man that has the tenderness of heart here intended is
untractable toward evil, and only flexible unto good, 1 John 3.9. He cannot
sin because he is born of God, his heart is obstinate against sin, he keeps
himself from the touching of the wicked one, Chap: 5.18. But is pliable to the
will of the holy one, prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy: 2.21.

Thirdly, Natural tenderness is faint in the cause of God, it has no courage,
no magnanimity for God, but spiritual tenderness has. Paul was tender hearted
after his conversion, and see what a spirit he had for God, Acts 17.22, 23. Ye
men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious, etc. He
contested with the whole University of Athens. The Bock of Martyrs tells of
Alice Driver (a tender hearted woman) who said, She would set her foot against
the foot of any of them all; she meant the Bishops and their creatures; she had
courage for God and his cause.

Fourthly, Natural tenderness is dulled by fasting, prayer, and humiliation,
but spiritual tenderness is sharpened and quickened by the same. Esther after her
fasting, praying, and humbling her soul was more sensible of the state of the
Jews, and the great danger they were in, and ventured her life for them, Esther
4. and 5. Chap.

Fifthly, Afflictions, crosses, are very heavy to that heart that is naturally
tender, its restless, unquiet under them, but an heart spiritually tender
welcomes afflictions, receives them with joy, Heb. 10.34. and finds sin heavier
then afflictions. There be some soft natures which can weep, shed tears in
abundance for loss of Relations, Estates, Favors of great Ones, yet never
wept for sin; these have a natural tenderness, not a spiritual.

Besides what may be gathered from what is said, I shall give some Characters
of a tender heart.

First, Its sensible of the Churches and Saints afflictions, it mourns for, and
with them; a tender heart bleeds when it goes ill with Sion and the people of
God. When the men of Ai smote but thirty six Israelites, how was Joshua
affected with it? He rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face,
before the Ark of the Lord, until the even tide, Josh. 7.6. You may read Ps.
79. and 80. how greatly David or Asaph were affected with the desolation of
Jerusalem, and miseries befell the Church. These were men of tender hearts, and
sensible of evils at a distance. Such was Paul, 2 Cor: 14.29. and Jeremy, whose
eyes ran down with tears, because the Lords flock was carried away captive,
Jer: 13.17.

Secondly, Where an heart has a gracious and spiritual tenderness, its
affected with the perishing condition of others, it grieves to see men
impenitent, unbelieving, going on in the broad way, to be in a state of
irregeneracy, and pityes them, Rom: 9.2, 3. Paul had great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in his heart, and why? for his brethren and kinsmen according
to the flesh; they rejected Christ and his Gospel through unbelief and
hardness of heart, they were in the broad way to destruction. Christ seeing
Jerusalem insensible of her own good, he wept over her, Luke 19.41. And in
former times Jeremy had manifested the tenderness of his heart toward the Jews,
when he said unto them thus, Hear ye, and g^ve ear, be not proud; for the Lord
has spoken: Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light,
he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness: but if ye
will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, Jer:
13.15, 16, 17.

Thirdly, A tender heart dare not go out from God in any case, but commits it
self and way to him, it consults with God, and leans upon him for counsel and
direction. Josiah, when the Law was found, and he understood from it what wrath
was due to the breach of it, presently sends men to enquire of the Lord for
himself and others what to do; he took counsel of God, and not of man, 2 Chronicles:
34.21. So Jehoshaphat he sought not to Baalim, but to the Lord God of his
fathers; and David made Gods Testimonies his Counselors, Psalm. 119.24. Hard
hearts dare presume and venture to go out from God, and into ways he has not
warranted; so did Gehazi, Judas and Demas, they followed the imaginations of
their own hearts, and declared that their hearts were Brass. Those that have
hearts of flesh say with them in Isa: 2.3. Come, let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths, not in our own.

Fourthly, Its affected presently at the frowns and chidings of God, at the
appearance and shaking of the Rod. A child of a tender nature will melt when
the Parent begins to manifest displeasure, as to chide or take the Rod into his
hand; but its not so with a stubborn nature, that will hear bitter words, and
endure many strokes before it will melt, Jer: 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but
they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction; they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have
refused to return: These had no tender hearts in them. When Absalom had driven
David out of Jerusalem, he went up mount Olivet weeping: He was presently
affected with the hand of God, 2 Samuel: 15.30. Moses was presently affected with
the wrath that went out from God against the people, Numb: 16.46.

Fifthly, A tender heart feels much stoninesse in it self, and complains of it;
O what a stony, rocky, Adamantine heart have I! says a tender hearted man: its
tenderness discovers and feels hardness, Ephesians: 4.19. They were hardened in sin,
were past feeling, Where hearts are all stone, there is no sensibleness of the
stonyness; those have the tenderest hearts, that feel most Brass and Iron in
them. David cried often to God for quickening, Psalm: 119.154, 156, 159. Quicken me
according to thy Word; Quicken me according to thy judgments; Quicken me
according to thy loving kindness. And why did he cry so for quickening? because
he felt much deadness and hardness in his heart. A dead heart is an hard heart:
A man when dead is cold, stiff, and hard; so a man's heart, if dead within him,
is cold, stiff, and stony.

How may the heart be kept tender?
First, By taking heed of every sin, for its only sin that hardens the heart;
as the foot by treading hardens the earth, so when sin walks up and down in the
heart it hardens and obdurates the same; Dan: 5.20. Nebuchadnezzars mind was
hardened in pride; and the Apostle tells you, Heb: 3.13. That men's hearts come
to be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Men think little sins can do
them little harm; but they harden their hearts, and is that no harm? is that
little harm? its the greatest harm can be done you.

Secondly, By searching and examining of your hearts frequently, that is a
special means to keep them tender; its like digging of the Garden, and
ploughing of the Earth, which keeps it from hardening; the more digging and
ploughing, the more tender and crumbly is the earth, that is the chiefest way
to preserve it so; and they who are ever searching their hearts, examining them
daily, have them in a tender frame. David communed often with his own heart, and
his spirit made diligent search, Psalm. 77.6. That kept his heart in a tender
frame.

Thirdly, By studying the word much and minding it there is great virtue in the
word, it is like fire, and will not only thaw the icyness of their hearts, but
keep them unfrozen; the hardest metals while they are in the Fire are soft,
and whilst men's hearts are in the Divine fire of the Scriptures, they will be
soft. The Word is like Water and Oil which moisten and supple the heart, so
that the tenderness of it is preserved.

Fourthly, By meditating seriously on Gods love, the heigths, depths, lengths,
and breadths of his love. When a soul is taken up with thoughts of the
freeness, greatness, strength, sweetness, everlastingness, and fruits of Gods
love, it will be in a melting frame, that fire works kindly upon the heart;
love apprehended makes the heart tender.

Fifthly, Look much to Christ crucified, Zech: 12.10. When we consider what
Christ has suffered for our sakes, it will make and keep our hearts tender.

First, Observe;

A tender heart is a choice mercy.

As a stony heart is a grievous plague, so an heart of flesh is a great
blessing, its sensible of sin, even secret sins, it trembles at thoughts of
God, his Attributes and Word, it understands divine things, its teachable and
obediential, its compassionate and full of bowels toward all; such an heart is
rare to find, but wherever it is, it is a mercy of mercies, a superlative
mercy.

Secondly, Observe;

Its a gift, even the gift of God.

I will give you an heart of flesh. None but he who can fetch water out of a
Rock, and turn stones into flesh, ( Mat. 3.9.) can give this tender heart; we
can make our hearts stony by sinning, but we cannot soften them again. Its Gods
prerogative to make and give an heart of flesh; he can make the hardest heart
exceeding tender: beg such an heart of him, and press him with his promise;
For faithful is he who has promised, who also will do it.

Verse. 27. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.


IN the 35. verse remission of sins was promised, in the 36. regeneration, and
in this, infusion of the spirit is promised: In the words are 1. The mercy
promised, viz: the spirit. 2. The parties recipient, you. 3. The effects of
this reception, walking in etc.


I will put my spirit within you.
By spirit here, I understand not the new heart, or new spirit mentioned in the
verse before, viz. the gifts and graces of the spirit, but the spirit it self,
so Aecolampad: Lavater, Junius and Polonius; and however it be a great dispute
among Schoolmen, Whether the spirit it self be given unto men, and dwell in
them; some conclude, That the person of the spirit is not given, but dwells in
us only Mediantibus donis; yet the Scripture is clear, That the spirit it self
is given, and dwells in the sons of men, Rom: 5.5. The love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy spirit which is given unto us. Here is a
distinction made between the grace of the spirit, and the spirit it self; the
grace of love is shed abroad (...) the hearts of the Saints by the spirit, and
that spirit which ^^keth that grace in them, is given unto them; the person of
the spirit is distinguished from the gifts, and graces he works in men; 1 Cor:
6.19. Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy spirit in you. A
Temple is not for gifts or graces, but for a person, a Deity, and some special
presence of that Deity; the world has God in it, yet it is not called The
Temple of God, because he is in a general and common manner in the same, but
the spirit is in the bodies of the Saints, and that in a special manner, 1 Cor.
2.12. We have r^ceived not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. By
spirit here cannot be meant gifts or graces, but the person of the spirit, who
searches the deep things of God, as it is verse. 10. and makes them known by
degrees, unto those he dwells in, discovering what God has done for them, Rom:
8.11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you: its
the spirit of God himself, who dwells in believers, and not only the gifts and
graces of the spirit; these are in them as qualities in a Subject, but he is in
them as an Inhabitant in an house.

The spirit by reason of its Infiniteness, is every where, in Trees, Worms,
Flowers, waters, all creatures; is it any other wise in the Saints then in
them? True, the spirit quoad essentiam is in all things; yet,

First, Its not in them per modum unionis, by way of union; a Fish is in the
water, but not united to the water; the spirit is in the Saints by way of
union, therefore is said to dwell in them by his own gifts and graces; we are
united to the spirit, and the spirit to us.

Secondly, Its not in them per modum gratiosae operationis, by way of gracious
operation; all he does in other creatures, is upholding their beings, enabling
them to put forth their natural power, vigor, virtue, and ordering their
motions to what ends he pleases, he works nothing in them above their
natures, but in those he dwells, he works gracious effects, in those the Lord
gives the spirit unto, he works such operations as are not elsewhere, even
such as are above nature; he is in them Speciali titulo ratione gratiae: A
Gardener works curious Knots in the Garden, which he does not elsewhere; God
made other works, and set other plants in Paradise than in the world.

Thirdly, As the Deity of Christ is every where in every creature, yet
otherwise in Christ's humane nature, than in any creature, Col: 2.9. so the
spirit, though it be every where, yet is otherwise in Believers, than in other
creatures, it is in them as it is in Christ himself, but not in the same
measure.

What does the spirit being within us?
First, It unites the Lord Christ and the soul together, it makes an happy
union between them two. The Corinthians were espoused to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.
not only by the Ministry of Paul, but by the spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one
spirit are we all baptized into one body; that is, the Church, the body of
Christ; the spirit is the great Agent in this work.

Secondly, The spirit gives out divine Oracles and Truths unto the soul: As in
the Temple God gave out his mind, made known his will, so does the spirit in
the heart of man; Mat. 10.20. The spirit of the Father speaks in Believers; 1
John 2.20. Ye have an anction from the holy One, and ye know all things. That
unction is the spirit which makes known all needful things unto those it dwells
in; its needful to be instructed, and armed against Antichrist and his
seducements, its needful to be directed in the way to Heaven, they had the
spirit which did teach them how to avoid the one, and how to proceed in the
other; and so were (...), taught of God; and who teaches like him? Job 36.22.
He teaches inwardly, infallibly, powerfully.

Thirdly, It conquers and drives out the enemies that had possession of, and
quartered in us. There is no man the Lord puts his spirit into, but the spirit
finds the Devil there, he has possession of men's hearts, and labors to keep
the same; there be also a multitude of base and ungodly lusts which fight for
the Devils interest, these the spirit sets upon, subdues and casts out. When
Christ came into the Temple, he whipped out all the money changers; when Joshua
came into Canaan, he drove out the Canaanites and other Nations; and when the
spirit comes into a man it beats down strong holds, drives out Satan and his
Troops; 1 John 4.4. Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.
The Devil had been in them before, but was now driven out of them into the
world by the spirit which was in them, and their lusts were mortified by the
same spirit, Rom: 8.13.

Fourthly, The Spirit put into man, takes the rule and government of that man
into his own hand; he must no longer be under the dominion of sin or Satan, but
under the conduct of the spirit, he, and all in him, must bow to that great
Person. When a great man comes into the Country to dwell, he looks for all
about him to bow unto him, and to be at his command; hence men that have stout
and stubborn spirits which cannot bow use to say, Magnum vicinum nolumus, We
care not for a great Neighbor. The spirit is greater than all men, and when he
is put into men, it is to rule; he is there not to be checked, controled,
opposed, but to bear sway, to have the Keys of every Room delivered up unto
him, he must be, and will be Sovereign in the soul, before him every Mountain
and Hill must be brought low, yea every creature must swear fealty unto him,
Rom: 8.14. They are lead by the spirit of God. The spirit is the Commander and
Leader of those it dwells in, they follow him and not others; whereas those
that are without the spirit are led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy: 3.6. or
drawn away with their own lust, James 1.14. and so follow Satan, 1 Timothy: 5.15.
It Is not so with those that have the spirit that is called A Guide, John 16.13.
and such a Guide, as guides into all truth, and orders them so, as that they
shall not miscarry, for its a spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1.17. of counsel, Isa:
11.2. of power, 2 Timothy: 1.7. so that he must rule, and where he rules, he does
it wisely.

Fifthly, He frames them to his own mind, and transforms them into his own
likeness: as a Graft put into a Stock, turns the sap of the Stock, and
assimilates it and the Stock to it self; so does the spirit in the parties
where it is, 2 Cor: 3.18. We are changed into the same Image from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, or by the Lord the Spirit, so the
Greek will bear it; we are selfish, sinful, natural, moral, and the spirit
makes us spiritual. The husband frames the mind of his wise suitable unto his
own; when a man comes into an old house, he pulls down, and sets up, he takes
away and adds what he pleases, and fits the house to his own mind; so does the
spirit being in our earthly Tabernacles, it abrogates the Laws of the flesh, it
throws out the Principles of Satan, and the world, it sets up new Laws, and
works new Principles, Rom: 3.27. Chap: 8.2.

Sixthly, The spirit being put into man, and man becoming his Temple, he does
beautify and adorn that Temple, and make it glorious. Solomon over-laid the
Temple with pure gold, 1 Kings 6.21. the inside was very glorious; and the
spirit trims up its Temple with pure graces, with love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc. Gal:
5.22, 23. Ephesians. 5.9. The spirit garnished the Heavens with those greater and
lesser Lights, Job 26.13. which fill this lower world with their glory: Its the
spirit which renews the face of the earth, Psalm: 104.30. and makes it
beautiful, and its the spirit renews and garnisheth the soul, making it
glorious and beautiful with all graces, Psalm. 45.13. The Kings daughter is all
glorious within; and the spirits Temple is no less glorious: If Solomon's
Temple were called The holy and beautiful house, Isa. 64.11. much more may the
Temple of the spirit be so called.

Seventhly, It being in man enables him to do many things, it strengthens him
with might to do that which otherwise he could not do, Ephesians: 3.16. As

First, To discern between the things of men, and the things of God, between
the things of Christ, and those of Antichrist, between true and counterfeit
graces, 1 Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual judges all things. He has the
spirit enabling him to make a difference, and to see the reallity, beauty and
excellency of some things above others: The High Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, saw no beauty in Christ that they should desire him, but the
Apostles who had the spirit in them did, John 1.14. We beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father: and Paul saw so much in Christ,
and the knowledge of him, That he counted all things but less for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8.

Secondly, It enables them to pray spiritually, Romans 8.26. The spirit helps
our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought. The
spirit tells us what to pray for, and helps us to bring forth those Petitions
it has formed in us; Zech: 12.10. its called The spirit of supplication,
because it teaches us what to supplicate God for, and assists us in
supplicating. Both Paul and Jude exhorts those they write unto, To pray in the
spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Jude 20. That is, in the strength and help of the spirit,
not in their own strength.

Thirdly, It enables to stand in time of trouble, persecution and sufferings:
The spirit prompts answers unto those that are questioned for truths sake, and
helps them against all their opposers, see Mark 13.11. Matthew: 10.19, 20. Luke
12.11, 12. When they were lead before Magistrates and Powers, they must take no
thought before hand what to speak, nor premeditate, the spirit should help
them, encourage, and uphold them, not an Angel, but the spirit; Acts 6.10.
Stephen was so mightily assisted by the spirit, that his opposers, viz: the
Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and others were not able to withstand him.

Fourthly, It enables to bring forth good fruit. If there be no sap in a Vine,
it will bear no fruit; if there be only our own sap, it will yield sour fruit;
but if the sap of the spirit be there, then it will afford good fruit, special
fruit, Acts 10.38. Christ being anointed with the holy spirit, and with power,
he went about doing good; so the Apostles, Acts 1.8. Ye shall receive power
after the holy spirit is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both
in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of
the earth. The spirit empowered them to walk up and down in the world, to
preach the Gospel, convert souls, plant Churches, and to do them good; so did
Paul, Romans 15.19. Where the spirit is, it enables, and provokes unto good, John
7.38, 39.

Fifthly, The spirit enables men to keep the Word of God, and yield obedience
unto it; 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep by
the holy spirit which dwells in us. Timothy, says Paul, thou have that which
is of great concernment committed to thy keeping, viz: the Gospel, the form of
sound words, and thou have a great helper to enable thee thereunto, even the
spirit of God which dwells in thee; see therefore that thou keep it by the
enabling power of the spirit, which helps not only to remember truth, but also
to obey truth; for Peter assures us, That the believing Jews did obey the truth
through the spirit; that is, through the assistance of the spirit: This is that
which follows in the next words to be opened.

And cause you to walk in my statutes.
The Hebrew word for cause is (...) faciam, I will make, effect, or bring to
pass by the operation of that spirit I put into you, that you shall walk in my
statutes. Vatablus renders it efficiam, which imports influence of power;
David, Psalm. 143.10. prays unto the Lord to teach him to do his will; and
Psalm. 119.35. he says, Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments; both
these the spirit being put into man performs, it teaches him to do the will of
God, and causes him to go in the path of his Commandments.

To walk in Gods statutes, implies several things.

First, The making of Godliness and Religion our chief work in this life:
other things are to be done as inferior things, this is to be the principal,
no work should be so minded as this; says Joshua Chap. 24.15. As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord; that shall be our great and chief business in
this world: He remembered what God had commended to him and all men, Deuteronomy. 6.6,
7, 8, 9. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart;
and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them
when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up; and thou shall bind them for a sign upon
thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, and thou shall
write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates. God would have us
to be godly inwardly and outwardly, at home and abroad, night and day, and to
make our familyes religious; and they are repeated again, Deuteronomy: 11.18, 19, 20.
that so they might take the deeper impression upon the hearts of men. David
looked at this work above all others, Psalm. 119.97. O how I love thy Law! it is
my meditation all the day. To be godly and religious was his principal care,
that is the one thing necessary; and Solomon has drawn it up into this
conclusion, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of
man, Eccles: 12.13.

Secondly, Taking delight in the ways of God: His statutes, commands, and
ways are grievous to men, naturally they walk not in them: When men walk in
any way, they are delighted with and in that way; so here, walking in Gods
statutes notes delight, Psalm: 119.14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy
Testimonies, as much as in all riches. Some rejoice in fine houses, some in
fertile Lands, some in great Flocks, some in Silver and Gold, but David
rejoiced in the way of Gods Testimonies, and as much as any of them, or all of
them in their riches; he found more sweet in them, then they in their wealth,
verse. 143. Thy Commandments are my delights: They were his chief, his
satisfying, his sole and soul delights. It was meat and drink to Paul, to be
doing the will and work of the Lord, Acts 20.24. as it was unto Christ, John
4.34.

Thirdly, It imports motion and progress; they should not stand still in
contemplation, nor sit still in meditation, but they should proceed and go on
in the ways of God, they should get nearer their journeys end, be daily more
knowing, more holy, more gracious and godly. The Thessalonians faith did grow
exceedingly, and their charity abounded, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. They walked from faith
to faith, and from love to love. When Paul was converted, and brought into the
way of Christ, he increased in spiritual strength, Acts 9.22. He reached
forward, and pressed toward the mark, Phil: 3.13, 14. He put on mightily for
to get the knowledge of Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings; he did not only walk, but ran often in the way of
truth and godliness, 1 Cor. 9.26.

Fourthly, Walking in Gods statutes, imports perseverance in them; they shall
not apostatize and turn back from them, but continue in them. Of a wicked man
destitute of Gods Spirit, its said, He has left off to be wise, and to do
good, Psalm. 36.1. But of a righteous man its said, He shall hold on in his way,
Job 17.9. He knows he is in a safe and good way, a way that will recompense him
fully at the end, whatever hardships or storms he meets withal, and therefore
will neither sit still nor go back, he may be extra semitam sometimes, but
never turning back again.

Ye shall keep my judgments and do them.
Statutes and Judgments are comprehensive words, and sometimes are used
promiscuously, as has formerly been showed in Chap: 18. and 5. but here they
may be thus differenced, Statutes to signify the duties of the first Table,
the things of Gods worship and manner of the same, whether under the Law or
Gospel; and Judgments, the duties of the second Table, matters of equity and
justice between man and man.

The word for keep is (...), which imports keeping with care and diligence,
they should not keep them in their houses or memories only, but they should
keep them practically, they should do them.

First, Observe;

Gods spirit differs from all other spirits.

Angels are spirits, souls of men are spirits, but these are below Gods spirit;
I will put my spirit. Gods spirit is a spirit of holiness, Romans 1.4. The power
of the highest, Luke 1.35. A spirit of truth guiding into all truth, John
16.13. A spirit of grace, Zech: 12.10. The Oil of gladness, Heb: 1.9. The
Comforter, John 14.16. A spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4.14. A spirit, that is the
Lord, Isa. 11.2. Ruach Jehovah, The spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him.
Whatever excellencies may be in souls or Angels, they are infinitely short of
that that is in the spirit of God; Psalm. 143.10. Thy spirit is good; that is,
Thy spirit, O Lord, is transcendently good; my own spirit is naught, and all
other spirits are nothing compared with thy spirit, that, and that only is
good, good originally, good transcendently, good infinitely.

Secondly, Observe;

The putting in of the spirit into the sons of men, is a free act of God.

He does it not upon the account of the Covenant of works, but by virtue of the
Covenant of grace. This verse is a branch of the Covenant of grace, and agrees
with that in Jerem. 31.33. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts; that God does when he puts in his spirit, 2 Cor. 3.3. for
the spirit being within, writes divine truths in the heart: Adam had the Law
writ in his heart by the spirit, but not as it is written by the spirit in the
hearts of Believer, who are under the new Covenant; the spirit writ the Law in
Adams heart as Concreator with the Father and the Son, not by virtue of any
Covenant; but Believers receive the spirit, and have the Law writ in them by
virtue of Covenant; God has covenanted to put his spirit in them, and they
have the spirit from Christ and the Father; Christ purchased of the Father the
mission of the spirit, therefore says, He will send the Comforter unto them,
John 16.7. And that he will pray the Father, and he shall send the Comforter
unto them, John 14.16. So that Believers now have the spirit from God as a
Father in Christ, from Christ as Head of the Church, and both these by virtue
of the new Covenant; Adam had not the spirit so: and for those that had the
spirit under the Law (for some had it as you may see, Psalm. 51.11. Nehem: 9.20.
Numb: 27.18. Hagg. 2.5.) they had it not by virtue of the Covenant of works, Do
this and live; for none were able to keep the Law, but by virtue of the
Covenant of grace; there was Gospel in the Law, yea, the whole Ceremonial Law
was so: The Apostle tells us that the Galatians received not the spirit by the
works of the Law, but by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2. And look how the
Gentiles received the blessing of Abraham, viz. the spirit, which was through
faith, and through Christ, verse. 14. so did the Jews likewise.

Neither Jews nor Gentiles do bring any preparations or qualifications toward
the reception of the spirit; God gives his spirit freely where there are no
such things: when men are in a state of sin and wickedness, the spirit is put
in; first, its there, and then it works grace; before they have new hearts, new
spirits, the stone be taken out of the heart, and there be an heart of flesh;
the spirit is put in and acts, he finds not qualifications or dispositions, but
brings them, works them. The Bees when they come to the Hive, find no wax, no
honey there, but they bring the wax and honey; so the spirit, when it comes to
men's hearts it finds no wax, no honey, no graces, nor gracious dispositions
there, but brings them; when the spirit comes to regenerate and sanctify it
finds nothing in men but darkness, unbelief, unholinesse, and enmity, by which
its no more defiled than an Angel by coming into the world which lies in
wickedness, or the Sun shining upon a Dunghill; but when it comes to be an
Inhabitant, a Comforter, a spirit of glory to rest upon a man, then it finds
the heart prepared, and made meet for its entertainment and abode.

Thirdly, Observe;

The gift of the spirit is a great and excellent gift.

I will put, or give my spirit within you. The greatness and excellency of it
appears in these following particulars:

First, Its the person of the spirit which is a fundamental mercy, and more
considerable than all his gifts and graces which flow from him; the Tree is
better than all the fruit, the Sun is of more worth than all his Beams.

Secondly, It is the procreator of all grace in the soul, Gal. 5.22. The fruit
of the spirit is love, joy, peace, faith: Take but those four graces, and see
how they are exalted; faith is styled precious, 2 Pet. 1.1. peace is said to
pass all understanding, Phil. 4.7. joy to be glorious and unspeakable, 1 Pet.
1.8. and love is magnified by Paul above all gifts and other graces, 1 Cor. 13.
What a gift then is the spirit which is the Parent, not only of these, but of
all graces and all gifts, Ephesians. 5.9. The fruit of the spirit it in all
goodness.

Thirdly, It is the Conservator of all grace and good things in us: As God
conserves the world which is his creature, so the spirit conserves grace which
is its creature; the spirit as it gives being to all graces, so it preserves
them in their beings and operations; It Is the spirit which mortifies lusts,
Romans 8.13. And it is the spirit maintains graces, John 3.6. That which is born
of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. As flesh
brings forth flesh, so it maintains the same, and as the spirit brings forth
spirit, so it maintains the same; each maintains their own offsprings. The
spirit is the Nurse of all those graces it has brought forth in the heart of
any; 2 Cor. 4.13. its called The spirit of faith, not only because it creates
faith in the heart, but keeps it there; so its called The spirit of grace,
Zech. 12.10. not only because it works grace in men, but also because it keeps
grace in them; hence those who are after the spirit, are said to mind the
things of the spirit; their graces are maintained by the provision of the
spirit.

Fourthly, The spirit is he who actuates and consummates our graces; the spirit
does not content it self to beget and preserve graces in men's hearts, but
improves and perfects them; we and our graces would act very poorly, did not
the spirit assist us, John: 15.5. Without me (says Christ) you can do nothing;
that is, without my spirit concur with your graces and actuate them, you can
do nothing. The Mill may have all things fit for motion, the Sails may be
spread, but if the wind blow not, the Mill goes not; so a man may through grace
be prepared and fitted to every good work, but if the spirit blow not, he moves
not, John 6.63. It is the spirit that quickens; it quickens us and our graces
also; 2 Cor. 3.6. The spirit gives life, Life to men's persons, and life to
their graces; its the spirit makes lively, and sets grace a work. It Is the Sun
and influences of Heaven which draw up the sap, and make the Tree grow, and it
is the spirit and its influences, which draw out our graces into act, they lie
still unless fresh blasts of the spirit come upon us and them. And as the
spirit acts our graces, so it perfects them, it adds supplies unto them, Phil.
1.19. and changes us into further glory, day by day, 2 Cor. 3.18. And what is
said of Christ, Heb: 12.2. That he is the Author and Finisher of our faith;
the same Christ does by his spirit, and so the spirit is the Author and
Finisher of all our graces.

Fifthly, The spirit is a great and excellent gift, in that it does facilitate,
sweeten, and make delightful unto us all the ways of God; they are hard and
harsh to flesh and blood, as to deny a man's self, to pass by wrongs, to
forgive enemies, to bear the Cross cheerfully, etc. these are things corrupt
nature cannot digest; but where the spirit is given, they become easy; the
spirit is the oil of gladness, and makes the soul cheerfully fall in with
whatever is of God. When a child has the father to go before, and leads it by
the hand, though the way be stony, durty, up hill, it goes willingly; so the
soul that has the spirit to lead it, let the way be what it will, follows
willingly, Psalm. 119.32. I will run the way of thy Commandments when thou
shall enlarge my heart; the spirit does enlarge the heart, 2 Cor. 3.17. where
that is there is liberty; let the Lord command things hard, David will run to
do them, they are suitable to the spirit, and the work of the spirit in the
heart.

Sixthly, The spirit is an excellent gift, in that it makes them excellent who
have it, Dan: 5.10, 11. says the Queen to Belshazzer, There is a man in thy
Kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods, he is an excellent man, none
like him in all thy Provinces, he has the spirit of the gods in him, which
others have not. Where the spirit of God is put into a man, that man is an
excellent man, he has an excellent person in him, more excellent than his
soul, than all souls, than all Angels, he has excellent graces, and is
honorable above others, 1 Samuel 9.6. There is in this City a man of God, and he
is an honorable man, said Saul's servant; so every one that has the spirit, be
he in the City, or out of it, is a man of God, and an honorable man.

Fourthly, Observe;

There is an union between the Saints and the spirit of God.

I will put my spirit within you; it is not said, I will put my spirit upon
you, but within you; So that by virtue of those graces it works in you, there
shall be an union between you and my spirit. This union is not such as is
between the three John speaks of, 1 John 5.7. for they are one essentially, nor
such as is between the Deity, and Christ's humane nature, Col. 2.9. for that is
personal, but it is a mystical union, an union of persons, not a personal
union. It is

First, Real; there is a true oneness between the spirit and those its put
into, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit, he says not
is one body, or one soul, or has one spirit with the Lord, but is one spirit;
there is as real an union as is between soul and body, he is so one with the
spirit as he is denominated spirit, John 3.6. That which is born of the spirit
is spirit.

Secondly, It is a wonderful union. The spirit of God who is one with the
Father and the Son, to be one also with man, and not with one man, but all he
is put into, even thousands of men, is wonderful. John tells us, It was a
great wonder to see a woman clothed with the Sun, Rev: 12.1. but it is a
greater wonder to see a man or woman united to the spirit of God, which is in
our souls and bodies, the faculties and members of them, as the sap is in the
root, vine, and branches; and here is the wonder, the same sap to be in every
one of these, and in all other Vines.

Thirdly, It is a most glorious union. When the Lord came into the Temple it
was filled with glory, 1 Kings 8.11. and when the spirit is put into a man, and
the union made between them, the man is filled with glory: when the Sun shines
into an house, it fills it with glory; when the fire is in the Iron, how
glorious is it? the union between the Fire and the Iron makes the Iron a thick,
dark, solid body, as glorious as the Fire it self.

Fourthly, It is a strong and intimate union which cannot be dissolved; I will
put my spirit within you, that is, into their inward parts; the spirit is
deeply seated, and strongly united unto those it is in, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will
dwell in them. The Greek is, I will indwell in them; there is such an
indwelling of Gods spirit in the hearts of his, that he will neither leave, nor
be thrust out of his habitation; John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. I am
leaving you (says Christ) but when I am gone, I will intercede with the Father
for you, and he shall send the spirit, the great Comforter, and he shall never
leave you, he shall abide with you for ever, none shall be able to dispossess
or drive him out of you.

Object: But both these seem contrary to Scripture, 1 Samuel 16.14. The spirit of
the Lord departed from Saul; and David did drive away the spirit, when he
committed his great sins of murder and adultery.

Answ. 1. Wicked men have the spirit from God as a Lord, by virtue of the
Covenant of works, and so sinning the spirit departs from them; thus was it
with Saul, he rebelled against God, vexed his spirit, and so that left him; but
David who was a godly man, had the spirit from God as a Father in Christ, by
virtue of the Covenant of grace; and so though the spirit were grieved by his
sins, it did not depart from him; for Psalm: 51.11. he prays unto the Lord,
saying, Take not thy holy spirit from me. Had it been gone, the tenor of his
prayer had been for restitution, not against ablation of it.

Secondly, The spirit departed from Saul was the spirit of prophecy, and those
Kingly endowments which he had received 1 Samuel 10.6. they ceased. The spirit is
often put for the gifts of the spirit, and they do oft-times fail in men.

Thirdly, All men have the spirit of bondage to fear, but all have not the
spirit of adoption to cry, Abba, Father, whosoever have the same it abides with
them.

Fifthly, Observe;

That before the spirit of God be put into men, they are without life or motion
toward God, or spiritual things, they live not to God, they walk not in his
statutes, they live to themselves, to the flesh, to the creatures, and wander
from God and his ways.

Naturally men are destitute of the spirit, sensual, as Jude tells you, verse.
19. Sensual, not having the spirit. (...): Those that have not the spirit, at
the best are but sensual or soulie men; and those had the best souls, most
reason, understanding, knew not God, Acts. 17.23. 1 Cor. 1.21. David tells us,
Psalm. 14.2, 3. That God looked down from Heaven upon the children of men; that
is, Jews and Gentiles, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek
God, that is, whether any did so know God as to set them a work to seek him, as
being the highest good, beyond all creature excellency. But what was the issue
of Gods so looking upon men? They are all gone aside, that is, from him and his
ways, They are altogether become filthy, their practices are such as makes
them stink, There is none that does good, no not one; of so many millions of
men as are upon the earth, there is not one does good. There were men of
excellent parts then in the world, men of soul, or foulie men, but not one of
them did know God, or seek after God; Paul therefore has laid it down for an
universal Maxim, That the animal, natural, or soulie man, receives not the
things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him. Whilst he is
without the spirit of God, they are no better than foolishness unto him, and
so are rejected by him.

Sixthly, Observe;

The principle of spiritual life and motion is the spirit of God.

I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk. Immediately upon the
putting in of the spirit into the heart of any, there is life and motion; men
live and move spiritually. Some make grace the principle of life and motion,
but all grace flows from the spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23. Ephesians. 5.9. and why should
grace have that honor is due to the spirit? It was the entrance of the spirit
which quickened the dead bodies of the Witnesses, and caused them to move, Rev.
11.11. and it is the entrance of the spirit which quickens dead souls and
causes them to move. We must beware of an error here which has siezed upon
diverse of late, viz: That because the spirit is in us, and the principle of
life and motion, that therefore the spirit does all. Matthew: 10.20. It is not ye
that speak, but the spirit of your Father which speaks in you; so it is not
you that do, but the spirit in you, and if the spirit speaks and do all, we
must sit still and leave our selves to the spirits motions and actings: This is
a dangerous error; know therefore, That though the spirit be in men, and the
principle of life and motion, yet it does not act or work without us; in the
putting in of the spirit we are Passive, John 3.6. we concur no more to our
birth, then a child does to its generation; but when the spirit is in us and
has quickened us, then there is the cooperation of man with the spirit, Rom:
8.16. The spirit bears witness to our spirit, verse. 26. It helps our
infirmities. Acti agimus, the spirit acts us, and we co-act with it; If the
spirit did all, then the spirit should repent, believe, and not man; but what
cause has the spirit to repent or believe? it never sinned, it stands not in
need of help or mercy; that place Matthew: 10.20. is not absolutely to be taken,
that they did not speak, for so it should be false, Luke 12.12. The holy spirit
shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say. They spoke, and the
spirit taught them to speak; the place is to be taken comparatively, not you,
but the spirit; that is, it is rather the spirit than you, the spirit is the
principle which sets you on. For men to sit still, and leave all to the spirit,
is a grieving of the spirit, and contradicts what the spirit has given out,
Matthew. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find; knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. The spirit would have us use means, and does
most vigorously assist us, when we are most diligent in the use of them, Prove.
2.3, 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

Quest: If the spirit be put into us, dwell in us, and be the principle of life
and motion, what need the soul look unto Christ for any fresh or further supply?

Answ. 1. It is granted there is a sufficiency and fulness in the spirit, yet
because it is the will of God that we should look unto Christ, we are bound to
do it, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith; 2 Timothy 2.1. Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus; and Paul himself, 2
Cor. 12.8, 9. looked up to Christ for more help, notwithstanding he had a
fulness of the spirit within him, Acts 13.9.

Answ. 2. The spirit is not the head of the body, though it be in the body;
that honor is Christ's, Col. 1.18. He is the Head of the Body, the Church; and
from it the whole body receives influence, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Col. 2.19. its
requisite therefore, that every member in the body should look up to the head.

Seventhly, Observe;

God first makes men good, and then they do good; first he puts his spirit into
them, and then they walk in his ways.

It is said of God himself, He is good, and does good, Psalm. 119.68. He is
first good, and then good comes from him; so God makes men good by the infusion
of his spirit, and then they bring forth spiritual fruit, Ephesians. 2.10. We are
his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Since man's fall,
amongst all the sons of men God finds none good, Romans 2.10. There is none
righteous, no not one; if any be so, he is (...), God has made him so by his
spirit, he has made him a new creature, and so fitted him for good works; the
Tree must first be good, before the fruit be good: amongst men good actions are
first done, and then men are reputed good; but with God it is otherwise, he
makes men first good, and then they do good actions; they do not make
themselves good by their free will, by frequent acts of good, but God puts in
his spirit toward which they contribute nothing, and thereby they are made
good, and act answerably, then their actions have life in them, worth in them,
and are suitable to God who is a spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and
truth. Let men look heedfully to themselves, and not stand upon their actions;
men may do many actions outwardly glorious, and magnified by men, themselves
being corrupt and naught; if men have not the spirit of God in them, their
actions are no better than corrupt fruit, of a corrupt Tree, they do not please
God; and if any have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, He is neither
good, nor does good.

Eighthly, Observe;

In what heart soever the spirit dwells, there will be outward and visible
manifestations of it.

Grace within will appear without; I will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, to keep my judgments, and to do them. The spirit
is like the Sun in the Firmament which cannot be hid long, though it may be
clouded for a season; the Cough and Grace are of such natures as will not be
concealed; and the spirit is of that nature, as it will di^^^^er it self in the
man it is within, causing him to change his courses, and to walk in other ways
then ever he walked in. When the spirit is put into a swearer, a liar, an
unclean person, an extortioner, a bloody persecutor, it makes the swearer fear
an oath, the liar speak truth from his heart, the unclean man to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor, the extortioner to make satisfaction, and
give half of his goods to the poor, and the bloody persecutor to love and
preach the Gospel he persecuted, so demonstrating it self to be in them. The
spirit in Scripture is compared to Fire, Matthew: 3.11. to a mighty wind, Acts
2.2. to a fountain or spring, John 7.38, 39. to an ointment, 1 John 2.27. to
the oil of gladness, Psalm: 45.7. All which things will be seen, heard, or
smelt, and set out the spirits manifestation of it self. The spirit is an
active thing, and makes its inbeing-known by men's outward actions, as the
inbeing of the soul is by speaking and walking; the sap keeps not always in
the root, but ascends, disperseth it self into every branch, and by leaves,
blossoms, and fruit, declares the life and nature of the Tree; many whose lives
do testify what they are, cheat their own souls with this delusion, They have
honest hearts, and are inwardly good, though they be not so gracious, and holy
outwardly as others; yea, though corruptions do break out sometimes, inwardly
they are good; but let such know, it is impossible there should be grace,
Christ, or the spirit within them, and these not appear in their tongues and
lives; For out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks, and the hand
acts: The corruption breaks out testifies there is a corrupt, graceless,
Christless, and spiritless heart within.

Ninthly, Observe:

When men have received the spirit of God, they are assisted and enabled by it
to proceed and persevere in the ways of God.

I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments. As the stonynesse of their hearts, and power of their
wills, could not hinder God fr^^ ^utting in his spirit; so the stonyness being
removed, the liberty or power of the will cannot hinder the spirit from
carrying on the men in whom it is in the ways of God, it complyes and
co-operates with the spirit therein: Man's Will after the spirits infusion and
work upon it neither does, nor can hinder his proceeding and persevering in the
ways of God; for if so, man's will should frustrate the promise of God, and
make him in one part of it unfaithful; for he that said, I will put my spirit
within you, said also, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, to keep my
judgments and do them; he says not, If man will it shall be so, but I will
have it so. The spirit of God is stronger than Satan, 1 John 4.4. Stronger than
men's wills and corruptions, and will put forth his strength to maintain the
truth and faithfulness of him who put him within men for that end, that he
should assist them against whatever should hinder their progress and
perseverance in his ways. The spirit writes the Law of God in the hearts of
men, 2 Cor. 3.3. teaches them to understand the same, 1 John 2.27. and enables
them to obey all truth, 1 Pet. 1.22. They obeyed the Truth through the spirit;
that caused them to walk in the way of truth, notwithstanding Satan's
temptations, the strength of their own corruptions, and liberty of their wills.
Those that have the spirit are led by it, and cannot be under the dominion of
sin or Satan, Romans 6.14. They are under grace, under the conduct of the spirit,
which will never let them apostatize and perish, 1 John 3.9. There is a seed in
them which will never suffer them so to degenerate, as to become the seed of
the Serpent.

Tenthly, Observe;

Those that have the spirit in them, do make godliness and the ways of God
their business and delight here in this world.

They walk in his statutes, that is their work, trade, recreation; no business
lies more upon them than to be godly; The world they are dead unto it, Gal.
6.14. and use it as if they used it not, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. And sin they are
dead unto, they have nothing to do with the unfruitful works of darkness,
Ephesians. 5.11. but they are alive unto God, Rom: 6.11. They spend their time and
strength for him, they live to his praise and glory. So Paul, Phil. 1.21.
says, To me to live is Christ; Vita mea non nisi in rebus Christi occupatur,
My life is employed and laid out in the service and interest of Christ. Those
that have the spirit in them, live in the spirit, and walk in the spirit,
according to Gal. 5.25. They show forth the virtues of him that has put in the
spirit within them, and the virtues of the spirit being within them. David had
the spirit of God within him, and he made godlin^^^e his (...) his principal
business, and the statutes of God his delight, Psalm. 119.164. Seven times a
day do I praise thee; verse. 62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto
thee; verse. 97. Gods Law was his meditation all the day; Psalm. 71.15. My mouth
shall show forth thy righteousness and salvation all the day; Psalm. 25.5. On
thee do I wait all the day; Psalm. 84.^0. A day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand; I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than dwell in
the Tents of wicked^esse; Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that I will seek after, That I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.
Where is a King? where is a Christian that minds godliness as David did? or
delights in the ways of God as he did? May it not be taken up for a
lamentation, that most Christians declare, that neither Christ nor the spirit
is in them, because they neither seek the things of the one, nor savor the
things of the other, Phil. 2.21. Romans 8.5.

Eleventhly, Observe;

A man endowed with the spirit, must walk in Gods statutes, and in his only.

I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; they
must not worship God any other way then he has appointed in his word. Inward
and outward worship must be appointed by God, for who knows, what will please
God but himself? he is a glorious and holy spirit, infinitely and only wise,
and that only must we stick unto as pleasing unto him, which himself appoints.
Men's inventions and appointments in worship, defile men's souls, and provoke
divine Majesty; a godly man therefore is very tender in point of worship, and
will practice nothing therein but what he has found a clear foundation for out
of the word of God; he knows that when Nadab and Abihu brought strange fire
before God, it brought a strange judgment upon them from God, Levit. 10.1, 2.
He knows that all worship after the Commandments and Traditions of men is in
vain, Matthew. 15.9. He knows no Coin is current in the Court of Heaven, but that
which has the Image and Superscription of God himself upon it; he knows what
God has said; Ezekiel. 20.18, 19. Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers,
neither observe their judgments, nor defile your selves with their idols; I am
the Lord your God, walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them. He
knows that to fear God, and keep his Commandments is the whole duty of man,
Eccles. 12.13.

Twelfthly, Observe;

That man that has the spirit of God, is for righteousness as well as
holiness;

He is a second Table man, as well as a first Table man; he is conscious
toward man, as well as toward God; he keeps the judgments set between man
and man, as well as walks in the statutes which are between God and man, as,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Romans 13.9. Not to defraud thy
brother in any matter, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. To do to others as we would be done unto
our selves, Luke 6.31. To condescend to those of low estate, to recompense to
no man evil for evil, but to overcome evil with good, Romans 12.16, 17, 21.
Blessing them that curse you, and praying for them that despitefully use you,
Mat. 5.44. To forbear and forgive one another, Col. 3.13. To bear one another
burdens, Gal. 6.2. Every man to possess his vessel in sanctification and
honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle,
showing all meekness unto all men, Titus 3.3. To put away all bitterness,
wrath, anger, clamor, and evil speaking, with all malice, and to be kind and
tender hearted one to another, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. Not to lie, but speak the truth
every man with his Neighbor, verse. 25. To distribute to the necessities of
Saints, Romans 12.13. To lend, looking for nothing again, Luke 6.35. etc. These
be judgments God has set in his infinite wisdom between man and man, and
whosoever has the spirit of God dwelling in him, keeps these and many other
mentioned in sacred writ. David had respect to all the Commandments of the
Lord, Psalm. 119.6. Those which concerned men, as well as those concerned God,
for they are all of equal authority, being from the same God, and branches of
his infinite wisdom; the one tending to man's good, and Gods glory, as well as
the other, which David knew, and therefore kept. So Paul, his care was not only
to mind the duties of holiness toward God, but those of righteousness toward
men, Acts 24.16. Herein (says he) do I exercise my self, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward man. Had he not kept the
judgments set of God between man and man, his conscience had not been
innocent, but because he did keep them, therefore he could say, Acts 25.10. To
the Jews have I done no wrong; and to the Corinthian Gentiles, we have wronged
no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man, 2 Cor. 7.2. He had
the spirit within him which carried him forth strongly to do just, righteous,
and equal things, and to move others thereunto, Phil. 4.8. Finally Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. He writ these words unto the Philippians as his last
words, that so they might take the deeper impression in them; knowing that if
second Table duties were not done, first Table duties would be in vain. See how
the Lord with indignation takes up the Jews for failing in their duties toward
men, though they did their duty toward him, Jer. 7.6, 9, 10. Will ye oppress
the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow? will ye steal, murder, and commit
adultery, and swear falsely, and come and stand before me in this house? what,
do you come hither for to pray, to hear the Law, to offer Sacrifice, and think
I am pleased with these duties? no, no, I will destroy the Temple where ye
worship, and I will cast ye out of my sight as I have done all your brethren,
even the whole seed of Ephraim, verse. 14, 15. It is in vain to be religious, if
we be not righteous; such Religion is a dreadful provocation of God, as you may
read Isa. 1.10, 11, 12* 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Many are religious in these days,
but where is a righteous man? He that does righteousness, just and equal
things, is righteous, 1 John 3.5. Let us learn, as to walk in Gods Statutes,
that is to be religious, so to keep his judgments and do them, that is to be
righteous; for of the three great things which God requires of man, this is the
first, Micah 6.8. What does the Lord require of thee, O man, but to do justly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

Verse. 28. And ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers, and ye
shall be my people, and I will be your God.


THis verse comprehends in it both temporal and spiritual mercy, as
repossession of their Land, and Gods renovation of Covenant with them.

And ye shall dwell in the Land which I gave to your fathers.
God had long before this time given Canaan unto Abraham and his posterity, who
through their sins were driven out of the same, and made captives in Babylon,
but he would bring them back again and set them in it, which resembled Gods
gathering of his out of all Nations, and bringing them into the Church of
Christ, the City of God, the spiritual Canaan.

And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.
Like words to these we had Ezekiel. 11.20. Ch: 14.11. Ch: 34.31. and therefore
shall not stand upon them: The sense of them is this; You being in Babylon
think your selves cast off of God, and that ye shall never again have the
honor to be his people, and to have him for your God, but your thoughts are
not as mine, for ye shall come again to Canaan, and there I will own you for my
people, and ye shall own me for your God; ye shall be my people to worship me,
and I will be your God to bless you; ye shall be my people to depend upon me,
and I will be your God to protect you; ye shall be my people to obey my
Commands, and do my Will, and I will be your God to exalt and honor you; ye
shall be my people to love, fear, honor me, and to stand for me and my glory,
and I will be your God to counsel, comfort, delight in, and to deliver you, and
to plead your cause against all your enemies.

First, Observe;

There is nothing difficult or impossible to God, though it be so in the eye of
man.

The Jews thought it an hard, if not a thing impossible for them to get from
under the Babylonish yoke, into their own Country; but God thought not so,
says he, Ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your fathers; I will break
off every yoke which hinders, and remove every mountain which lets; And this he
did with ease, for he did but stir the heart of Cyrus King of Persia to make a
Proclamation to this purpose, That whoever among the Jews had an heart to go up
to Jerusalem, might do it, 2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23. and it was done. The getting
Peter out of Prison seemed a thing impossible, he was in two Chains, between
two Soldiers, keepers at the door, a first and second Ward after these to
pass by, and then an Iron gate to open, all these things were as nothing to
God, he sent an Angel who brought Peter out of Prison, notwithstanding all
these difficulties, and as to men impossibilities, Acts 12. God says, Jer.
32.27. I am the Lord, the God of all flesh; is there any thing too hard for me?
Many things are too hard for you, but is there any thing in Heaven or earth too
hard for me? what, cannot I bring the Jews again to Canaan? verse. 37. I will
gather them out of all Countries whither I have driven them in mine anger, and
in my fury, and in great wrath, and I will bring them again to this place, viz:
to Jerusalem.

Secondly, Observe;

Lands are at the dispose of God.

Ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your fathers. Canaan God first gave
to the Canaanites, for their iniquities God took it away, and gave it to the
Jews, they provoking God by their idolatries and oppressions, he took it from
them and gave it to the Chaldeans, who having possessed it for some years, he
took it from them, and restored it again to the Jews; not only the Land of
Canaan was disposed of by the Lord, but all Lands and Nations are his, and
given to whom he pleases, Jer. 10.7. He is King of Nations, he rules in the
Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whom he will, Dan. 4.32. All Kings are Gods
Coppyholders, and he can turn them out of their Tenures at pleasure, Jer. 27.5,
6. I have made the earth, and given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me; and
now have I given all these Lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon. He turned out the King of Moab, the King of Edom, the King of the
Ammonites, the King of Tire, the King of Zidon, and gave all their Lands into
the hands of Nebuchadnezzar.

Thirdly, Observe;

No condition of Gods people is so grievous, but shall have a comfortable
issue.

That the Jews were in captivity, deprived of all those sweet enjoyments they
had in the Land of Canaan, was grievous; that they were amongst Idolaters,
Blasphemers, in a polluted Land, and made to serve the enemies of God, this was
exceeding grievous unto them; yet this condition was not to last always, it
should have a comfortable end, they should return and dwell in the Land of
their fathers, and enjoy their ancient, honorable, and comfortable
privileges. In the Apostles days the Church was under great persecution, and
many suffered, Acts 8. and 9. Chap: but the persecution and suffering of the
Saints had an end, yea, a comfortable end; for Chap: 9.31. its said, Then had
the Churches rest throughout all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria, and were
edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy
spirit, were multiplied. Here was a blessed conclusion of a sad persecution;
this blustering Winter had a sweet Spring following of it.

Fourthly, Observe;

It is an act of grace in God to take any people to be his, and a renewed act
of grace to fall in again with those that have revolted from him and he has
cast off.

What was in this people of the Jews at first to move him to mind them, to take
them for his people, they had that enough in them, and as all other Nations
have, to make him abhor them, but nothing to incline his heart toward them,
Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. When thy person was loathed, and thou wast polluted in thy
blood, I said unto thee live; verse. 8. I entered into Covenant with thee, and
thou becamest mine. Here was an act of grace, it was Gods pleasure made them
his people, 1 Samuel 12.22. and nothing else, and when they had forsaken God,
Jer. 2.13. and he had cast them out of his sight, Jer. 7.15. which was done
when they were cast into Babylon, to fall in again with these, to own them for
his people, and to become their God again, this was a renewed act of grace,
height of mercy, strength of love: God might have said, Ye are weary of me, and
I am weary of you, I know your thoughts and what comes into your mind, that you
would be as the Heathen, as the Familyes of the Country, to serve Wood and
stone, Ezekiel. 20.32. but God would not suffer it, he would bring them out of
Babylon, be their God, and take them to be his people, which sets out the
freeness and fullness of divine grace; he would not let his people become
heathenish, and worship heathen gods.

Fifthly, Observe;

All Nations have not an equal interest in God, his favor and grace is not
alike dispensed unto all.

God said not to the Babylonians, Ye shall be my people, and I will be your
God. This was spoken to the Jews, and to no other Nation; therefore says God
of that Nation, You only have I known of all the familyes of the earth, Amos
3.2.
you have I taken into nearer relation than any other; you have I known by way
of Covenant, you have I known so as to record my name among you, and to dwell
among you; but so I have not dealt with other Nations, They were without God in
the world, Ephesians. 2.12. They were far off, (ver. 13.) from God, from the means
of grace and salvation. The Gentiles had not such interest in God as the Jews
had; they had common favor as they were his creatures under the Covenant of
works, these had special favor as they were his people under the Covenant of
grace, Isa. 43.3. I am the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel, thy Savior; I
gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee: God exposed them to
destruction, for the safety of the Jews.

Sixthly, Observe;

That people is honored and happy, whom the Lord owns to be his, and
vouchsafes to be their God.

Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. What greater honor could the
Jews have in the wo^ld, then to be taken by the infinite, holy, great, and
glorious God, to be his people: It is a great honor when poo^ begga^ly people
are taken into great men's, and Princes services; much more is it so when a
sinful Nation is taken in by God to be his people. And not only is it an
honor, but an happiness, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people whose God is the
Lord; is not that people happy which have peace, and plenty of all good things?
Yes, it is an humane, a conceited happiness, but it is not a real, a true
happiness, that lies in having God our God, our Lo^d: propriety in a Deity
makes a Nation or Person happy, Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is the Nation whose God is
the Lord, and the People whom he has chosen for his own inheritance. David who
was a Prophet, and a man after Gods own heart, fixes no^ happiness upon
riches, honors, peace, parts, multitudes of Soldiers, Subjects, or
Counselors, but in mutual relation between God and a People, the one owning
the other. When God owns a people to be his inheritance, and a People own God
to be their God and Portion, this is true happiness; such a people may plead
with God for great things in prayer, and expect them, as Jehoshaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. and as Asa did, 2 Chronicles: 14.11. and Moses, Exodus: 32.11, 12, 13,
14.

Verses 29, 30.
I will also save you from all your uncleanness, and I will call for the
Corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.

And I will multiply the fruit of the Tree, and the increase of the Field, that
ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen.


THese two Verses hold out two more great Promises unto this people; which are
1. Ablation of evils, as uncleanness, famine, reproach. 2. Collation of good
things, Corn, Fruit, and increase of the field.


Verse. 29. I will also save you from all your uncleanness.
This is a special Promise, and of great concernment: Some refer it to
Justification, and make it to be Gods free taking away the guilt and
punishments deserved by their uncleanness: Some refer it to Sanctification,
and make it to be Gods cleansing them from the filth, and delivering them from
the power of sin. They are mistaken who interpret the words of Babylonish
uncleanness, as if God would deliver them out of Babylon, and save them from
the pollutions thereof; if that had been the sense, the words should have run
thus, I will save you from all their uncleanness, not from all your
uncleanness. To let that Exposition pass, we may take in here both their
Justification and Sanctification, and so make the sense full, I will save you
from all your uncleanness by my pardoning grace, that shall acquit you from
the guilt and punishment of all your sins; and I will save you from all your
uncleanness by my sanctifying grace, that shall purge out all your
defilements and spots: The word for uncleanness is Tumeoth, which notes not
only Ceremonial uncleanness, but Moral also, as Levit. 18.27.

I will call for the Corn, and will increase it.
The Hebrew is, I will call to the Corn, I will command the Corn to grow and
bring forth; I will give but a word of power, and as that has caused all
things to be and bring forth, so shall it do with the Corn, and not only cause
it to grow, but to increase, so that there shall be plenty, and plenty
continued; for it follows,

And lay no famine upon you.
The Jews had often been under grievous famines, as appears 2 Samuel 21.1. 2 Kings
6. 1 Kings 18. Joel 1. Amos 4.6. 2 Kings 25.3. The Lord called for, and laid
famines upon them; but here he promises, not to lay any famine upon them; they
should be free from that judgment, and live in the abundance of good things.

Verse. 30. And I will multiply the fruit of the Tree.
Not only should the Corn thrive and bring forth, but the Trees also they
should be fruitful, yea, very fruitful; God would multiply the fruit of all
the Trees which used to bear fruit. Some Trees are for ornament of the earth,
some for Timber, some for Fire, but most for fruit, and those that were for
fruit should bear fruit in abundance.

The increase of the field.
These words are spoken of those things which sponte nascuntur do grow of
themselves without setting, sowing, or planting, they are properly the increase
of the Field.

That ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen.
The Heathens took occasion from the famines the Jews met with, to reproach
them and say, What do you want bread? is your God the chiefest and best of
Gods, and will he see you want? is he hard-hearted, and will not afford you
necessaries to live? surely our gods are better, and more merciful than the
God of the Jews; they suffer us not to want any thing, we have no such famines
as you Jews have, you are hunger-starved wretches, and beholding to us for
bread. These were grievous reproaches which the Lord promised here to take
away, by giving unto them plenty of all things for their maintenance. They had
upbraided the Jews, verse. 13. That their Land was a Land devoured men; God
therefore now told them, Their Land should bring forth Corn, fruit, and other
good things, and so maintain the inhabitants of it.

First, Observe;

When God enters into, or renews Covenant with a People, he will do much for
them.

I will be your God, I will also save you from all your uncleanness, and I
will call for the Corn, and increase it, and lay no famine upon you, and I will
multiply the fruit of the Tree, etc. Here God renewed Covenant with them, and
promised them spiritual and temporal mercies, which in due time he gave them
in; so when he first entered into Covenant with them, Ezekiel. 16.8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. what great things did God do for them? Then washed I thee with
water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and anointed thee with
oil; I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with Badgers skin,
and I girded thee about with fine Linen, and I covered thee with silk, etc.
When God is once engaged to a People, he does much for them, and great things,
he lays out himself and his Attributes for their good.

Secondly, Observe;

God is a perfect Savior.

I will save you from all your uncleanness. They had many, and variety of
uncleanness, Ceremonial and Moral impurities, inward and outward pollutions;
they had much guilt, and much filth, but God saved them from them all; he does
perfectly justify, and will perfectly sanctify in due time: there is not one
inherent corruption within, cleave it never so fast unto the spirit of man, but
God will work it out; He will take away all iniquity, (Hos. 14.2.) the guilt of
sin, the power and pollution of sin, yea, the very being of sin, verse. 13. of
this Chapt: I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from
all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. God will do
his work of this nature thoroughly and perfectly; David acknowledged it, Psalm.
103.2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.

Thirdly, Observe;

It is no difficulty unto the Lord to make plenty of things, he can easily do
it.

I will call for the Corn, and will increase it. It is but calling for it, and
it comes; if he call for fruitfulness of the Field, or Tree, or both, they
come: as servants come at the call of their masters; so any creatures, Corn,
Wine, Oil, come at the call of God; if God do but say, Let the earth bring
forth, it will bring forth; there is power in his Word, it is the Word of the
greatest King; no earthly King has fertility or sterility at his Command as
God has, Haggai 1.11. He called for a drought upon the Land, and it came; 2
Kings 8.1. He called for a famine, and it came and sojourned seven years with
them. If God call for a judgment or a mercy, it comes presently. Let us fear
to offend him least he call for a famine, the pestilence, or a sword; let us
improve mercies for his honor, that he may call for the Corn and Fruit, and
continue the same unto us.

Fourthly, Observe;

Whatsoever plenty is in a Land, it is from the power, blessing, and bounty of
the Lord.

I will call for the Corn and increase it. Though the Land have kept her
Sabbaths, has not been ploughed or sown in many years, yet I will cause it to
bring forth, and that richly; I will multiply the fruit of the Tree; the Vine,
Fig Tree, and the Olive shall be laden with fruit, and that ye take no pains
for, the tender Grass and Herbs, the increase of the Field: These, even all
these, are from the call, benediction, and bounty of God, which we should take
notice of, and be thankful for. All the Corn we have for bread, all the Fruit
we have for delight, all the Herbs we have for Physic, and all the grass and
fodder we have for Cattle, are all from the Lord; and if we do not use all for
his glory, but abuse the same as Ephraim did, God will deal by us as he did by
Ephraim, Hos. 2.8, 9. even take all from us, I will take away my Corn in the
time thereof, etc.

Fifthly, Observe;

God takes notice how wicked ones reproach his children being under his
judgments, and will cause their reproachings to cease.

Ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen. It was a vile
thing for the Babylonians to cast it in the Jews Teeth, That their Land was a
Land of famine, and so to reproach them for that judgment which God for their
sins did often lay upon them; this was inhumane, barbarous, to add affliction to
the afflicted; God observed it, and to comfort them against so soar an
affliction, he gives in a promise of a plentiful maintenance, I will call for
the Corn, and multiply all things, so that there shall be no occasion for an
enemy, for any Babylonian to say so any more; Ye shall receive no more reproach
of famine among the heathen.

Verse. 31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and
for your abominations.


THis Verse is the last of the special Promises made here unto this people,
and it is a promise of repentance. Something like part of this verse. we had
Chap. 6.9. almost the same words we had Chap. 20.43.

Then shall ye remember.
When I have broken the Babylonish yoke off their necks, brought you into your
own Land, and done great things for you, Then ye shall remember, that is, not
simply to call to mind what ye have done, but to roll up and down in your
thoughts seriously, to muse upon and ponder, for so much the word Zacar
signifies, and so to ponder as to do something thereupon.

Your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good.
In Chap: 20.43. its your ways, and all your doings wherein ye have been
defiled; and here it is Your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good. What their ways and doings were, you may see Ezekiel: 22. throughout the
whole Chapter, they did speak and do evil as they could, Jer: 3.5. They were
worse than the Nations and Countries round about them, Ezekiel: 5.6. than Sodom
and Samaria, Ezekiel: 16.47.

And shall loath your selves in your own sight.
Montanus renders the Hebrew thus, Reprobabitis vos in faciebus vestris, Ye
shall reprobate your selves in your own sight, ye shall judge your selves worthy
to be cut off, and to be made a curse; so (...) signifies, says Maldonate. The
Vulgar, is your iniquities shall displease you; there is more in the word than
displeasing; Fastidio eritis vobis ipsis, Ye shall be for a disdain, a loathing
to your selves. Compungemini, says Aecolampadius, Ye shall be pricked at the
heart, ye shall see your selves so defiled, and deformed through sin, that ye
shall loath and abhor your selves.

For your iniquities and for your abominations.
Iniquities are perverse, crooked, and unrighteous actions; abominations things
disaffecting and loathsome to the senses.

First, Observe;

Gods loving kindnesses and mercies do work more with sinners than his
judgments do.

All the time they were in Babylon, their hearts were never so affected for
their sins, as after God brought them out, settled them in Canaan, and showed
much love unto them, Then they should remember their evil ways; before they
minded them no^, then they should loath themselves. Mercies in Sion are more
efficacious with sinners than judgments in Babylon; Gods favor sooner melts
hard hearts than the fire of his indignation; his kindness is very penetrative,
it gets into the hearts of sinners sooner than his threats and frowns; it is
like a small soaking rain which goes to the roots of things, when as a dashing
rain runs away, and does little good. It was David's kindness brake the heart of
Saul, 1 Samuel 24. And it is Gods kindness which breaks the heart of sinners.
The Milk and Honey of the Gospel affect the hearts of sinners more than the
Gall and Wormwood of the Law; Christ on Mount Sion brings more to repentance,
than Moses on Mount Sinai.

Secondly, Observe;

When God brings his People out of Babylon into Canaan, out of the world and
Antichristian ways, into near relation to himself, and into Gospel order, then
he will frame their spirits so, that they shall review their former ways, be
ashamed of, and loath themselves for them.

Verse. 28. Ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your fathers, and ye shall
be my people, and I will be your God, and then shall ye remember your doings
that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities and abominations. When people are delivered from the power of
darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of Christ, then they come to see
what works of darkness they committed, and so to abhor and loath themselves
for the same. When men come out of Popish darkness, or the profane courses they
have lived in, and are brought near to God, how do they judge, condemn, and
loath themselves for the same! When Paul was translated from his Pharisaisme
into Christ's unity, then God molded his spirit so, that he saw and confessed
what a Blasphemer, Persecuter, and injurious person he had been, and loathed
himself, saying, He was the chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. And when the Jews
shall be brought out of that Babylonish condition they now are in, and become a
people near to God, being in the Church of Christ, then they will remember
their evil doings, their bitterness against Christians, and bloudynesse
against Christ, and loath themselves for the same, Zech. 12.10. Rev. 1.7.

Thirdly, Observe;

Where repentance comes, it makes a change in men's judgments, affections, and
lives.

They should loath themselves in their own sight, for their iniquities, and for
their abominations. What they approved of before, delighted in, and practiced,
that they should look upon as abominable, loath, and turn from. Repentance
begins in men's minds and judgments, altering them, and when they are altered,
the affections and conversation will alter; when the Prodigal repented there
was a change inward and outward.

Verse. 32.
Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto you; be
ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.


IN this Verse is comprehended the ground of all the gracious and great
Promises specified in the words before and following: And 1. It is expressed
Negatively, It is not for your sakes. 2. Employed Affirmatively, It is for the
Lords sake.


Not for your sakes do I this.
God saw nothing in them to move him to bring them out of Babylon, or to do
ought for them in Babylon; but he beheld that in them, which might have moved
him to destroy them, he saw how they profaned his holy name among the
Babylonians, verse. 21. he saw how they intended to turn heathens, and worship
wood and stone, Ezekiel. 20.32. Being Gods people they thought God was bound to do
much for their sakes, and that he should not deal justly with them, if he did
not mind them, and do for them; see how they expostulated with God, Isa. 58.3.
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? wherefore have we afflicted
our soul, and thou take no knowledge? They did in effect tell God he dealt
not well with them, they deserved better things at his hands than they had;
therefore said the Lord here, Not for your sakes do I this,

Be it known unto you.
Take notice that what conceits soever ye have of your own worth or deserts,
because ye are my people, and of the seed of Abraham my friend, yet I do not
bring you out of Babylon for your worth or merits sake, I do nothing upon that
account, and proclaim it openly unto you, and all the world.

Be ashamed and confounded for your own ways.
Your ways are so far from meriting at my hands, that they merit not at the
hands of men, they are of that nature as you ought to be ashamed and confounded
for them; of the words ashamed and confounded was spoken Chap. 16.52, 54, 61.

First, Observe;

Men are apt to think they deserve something at Gods hands.

The house of Israel thought she had suffered a long and sore captivity, and
having fasted and mourned every fifth and seventh month throughout the seaventy
years, Zech: 7.5. she conceived God now should deal unkindly, yea unjustly, if
he should not do some great thing for her; now it was just for him to remember
all her tears, sighs, prays, fastings and sufferings, to set her at liberty,
and give her repossession of her Land, rewarding her with old and new
privileges. Matthew. 7.22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have not
we prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out Devils? and in thy
name done many wonderful works? They thought they had merited Heaven by their
doings, and looked for some wonderful reward for their wonderful works. The
laborers which came into the Vineyard at the third and sixth hours, thought
they deserved more of the Lord of the Vineyard than they that went in at the
ninth and eleventh hours, Matthew. 20. Prone is corrupt nature to conceit it
merits somewhat at the hands of God. But

Secondly, Observe;

Men's ways are such as they ought to be ashamed of themselves, and fear
destruction from God for them.

Be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel; they are such
as you should blush at, and loath to behold, and make you fear least my
judgments should sieze upon you for them. Nehem. 9.30, 31. What says he of
them? Lord, thou gave them into the hand of the people of the Lands; that is,
thou did cast them into captivity for their own ways; and what then?
Nevertheless, for thy great mercies sake, thou did not utterly consume them.
They had cause to fear consuming; had not mercy and great mercy stepped in,
they had been utterly consumed: So Jeremy, Lament. 3.22. It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed. If it be mercy that our persons are not
destroyed, what do our works or ways deserve from him?

Thirdly, Observe;

The Promises God makes unto, and the mercies he bestows upon his people are
free, and for his own sake.

Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto you; I have
promised To sprinkle you with clean water, to put a new heart into you, to give
you my spirit, to save you from all your iniquities, to bring you again to
Sion, to give you many mercies there, and to do you much good; but these I do
not for your sakes, you deserve them not, but for mine own sake, for mine own
honor and name; as verse. 22. I do not this, O house of Israel, for your sakes,
but for mine holy names sake. For man's sake come judgments; the earth was
cursed for Adams sake, Gen: 3.17. For Achans sake the Israelites fell and fled,
Josh: 7. For Jonas sake the Sea was tempestous, Jon: 1.4.12. But when mercies
come at Land or Sea, it is for the Lords own sake; He made all things for
himself, Prove: 16.4. for his own names sake; and what good soever he does to
any Nations or Persons is not for your sakes, but for his own holy names sake.
When the Jews were near destruction, he wrought for his names sake, Ezekiel: 20.9.
So when we were near to destruction often times in these Nations, the Lord
wrought for his own names sake, not for our sakes. Let us give God the glory of
what he has done for our Nation, and for our selves, and say, Help us, O God
of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, and deliver us, and purge away our
sins for thy names sake.

Verse. 33, 34, 35.
Thus says the Lord God, In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all
your iniquities, I will also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes
shall be builded.

And the desolate Land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of
all that passed by.

And they shall say, this Land that was desolate, is become like the Garden of
Eden, and the waste, and desolate, and ruined Cities are become fenced, and are
inhabited.


IN these Verses the Lord proceeds in Temporal Promises, and tells them what he
will do for them after he has cleansed them from their sins.

1. Their Cities and waste places shall be re-edified. 2. Their Cities shall be
inhabited. 3. Tillage of the Land. 4. Such a choice blessing upon the Land,
that it should be thought like Eden.
Verse. 33. In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities.
He spoke of cleansing them from all their filthiness in the 25. verse. and of
saving them from all their uncleanness, in the 29. Iniquities here imports
the same that filthinesses and uncleanness do there: The sense is this, In
the day that I shall forgive your sins, free you frtm the guilt and punishment
of them, by bringing y u out of Captivity into your own Country, then will I
do such things for you.

I will also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded.
The Cities and Places which by war and length of time were wasted and decayed,
should be built again, repaired and inhabited.

Verse. 34. And the desolate Land shall be tilled.
Canaan had layen desolate many years, and kept many Sabbaths, there being none
to Till it; but now God promises, It should be ploughed, sown, and yield
increase; as it is verse. 29.

Whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by it.
There being no husbond-man to plough the Land, to dress the Vines, nor others
to repair the waste places, all lay desolate, and the desolateness thereof was
seen by strangers. Doubtless many Travelers turned aside to see the
desolations of Jerusalem, the Temple, and Cannan which had been so famous in
the world, and when they came, they saw all overgrown with Thorns, Briars, and
Nettles.

Verse. 35. This Land that was desolate, is become like the Garden of Eden.
God would so bless the Land of Canaan, and their labors in it, that it
should be like the Garden of Eden for order, plenty, and pleasure. They who
wondered before at the desolateness of it should wonder at the great alteration
made there, they should see order where was confusion, plenty where was
barrenness, and pleasure where was nothing but abhorrencie.

And the waste desolate and ruined Cities are become fenced and inhabited.
Many Cities had been in the Land of Canaan, which Nebuchadnezzars Army and
Forces had laid waste, made desolate, and utterly ruined; but after their
return from Babylon, they were not only built, but fortified and fenced with
walls.

First, Observe;

When God pardons the sins of his people, then he vouchsafes them other
mercies.

In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities, I will
also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded, and the
desolate Land shall be tilled. God would bless them with liberty, commodious
habitations, and plenty of all things, 2 Chronicles: 7.14. I will forgive their
sins, and heal their Land. Pardon of sin is a fundamental mercy, and has many
other mercies following of it, Jer: 33.8, 9. I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against
me; and it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all the
Nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them; and
they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity
that I procure unto it. When God forgives his people their iniquities, he will
take delight in doing them good, count it his honor, get himself a name
throughout the earth by blessing and prospering them, and Jerusalem, or the
Church which is meant by it, so that the enemies shall be afraid of that God
and that people.

Secondly, Observe;

The best of Lands may be laid desolate.

Canaan was a Land flowed with Milk and Honey, the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel:
20.6. And here it is called The desolate Land; it was deprived of Men and
Beasts, of Cities, Towns and Houses, it was become a Wilderness, for the sins
of the people it was brought into that condition, Zech: 7.11, 12. They were
stubborn, hard-hearted, rebellious, and therefore God scattered them with a
whirlwind among all the Nations whom they knew not; and thus the Land was
desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned, for they laid the
pleasant Land desolate, verse. 14. It was their sins which made that Land of
desire, a Land of desolation.

Thirdly, Observe;

Desolate Lands shall not always lie in that condition.

The desolate Land shall be tilled. If Canaan lie desolate seaventy years, at
the end thereof she shall be tilled; as she had her time of lying fallow, so
should she have her time of ploughing and sowing. Behold, the days come, says
the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel, and the house of Judah with the
seed of man, and with the seed of beast; and it shall come to pass, that like
as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down,
and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them to build, and to
plant, says the Lord, Jer. 31.27, 28. As God has his days and times to lay
waste and to pluck up, so to build and plant; he compares men and beasts here
to seed, not only because they do multiply themselves, but also because men by
the help of beast should till the Land and sow it, whereupon it should bring
forth abundantly. And as God deals with desolate Lands, so he does with
desolate hearts, he has his times to till and sow them, as verse. 15, 16, 17.
Rachel wept and refused to be comforted; but what said God to her? Refrain thy
voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded,
etc. God sowed in her heart seeds of hope and comfort.

Fourthly, Observe;

What a great and wonderful change God can make in a little time.

God can make a desolate Land like a Garden, and the best of all Gardens, viz:
The Garden of Eden, which was of Gods own planting, Gen: 2.8. The strangers
that saw Canaan in its desolateness, even they should see the change, and
wonder at it; saying, This Land that was desolate is become like the Garden of
Eden, now there is beauty, plenty, and pleasure in it; God can bring order out
of confusion, abundance out of barrenness, and delight out of desolation. When
the famine was so sore in Samaria, that women did eat their own children, what
a change did God make in a day? To morrow about this time shall a measure of
fine Flower be sold for a shekel, and two measures of Barley for a shekel, in
the gates of Samaria; and it proved so, notwithstanding that the Noble man
said, viz: If the Lord would make windows in Heaven, might this thing be? yea,
it was, and his eyes saw it, 2 Kings 7. The Syrians fled, left their provisions
which were brought into Samaria, and made such plenty there. When the
Israelites wanted flesh to eat in the Wilderness, did not God send Quails two
Cubits high upon the face of the earth? Numb: 11.31. He can make a Desert to
blossom, and that abundantly, Isa: 30.2.

Verse. 36.
Then the Heathen that are left round about you, shall know that I the Lord
build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate; I the Lord have
spoken it, and will do it.


GOd having through his grace pardoned his people, brought them to Sion, and
bestowed many blessings upon them; here the end of all is set down, and that is
the glorifying of God not only by the Jews, but also by the very Heathens.

Then the heathen that are left round about you.
After Nebuchadnezzar had laid Jerusalem and Judea waste, he fell upon the
Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, Philistims, Tyrians and Egyptians, and spoiled
them; therefore our Prophet says, The Heathen that are left; some escaped and
remained until the Jews restoration.

Shall know that I the Lord build the ruined Places.
They should be so convinced by the return of the Jews, and the mercies they
enjoyed, that they should acknowledge it to be the hand of God, that he was
faithful in making good his promise to his people, able to save, and bountiful
in bestowing such mercies upon them. The word to build is Banah, which
s^gnifies to build an house, distinguished into it is several rooms and parts;
the Cities, Towns, and Houses every where had been ruined, and God raised them
up again.

And plant that that was desolate.
The word (...) to plant signifies the putting of Trees, Vines, Shrubs, or any
plants into the earth, and to cover them so with earth, that they remain fixed
therein: The Orchards, Gardens, Vineyards, Olive-yards, Places of pleasure and
profit were laid desolate; the Trees, Plants, Herbs and Flowers, were all cut
down, or pulled up by the roots; those place God did re-plant, and made as
useful and delightful as ever.

I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it.
I have purposed it in my self, I have spoken it by Ezekiel, and I will do it;
the Hebrew is, I have done it; a Preter Tense for a Future, which is frequent,
as Isa. 46.11. I have purposed. The Hebrew is Jatzarti, I have formed, I have
created; the Preter Tense for the Future, as the former and following words do
show, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass, I will form or create
it, I will also do it.

First, Observe;

That though judgment begin at Gods house, yet it ends not there.

The Babylonians first fell upon the Jews and destroyed them, and after
proceeded to the Heathens, they cut off many Nations of them. The Sword first
did eat the flesh of Jews, and then the flesh of Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites,
etc. When the green Trees are lopped, then the Axe cuts down the dry Trees;
wicked men and Nations are glad when it goes ill with the Church and People of
God, but usually when God has corrected his own, he breaks the Horns, the
Back, and Bones of their and his enemies. The Cup of Gods fury began at
Jerusalem, but it stayed not there, it passed thence to Egypt, to the mingled
people, to Vz, Philistia, Ashkelon, Azzah, Ekron, and Ashdod, etc. To all the
Kings of the North, and to all the Kingdoms of the world upon the face of the
earth, Jer: 25.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. It were an
unrighteous thing if God should judge his friends and spare his enemies, and
this he acknowledges; verse. 29. Lo, I begin to bring evil on the City which
is called by my name; and should ye (the Heathens) be utterly unpunished? ye
shall not be unpunished, for I will call for a sword upon all the Inhabitants
of the earth, says the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, Observe;

Some works of God are so convincing, that they cause even Heathens to see, and
acknowledge the hand of God in them, and so to glorify him.

The bringing the Jews out of Babylon, the re-planting them in Canaan, the
re-building of their waste places, peopling of them rebuilt, and making their
Country like the Garden of Eden, convinced the Heathens, so that they said and
acknowledged It was the Lord had done these things, which was a glorifying of
his name, Psalm. 126.1, 2. The Babylonians and others said, The Lord has done
great things for them, when he turned their captivity. There is so much of Gods
wisdom, power, mercy, bounty, in some of his works, that they constrain all
that behold them to acknowledge him in them; see Nehem: 9.16. Psalm. 98.1, 2.
Isa: 52.9, 10.

Thirdly, Observe;

That Architecture and Husbandry are the work of the Lord.

I build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate. There is no
House, no City built, but the Lord has the chief hand therein; Psalm. 127.1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. All is
nothing without the counsel, assistance, and blessing of God; he teaches the
Carpenters and Masons their Art, he inables them to work, and blesses them
working. So for Husbandmen, it is God that does instruct them to discretion,
and teach them, Isa. 28.26. they have all their ploughing, sowing, and planting
skill from him: This comes forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working, verse. 29. If a Land be well built with
Houses, Cities, Castles, it is the Lord that builded them; if it be well tilled
and planted with Orchards, Gardens, Vineyards, and Nurseries of young Trees, it
is the Lord that has tilled and planted them; men's Art and Industry are
nothing without him.

Fourthly, Observe;

Gods purposes and promises shall take effect, and certainly be fullfilled; God
is faithful in what he says, and will perform the same.

I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it. He will not go back from his word,
change his purposes and counsels, or falsify his promises, Isa: 31.2. He will
not call back his words; Isa: 14.27. The Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who
shall disanull it? Isa: 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure; Jer: 32.42. I will bring upon them all the good that I have promised
them. There is none wiser than God to advise him so as to alter his purposes or
counsels, there are none stronger than God to hinder him from making good what
he has purposed and promised; Isa: 43.13. I will work, and who shall let it?
All the Babylonians could not hinder Gods setting his people at liberty; all
the wild beasts, briars, and thorns in Canaan could not hinder him from
bringing them in, and making the Land like Eden, plentiful and pleasant; all
the policy and power of Tobiah, Sanballat, and others could not hinder the
building of the Temple and Walls of the City; God had promised Jerusalem should
be rebuilt and fenced, that the Jews should have their Temple to worship in
again, and they had them.

Verse. 37.
Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of
Israel, to do it for them: I will increase them with men like a flock.


THe word iddaresh, is from Darash, which signifies to make diligent and
careful inquiry. The Vulgar is Adhuc in hoc invenient me domus Israel,
moreover, in this shall the house of Israel find me; when they pray and seek
me, I will be found of them, they shall prevail with me to do this for them.
Vatablus in his Notes has the words thus, Ero requisitus a domo Israel, I will
be required by the house of Israel, they shall come and mind me, and entreat me
to do this for them. Junius is otherwise, Expositus ero domui Israelis, ut hoc
faciam eis, I will be exposed to the house of Israel, that I will do this for
them. Piscator is more plain, Inveniendum me exhibebo Domui Israelis, I will
show my self to the house of Israel to be found of them, that I may do this for
them. Lavater and the French is, I will be required, I will have the house of
Israel sue unto me for it.

What it is that God will be enquired of for, is next to be spoken of.

Maldonate makes it Quicquid petiverint, whatsoever they shall ask: Some refer
it to all the promises mentioned before; but both these are too large, and the
words would not have been for this, but for these things, or these promises
will I be enquired of. Lavater makes for this to be Vt multiplicentur, that
they may be multiplied and increased again; or, For this, viz: which I have
spoken and said I will do; I have said I will return, rebuild, replant them,
and make their desolate Land like the Garden of Eden, so that the Heathens
shall wonder at my dealings with them, now for this will I be enquired of by
the house of Israel.

I will increase them with men like a flock.
The Hebrew may be read thus, I will increase them like a flock of men. The
Septuagint is, I will increase the men themselves, (...), as sheep, I will so
multiply them that they shall be like a flock. The Jews greatly desired issue
always, and it is probable more strongly after their reduction from Babylon
then ever, that so they might plant, build, and fill the Land again.

Verse. 38.
As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn Feasts, so shall
the waste Cities be filled with flocks of men, and they shall know that I am
the Lord.


IN the Hebrew it is, As the flocks of holinesses or holy things. The Jews
besides other feasts, had three great solemn Feasts every year at Jerusalem; 1.
The Passover; 2. Pentecost; 3. The Feast of Tabernacles, unto which the people
came up from all parts of the Land; and for their use at those times great
flocks of sheep, and herds of Cattle were brought to Jerusalem. In Josiahs time
there were 30000 Lambs and Kids, besides Oxen and small Cattle which were for
holy services, and therefore here are called The holy flock, and flock of
Jerusalem. John 15.2. You read of a sheep Market, and by it a Pool; great
flocks of sheep were brought unto that Market, and they were washed in that
Pool before they were used in holy services. Jerusalem at these Feasts were
filled with flocks of sheep and men, and God here promises, That the waste and
desolate places of Judea should be filled with men, and made to abound with
inhabitants again, how improbable soever it seemed to the Jews or Heathens.

And they shall know that I am the Lord.
They shall acknowledge that my thoughts are not theirs, nor my ways theirs,
and that I am faithful, and able to do great things.

First, Observe;

God expects that his People should seek to him for performance of those
Promises he graciously makes them.

I will for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. It
is tender mercy, and loving kindness in God to make promises unto sinners, and
it is duty in man to mind them being made, and to sue them out by prayer; David
did so, Remember (says he) the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have
caused me to hope, Psalm. 119.49. And again, Quicken me according to thy Word,
verse. 154. He minded God of his word and promises, and pressed him by hearty
prayer to make the same good. So Jacob, Lord, did not thou bid me return unto
my Country? and said, thou would deal well with me; deliver me I pray
thee from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him, Gen:
32.9, 11. Had not Jacob improved the promise, he might have gone without
deliverance: Promises as they are foundations for faith, so they are incentives
unto prayer, and provoke those to whom they are made, to sue them out. O Lord
God (said Solomon) let thy promise unto David my father be established, 2 Kings
1.9. Thou did promise him that I should sit upon the Throne, Lord, make it
good. Jeremy holds out this truth most clearly, That God expects to be sought
unto for the performance of what he promises, Chap: 29.10, 11. After seaventy
years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you, in causing you to return to this place; for I know the thoughts
that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil,
to give you an expected end: Here is the promise; what now follows in the 12,
13, and 14. verses? Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto
me, and I will hearken unto you, etc. See it put in practice, Dan: 9.2, 3, 4,
etc. God tells them, Isa: 43. That he blots out transgressions for his own
sake, and will not remember their sins; but then it is added, Put me in
remembrance, verse. 25, 26.

Secondly, Observe;

That the increase of Children is the blessing of God, and he can increase them
in a short space to become like a flock.

They multiplied and filled the Land after their return, and were as the Stars
of Heaven, the Sand of the Seashore, and Dust of the earth; the Key of the
womb is in Gods hand, and he makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a
joyful Mother of children, Psalm. 113.9. And he makes the fruitful woman to be
more fruitful. He multiplied his People as the Bud of the field, Ezekiel: 16.7.

Thirdly, Observe;

How desperate soever the conditions of men and things are, the Lord can
restore them to their Pristine estate, yea, to a better.

They were in a low and lost condition in Babylon, all their Cities laid waste
in their own Land, and never like to be built or inhabitated; but God delivered
them, and restored them to their Primitive state, and made all their waste
Cities populous. Jerusalem formerly was filled with men, now the waste Cities
should be also filled, abounding with men, now their Land should be planted and
inhabited; things in that Land were often at the point of ruin, and incurable
in the eye of men, but God relieved them, raised and restored them: When
Sennacherib was there with his great Army, and all seemed lost, did not God
destroy his Army, and relieve them publicly and privately? though there were
now no Cities left, God could, and did raise them up many Cities; though there
were no people to inhabit those Cities raised, God could raise them up men, and
did make them exceeding populous, even as populous as Jerusalem was at her
solemn Feasts, more populous than ever.

Fourthly, Observe;

The end of Gods deliverances, works and mercies, is, that God may be
acknowledged and glorified.

When I have brought them out of Babylon, planted them in Sion, built their
Cities, filled them with inhabitants, and blessings of all sorts, Then shall
they know that I am the Lord, that I am not like the heathenish gods and lords,
but that I am faithful, omnipotent, gracious and merciful, worthy to be
honored and adored by the house of Israel.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse 1. The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit of
the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the Valley which was full of bones.

2. And caused me to pass by them round about, and behold, there were very many
in the open valley; and lo, they were very dry.


IN the former Chapter, he spoke of the Jews Return out of Babylon, and
likewise of the Kingdom of Christ: In this Chapter also, he proceeds to comfort
the Jews, assuring them of their Return, who well-nigh despaired thereof, and
of the union of the two houses, Judah and Israel.

The parts of this Chapter, are 1. A Vision of dry bones presented to the
Prophet, from the 1. ver. to the 11. 2. The Interpretation and Application of
this Vision, from the beginning of the 11. to the end of the 14. 3. A Type of
two Sticks, and the uniting of them, from the 15. to the 20. 4. The explication
of the Type, from the 20. ver. to the end.


Verse. 1. The hand of the Lord was upon me.
By hand of the Lord, the Chaldee understands, the spirit of Prophecy, which
did enlighten and affect the mind of the Prophet; so also do diverse others:
But, some take it for the power of God upon him; or, a Divine instinct, which,
like an hand pulled or moved him to some other thing, as Chap. 8.3. It was the
Spirit of God came upon him, as Chap. 3.14. And why its called the hand of God,
see Chap. 1.3.

And carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord.
The Hebrew may be read thus, and is by M^ntanus, And the Lord carried me out
in the Spirit; that is, I was rapt out of my self, and my spirit was carried by
the Lord to have a sight or view of Bones. If we take the words as they are,
the sense is this, The Spirit of God being upon me, carried me out in the
spirit of Prophecy, which is the Spirit of the Lord; his body was not carried
from place to place: He had a Prophetical Vision.

And set me down in the midst of the valley.
The Prophet seemed to himself to see a Hand, and to be led out by that hand
into a certain Valley; all which was Visional, not real. He names no particular
Valley. A-lapide says, it was in Campo Sennaar. Mesopotamia, and Chaldaea were
Plains; but whether it were in either of them, is not specified. In valleys
Prophets were wont to have Visions. Our Prophets first Vision was by the River
Chebar, and Rivers are always in Valleys; and in this Valley, its conceived by
some, as Lavater observes, was this Vision: but its safer to judge, that this
Valley was also Visionall.

Which was full of Bones.
This Valley or Plain was no burying place, for then the bones would not have
layen upon the face of the earth, and been exposed to view. Some make these
bones to be the bones of all Mankind being dead, and to respect the general
Resurrection; but they are out, nothing of that is here intended. Some make
them to be the bones of the Babylonians; but the Prophets scope here is not to
comfort them; its the Jews condition he points at, and therefore by bones are
meant the Jews, as is clear, v. 11. These Bones were Visional also, not real,
for then they should not have him unburyed, suffering reproach. Some Jews have
an Opinion* that these bones were the bones of those Jews that dyed in Babylon;
and one Rabbi Jose, a Galilaean, says, That Ezekiel raised those dead Jews,
many of which returned into the land of Israel, and had children there; that
when this fell into controversy among the Jews, one Rabbi Juda the Son of
Bathira stood up and said, Ego sum oriundus ex posteritate illorum, quos
Ezekiel in vitam revocavit: I am of that race which Ezekiel raised, and showed
the Phylacteries his Parent put upon him, and had received from those were
raised.

Verse 2. And caused me to passed by them round about.
The Lord would have the Prophet to take exact notice of them, and therefore
made him to pass Savif savif, undique undique, on every side, on every side;
that so he might observe the number and quality of them, and where they lay;
which he did, for it follows,

And behold there were very many in the open valley.
The number of these bones was great, passed number, and they lay in open view,
in an open Valley, where he had a full sight of them.

And lo, they were very dry.
These bones were not clothed with flesh, juycy, and full of marrow, which had
been more easily raised to life if so: but they were dry, all the moisture was
out of them; they had lain long, nigh 70 years in that condition, and were
almost become earth.

First, Observe.

It was the Spirit of God moved the Prophets to give out those truths are now
extant in the Scriptures, that directed and enabled them to do what they did.
The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit to see and
give out what you have here. The Prophets might not speak or act at their own
pleasures, but, as the Spirit of God moved them, 2 Pet. 1.21. so they spoke, so
they acted. It was the Spirit in the Prophets, that testified against the Jews,
Neh. 9.30. The words of the Lord of hosts, were in the hand and mouth of the
Spirit, before they were in the heads and mouths of the Prophets, Neh. 7.12.
The Apostles had the Spirit falling upon and filling them, before they gave out
Divine truths, Act. 2.4. which verified what Christ had said of the Spirit,
John 16.14. He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. All the truths Paul
has given forth for the Instruction, Edification, and Consolation of the
Church of Christ, he received from the Spirit of Christ; Hence, he says, 1
Cor. 11.23. I received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you: And Chap.
14.37. The things I write unto you, are the commandments of the Lord; he had
them all from his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12, 13.

Secondly, Observe.

The true Messengers and Servants of God, come not only with the Word of God;
but in the Spirit and Power of God. Ezekiel had the hand of God with him. So
Paul, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. His preaching was not with entising words of man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. False Teachers may come with
the Letter, but only those are the true Prophets, the true Messengers of
Christ, that come in the Spirit, and with the Spirit, are carried out by the
Spirit.

Thirdly, Observe.

God honors his servants sometimes so as to make them of his Counsel and
Copartners with him in his works. God makes known his mind here to Ezekiel, and
uses him in the work he was about. Samuel was thus honored, God made him of
his Privy-councel, and told him what he would do to the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.
So he dealt by Abraham, not only in the business of Sodom, Genesis 18.17. but in
that of his Posterity, telling him, His seed should be a stranger in a land not
theirs 430 years, and that afterward they should come out with great
substance, Genesis 15.13, 14. The Prophets and Apostles were Cabinet-men, and knew
the secrets of the Lord, and were Coworkers with God. The Apostle Paul is
expressly for it, 2 Cor. 6.1. they are (...), men that work together with God in
the same work. This is great honor, and such honor as have not all the Saints.

Fourthly, Observe.

Our God calls and moves his servants, by his Spirit, to do difficult things;
he orders them so as to do them safely. It was somewhat averse to nature to go
among dead bones, and dangerous to the Prophet, being many and scattered up and
down the Valley; for had he accidentally touched but one of them, he had been
unclean, according to the Law, Numb. 19. but God caused him to pass by them, so
as he was preserved from pollution; he saw the bones, he touched none of them.
It was a sad and dangerous work God called Abraham unto, viz. the Sacrificing
of his Son; but he ordered it so, that Abraham came off, not only without
imputation of sin, but with great honor for his obedience.

Verse 3. And he said unto me, Son of man, Can these bones live? And I
answered, O Lord God, thou know.
This verse is a Dialogue between God and the Prophet, as Polanus calls it.

1. God propounds a question.

2. The Prophet answers it.

The question is this,

Son of man, Can these bones live?
Ezekiel, thou have had a full view of them, thou see how dry they are, in
what condition they lie; tell me thy thoughts, what thy judgment is of them, I
am desirous to know thy mind, Have thou any art, skill, or power to quicken
them? or, know thou any creature that has? To this Question the Prophet
answers in the next words.

And I answered, O Lord God, thou know.
The Prophets answer is suitable unto the Lords question, which was concerning
the present life of these bones, not future life at the General Resurrection,
which he doubted not of, therefore he confesses his ignorance: I do not know,
O Lord, what thy pleasure is; Thou art able to put life into these dry bones in
a moment, though neither my self nor any other creature can do it; our power is
finite, thine is infinite, and thou can do whatever thou please, but thy
pleasure is held from me and others; therefore, O Lord God, thou know.

First, Observe.

Divine Interrogations argue not Ignorance in God, but are instructory to the
interrogated. God knew what these bones could do, before he propounded the
question to Ezekiel: It was therefore propounded for his Instruction, to
acquaint him with the power of God, and his own weakness, that so, knowing the
one, and being sensible of the other, he might be the fitter Instrument in the
hand of God to work by; Christ's question to Peter, Joh. 21.15. was of this
nature, Simon, love thou me more then these? It was not so much to prove him,
as to instruct and mind him of his former failing, and to fit him for action,
viz. the feeding his Lambs and Sheep.

Secondly, Observe.

God can easily nonplus or silence wise and holy men, with a short question.
Here he puts Ezekiel to it, Can these bones live? The Prophet could not tell,
he was non-plus'd. When God propounded some questions to Job, was he able to
answer him? Job 38.3, 4, etc. He professes he was not able to do it, but must
be silent, Chap. 40.4. Did not Christ by a question put the chief Priests,
Scribes, and Elders to silence. He asked them, Whether the Baptism of John was
from heaven or of men. This little question so perplexed them all, that they
professed, they could not tell, Mark. 11.30.33.

Thirdly, Observe.

It Is wisdom and duty in the Servants of God to resolve all, they cannot reach,
or know not how to be effected, into the knowledge and good pleasure of the
Lord: O Lord God, thou know. He resolves the question into Gods bosom; He
had Knowledge, Power, and Will to do what ever seemed good to himself. There be
many things in the Word men^ion'd, which man can say nothing unto, but, Lord,
thou know; As where the Sepulcher of Moses was, Deuteronomy. 34.6. The spreadings
of the Clouds how they are, Job 36.29. The wind whence it comes or whither it
goes, Joh. 3.8. Whether the seed sown in the evening or the morning shall
prosper best, or be both alike, Eccles. 11 6. What is the true interpretation
of the number of the Beast, 666? Rev. 13.18. Or of the two witnesses, and the
time of their prophesying in Sackcloth 1260. days; when it began, and when it
ended, or shall, Rev. 11.3. These and other things, be said, Lord thou knew.

Verse. 4. Again he said unto me, Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them,
O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.

5. Thus says the Lord God unto these bones, Behold, I will cause breath to
enter into you, and ye shall live.

6. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover
you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live, and ye shall know that
I am the Lord.

7. So I prophesied, as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a great
noise; and behold, a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone.

8. And when I he held, lo, the sinews, and the flesh came up upon them, and
the skin covered them above; but there was no breath in them.

9. Then said he unto me, Prophecy unto the wind, Prophecy son of man, and
say to the wind, Thus says the Lord God, Come from the four winds O breath,
and breath upon these slain, that they may live.

10. So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and
they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great Army.


The Quickening of the dry bones is the great thing considerable in these
verses, and it is set out.

From the Causes; 1. The Efficient. 1. The Instrumental, Prophesying, v. 4, 7,
9, 10. 2. The Principal, v. 5.
2. The Formal which is expressed, 1. By coalition of bone to bone, v. 7. 2. By
clothing of the bones with flesh, sinews, and skin, v. 8. 3. By the entrance
of breath, v. 10.



Verse 4. Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones hear
the word of Lord.
This seems an absurd thing, that the Prophet should prophecy unto Creatures
insensible, unintelligible, void of life. It was as if God should bid a man
preach unto an heap of stones, or dry chips, which are incapable of hearing.
But though these Bones were incapable of hearing Ezekiels voice; yet they were
not incapable of hearing Gods voice, for all creatures; even the most senseless
hear the Lord when he speaks; the stormy winds fulfill his word, Psalm. 148.8.
The Heavens and the Earth, Isai. 1.2. Whales and Ravens, Jon. 2.10. 1 King.
17.4 The Lord intended to bestow life upon these bones; and, that they might
have life, they must hear his word, which had inlivening virtue in it. There is
an obediential virtue in every creature to yield to the will and command of the
Creator, and when it does so, then it is said to hear the voice of the Lord;
then properly men hear God when they do what he requires.

Verse. 5. Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live.
These words prevent an Objection which the Prophet might have made, saying;
Its in vain for me to prophecy to these dry bones; what ever I shall say over
them, or unto them, will come to nothing, and prove ridiculous if any take
notice thereof. No, says the Lord, it shall not be so; for, Behold, I will
cause breath to enter into them, and they shall live. The Septuagint says,
(...), Behold I bring upon you the Spirit of life. Others, render the words
thus, Behold, I do make the Spirit to enter into you; or, I am about to bring
the Spirit into you, and ye shall live; that is, I am ready to breathe life
into you; or, I will breathe the breath of life into you. It Is life is here
promised; which he mentions first to encourage the Prophet, though it were
performed last; for the bones must first be united, then be clothed with
sinews, flesh and skin, before the breath of life enters.

Verse 6. And I will lay sinews upon you.
The Hebrew, for Sinews, is, Gidim, which is from Gadad, Turmatim oonncurrere,
quia nervi in corpore ad sensus and motus officia concurrant, etc. The nerves
in the body do concur unto the duties of sense and motion. Some Nerves are
soft, some are hard; the soft are specially for sense, and they come from the
Brain; the hard are chiefly for motion, and they come from the Marrow in the
backbone. Here God would cause these visional Bones to have visional Sinews,
which might fit them for sense and motion.

And bring up flesh upon you.
The word for, Flesh, is Basar, which Synechdochically signifies sometimes Men,
and sometimes other living creatures; but here it notes that part of man's body
which is simplex, mollis, and rubicunda, simple, soft, and ruddiest; such flesh
would God bring up upon these Bones. The Hebrew for, bring up, is, I will make
to ascend. God would cause flesh to grow up and ascend out of those dry bones.

And cover you with skin.
When the bones had sinews, and flesh, God would not leave them so; it is
unsightly to behold naked, raw flesh, He would give them a garment, viz. cover
them with Skin. Incrustabo vos cute, says Montanus, I will crust you over with
skin. Superextendam in vobis Cutem, says the Vulgar, I will stretch over you a
Skin. The word for Skin is (...) from (...) to be naked. Though the flesh were
covered with skin, yet was not the skin covered with any artificial covering.

And put breath in you, and ye shall live.
These words are the same with those in the 5. verse. Now when the bones had
their sinews, flesh, and skin, and were fitted for the breath of life, they
should have it. The Septuagint is thus, (...), I will give my Spirit upon you,
that shall beget life in you, and cause you to live.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord.
These dry bones, being so Metamorphosed and raised to a living condition,
should acknowledge the mighty hand of the Lord, and be convinced that he was
able to do whatsoever he pleased.

Verse 7. So I Prophesied as I was commanded.
The Prophet stood not disputing the case with God; but he, understanding the
mind of God, presently set himself to fulfill it.

And as I prophesied, there was a noise.
What Ezekiel Prophesied to these bones is not so much to be questioned: he had
direction from God what to say unto them, even those words ye have in the 4, 5,
and 6, verses: And as he was Prophesying, before he had uttered all given him
in commission, there was a noise, not of thunder, or of Angels, or of an
Earthquake; but of the bones themselves, which being many, dry, and stirring,
could not but make a great noise. This noise was an evident demonstration of
Divine presence and power, put forth in this Miraculous work.

And behold a shaking.
These bones that were dead and dry, now began to stir and shake, they moved
from their places. Maldonate thinks, that the earth was moved, that so the
bones which were in the graves, and under the earth, might come forth; but
these were bones lay in an open valley, not under the earth. Their shaking or
concussion was cum impetu, with force. It was Divine Power made them to shake
and move. Some refer this shaking to the invasion of the Babylonians by the
Medes and Persians, at what time the Jews obtained their liberty.

And the bones came together, bone to his bone.
As timber in an house, so are bones in the body, the strength and support of
all. The Hebrew word for a Bone is (...), Etzem from Atzam; to corroborate and
make solid. Bones are robur and soliditas corporis, the strength and solidity
of the body. These bones came together, not promiscuously, the bones of one man
or woman, to the bones of another man or woman; but, bone to his bone, that is,
every bone of the same man to his right place, and every bone of the same woman
to its right place; the rib-bones, thigh-bones, and ancle-bones came every one
to his proper place, and so united together.

Verse 8. And when I beheld, lo the sinews and the flesh came up upon them,
and the skin covered them above.
Here was a strange sight to see dry bones come creeping together, every one to
coalesce and join in his due place, making up a perfect Skeleton; and out of
that sinews, flesh, and skin, to ascend: this was such a sight that neither
Ezekiel, nor any man, had ever seen before.

But there was no breath in them.
Here were perfect humane bodies, as if they had been newly dead, or newly
formed out of the earth, as Adams body was; but there was yet no Life in them,
they were no other then dead carcasses. The Coalition of the bones, the
ascension of sinews, flesh, and skin upon them, argued not life in them, but
Divine Power acting and ordering them so.

Verse 9. Prophecy unto the wind, Prophecy son of man, and say to the wind.
The word Ruah, or Ruach, signifies several things. Sometimes, the Spirit of
God, as 2 Samuel 23.3. Sometimes, an Angel, as Job 4.15. Sometimes, the soul of a
Beast, Eccles. 3.21. Sometimes, the Wind, as Job 1.19. Sometimes, the breath of
Man, as Job 12.10. And sometimes the Soul of Man, Eccles. 12.7. Zach. 12.1. In
what sense it is here to be taken, is the question. To let other senses pass, I
conceive here it notes the soul or spirit of Man, which is called wind, or
breath; here it expresses and declares it is self by breathing, which is a wind.
When all other signs of life fail, as speech, sight, hearing, motion, etc. yet
breath oft-times remains, and so manifests the soul to be there; which is Ruah
Chajim, the breath of life, Genesis 6.17. These bones being brought into the forms
of bodies, lay destitute of souls, and so of life; the Prophet therefore, is
commanded to Prophecy unto their souls. If any will understand here by Wind,
the Spirit of God, which is in Scripture compared to wind, Joh. 3.8. and gives
life to the dead, Psalm. 104.30. I shall not contend.

Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they
may live.
The four winds, note out, here, the four chief parts of quarters of the World,
East, West, North, and South; and the Prophet is commanded to call for the
souls of these bodies to come from all quarters, where ever they were, to
breathe upon them; that is, to enter into them, and to cause them to live. That
he called wind before, he calls breath now. By slain, are meant, the visional
carcasses which lay dead.

Verse 10. So I Prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them.
The Prophet doing his duty, the effect followed: he said, Come, O breath; and
the spirit, soul, or breath came into those bodies lay in his view; they were
animated, and thereupon

They lived, and stood up upon their feet.
Immediately upon reception of their souls, they had life and motion; as every
bone came to his bone, and made up a body: so every soul came to its own body,
and made it to live, and to testify its life by standing up upon its feet.

An exceeding great Army.
The bones were many, and they being quickened, and raised, made an Army; yea, a
great, an exceeding great Army. The word for, Army, is Chaiil, which signifies
Virtue, Courage; and so the words may be rendered, They stood upon their feet
being of very great Courage.

First, Observe.

God sometimes puts his servants upon strange employments, even such as seem
ridiculous, unseasonable, impossible. He set Ezekiel on work to Prophecy over
bones, and to say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. This
was, as if one should water a dry rotten Stick, and say, Grow. God said to
Moses, Lift up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the Sea, and divide it,
Exodus 14.16. Here was a strange command, and strange work for Moses to do;
Could his rod or hand divide the Sea? Was it not strange work God put Joshuah,
the men of War, and the Priests unto, when he appointed them to go seven days
round about Jericho, six days together once a day, and the seventh day seven
times, with Trumpets and Ramshorns, Joshua 6? So when God commanded Ezekiel to
take a tile Pourtray Jerusalem upon it, and lay siege against it, with
Battering-Rams, then to set an iron Pan between him and the City for a wall;
after these things, to lie upon his left side 390 days, and after that on his
right side 40 days; were not these strange kind of employments, which God put
the Prophet unto? Ezekiel. 4. So Jeremiah must put bonds and yokes upon his own
neck, and then send them to Kings by their own Ambassadors, which came to
Zedekiah at Jerusalem, Jer, 27. In all these things there was depth of Wisdom,
however they seemed unto men.

Secondly, Observe.

Whatsoever means are used, it is God does all. Here was Prophecy used, but
that did not the work without God; Behold I will cause breath to enter into
you, and ye shall live. God could have done this without Prophecy, but that
was the means he would use and work in or by. We must not neglect means, and
leave all to God; that is tempting the most High: neither must we trust to
means when used, that is to idolize a creature; but we must use means and look
unto God to be all in them (for without him nothing is done), and if we make
him all in the means, we shall make him all after them,

Thirdly, Observe.

How low, deplorable, or desperate soever the creature be, God can alter it,
and that easily. These dry bones were almost dust, and come to nothing, their
condition was very deplorable and desperate, the Prophet himself could not tell
what to think of them; And did not God alter their condition quickly and with
ease? He bids the Prophet Prophecy and say, Hear the word of the Lord, ye dry
bones; and that being done, presently the bones shake, come together, are
clothed with sinew^, flesh, and skin, receive breath, live, and stand up. Here
was a wonderful sudden change wrought with great facility. God can make the dry
tree to flowrish, Ezekiel. 17.24. Arons rod to bud and blossom; Sarahs dead womb
to conceive; Rivers in high places, and springs of water in dry lands, Isa.
41.18. If God speak but the word, these things are done, Romans 4.17. He quickens
the dead, and calls those things which be not, as though they were; let God
only give a Call, and things without life have life, and things without being
have a being, Jer. 31.15, 16, 17. Are we in bondage? He can easily set us at
liberty, as he did Peter: Are we sick unto death? He can easily cure us, as he
did Hezekiah: Are we poor and despicable? He can easily enrich us, and make us
honorable, as he did Job when stripped of all: Are we dead in sins and
trespasses? that we cannot stir at all toward God, or, are we dead hearted,
that we stir poorly toward him? He can quicken us in a moment, as he did these
dry bones, so that we shall live, move, and act vigorously.

Fourthly, Observe.

There is a mighty efficacy in Gods word, when he is pleased to concur with
it, and to be present with it in his own Ordinance. Ezekiel Prophesies, and as
he Prophesied there was a noise, a shaking of the bones, a Coalition of them, a
compassing them about with sinews, flesh, and skin, an entrance of breath, so
that they lived, stood up, and were full of vigor. When God accompanies his
Word, it is a Creating-word, an Inlivening-word, yea, and a Killing-word. Ezekiel
11.14. It came to pass when I Prophesied, that Pelatiah died. It Is said of
Elisha, that he should slay those escaped the sword of Hazael and Jehu, 1 King.
19.7. But how should that be? for he was no sword-man: it was to be done by his
Prophesying, which was sharper then their Swords.

Fifthly, Observe.

In the Resurrection men shall have their own bodies and souls again. This
Vision of the dry bones, is by the Fathers, and others, held to be a lively
representation of the Resurrection. And see here, the bones came together, bone
unto his bone; the same bones which were united before, were united again in
this Resurrection; and the sinews, the flesh, the skin, belonged to them
formerly, the same came and covered them again: so the same souls, the same
breath, came and entered into them, and they lived. The Father had not the soul
or body of the Son, or the Daughter the soul or body of the Mother; but, every
one had their own bodies and souls. Job was of this faith, saying, Though after
my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I
shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, Job 19.26, 27.

Sixthly, Observe.

The souls of men do no sleep with their bodies in the dust, nor vanish into
nothing. The Prophet calls for the soul of every body here to come from the
four winds, that is, from those parts where they were. Had they been in the
bones or dust of the earth, or vanished into nothing, the Lord would not have
directed the Prophet to have called for them from all parts of the world.

Verse 11. Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of
Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut
off for our parts.

12. Therefore prophecy and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O
my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your
graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

13. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my
people, and brought you up out of your graves,

14. And shall put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you
in your own land: then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and
performed it, says the Lord.


The Vision being related to the Prophet, here Application of it is made, by
God himself, to the house of Israel.

And here we may consider, 1. The Complaint of the house of Israel, ver. 11. 2.
Gods gracious Promises unto the house of Israel, ver 12, 14 3. The event or
sequel thereof, ver. 13, 14.


Verse 11. These bones are the whole house of Israel.
The Bones themselves were not the house of Israel: but they signified and
represented the Condition of the house of Israel, which being captive in
Babylon, were like unto the dry Bones in the open Valley. To insist a little
upon the Resemblance between them.

1. The Bones were many, very many, the Valley was full of bones; when they
were quickened, they made a great Army. So were the Jews in the Valley of
Babylon, they were very many. Those came out with Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, were
49897. or, Fifty thousand wanting One hundred and three, Exra 2.64, 65. Besides
those that came with Ezra afterward, Chap. 8. And many there were which never
returned. In those 70. years they were in Babylon, they multipled into a great
number.

2. The Bones were without skin, flesh, and sinews; the Worms, Fowls, or Wild
beasts, had eaten up them. So the Jews were stripped of Wealth, and Substance,
the Babylonians had eaten up that. Lament 1.10. The adversary has spread out
his hand upon all her pl^asant things: whatsoever Jerusalem had desirable, the
Babylonians laid their hands upon: And, ver. 11. All her people sigh, they seek
bread, they have given their pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul. The
Chaldaeans dealt hardly with them, in the time of their Captivity. Jerem.
50.17, 33. They broke their bones, they held them fast, and wearyed them with
burdens and Taxes, they flayed off their skins, eat their flesh, and sucked
their blood.

3. The Bones were disjoynted and separated from their places, one here,
another there. So the Jews were rent from their Habitations and Country, and
were scattered all over Babylon. Ezekiel. 34 6. My flock was scattered upon all
the face of the earth; that is, chiefly, the Babylonish earth. They were forced
out of Sion, and dispersed into all parts of Babylon. This made Jeremiah to
say, Chap. 50.17. Israel is a scattered sheep. The Princes, the Nobles, the
Priests, the Prophets, and the People, were all scattered one from another; the
Bones of that Common wealth, were pulled all asunder and thrown into several
places.

4. The Bones were dry, yea, very dry; they had no moisture or Marrow in them.
Such was the house of Israel. being in the furnace of Babylon. Their long
Captivity, with the evils attending it, had dried up their moisture and marrow.
They wanted the Milk and Honey they had in Canaan for their bodies, and the
Manna they had for their souls; they were without a Temple and the Ordinances
of it; so that not only their bodies, but their souls also were as dry bones,
for they said, They were without hope.

5. The Bones being uncovered, lay exposed to the reproach and injury of any
foot that passed by them: And the Jews the time of their being in Babylon, were
exposed to scorns and injuries from all sorts, Ezekiel, 36.14, 15, 30. Lam. 5.1.
Psalm. 137.3. The whole house of Israel was a derision and scorn to the
Babylonians.

Behold, they say, Our bones are dried.
This speech, Our bones are dried, is Proverbial, and notes a most miserable
and forlorn condition, such as those dry bones lay in; so far off were they
from life, that the Prophet could not see a possibility thereof. The Jews in
Babylon were in such a condition, they saw no possibility of their returning.
Captivitas est mors civilis; Captivity and Servitude under enemies, is a civil
death; such men are like those are dead, and their bones dried.

And our hope is lost.
Hope is the Element by which the afflicted live, the Anchor of the soul in a
storm, the bladder keeps up a man from sinking when in deep waters, and upholds
a man in life when death knocks at the door: but these Jews had lost their
hope, and were at the brink of despair; they said, We hoped a long time to
return to our own land, but we were deceived, here we are held fast. Jer.
50.33. Let who will hope to see Canaan again; our hope that way is dead, and in
Babylon we must die.

We are cut off for our parts.
This is a Proverbial and Metaphorical expression, taken either from the branch
of a tree cut off from the body, or from the whole tree cut off from the earth;
which no sooner is done, but they wither, become fruitless, and without hope of
recovering their pristine condition. So these Jews, who were once Gods Vine and
Olive Tree, said now, We are cut off from Canaan, the land of the living, where
we had alimentum vitale, such nourishment as made us grow and be fruitful: but
here, in our captivity, we have no City, no Temple, no Sacrifice, and so we are
as branches cut off, and trees cut down, never like to be replanted more: See
Chap. 17 9. Like hereunto is that of Job, Chap. 19.10. He has destroyed me on
every side, and I am gone; and mine hope he has removed like a tree; that is,
as the e is no hope of a tree cut off from the earth; so have I (says Job) no
hope of recovering my former condition.

Verse 12. B^hold, O my people, I w ll open your graves.
In this verse, God promises unto them, removal of Impediments, and reduction
of them in^o their own Land. The first is in these words, I will open you
graves. Canaan was so dear unto the Jews, Si transfer seeds cogerentur major
vitae metus quam mortis. Tacitus.
that they counted it death to live out of it; they esteemed it only the land
of the living, and had rather have dyed then left their Country: being
therefore Captives in a stange land, they were as dead men, and that land as a
grave unto them. When a man is in his grave, he is cut off from the Land of the
living, laid in darkness, bound with grave-clothes, and pressed down with
earth: So these Jews were cut off from their own Land, had long been in
Babylonish darkness, were bound up by Babylonish Laws and Power, and so
oppressed and kept down by the Tyranny of the Babylonians, that they were
without hope of liberty. Hereupon the Lord says, I will open your graves; I
will remove all that hinders, ex part Babyloniorum; their Policy, Power, Law,
Oppression, shall detain you no longer in Captivity; yea, I will remove all
hinders ex part vestra. Your despair and unbelief, are like grave-stones which
keep you in a captive and dead condition; but they shall be taken away, and a
door opened for your coming forth. It Is not irrational to conceive, some or
many of them might be in prisons, and Babylonish Families, whom God would set
at liberty.

And cause you to come up out of your graves, etc.
When the graves are opened, the dead cannot rise or come forth, no more then
the dry bones could move or stir of themselves. The Jews deliverance out of
Captivity, is likened to the raising the de^d out of their graves. God causes
the dead to rise, Isa. 26.19. and he would cause them to come out of Babylon,
and not only b^ing them out hence, but also bring them into their own Land;
though they were cut off from their own Olive Tree, God would ingraft them in
again.

Verse 13. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your
graves, etc.
When God should do this wonderful and great work, viz. bring them out of their
Captivity, raise them from their dead condition in Babylon, and restore them to
life in their own Country, then they should know and acknowledge God in a
special manner.

Verse 14. And shall put my Spirit in you.
By Ruah, or Spirit, here, is not meant breath, or life, as ver. 9.10. for they
were first to be brought up out of their graves, and to have natural life,
before the Spirit should be put into them. But by Spirit here, we understand
the holy Spirit of God; even that Spirit spoken of, Chap. 36.27. where are the
same words. Lavater says, Indam vobis alium Spiritum, I will put into you
another Spirit. Oecolampad. says, It Is Spiritus adoptionis, moderator and
actor Filiorum Dei, The spirit of Adoption which moderates and acts the Sons of
God.

And ye shall live.
They lived before a natural life, a sad and melancholy life; but now they
should live a spiritual life, and comfortable, and heavenly life; they should
forget their sorrows, and rejoice in their God. You have been in a dying
condition these 70 years of your Captivity, but hence forward ye shall live.

I shall place you in your own Land.
The Hebrew is, I will make you to rest upon your own Land. The word Janach,
signifies deponere, demittere: God would dismiss them from Babylon, carry them
upon Eagles wings and set them down in their own Land, where they should be at
rest. They had been disquieted and vexed in Babylon many years, and suffered
grievous things; but God put an end thereunto, and gave them rest in Canaan;
which types out Gods dealing with his people under the Gospel, viz. The
bringing them from under the Antichristian state into Sion.

Then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and performed it.
Ye think it impossible that you should have the Babylonish yoke knocked off, be
set at liberty, and planted in your own country, but if I can give life to dry
bones, and cause them to stand up and become a great Army; which is a more
difficult thing, and thou Ezekiel have seen it; then let the Jews be assured, I
can deliver them, and return them into their own Land, and will do it, and when
it is done, they shall know that I am a God of Truth and Power.

Something we shall observe in General from these words, and something more
specially,

First, Observe.

That sense which God gives of Visions, Types, and Parables, is sound and
certain, yea, infallible.

Ezekiel had a Vision of dry bones, and who could tell the meaning of this
Vision? Many have mistaken about it; but God himself he told the Prophet, and
so all others, what was the sense of that Vision, Behold, the bones are the
whole house of Israel. God who is the author of Visions, Types and Parables,
knows best what is the meaning of them. He knew what the golden Candlestick,
and the two Olive trees on the right and left sides thereof meant, and
interpreted them unto Zechariah, Chap. 4. Daniel's Vision of four Beasts, Chap.
7. did the Lord open and make known unto him. John's Vision of the woman
sitting upon a scarlet colored Beast full of names of blasphemy, having seven
heads and ten horns; the Lord interpreted and made known unto him, Revel. 17.
Christ uttered many Parables which were dark, and when he gave the sense of
them it was certain and infallible.

Secondly, Observe.

Tropes and Types are not, in sacred Scripture, to be taken literally.

These bones are the house of Israel; they were not the house of Israel in a
literal sense, but they signified the house of Israel. It Is frequent, in the
Word, to give the name of the thing signified, to the thing signifying, as 1
Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ; here the Rock is called Christ; whereas, the
Rock did only signify Christ. So Genesis 41.26. The seven good kine are seven
years, and the seven blasted ears are seven years; none of these were years,
but all of them signify so many years. So Dan. 4.22. The tree, which
Nebuchadnezzar saw, whose top reached to heaven, and branches to the ends of
the earth, is said to be Nebuchadnezzar himself, It is thou, O King; that is,
it signified him, it was not him himself. The Papists trouble the world with
their absurd sense of those words, Mat. 26.26, 28. This is my body, and this is
my blood; they will have them to be taken literally, and make us lose our
senses, that we may believe the Bread and Wine, are the very flesh and blood of
Christ; but we neither see nor taste any such thing: only we believe, that they
represent the same unto us, and are to convey the fruit and benefit of Christ's
death unto us.

Thirdly, Observe.

Gods people are sometimes brought into great streights and exigents, they know
not what to do, they are heartless and hopeless.

Our bones are dried, our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. They saw
nothing but destruction before them, they saw no possibility of escaping, they
thought their condition desperate. Such was Joseph's condition, when his
Brethren cast him into a pit, Genesis 37.24. Such was the Israelites condition at
the Red Sea, when the Egyptians were behind them, the Sea before them, and no
door of hope left unto them, Exodus 14. their hope was gone, and nothing but
death presented it self unto them, ver. 11. when the Anchor of hope is broken,
men are in a Sea of troubles, tossed up and down, ready to sink every moment.
Job himself was sometime in this case, Chap. 7.6. My days are swifter then a
Weavers shuttle, and are spent without hope: he had neither hope of
restoration to his former condition, nor of continuance of his life; he looked
only to make the grave his house, and darkness his bed, Chap. 17.13, 14 15. His
hope was gone, and he thought he must go to corruption, and the worms.

Fourthly, Observe.

When men are in great Afflictions, they manifest great weakness.

These Jews being in such an afflicted condition, they forgot what Promises God
had made to them of Returning after 70 years, Jer. 25.12, 13. Chap. 29.10. They
minded not Gods Power, or Faithfulness, but said, We are cut off for our part.
God has cut us off from our Land, and cast us into this Furnace of Babylon,
where we shall be consumed. When Saul hunted David like a Partridge upon the
Mountains, and his life was in Jeopardy; Did he not say in his heart? I shall
one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27, 1. Here he manifested his
weakness greatly. God had told him he should be King, and sent Samuel to
anoint him, Chap. 16. but he forgot this, and gave way to the reasonings of
flesh. Jeremiah being in a suffering condition, scorned, and defamed by the
People, he resolves to cast aside his Commission, and speak no more in the name
of the Lord; he curses the day of his Nativity, and the man brought tidings of
his Birth; wishes He had slain him from the womb, or that the womb had been his
grave, etc. thus did he declare his infirmities, Chap. 20.8, 9, 15, 16, 17. not
considering what God had promised him, Chap. 1.5, 8, 9, 17, 18, 19. The like
did Job.

Fifthly, Observe.

There be states of men in this life which do resemble the dead; and they are
two especially; both which are here held forth.

1. The state of great and long Afflictions. These Jews, in their Captivity,
are likened unto dry bones, men in their graves. This made Jeremiah say,
Lament. 3.6. He has set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old: The
state of Death, is a state of Darkness, and so is the state of Affliction. Isa.
59.10. We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes:
we stumble at noon day as in the night, we are in desolate places as dead men.
They were in deep Affliction, and destitute of all Counsel; they saw no way or
means how to get out of the same. David being under great Calamities, goes
further, and shows you, that such a state is not only a state of Darkness, but
of Consumption, of being Forgotten, and Broken: Psalm. 31.9, 12. I am in
trouble, mine eye is consumed with grief, yea my soul and my belly. I am
forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel. So Psalm. 44.19.
Thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death: He calls great Afflictions, the place of Dragons, because they
sting, bite, and endanger a man's life; the shadow of death, death is very near,
and overshadows the man is in them, his grace is designing, and he is ready to
be put thereinto. This consideration made Heman say, his soul being full of
troubles, My life draws nigh unto the grave, I am counted with them that go
down into the pit, I am as a man that has no strength, free among the dead,
like the slain that lie in the grave whom thou remembrest no more, and they are
cut off from thy hand; thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the
deeps. He shows you clearly, that great Afflictions, especially Soul^
^fflictions, are a state of Death.

2. The state of Sin, which these Jews were in; for it is said, I will put my
Spirit into you, and ye shall live. At that time they were dead, being in an
unregenerate estate. Men being in their sins, are no better then in a state of
death. They are in Darkness, ignorant of Christ, the Gospel, and Mysteries
thereof, Ephesians. 5.8. They are in bondage to their Lusts, and to Satan, 2 Pet.
2.19. Romans 6.16. 2 Timothy 2.26. Joh. 8.44. They are senseless, eyes they have,
and see not; ears and hear not; hearts and understand not, Matthew. 13.14, 15.
They have hearts of stone, and are past feeling, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. They are
corrupt and unsavory, Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 3.13. This is the condition of sinners,
which the Gospel accounts and calls, A state of Death, Mat. 8.22. Joh 5.25.
Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 2.13.

Sixthly, Observe.

God is afflicted with the afflictions and sufferings of his people.

O my people, you are in your graves here in Babylon, you are afflicted,
reproached, oppressed, but I am sensible thereof, and do sympathize with you in
that condition; not a word is spoken against you, not an unjust act done unto
you, but I hear, I feel the same. The words are twice mentioned, O my people, O
my people, in the 12. and 13. verses, to show, the Lord was much affected with
their calamities, and languishing condition. When the Jews were in Egypt, that
house of Bondage, and in the Wilderness, they were like men in their graves,
often covered with the shadow of death, and, Did not God pity them? Psalm. 106.44.
He regarded th ir affliction; he looked upon them and pitied them; yea, he made
their enemies to pity them, ver. 46. In the book of Judges, Chap. 10 16. you
have a notable expression to this purpose: it is said there, His soul grieved
for the misery of Israel. Tikzar naph. (...) abbreviata est anima ejus; His
soul was shortened. When things are laid to heart, they dry and shrink up a man's
spirits. God laid their misery so to heart, that his soul was, as it we^e,
shrunk up and shortened.

Seventhly, Observe.

There is no state of affliction, sin, or death, but God can and will, raise
his people out of the same.

O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your
graves. Though they had layen 70 years in their graves, God would open them.
When earth lies long undigg'd, when graves continue long unopen'd, it is the
harder to remove the earth, and open the graves. What difficulty soever there
was in the way, God would step over it, and do the thing. Job lay buried in the
grave of Affliction a long season, but at length God opened his grave, and led
him out, Job 42.10. The Lord turned the captivity of Job. David was in the
grave of affliction, but God raised him out of it, Psalm. 40 2. He brought me up
out of an horrible pit: Elacu stupendo, says Munster, Out of the miry clay;
that is, out of the deepest and extremest misery. Mary Magdalen lay in the
grave of sin, was in a state of spiritual death, and Christ he quickened her, he
forgave her sins, Luke 7.48. The Ephesians did, among other Gentiles, lie in
their graves of sin, they were shut up under unbelief, that was a weighty
gravestone that kept them under; but God rolled away that stone, opened their
graves, and brought them forth. Ephesians. 2.1. You that were dead in sins and
trespasses, has he quickened Those a^e in a literal sense dead, and in their
graves, God can open their graves, and bring them forth also. Lazarus had lain
four days in his grave, he was corrupted therein and stunk; yet, when Christ
said, Lazarus, come forth, the grave did open, the dead man heard, lived, and
came forth, Joh. 11.43, 44. The keys of life and death are in the hand of
Christ; be it a grave of affliction, a grave of sin, or a grave of the body,
Christ can turn the key, open the grave and bring out thereof: At last he will
open the graves, and bring fo^th all the dead bodies.

Eighthly, Observe.

Nothing in men moves God to put his Spirit into them.

These Jews were in a despairing condition, they said, Our bones are dried, our
hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. They dispair'd, dishonored God
highly thereby, and deserved to be cut off and perish for ever; but see how God
dealt with them, he promises to put his Spirit in them, ver. 14. The giving of
his Spirit is an extraordinary mercy, and he gives it freely. Their goodness
did not incline God to give, nor their sin hinder him from giving. Gods
choicest gifts are freest, as Christ, the Spirit, and Gospel; they are the acts
of His good pleasure.

Ninthly, Observe.

Spiritual life and comfort, are from the Spirits indwelling in men.

I shall put my Spirit in you, and you shall live. Then they shall live, as
they had never lived; they should live Spiritually, Comfortably. Natural life,
in its kind, has an excellency; but, it is far beneath a Spiritual life, which
is called, the life of God, Ephesians. 4 18. So the comforts of a Natural life, may
have some sweet and pretiousness in them; but, they are comfortless comforts to
those of the Spirit and Spiritual life. Men destitute of the Spirit, are dead
men, and have but dead comforts: Those have the Spirit, are living-men, and
have living-comforts. The Spirit is a Spirit of life and comfort, and wherever
it comes, it makes men lively and comfortable.

Tenthly, Observe.

When the people of God are gathered into Canaan, they shall have rest there.

God would bring these Jews out of Babylon into their own Land, which was
Canaan, and there they should rest, there is no rest in Babylon: God is
gathering his people out of Babylon daily: He says unto them, as it is in
Micah 2.10. Arise ye and depart; for this is not your rest. He is drawing and
driving them out of Babylonish and Antichristian conditions, and bringing them
into Sion, where there is true rest, though not perfect rest: that will be in
the Heavenly Canaan, whither in due time we shall come.

Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
15. The Word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

16. Moreover, thou Son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it; For
Judah and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick,
and write upon it; For Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of
Israel his companions,

17. And join them one to another, into one stick, and they shall become one in
thine hand.

18. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Will thou not show us what thou meanest by these?

19. Say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will take the stick of
Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the Tribes of Israel his fellows,
and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one
stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.


THe Vision of the dry bones, and Interpretation of them being ended; here the
Typical work of two Sticks, and the uniting of them, succeeds. In the three
first verses you have the Author of the Type, and the Type it self: in the two
last, direction what to say, upon inquiry made after the meaning of the Type.

Verse. 16. Moreover, thou Son of man, take thee one stick.
The Prophet before had a Vision, here he has a Command. He must take a stick:
the Chaldee says, a Table: the Septuagint, a Rod: the Hebrew is (...) Lignum,
Wood. Wood or Stick, is, by a Metonymy of the matter, put for a Table, or
Tally, whereon something might be written. So it was here, he must write upon
it;

For Judah, and the children of Israel his companions.
These were the words to be written upon the Stick. In the 17. of Numb. v. 2.
the Lo^d commanded Moses, to take twelve rods, according to the number of the
Tribes, and Princes, and to write every man's name upon his rod. To this does
the Lord allude here, commanding the Prophet to take a Stick, or Rod, and write
upon it, For Judah; that is, let Judah, the royal and noble Tribe, be signified
thereby. And the children of Israel; by these, the Tribe of Benjamin is meant,
which clave to the house of David, and fell not from Rehoboam to Jeroboam, 1
King. 12.23. 2 Chr. 11.12. as the other Tribes did. This Tribe did wholly
adhere to Judah, and some also out of other Tribes did, some out of Levi, and
some out of the rest, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 16, 17. Chap. 15.9. and these are
called the children of Israel his companions; that is, Judah's companions,
because they forsook him not, as others did. All these were represented by this
first Stick.

Then take another stick, and write upon it; For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim.
Having finished the first Stick, he is bidden to take another. The Hebrew is,
take one stick; that is, one more, and write upon it, For Joseph. As the other
Stick was for Judah, so this for Joseph; viz. to represent the Tribe of Joseph,
which was the principal of the ten Tribes; and his Stick is called the stick of
Ephraim. Ephraim was the Son of Joseph, and the ten Tribes are usually called,
in Scripture, by the name of Ephraim, as Hos. 4.17. Chap. 5.3, 9, 11, 12, 13,
14. But here the Tribe of Ephraim is meant. The Chaldee says, Lignum Ephraim,
est Tribus Ephraim. Jeroboam, who made the great rent in the house of David,
was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and to him did the other Tribes adhere.

And for all the house of Israel his companions.
This Stick was for the whole ten Tribes which are called the house of Joseph,
Amos 5.6. The seed of Ephraim, Jer. 7.15. Samaria, Hos. 8.5. And here, The
house of Israel. All these did side with Jeroboam when he revolted, and so were
Companions with him, with Ephraim and Joseph. Long before this time, the ten
Tribes were carried into Captivity by Shalmanezer King of Assyria; but here the
Lord thought upon them, and ordered the Prophet to take a Stick for them.

Verse. 17. And join them one to another into one stick.
The Hebrew is, and make them come one to one to thee into one stick. Those two
Sticks he must join together, and make one Stick of them. Some do make a
Miracle here, saying, That as Moses Rod was turned into a Serpent, and Aarons
blossomed, Exodus 4.3. Numb. 17.8. by a miraculous work of God: So did Ezekiel's
Sticks unite together in his hand. It Is true, God, by his Divine Power, could
unite them into one; but here he bids the Prophet join them one to another into
one Stick; which he might do by some artificial means; or else, hold them
together in his hand, which might suffice for the purpose intended.

And they shall become one in thine hand.
They shall be, Vnum in ma^^bus tuis, so Montanus renders the Hebrew, not, they
shall become; but, they shall be one thing or stick in thine hand; they should
no more appear to be two Sticks, but one: and the Characters writ upon them
visible for every man to read. The old Translation has it, They shall be as
one in thy hand. While he held them, they were as one, but, had he let them go,
they had fallen asunder, and been two Sticks as before.

Verse 18. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying.
In the 12, and 13. verses, God had said, O my people, He owned them for his;
here He terms them the Prophets people, The children of thy people. They were
Ezekiels people, because he was set of God a Watchman over them, Chap. 3.17.

Will thou not show us, what thou meanest by these?
The Hebrew is, Will thou not show us, Mah elleh lack, What these things are to
thee. So the Septuagint, (...), What is thine intention in taking these Sticks,
and holding them in thine hand? what is the Interpetation thereof? It is a
Riddle unto us; let us know the sense and meaning thereof.

Verse 19. Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph which is in the hand of
Ephraim, and the Tr^bes of Israel his fellows.
The Stick of Joseph, that is the Tribe of Ephraim which was in Jeroboam's hand,
who was of that Tribe; and not only that, but nine more were under him, and his
Successors a long time, 260 years, or thereabout. These ten Tribes made up the
Kingdom of Israel, which was divided from the Kingdom of ^^dah, and therefore
are called Ephraim's fellows, not Judah's. All these represented by the Stick
God would take, and what would he do with them?

And will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one
stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.
God would make these two Sticks one, not one Tribe, but one Kingdom. They had
been two Kingdoms at great enmity, and were at this time scattered abroad among
the Nations; but, the Lord promises to gather them together, and to unite them
so, that there shall not be a Kingdom of Israel, and a Kingdom of Judah; but,
the Stick of Ephraim shall be united to the Stick of Judah: they should be but
one Stick, one Kingdom, and one King, and that in the hand of the Lord: the
Septuagint says, in the hand of Judah.

First, Observe.

True Types have God for the Author of them.

God bad the Prophet here, take one Stick and another Stick, and write upon
them; and thereby to type out the houses of Judah and Israel. Had he taken
these of his own head, they had been nothing, bastardly Types, not true Types.
When Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of Iron, saying, Thus says
the Lord, With these shall thou push the Syrians, until thou have consumed
them, 1 King. 22.11. This was a bold presumption of him to make Horns Typical,
without Command from God. The event showed him to be a false Prophet, and his
Type to be a lying Type. It Is peculiar unto God to make Divine Types.

Secondly, Observe.

God can, and does, make use of mean things, to honorable purposes.

Sticks are mean and contemptible things, trodden under foot; yet, God orders
Sticks here to be taken, writ upon, to represent the two principal Houses in
the World, the house of Judah, and the house of Israel, and their uniting
together; here was high honor put upon these Sticks. God made use of a Tile to
pourtray Jerusalem upon, Ezekiel. 4. And of Hair to Type out his Judgments, Ezekiel.
5. which was a great honor unto such despicable things. What honor did God
put upon the Brazen Serpent, to represent Christ thereby, Numb. 21.9. Joh.
3.14. As God puts honor upon mean things, so upon mean persons, 1 Cor. 1.28.
The base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen:
yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are. He exalted
Gideon, and did great things by him, Judge. 6. God took Amos an Heardman, a
gatherer of Sycamore fruit, in vested him with the honor of a Prophet, Amos
7.14, 15. and by him confounded Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, and Jeroboams
Chaplain.

Thirdly, Observe.

God has a care of his people, be they in never so poor, broken, scattered, or
despicable a condition.

The house of Judah had been now in Babylon upon 70 years, the house of Israel
204 years, if not more; they were despised of men, and seemed forgotten of God;
but the Lord had them in remembrance, and bids the Prophet write upon one
stick, For Judah and his Companions; and on another stick, For Joseph, Ephraim,
or the house of Israel, and his companions; not one of them were out of Gods
thoughts. Their forefathers had been 400 years in Egypt, were tyrannized over
by cruel Taskmasters, looked upon as contemptible; but the Lord had an eye to
them, cared and wrought for them. They have now layen 1600 years in darkness,
in a desolate and despised condition; yet doubtless they are not forgotten,
Gods thoughts are upon them to do them good again.

Fourthly, Observe.

Typical and obscure things, will excite men to inquire after the sense of
them.

This is intimated in the 18. ver. When the children of thy people shall speak
unto thee, saying, Will thou not show us what thou meanest by these? God knew
they would inquire. Common things are neglected; but things strange and
mysterious, are dived into, sought after. When Ezekiel was to dig through the
wall, cover his face, and remove his stuff; then the people were stirred and
said, What do thou? Chap. 12.9. Those typical actions bred inquisitiveness
in their spirits. When the Lord Christ spoke Parables, they sought to him to
know the sense and meaning of them.

Fifthly, Observe.

God is pleased to direct his Prophets and Servants what to say unto the
People, when they come to question with them about things.

If this people come to Ezekiel to know what he meant by the two Sticks, his
writing upon them, and holding them in his hand, the Lord tells him what he
shall say unto them, say, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will take the
stick of Joseph which is in the hand of Ephraim, etc. When God sent Moses unto
the people, he was timorous lest he should not know what to say to the people,
how to answer their questions; but see how God directs and instructs him, Exodus
3.13, 14. Moses said unto God, when I come unto the children of Israel, and
shall say unto them, The God of your fathers has sent me unto you: and they
shall say unto me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? I know not how
to answer that question. See what now follows, And God said unto Moses, I AM
THAT I AM: And he said, Thus shall thou say, I AM has sent me unto you. Thus
God taught him what answer to give the people. So Ezekiel. 14. when the Elders
came to inquire somewhat of Ezekiel, God told him what answer to give them. It
was given in of God, by his Spirit, to the Apostles, what answer to give
Governors and Rulers, when they ^ere brought before them, Mat. 10.19.

Verse. 20, 21, 21.
20. And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their
eyes.

21. And say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will take the
children of Israel from among the Heathen whither they be gone, and will gather
them on every side, and bring them into their own Land.

22. And I will make them one Nation in the land upon the Mountains of Israel,
and one King shall be King to them all: and they shall be no more two Nations,
neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all.


THe Explication of the Typical Sticks is laid down in these and the subsequent
verses.

Verse. 20. And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before
their eyes.
The Prophet was not to do this privately, but to write upon the sticks, and to
hold them in his hand, so that all might see them, and hereby be provoked to
inquire, what the mystery of them was, and so become partakers of the
consolation intended thereby.

Verse. 21. Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the Heathen
whither they be gone.
(...) this verse is promised the reduction of the twelve Tribes, comprehended
under these words, the children of Israel, out of all Countries where they were
scattered, into their own Land. Not only Judah and Benjamin should be gathered
up, and brought into Canaan again, but the rest of the Tribes also. This is a
great and gracious Promise.

And will gather them on every side.
The ten Tribes being carried away by Shalmanezer, were placed in Haloth and
Habor by the river Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes, 2 King. 17.6. they
were seated in the utmost parts of his Dominions, North and East, and the other
Jews whom Nebuchadnezzer led away captive, were scattered up and down his
manifold Provinces, as appears, Esth. 3.8. Now God would look on every side,
and gather them up out of all Quarters.

Verse. 22. And I will make them one Nation in the land upon the mountains of
Israel.
Being brought into their Land, here God adds three great Promises more. The
first is, uniting of them into one Nation, who had some hundreds of years been
divided, and at bitter enmity one against another.

And one King shall be King to them all.
After the division made by Jeroboam, you read of several Kings they had, Kings
of Judah, and Kings of Israel. There were two Kingdoms and diverse Kings of them
both, but the Kingdoms being united into one, the Lord promises them not a
succession of Kings over them, but one King to Rule over them both. They should
be one Kingdom, and have one King. This is the second great Promise.

And they shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two
Kingdoms any more at all.
This is the third Promise, and it is a great one also, viz. they shall continue
a Kingdom, one Kingdom, and never be torn or rent in pieces any more. There
shall be no Rehoboam's or Jeroboam's, to cause divisions in it.

It will add some light to the words under consideration, if we make inquiry,
Whether the Type of the two Sticks be fulfilled, by the incorporating of the
two Nations into one, and making of them one Kingdom?

It Is affirmed by some, that this Hieroglyphical Prophecy was fulfilled at the
Return of the two Tribes out of Babylon. For then Cyrus King of Persia made a
Proclamation throughout all his Kingdom, to this purpose, Thus says Cyrus King
of Persia, All the Kingdoms of the earth has the Lord God of heaven given me,
and he has charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judea:
Who is there among you of all his people? the Lord his God be with him, and ^^t
him go up, 2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23. The Proclamation excepts no persons, no Tribes;
but gives full liberty unto all. The ten Tribes having been now 204. years, or
there abouts, in Captivity, it is likely, were weary of their condition, and so
willing to return into their own Country, and so they took the opportunity
before them. For it is evident, that some of the ten Tribes did ^eturn to
Jerusalem. Of the Levites there were 74. Ezra 2.40. Nehem. 7.43. and of the
Priests, who were of that Tribe, as appear, 1 Chronicles. 24.1, 2, 7. Exodus 6.16,
18, 20. and Nehem 7.39. there were 973. Paul was of the T^^^e of Benjamin,
Phil. 3.5. Anna the daughter of Phanuel of the Tribe of Aser, Luke 2.36. and
Paul speaks of the twelve Tribes as present in his days at Jerusalem, Act.
26.7. Others think not all this which is said sufficient to prove the union of
the two Sticks, and so of the two houses of Judah and Ephraim; for of all that
returned, there were but 42390. besides servants and maids, whose number a
mounted to 7333. as it is, Ezra 2.64, 65. whereof both Hebrews and other
Authors observe, there were 10000. out of the other ten Tribes, which is an
inconsiderable number for so many Tribes, when as there was 32000. out of two
or three Tribes. Besides, it is not clear, that those 10000. were out of the
other Tribes; for, neither Ezra nor Nehemiah do specify so much in the
Catalogues they make of those returned. Doubtless, had such a number returned
out of any, or each of the Tribes, as had been considerable, they would have
taken notice thereof, and mentioned the Tribe, or Tribes, and spoken of the
uniting of them. For it is said here, the sticks shall be in thine hand before
their eyes. The union would have been visible and observable by them all, had
it then been. Some few of the Tribes, it is possible, did return, and of them
Paul speaks, Act. 26.7. The bulk and body of them staid behind, being increased
in 200. years, to an innumerable company; and the Jews say, They are shut up in
the Caspian Mountains, from whence they shall come forth in due time. Manasseh
Ben Israel, with Montezinus, say, The ten Tribes were the first Inhabitants of
America, and that they lie hid behind the Mountains of Cordillere.

It Is the opinion, if not the faith, of many, that the two Sticks representing
the two houses of Judah and Israel, are yet to be united and made one, and the
great reason for it is, because they have not had one King, one Shepherd, viz.
David, by whom is meant the Messiah, to reign over them. This is that Hosea
points at, Chap. 1.11. where he says, The children of Judah and the children
of Israel shall be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they
shall come up out of the Land. The Head spoken of by Hosea, is not Zerubbabel,
but the same that our Prophet speaks of, viz. David, by whom is meant the
Messiah; of which mind is Manasseh Ben Israel, who says, In his Epist. to the
Hope of Israel. Sect. 25
The ten Tribes never returned to the second Temple, that they there keep the
Law of Moses, and the Sacred Rites, and at last shall return into their Land,
with the two Tribes Judah and Benjamin, and shall be governed by one Prince who
is Messiah the son of David. If it be said, This was made good when Christ was
born, and lived at Jerusalem. This will not suffice; for, He came to his own,
and they received him not, Joh. 1.11. The people of Israel were against Christ,
Act. 4.27. They would not have Him to reign over them, Luke 19.14. They owned
no King but Caesar, and cried, Crucify him, Joh. 19. And for their crucifying
of him, they were scattered, and the wrath of God came upon them, to the
utmost, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Had the two houses been united, they would themselves
have appointed and chosen Christ to have been their Head, continued still
undivided and unscattered, submitting to his Government, and observing his
Laws, as it is, ver. 24. of this Chapter. For, when Christ takes his Government
upon him, He must rule for ever, Luke 1.33

There is a place in Zechariah, very observable: It is in Chap. 10. ver. 6, 7,
8, 9. I will strengthen the house of Judah. They of this house were come
already to Judaea, and Zechariah with them, they were upon building the second
Temple; now see what follows, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will
bring them again to place them, for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be
as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and will hear
them. And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall
rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad; their
heart shall rejoice in the Lord. I will hiss for them, and gather them, for I
have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have increased. And I will
sow them among the people, and they shall remember me in far countries, and
they shall live with their children, and turn again.

Here you may clearly see two things,

1. That the house of Joseph and Ephraim did not return with the house of Judah.

2. That God has promised to gather and bring them out of those places where
they are scattered: which must be accomplished in its time.

It Is no Haeresie to say, Christ meant the ten Tribes when he said, John 10.16.
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they
shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. Christ here
alludes to this 37. of Ezekiel, ver. 22, and 24.

First, Observe.

The conversion of the Jews, we may warrantably expect and pray for.

God has promised to gather the children of Israel, and to bring them to David
their King; that is, Christ. I will gather them out of every side; I will take
the children of Israel from among the Heathen whither they be gone; and one
King shall rule over them. Seeing God has promised to do it, we may believe
and pray for the same. This Conversion of the Jews will be not of some few
particulars, but National, though not of every one belonging to the Nation,
Hos. 3.5. The children of Israel shall return, and seek the Lord their God, and
David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter
days. There will be a very general, glorious, and visible Return of them; they
will prove eminent Christians, frearing the Lord and his goodness. Paul hints
unto you, that there is a time when the vail shall be taken off the heart of
the Jews, and they turn unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.15, 16. And John in his
Revelation tells you of 144000 which were sealed out of all the Tribes of the
children of Israel, Chap. 7.4. These were of the Jewish race, who were godly
and converted; for, ver. 9. it is said, A great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations, people, kindreds, and tongues, stood before the Throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. These
were of the Gentiles, as the other of the Jews. If any one doubt this point,
let him read and ponder thoroughly what is Romans 11. from the beginning of the
11. v to the 32.

Secondly, Observe.

When the Jews are converted, they shall repossess the land of Canaan.

God will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own Land. Hos.
1.10. It shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye
are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the
living God. This is spoken of the Land of Canaan. There he did disown them, and
there he would own them again. Testimony to this truth, gives Jeremy, Chap.
50.4, 5. In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the children of
Israel shall come, they and all the children of Judah together, going and
w^eping: they shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to
Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our selves to
the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant. That in Isa. 2.2, 3. speaks to the same
purpose, and most clearly that Isa. 11.11. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to recover the
remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assiria, and from Egypt, and
from Pathros, and from Chush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath,
and from the Islands of the Sea. And in the 12. And he shall set up an Ensign
for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together
the dispersed of Judah, from the four corners of the earth. Here is mention of
a second gathering of them from Assyria, which has not yet been fulfilled; but
shall, when the Lamb stand upon Mount Sion, with his 144000 sealed out of all
the Tribes, Rev. 14.1. Chap. 7.4. Consider Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 21, 22.

Thirdly, Observe.

The Lord knows how to, and can, reconcile divided Nations.

I will make them one Nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel. The
Jews were divided into two Nations, or Kingdoms: There was the Kingdom of
Israel, and the Kingdom of Judah; and they were at great enmity, such enmity,
that they would have no commerce one with another, Joh. 4.9. The ten Tribes
went under the name of Samaritans, the other were called Jews. They were of
diverse Religions, ver. 22. They had their Calves at Dan and Bethel, the true
worship was at Jerusalem. The enmity grew so great between them, that they were
at open Wars, and sought the destruction of one another. Those of Israel and
Samaria slew in Judah 120000 valiant men in one day, and carried away captive
of their brethren 200000 women, sons, and daughters, and those they slew was in
a rage reached up to heaven, 2 Chronicles. 28.6, 8, 9. Now, notwithstanding all the
rage, fury, enmity, bitterness was in them, one against another, God knows how
to reconcile them, and make them one Nation, one People, so that Ephraim shall
not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim, Isa. 11.13. but, they shall
agree, and cordially love one another. The Jews and Gentiles were at a greater
distance, than the Jews amongst themselves, yet, God knew how to reconcile
them, and did it, Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Verse. 23.
Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their
detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them
out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse
them; so shall theybe my people, and I will be their God.


IN this verse there lies before us: 1. The renouncing of their Idolatrous
ways, and other evils. 2. Deliverance of them from the places they were
captive in. 3. Spiritual cleansing, or Sanctification of them. 4. Renewal of
the Covenant between them and God.


Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their Idols.
The Jews were much addicted to Idolatry, no sooner were they out of Egypt, but
they parted with their earings to make a Calf, Exodus 32.34. When they were in
the Wilderness they joined themselves to Baal-Peor, Numb. 25.3. In time of the
Judges, when in the Land of Canaac they served other Gods, Judge. 10.13. And
after the rent of Jeroboam, the ten Tribes did worship the Calves at Dan and
Bethel, 1 King. 12.29, 30. Judah also trod in the same steps, committing
Adultery with stones and with stocks, Jer. 3.8, 9. But when they should be
united into one Nation and Kingdom again, Israel should cease from her Calves,
and Judah from her Idols, they should no more go a whoring after them, whereby
they defiled themselves and the Land.

Nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions.
Sanctius thinks these three words, Idols, Detestable things, Transgressions,
to signify one and the same thing, to set forth the sinfulness of Idols, and
false Religions; they are detestable, and cause the greatest Breaches between
God and Men. The word for Transgression, is Pesha, which notes Apostasy,
Rebellion, a proud and malicious violating of a Command. We may by
Transgressions here, understand, not only their Idolatries; but, their other
capital and crying sins. When God pleases to call and convert the Jews, and
from them into one Nation, then they shall loath themselves, and their former
doings.

But I will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have
sinned.
They were scattered up and down into diverse Countries, and into several parts
in those Countries, where they settled themselves, and s^nn'd by conforming to
the Heathen amongst whom they dwelt, Ezekiel. 20.32. Jer. 44.8. But in what
Countries soever they were, the Lord would have an eye to them and deliver them.

And will cleanse them.
The word in Hebrew for cleansing, is (...) Taher, which is contrary to Tamee,
signifying to defile, pollute; and, because a thing defiled has lost its
beauty, some make Taher to import Munditiem nitentem, shining or beautiful
cleansing; for, when the filth of things is taken away, there is a splendour and
beauty. God says here, He will cleanse them; that is, from their Idolatry, and
other sins, by the blood of Christ, and by his holy Spirit.

So shall they be my people, and I will be their God.
Now they lie in a desolate condition, and are looked at as cast off of God;
yea, themselves conclude, they are cut off from me, ver. 11. But when they are
gathered out of the Countries where they are dispersed and cleansed from their
iniquities; then will I manifest to all the World, That they are my people;
and, that I am their God: they themselves shall see and know it. They shall
acknowledge me to be their God, and I will acknowledge them to be my people.
The Covenant between us, shall be renewed and manifested.

First, Observe, from the two verses before this, and the next.

That when God begins to show mercy to his people afflicted, He multiplies
mercies upon them.

He would take them from among the Heathen, bring them into their own Land,
make them one Nation, set one King over them, continue them in the same
condition, take their hearts off from I^^s, cleanse them from their
defilements, take them into Covenant with himself, give them David to be their
King, and keep them in doing of his will. Here is a series of many and great
mercies. The like you had, Chap. 36.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. So Jerem.
32.37, 38, 39, 40, 41. When God is in a way of Judgments, he adds judgment to
judgment, plague unto plague, as you may read, Levit. 26.18, 21, 28. And when
he is in a way of Mercy, He adds mercy to mercy, as appears in the same
Chapter, from ver. 4. to the 14.

Secondly, Observe.

False religious ways of Worship, are so far from advantaging men, that they
do defile them.

The Jews thought to better themselves by conforming to the Religion and
Worship of the Heathens; but, thereby they defiled themselves. And what is the
favor or wealth of Heathens, when the conscience is defiled before God. Many,
among Papists, when they have sinned, run to their golden, silver, brassie,
stony, and wodden gods, thinking by offering unto them to be purged from their
sins, whereas, thereby, they do more deeply defile themselves.

Thirdly, Observe.

When people afflicted, receive choice mercies from God, then they will take
heed of, and renounce former defilements.

Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their Idols, nor with their
Detestable things, nor with any of their Transgressions. When I shall show them
kindness, and load them with mercies, they will consider what offended me, and
ceas^ from it; then they will know me and my ways, and w^^^ in the same,
abhorring Idols. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, What have I any more to do with
Idols? When mercy comes, it melts the heart, makes a divorce between it and its
Idols, its beloved sins; then it will have to do no more with heart or house
Idols, nor with any Transgressions.

Fourthly, Observe.

God knows the dwellings of men, wherever they dwell, and the sins they commit
in their dwellings.

These Jews were some in Egypt, some in Babylon, some in Media and Persia, 2
King. 17.6. yet he took notice of all their dwelling places, wherein they had
sinned. There is not a Cottage in the Wilderness, nor a Closet in the City, not
a Dungeon in the Earth, but the Lord knows the same, and what sins are acted
there night and day. Revel. 2.13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell: so
says God of Pergamos, and may say it of every Man, Family, Church and Nation,
I know thy sins, and where thou dwell. Neither we, nor our sins are hid from
God, dwell we in Canaan, or in Babylon. Let us look well to our selves and to
our ways; for, wherever we dwell, whatever we are or do, God's eye is
constantly upon us.

Fifthly, Observe.

Deliverance out of afflicted and sinful conditions, is from the Lord himself.

I will save them out of all their dwelling places wherein they have sinned.
They were captives in Babylon, and other places, there they sinned, and sinned
greatly; and who but God could deliver them either from their sins, or their
captivity. Amos 9.14. I will bring again the captivity of my people. God could
break their bonds, change the Laws of the Medes and Persians, alter times and
seasons, remove all impediments, and set his people at liberty. Psalm. 107.19.
He saves them out of their distresses. When men are distressed at Sea, or
Land, if ever they get out of those distresses, it is by the hand of the Lord,
He saves them. He is the Savior of Israel in the time of trouble, Jer. 14.8.
He saves from uncleanness, Ezekiel. 36.29. Salvation from affliction, or from
sin, belongs to God, and to him alone, and he challenges it to himself. Isa.
43.11. I, even I, am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior.

Sixthly, Observe.

It Is the Lord who makes defiled persons clean.

They were defiled with Idols, Detestable things, and Transgressions, and what
says the Lord? I will cleanse you. When an house was defiled with Leprosy,
the Priest was to cleanse it with blood and water, Levit. 14.52. And when men
are defiled, the Lord cleanses them with blood and water, with the blood of
his Son, 1 John 1.7. and, with the water of his Spirit, Joh. 7.38, 39. These
are the I^op with which God cleanses sinners. Pharisees may cleanse the
outside, but it is that God cleanses inside and outside. Jer. 33.8. I will
cleanse them from all their iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and
I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned. When God Justifies
and Sanctifies a sinner, then is a sinner cleansed indeed, inwardly and
outwardly, 1 Cor. 6.11.

Seventhly, Observe.

God takes pleasure in a cleansed people, and owns them for His.

So shall they be my people, and I will be their God; that is, when they should
be cleansed. God has no delight in polluted ones, He is an holy God, and
delights in holy ones. David assures you hereof, when he, Psalm. 24.3. propounds
the question, Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand
in his holy place? and gives answer, ver. 4. He that has clean hands, and a
pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.
Such a man, and such a people God delights to have in his presence, but the
wicked, what ever they be, he puts away like dross, Psalm. 119.119. The Refiner
takes pleasure in the pure metal cleansed from the dross; the one he priseth,
the other he rejects.

Verse. 24, 25.
24. And David my servant shall be King over them, and they all shall have one
shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes and
do them.

25. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant,
wherein your fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even they and
their children, and their childrens children for ever, and my servant David
shall be their Prince for ever.


GReat Promises are made unto the house of Judah and house of Israel, being
united.

1. Of a King, called David, ver. 24. 2. Of Holiness, they shall also walk,
etc. ibid. 3. Of inheriting the Land for ever, ver. 25. 4. Of having the same
King rule over them for ever.
Verse. 24. And David my servant shall be King over them.
By David cannot Zorobbabel be meant: for he was not a King, and had he been
so, yet he was not their Prince for ever, as it is said of this David. David is
here put for Christ, which the holy Scripture does frequently, as Ezekiel 34.23.
Hos. 3.5. Isa. 37.35. 2 King. 19.34. Jerem. 30.9. And that you may clearly see
it is so, compare Isa. 45.3. where mention is made of the sure Mercies of
David, with Act. 13.34. and there it is interpreted of Christ. So that in Amos
9.11. The Tabernacle of David, refers to Christ, Acts 15, 16. So then, this
David is the Lord Christ, who is so called, both because, He descended from his
loins, Romans 1.3. whereupon, he is often called, The Son of David, Mat. 1.1. Chap.
15.22. Mark 12.35. And, because, David was a Type of him in his slaying Goliath,
and in his Kingly and Prophetical Office; It Is not said here, Abraham my
servant, or Jacob my servant shall be their King, although Christ descended
from their loins, as well and really as from David's; but, it is said, David my
servant shall be their King: And the reason is, because, David was King over
Israel and Judah, which they were not, and the first godly King they had.

My servant. David did serve the Lord, and fulfilled all his will, Act. 13.22.
and so Christ was his servant, Isa. 52.13. Behold, my servant shall deal
prudently, and he did so; for, He fulfilled all righteousness, Mat. 3.15. and,
Did the will of him that sent him, Joh. 4 34 Being in the form ^f a servant,
Phil. 2.7.

And shall be King over them.
The Jews had many Kings; some were very good, as David, Solomon, Jeh^shaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. but none of them like unto this King, the Lord Christ.
The Scepter of his Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness, Heb. 1.8. Other Kings
had crooked Scepters, and much Oppression was in their Government; but,
Christ's Scepter is a righteous Scepter, and none shall be oppressed thereby:
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and Faithfulness the girdle of
his reins, Isa. 11.5. He will break in pieces the Oppressor, Psalm. 72.4. The
Lord tells you in Jeremiah, what a King this King should be, Chap. 23.5. I will
raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper; and
shall execute justice and judgment in the earth. So Psalm. 45.4. In thy majesty
ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness. Most
Kings of the earth, because they were false, rigid, unrighteous, did not
prosper; but Christ, because of truth, should be trusted; because of meekness,
should be loved; because of righteousness, should be honored, and so should
prosper.

And they shall have one Shepherd.
Of these words has been spoken, Chap 34 23. Tantae erit clementiae, dicit
Hyeronimus, ut non solum Rex sed and Pastor appelletur; eo quod superbum nomen
Imperii, vocabulo pastoris mitiget.
King and Shepherd are here equivalent. They should not have many Shepherds,
as formerly, who destroyed them, Jerem. 12.10 but, one Shepherd; that is, one
better than them all; One transcendent, and incomparable, a Shepherd after
Gods own heart, who should feed them with knowledge and understanding, Jer.
3.15. who should gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and gently lead those which are with young, Isa. 40.11.

They shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them.
In Chap. 36.27. you had these words: only here judgments are mentioned before
statutes, and there statutes are set before judgments. The meaning is, they
shall no more live after the courses of men, or imaginations of their own
hearts; but, they should consult with the Word of God, and frame their lives
according to it; they shall trust no longer in their Legal performances, but
look at David their King, and call him the Lord our righteousness.

Some look upon this Promise of David to be King over the Jews, as accompl^shed
in the reign of Christ the Messiah when here on earth; for He gave out his
commands then, and required obedience unto them, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. All power
is given unto me in heaven and in earth, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Christ
manifests himself here, to be King of the Jews and of all Nations.

Others are of a different judgment, and do believe that this great Promise
made here to the two houses of Judah and Israel, remains yet to be performed.

1. Because, the two Houses are not yet united into one, as has formerly been
showed, which may further appear from that in Hosea, Chap. 3. ver. 4, 5. The
children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince,
and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and
without Teraphim. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the
Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his Goodness
in the latter days. This Prophecy refers to the latter days, which are the
days after Christ, not before Christ; and if the two houses were united before
Christ's coming in the flesh, and so He King over them, as the Promise is here,
How did the Scepter depart from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his feet. In
Genesis 49.10. the Promise is, it should not be so till Shiloh, that is, the
Messiah, should come, and then it should; but if the Messiah were King in
Israel, King over both houses united into one, the Scepter did not depart, but
was advanced. This knot must be untyed, before we can be of their mind who say,
This Prophecy and Promise was at Christ's first coming fulfilled.

2. Because, the Jews do not own Christ; neither one house, nor the other do
it; neither Judah nor Israel acknowledged Christ to be the Messiah. The Jews
said, He had a Devil, Joh. 8.52. They sought to kill him, Joh. 7.1. They took
counsel together to put him to death, Joh. 11.53. When Pilate said, Behold your
King; they cried, Away with him, Crucify him, John 19.14, 15. They persecuted
all them who did adhere unto him, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.

3. The Jews have been, and are still, under many Kings and Shepherds; some
are under Heathenish, some under Christian Kings; but when this Scripture is
fulfilled, they shall be under none but Christ; One King shall be King to them
all, ver. 22. David my servant shall be King over them, and they shall have on
Shepherd.

4. They shall then walk in the ways of Christ, not in the ways of Moses. The
Jews every where to this day stick unto Moses, and reject the Gospel, as in the
Apostles days, Act. 13.45. Act. 18.5, 6. But when this promise is fulfilled,
then they shall walk in my judgments, observe my statutes, and do them, says
the Lord; that is, those laws and rules which God should give out by Christ for
their Government; and so the name and worship of God and Christ should be one,
Zech. 14.9. that is, between Jews and Gentiles.

For the Scripture and Argument used out of it, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.

1. Take another Scripture showing Christ came not to be a King, and reign at
his first coming; it is, Mat. 20.28. The son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister. He came not to sit in a Throne, to take upon him the
state of a Prince, to exercise Dominion and Authority, to be attended with a
lifeguard and Ministers of state: He came not to assume any thing King-like;
but, He came in the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. to minister unto, and serve
others; yea, to do the meanest office belonging to a servant, as, the washing
of his Disciples feet, John 13.12.

2. The place in Matthew speaks of that Power was given unto Christ after his
Death and Resurrection, and so was the fruit and purchase of the same. He
speaks not of that Power which he had as God, nor of that which he had as Man;
but of that he had as Redeemer of men, and obtained by his Sufferings and
Resurrection, In lecum^
says Maldonate. It Is clear then, Christ was not King over the Jews before his
death; because he had not his Power then, and how he was their King afterward
when he quickly left the World and went up into heaven; I desire to learn.

3. The Power and Laws here mentioned, are Spiritual, and refer to the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, viz. His Church, as, Teach all Nations, and
baptize them in the name, etc. These are Spiritual Laws and Ordinances,
proceeding from that power Christ had given him, to gather out of all Nations
those He had Redeemed by his death. Here he appoints means for the gathering,
preserving, and ruling his Church. But this is not the Power our Prophet speaks
of; that is, a Political Power, such as David had, and therefore it is said, He
shall sit in the Throne of David his father, Luke 1.29. Act. 2.30. David's
Throne was an external, visible, political Throne. Christ's Throne in Heaven,
his Throne in the hearts of Believers, his Throne in the Church, is not the
Throne of David; you may judge what kind of Throne David's was, by Jer. 13.13.
Chap. 17.25. Chap. 22.4.30. 1 King. 2 12, 24. When David, Solomon, and others
sat in that Throne, they put men to death, and made Wars; which Christ did not
when he was here on earth.

Verse. 25. And they shall dwell in the Land that I have given unto Jacob my
servant, wherein their Fathers have dwelt.
This is spoken of the ten Tribes together with Judah and Benjamin, who should
return from their Captivity, and repossess the Land of Canaan. That Judah and
Benjamin did, is clear from the Scriptures, and gran^ed on all sides; but, that
the ten Tribes returned, is generally denied, and expected to this day to be
made good. The promise here is, That the whole body of the Jews, even the house
of Judah, and the house of Israel shall come thither and dwell there. Jer.
3.18. In those days, the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel,
and they shall come together out of the land of the North, to the land that I
have given for an inheritance to your fathers. See Jer. 50.45. Ezekiel 9.13. Jer.
30.3. Let not man think, because Christ has said, Mat. 23.38. Your house is
left unto you desolate, that therefore there is no hope of their returning to
their Land; for, this is not spoken of the ten Tribes: they were not there at
Jerusalem, and Revel. 14.1. The Lamb stood on mount Sion with 144000 which were
gathered out of all the Tribes of Israel; and the time is coming when the Jews
shall see Christ, and say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
Matthew. 23.

And they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their
childrens children for ever.
Not only will God bring them into their Land, but continue them and their's
therein for ever. The house of Judah after her return from Babylon, continued
in the Land of promise some 600 years: For, from the time of Cyrus Proclamation
to Christ, was 560; and about 40 years after the death of Christ, was Jerusalem
destroyed, and the Jews wholly scattered. These 600 years the house of Judah
and her children enjoyed, but they fall short of what is promised here unto
both houses, viz. Inheriting of the Land for ever.

And my servant David shall be their Prince for ever.
David was dead long before. Messiah, the Lord Christ is pointed out by David,
who should be their Prince, and rule them as David did. David was meek and
gentle in his Government, 1 Chr. 28.2. Faithful and wise, Psalm. 78.72.
Righteous and just, 2 Samuel 8.15. Such a King shall Christ be, Psalm. 45.4. Isa.
11.4, 5. Jer. 23.5. And whereas David's Kingdom was for a time, some 40 years,
the Kingdom of Christ shall have no end, he shall be their Prince for ever. All
the Kings the Jews ever had reigned not 500 years, it was about 493; but this
Prince should exceed them all, Luke 1.33.

First, Observe.

There is a time wherein Christ must reign over the Jews, they must be gathered
into one body, and Christ must be their King.

David my servant shall be King over them; not only in a special way, which
hitherto he has not been, but also in a visible, political way; for, he must
sit in the Throne of David. Hence it is that Christ said, Luke 22.29. unto his
Apostles, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me; He
does not say, He had a Kingdom; but, that a Kingdom was appointed them, and
such a Kingdom as should be visible; for, ver. 30 it follows, that they may eat
and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel. There is no Tables, no Eating, no Drinking, no Tribes, no
Judging of them in heaven. In Matthew. 19.18. Christ speaks of twelve Thrones,
whereon the Apostles shall sit and rule the twelve Tribes of Israel, together
with himself, being in the Throne of his Glory. And, when shall this be? in the
Regeneration, when the Jews shall be regenerate, when the time of restitution
of all things shall be. For the words should be rendered thus, They which have
followed me, and there stop, in the Regeneration when the Son of man shall sit
in the Throne of his Glory, etc. Then shall the twelve Tribes be there; I be
their King, and you Judges or Rulers under me. Grotius reads the words so, and
conceives them to be spoken of the Kingdom of Christ. Whose Kingdom shall not
be of Jews only, but of Gentiles also; they shall be under this King. Psalm.
72.11. All Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him: so
that the Lord shall be King over all the earth, Zech. 14.9.

Secondly, Observe.

There shall be no changes and alterations in the Kingdom of Christ by
succession of Princes; there they all shall have one Shepherd, one Prince.

We see great changes in Kingdoms, where they have King after King, be it by
Election or Succession. When Rehoboam succeeded Solomon, what tumults and stirs
were then in the house of David; so afterward in the house of Joseph, when
Baasha and Jehu were chosen Kings. There shall be no such thing here, One
Shepherd shall they have, who shall Rule them with Righteousness, and feed
them with Knowledge. Isa. 40.11. He shall deal like a good Shepherd by them,
Ezekiel. 34.23.

Thirdly, Observe.

The Subjects of Christ's Kingdom shall be holy. They shall walk in my
Judgments, and observe my Statutes, and do them.

They who do the will of God, they who keep his Laws, they be innocent,
undefiled, Psalm. 119.1. They are holy ones. The 144000 which stood with the
Lamb on Mount Sion, were Virgins, without guile, without fault before the
Throne of God, Revel. 14.1, 4, 5. Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be all
righteous. See Zach. 14.20, 21. There shall be no Canaanites then in the house
of the Lord of hosts. Then shall be the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein
shall dwell righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. that is, Righteous persons, such as
shall do righteous things; for, there shall be no exacting, no violence, no
destruction, but salvation and praise, Isa. 60.17, 18. There shall the
righteous flourish, Psalm. 72.7.

Fourthly, Observe.

We ought to think and speak honorably of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and Saints of God.

God thought and spoke honorably of David, of Jacob; He calls them, His
servants; that is an honorable Title which he gives them.

Fifthly, Observe.

The Jews and their Posterity shall inherit their Land again, become a Kingdom,
and continue so under Christ for ever.

They and their children, and their childrens children, shall dwell in the
Land, and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever. All other Kingdoms
have been shaken, broken; but this shall abide. Daniel speaks of it in his 2.
Chap. ver. 44. The God of heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall never be
destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
Revel. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this World, must become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Verse. 26, 27.
26. Moreover, I will make a Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an
everlasting Covenant with them, and I will place them and multiply them, and
will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

27. My Tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they
shall be my people.


HEre are more Promises given forth to the houses of Judah and Joseph, being
gathered out of the Nations, and united into one house. As 1. Of a Covenant of
Peace. 2. Of placing or disposing them. 3. Of multiplying of them. 4. Of God's
dwelling amongst them.


Verse. 26. Moreover, I will make a Covenant of peace with them.
The Hebrew is. I will strike or cut a Covenant with them. Caratti lahem berith
shalom. Carath signifies, to cut, and to cut off by death, 1 Samuel 31.9. the
Philistines cut off Saul's head. And 1 Samuel 28.9. Saul cut off those had
Familiar-spirits, and the Wisards out of the Land; also to cut off from place
and power, as 1 Samuel 2.33. But when it is joined with Berith, it always
signifies to strike or make a Covenant; because it was a custom when they made
Covenants to kill some beast or other, cut it in the midst, and pass between
the parts thereof; manifesting by so doing, that if they brake Covenant, they
deserved to be cut in pieces, Genesis 15.9, 10, 18. Jerem. 34.18. This practice
was among the Heathens, who cut a Swine in pieces, Stabant and caesa firmabant
faedera porca. Virg. Aeneiad. lib. 8.
passed between them, and so made Covenants. The Covenant here which God would
make with the two houses, was a Covenant of Peace. The word for Peace, is
Shalom, by which the Hebrews understand not only outward quietness, but all
kind of outward happiness. Hac voce appellant quicquid in bonorum censu
habetur, hoc est, quicquid expeti aut optari potest. Grot. Whatsoever they
count in the number of good things, and desirable, that they comprehend under
the name of Peace; and when they wish all happiness to a man, they wish him
Peace. Maldonate tells us, that the Covenant of Peace here, is the Gospel,
wherein we see Christ has pacified all things by the blood of his Cross,
Coloss. 1.20. And Lavater says, it is called a Covenant of Peace, Quia Christi
merito, pax inter Deum and nos constituta est; not only outward, but inward
Peace. The Jews had some Peace at their return out of Babylon; but, in the time
of the Macchabees, they had long, bitter, and bloody Wars. When Christ came,
there was Peace for a time; but, not long after his death, they and their
Nation were destroyed by the Romans. The Covenant of Peace here, is promised to
the two houses, who were not then, but still are to be united: and when they
shall be united, God will make good his promise, He will strike a Covenant of
Peace with them, which shall not be for a few years; but, as it follows,

It shall be an everlasting Covenant with them.
God will not make a Truce with them for days, months, and years; but, a
Covenant for ever. The Jews opposed Christ, when he came first, and had little
outward or inward Peace; but, when he shall reign over both Houses, they shall
have everlasting Peace.

And I will place them.
In the Original it is, Vnethattim, Et dabo eos, I will give them. Piscator
confesses, he does not ken the sense of these words. Ghappe he says, this is
it, I will place them in the holy Land. Vatablus is of the same mind,
interpreting them thus, I will place them in my Land. The Chaldee is, Benedicam
eis, I will bless them: And Mariana to that purpose, says, Dabo eis sc.
Benedictionem, I will give them a blessing. The Vulgar is, Fundabo eos; which
Pinus expounds thus, I will place them in a firm Land, where they shall have a
solid foundation. Oecolampadius more fully, Dabo eos, tali conciliatori, qui
est mea benedictio in gentes, I will give them to Christ, whom I have promised
to be a blessing to the Nations: which sense I conceive the best; for, he spoke
in the verse before, of dwelling in the Land where their Fathers dwelt. In that
Land God would give them to Christ.

And multiply them.
This multiplication is not only in a Natural sense to be taken, but in a
Spiritual also. Non tam secundum carnem, quam secundum spiritum, promittit
augendum Israelem, says Lavater. Their increase will be great, and they shall
be Believers. Suitable to which is that in Isa. 54.13. All thy children shall be
taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children.

And will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.
The word for my Sanctuary, is Mickdashi, which Montanus renders,
Sanctificationem meam, My Sanctification. The Chaldee, and others, call it,
Sanctuarium meum, My Sanctuary. The Septuagint has it, (...) My holy things.
Mariana says, Ecclesiam, My Church After the return of Judah and Benjamin from
Captivity, they had the Temple rebuilt, which in process of time was utterly
destroyed; but here the Lord speaks of setting his Sanctuary in the midst of
the two houses, being united, God will have his Church and Worship eminently
amongst them. Oecolampadius says, Non aberit Templum divinitatis Christus
Jesus, They shall not be without a divine Temple, viz. Christ Jesus, He shall
be the Temple amongst them, Rev. 21.22. And as he shall be their Prince for
ever, so shall he be their Temple and Sanctuary for ever.

Verse. 27. My Tabernacle also shall be with them.
My dwelling shall be with them. Mishcan, signifies, Habitaculum, a Dwelling
place. God assures them here, that though the Temple should be destroyed; yet,
when Judah and Israel should be united, they should have a Temple and
Tabernacle not subject to destruction. These words receive light from John,
Rev. 21.1, 2, 3. that when he saw the new heaven and the new earth, and new
Jerusalem coming down from God; then he heard a voice saying, Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them. What John had in
Vision, lies yet under expectation for fulfilling.

Yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
The Hebrew is, I will be to them for a God, and they shall be to me for a
People. Now I am as no God unto them, and they are as no People unto me. I have
no true worship from them, they have no special favor from me. But I will be
to them for a God eminently, and they shall be to me for a People eminently.
They shall own me for their God in a singular manner, and so will I own them
for my people.

From these two verses I shall only give you this Observation,

That there be great and precious Promises which concern the Jews, yet
unperformed.

The everlasting Covenant of Peace, Christ's being their King and Temple, with
many other; the Jews expect the fulfilling of, and so may we, for God is
faithful and will make good his word; and the performance of them may be nearer
at hand, than is apprehended by most: for, Mr. Wall in his Considerations of
the Jews conversion.
one says understandingly, God has, in our days, arrested the Turks
greatness; abated the formidableness of the German-Austrian Beast; revealed in
a good measure, the hypocrisy and lies of the false Prophet, who has his seat
at Rome, and has brought to light the subtleties of Satan, who had shifted
himself into several dresses of pretended Reformation. He is risen up like a
mighty Giant against his enemies: amongst us, and elsewhere, he has pleaded
his peoples cause so signally, that all those, but whose judgment it is to be
wilfully blind, will say, The Lord is on our side, etc.

Verse. 28.
And the Heathen shall know that I the Lord do do sanctify Israel, when my
Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.


THe end of Gods dealing so with the Jews, is here laid down, viz. Conviction
of the Heathen.

I the Lord do sanctify Israel.
God is said to sanctify, 1. When he separates things from a common, to an
holy use, as time, Joel 1.14 and the vessels of the Temple it is self. 2. When
he makes persons really holy, as Levit. 21.23. I the Lord do sanctify them;
that is, I do make them holy. Both these ways of Sanctifying may be the sense
of this place. God would separate them from the Heathens, take them to be his
people, give them the means, and make them effectual to their Sanctification.

When my Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.
The Hebrew is, When my Sanctification. The Septuagint, When my holy things
shall be in the midst of them. When Christ shall be their King, set up His
ways and worship amongst them, then they shall be sanctified. So
Oecolampadius, Vbi christus cum suis and verbum ejus, ibi sanctificabuntur
omnes qui Christi sunt: When Christ is with his, and gives them his word, there
all are sanctified which belong unto him.

Observe.

When the two Houses are united, and have Christ amongst them with his Word and
Worship, they shall be holy; and so holy, that Heathens shall be convinced,
that God is their Sanctifier, that he does Sanctify Israel. Zech. 14.20, 21.
Joel 3.17. Rev. 21.27.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
1. And the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

2. Son of man, set thy face against Cog, the land of Magog, the chief Prince
of Meshech and Tubal, and prophecy against him.

3. And say, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the
chief Prince of Meshech and Tubal:

4. And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy chawes, and I will bring
thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with
all sorts of armor, even a great company, with bucklers and shields, all of
them handling swords:

5. Persia, Ethiopia and Lybia with them; all of them with shield and helmet:

6. Gomer and all his bands, the house of Togarmah of the North quarters, and
all his bands, and many people with thee.

7. Be thou prepared, and prepare for thy self, thou and all thy company that
are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.


THis Chapter and the next, do treat of Gog and Magog, who were Nations against
the people of God. This 38. Chapter is a Prophecy against Gog; wherein is set
forth.

1. What, and by whom, the people of God were to suffer: to the 18. verse. 2.
Gods dealings with Gog, and the event thereof: to the end of the Chapter.
Lest the Jews should presently have looked for the fulfilling of those great
Promises in the former Chapter, concerning the uniting the two Houses, and
Messiah to be their King, and the great privileges they should have thereby;
he tells them here of great Calamities which they must look for, of sad times,
and heavy judgments, which should befall their enemies. This in general; now to
things more particular.

Verse. 2. Son of man, set thy face against Gog.
There be great variety of Opinions concerning Gog and Magog. The Jews affirm
them to be the Scythians, which live near Caucasus, and the Caspian Mountains.
Some understand by them the Roman Emperors and Empire. Some the Pope. Some the
Turks and Saracens. Some the Goths. Some, Heretics. Some, all the Persecutors
of the Church. Others, Antichrist. Some Interpreters understand the affliction
of the Jewish Nation, by the Successors of Alexander, which possessed Asia
minor, and Syria. Junius has labored to give light here, and tells us, That
Gog is the name of a Nation, derived from Gyges, or Gog the servant of
Candaules King of Lydia, whom he killed, and married his Queen, naming the Land
Gygaea, or Gogs Land, which, says he, is Asia the less, and Syria, where was a
City called Gogs-City. These Nations should infest the Jews, which were held by
Antiochus, Seleucus, Demetrius, and Nicanor. Bibliander and Bullinger interpret
this Prophecy literally of Alexander and his Successors, especially of
Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria; who, as you find in the Macchabees, did
greatly afflict the Jews; and specially of Antichrist and his members. A-lapide
denies this Prophecy to concern Alexander, the Kings of Syria, and Egypt,
because the Jews never conquered them, though they had some notable Victories
over them; and had they had such a destruction as is spoken of in the end of
this Chapter, Josephus who was an exact observer of Jewish affairs, would have
mentioned it. Neither did Josephus Gerionides speak any thing thereof who writ
the History of Gog. Sanctius leans to that opinion which conceives Gog to be
Antiochus, in whom Antichrist was prefigured, and the great troubles of the
Church by him: so do many Exposito^s: Yet, Maldonate and Vatablus think this
Prophecy not fulfilled; of which mind are diverse who write upon the 20. of the
Revelation, where John in the 8. and 9. ver. alludes to this Prophecy. By Gog
here, understand, the name of a Man, not of a Province; for, he is said to be a
Prince, ver. 3. to come out of the North, ver. 14. and he with his multitude
shall be buried in the Valley of Hamon-Gog, Chap. 39.11. These things cannot be
spoken of a Province, but of a Person. The Prophet must set his face against
him; that is, he must Prophecy constanter and fortiter against him.

The Land of Magog.
Gog is the name of a King, qui Magog imperat, which rules over Magog; that is,
the Scythians, says Vatablus, Magog was one of the sons of Japhet Genesis 10.2.
of whom came the Scythians, or Sarmatians, says Aynsworth on the place.
Josephus says, Antiq. l. 1. c. 7.
Magog dwelt amongst those were called Magogins, and by the Greeks Scythae, who
dwelt in Caelo-Syria. Marcus Paulus Venetus says, In Tartary, Vid. Martin.
Lex. in verbo Magog.
are the Regions Gog and Magog, which they call Gug and Mungug.

The chief Prince of Meshech.
In Hebrew it is Prince of the head; that is, Principal head or chief Prince.
This Gog was not only Prince of Magog, but of Meshech, that is, Cappadocia; and
of Tubal, that is, Iberia, not Spain or Italy, but a Country near the
Scythians.

Prophecy against him.
Thou have been prophesying of deliverance and great mercies to my people; now
Prophecy against Gog, and all his assistants open or secret. Had Magog,
Meshech, and Tubal, been Princes with Gog, the Lord would have said, Prophecy
against them.

Verse. 3. Say, Thus says the Lord, Behold, I am against thee, O Gog.
This is a dreadful message which the Prophet must deliver against this great
Prince. He must declare unto him that there is a greater Prince then himself,
even one that is King of Nations, that has all power in his hand, and brings
Princes to nothing, Isa. 40.23. and that he is against him. Thou think to
have thy will upon Gods people, to do terrible things unto them; but their God,
who is a God of Power and Wisdom, is against thee. The Hebrew is, Behold, I to
thee; that is, I come to thee to destroy thee for thine iniquities and enmity
against my people

Verse. 4. And I will turn thee back.
Lavater and Oecolampadius read these words, Conteram te, I will crush thee.
The Vulgar, Circumagam te, I will lead thee about. Some Rabbis, Decipiam te, I
will deceive thee. Others, Reducam, convertam te, I will bring or turn thee
back. Thou think to have thy pleasure on mine, but I will have my pleasure
on thee, and turn thee which way seems good to me. Educam te, I will bring thee
out.

And put hooks into thy chawes.
What the Lord says here of Gog, he said, Chap. 29.4. of Pharaoh. I will put
hooks in thy chaws. The Septuagint is, I will put a bridle in thy chaws. Thou
art like a pampered Jade, and think to tread down all, but I will hold thee
in. Montanus reads the former words thus, Educam te, I will bring thee out, and
if thou hold off, I will put my hook in thy chawes, and draw thee out as a
fish is drawn out of the waters; which sense is best.

And I will bring thee forth, and all thine Army.
Exire faciam te, I will cause thee to go forth: Thou shall not stay in thine
own Territories, how little or large so ever they be; but shall muster up thy
Forces, and lead out all thine Armies.

Horses and Horsemen.
The word for Horses is Sasim, which notes any Horse of Common use. Sus
signifies both a Crane and a Horse. The Rabbis say, he is so called, because
an Horse is a cheerful creature, and by his mettle and neighing, chears up his
Rider. Pharasim is Horsemen, from Parash, which in Hiphil, signifies to prick;
so that Parash is an Horseman, because he pricks forward his Horse with his
spurs.

All of them clothed with all sorts of Armor.
They were armed completely from head to foot. The Hebrew is, clothed with
all, or with perfection; nothing was wanting requisite to military undertaking.

Even a great company, with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords.
Gogs Army was a great Army, and well accommodated. A Buckler is, Tegumentum
corp^ris militare, A piece of Armor to cover and defend the body; and so is a
Shield in Hebrew, Magem, from Ganan to cover. Tzimnah is a Buckler, or Shield,
sharp or picked; which the Latins call Scutum. The other Clypeus. Shields,
were for footmen, Vide Martin.
and Bucklers for horsemen, says Servius. These Soldiers of Gog were skilful
in Military affairs, they all were expert at their Swords.

Verse. 5. Persia, Ethiopia. and Lybia with them.
Here is shown what Countries and People should join with Gog, viz. those of
the East, Persians; those of the South, the Ethiopians; and those of the West,
the Moors, whom Oecolampadius understood by those of Lybia. Of Persia,
Ethiopia, and Lybia, was spoken, Chap. 27.10. and 30.5.

All of them with shield and helmet.
Whoever joined with Gog, were well armed. The Hebrew is, All of them shield
and helmet. Covah is Pileus rotundus, some were made of Leather, some of Brass,
1 Samuel 17.5.

Verse. 6. Gomer and all his bands.
Josephus Anti. l. 1. c. 7.
Under this word Gomer, are comprehended Galatia, Phrygia, and Bythinia,
principal parts of Asia minor, which were inhabited by Gomer the son of
Japheth, from whom they were called Gomarians or Gomeriter.

The house of Togarmah of the North quarters, and all his bands.
By the house of Togarmah, Junius understands, Paphlagonia, and Cappad cia;
others Armenia the less. Doubtless by Gomer and Togarmah, all those parts which
lay North from Syria, where Antiochus reigned, and so North from Judaea, are
meant thereby. From these and the forementioned places, had Gog Auxiliary
Forces: for fear, hire, or out of enmity to Gods people, they helped him.

And many people with thee.
There were people with him from all quarters, from the East, West, South, and
North; which being come together, must make a numerous Army.

Verse. 7. Be thou prepared, etc. Per imperativos enuntiant Prophetae, quae
certo eventura praedicunt.

Jerome thinks there is an Ironie in these words, that God exhorts Gog to gather
up his forces to strengthen himself and hasten his design, with what
expedition he could; but all his preparations and undertakings should be in
vain, he should not escape the vengeance of God which hung over his head. But
here, under a command is declared what he would certainly do; he would not be
wanting to get a great Army from all parts, to assault and destroy the people
of God; and not knowing what the hazard of War might be, he would prepare for
himself, consider, and fit things for himself.

Thou and all thy company that are assembled unto thee.
Where is a great Army, there had need to be great preparations for their pay,
quarters, and protection. They know not what obstructions and enemies they may
meet withal.

And be thou a guard unto them.
Princes have great power, and it lies much in them to keep their Armies safe.
Vigilantia ducis est salus exercitus, The eye of the General is a special thing
to keep an Army in Order. The Vulgar reads the words thus, Esto eis in
praeceptum, Do thou show thy self an Emperor amongst them, Command and Rule
them; or thus, Thou will do thy endeavor to preserve them. Junius thinks these
words refer to the Jews. That Gog with all his Forces compassing about the
Mountains of Israel, and concluding he had the Jews in his power, as a bird in
a cage, to destroy at his pleasure, he should be a guard unto them. God can
make those a defense to his, who seek their destruction. But the other sense is
more genuine.

First, Observe.

That after Prophesies of Grace and Mercy, come tidingt of Affliction and
Judgments.

In the former Chapter, the Jews heard altogether of Mercies from God; here
they hear of Afflictions from Enemies. There, they heard of David their King,
and Shepherd, who should do great things for them; Here, of Gog, a Tyrant,
their enemy, who should seek to destroy them. God in his infinite wisdom orders
it so, that his Church and People should hear of, and meet with, not only good,
but evil; not only comforts, but crosses. Should we only hear of comfortable
things, we should presume; and should we only hear of sad things, we should
despond. God presents some of both sorts unto us, that so our Faith and Fear
may be exercised, and we kept in a more even frame.

Secondly, Observe.

The great Princes of the earth, being no friends to the Church of God, have
God for their enemy.

Gog was Prince of Meshech, and Tubal, an enemy to the Jews. And, Behold, I am
against thee, O Gog; how great soever thou art, I the great God am against
thee; thou will oppose my people, and I will oppose thee. Most of the Princes
of the earth, have been against Christ and his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.2 And God has
been against them, and vexed them in his soar displeasure. God was against the
Prince of Tire, and against Pharaoh King of Egypt, Ezekiel. Chap. 28. and 29.
Kings generally are Proud, Profane, Tyrannical, false to the trust committed to
them, obstructing the way and work of Christ in the World what they can;
therefore God is against them, He is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm.
76.12. And their ends have been dreadful. Some have had their bones burnt to
lime, Amos 2.1. Some have been eaten with Worms, Acts 12.23. Some have been
hanged up, Lam. 2.12. Josh. 10.26. Some have dyed of strange diseases, 2 Chr.
21.18.

Thirdly, Observe.

The Lord at his pleasure can bring enemies and Armies upon his own people.

God would bring Gog forth, and all his Army, Horse and Horsemen, a great
company; all of them armed with Bucklers, Shields, and Swords. God is the
author of Wars, he calls forth what Princes and Nations he will, to assault and
vex the Church. The ten Tribes, Who brought enemies upon them? was it not the
Lord? 1 Chronicles. 5.26. The God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pull King of
Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser King of Assyria, and he carried
them away, etc. 2 King. 15.19. Chap. 17.6. It was God stirred up the spirit of
the Philistines against Jehoram King of Judah; so that they came and spoiled
him of all his substance, of his Wives and Sons, 2 Chr. 21.16, 17. Let Gods
people take heed how they provoke God, for he is the Lord of hosts, and has
all Nations at his command, and can call, yea, bring them forth to trouble
Israel it self, and that soarly.

Fourthly, Observe.

The Lord can easily bring men to do his work and service, what ever the
difficulty or danger be.

Here was hard work for Gog, to gather the Nations East, West, South, and
Northward together, to come out of his Country and to invade Judaea; a
business which required much consultation, admitted many Objections and Demurs;
but God would bring him to it, and make him do it, as easily as a man pulls up
a fish out of the water. I will put my hook in his chawes. Let God put an
instinct into a Prince or State, once stir their spirits, to make war upon
others, the work will go on with facility and expedition. God has hooks to
draw on Princes to War, and hooks to draw them off, to draw them back from
them, 2 King. 19.28.

Fifthly, Observe.

From all quarters of the World there be enemies ready to combine and act with
Gog and Antichrist against the Church, Truth, and Christ himself.

Those of the East comprehended under Persia, those of the South intended under
Ethiopia, those of the West included in Lybia, and those of the North contained
under Gomer, and the house of Togarmah; were all at the beck of Gog, to go
against Jerusalem the Servants, and Worship of God therein. The whole World,
says Oecolampadius, contradicts and observes Antichrist. When Christ does any
eminent thing in his Church, the Nations are quickly misled, and join with some
grand enemy to vent their malice: see Rev. 20.7, 8, 9.

Sixthly, Observe.

The enemies of the Church do make great preparations against the same.

Be thou prepared. This shows and assures that Gog would neglect nothing, which
might conduce unto the carrying on his designs against the Jews. Isa. 8.9, 10.
Those expressions, Associate your selves; Gird your selves; Take counsel
together; Speak the word; do hint to us, the activity of the Churches enemies,
Psalm. 83.2, 3, 4, 5. see it there to the life, Thine enemies make a tumult,
they have lift up the head, they have taken crafty counsel against thy people.
They said, Come let us cut them off from being a Nation, etc. How did Zerah the
Ethiopian, and the Commanders of his Army, bestir themselves, when they brought
an Army of a thousand thousand against Judah, and with them 300 Charets, 2 Chronicles. 14.9.

Seventhly, Observe.

Princes, notwithstanding all their preparations, cannot secure themselves, nor
those under their command.

Prepare for thy self, be a guard to them. Gogs number, Power, Policy,
Preparations, did not advantage himself or his; they went forth to their own
ruin and destruction.

Verse. 8.
After many days thou shall be visited: in the latter years thou shall come
into the land, that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many
people, against the mountains of Israel which have been always waste; but it
is brought forth out of the nations, and they shall dwell safely all of them.


THis verse Prophesies of Gogs invading the Mountains of Israel, the
destruction of Gog, and the time of both.

After many days thou shall be visited.
The Scripture speaks of a double Visitation.

1. One in Mercy and Favor, as Exodus 4.31. When Moses and Aaron were sent to
deliver the Jews out of Egypt; and when Sarah conceived and bare Isaac, Genes.
21.1. These were Gods merciful Visitations of them.

2. One in Judgment, as Numb. 16.29. If these men, viz. Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, be visited after the Visitation of all men; that is, they shall not die
a common death, have a common judgment; but, some extraordinary punishment. So
Psalm. 89.32. I will visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes, I will punish them. This is the sense here, After many days thou
shall be visited; that is, punished. The time when it should be, is not
punctually, but indefinitely set down, after many days. If we take Antiochus
to be Gog in the Type, it was in the Macchabees days; if we look at the
Anritype, the time is yet to come.

In the latter years thou shall come into the land.
From the time of this Prophecy, unto the death of Antiochus Epiphanes,
Chronology tells us, there were 420 or 430 years; when eupon Expositors do
account the years that he came to Judea, and took Jerusalem, and defiled the
Temple with Idols, to be the latter years. Junius says, Consequentibus annis,
In the following years. Piscator has it, Posteri^ribus diebus, In the after
days or times. Posterioribus annis, In the after, or latter years, in the time
of Christ, says Vatablus. The Hebrew is, Beacharith Hashshanim which Montanus
and the Vulgar render in Novissima annorum, In the last of years; which,
according to John, is after the 1000 years, Rev. 20.6, 7, 8. And so Mariano, he
makes the Visitation of Gog to be, In fine mundi post mill annos, In the end
of the World, after the thousand years. Then shall Gog come into the land,
compass the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City, ver. 9.

That is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people.
The Jews were driven by the sword into Captivity, by it scattered into many
Provinces, and held under slavery, and so they are at this day; but the time is
coming, that the two Houses as well as the two Tribes, shall be brought back
from the sword, and gathered out of many people. Land, is put for, The
Inhabitants of the Land.

Against the mountains of Israel.
The Hebrew word (...) Al, signifies, ad, super, contra, to, upon, against.
Some therefore render these words to or upon the mountains of Israel; and in
that sense they refer to the Jews, who were brought back and gathered out of
all people to the Mountains of Israel, that is, the Land of Judaea. We read
them. Against the mountains of Israel, and so they refer to Gog who should come
against Judaea.

Which have been always waste.
The Hebrew word for always, is Tamid, which signifies diu, a long time; and
so the French Translation has it, Longuement deserts, Deserted or wasted for
a long time; 70 years were they desolate, all the time the Jews were in
captivity; and shortly after Christ his days, were they left desolate, and are
so to this day. Some make the mountains of Israel, to signify, The Church; the
sword and wastings, to be the Persecutions which it has always endured.

But it is brought forth out of the nations.
By it, the Prophet means the Land; and by Land, the People, who being (...)
into Egypt, Babylon, Persia, and other places, were to be brought forth to the
Land of Israel. The words import the thing done, because of the certainty of it.

And they shall dwell safely all of them.
When the Jews returned out of Babylon, repossessing their own Land, they dwelt
safely, confidently, without fear or disquietment therein, for 430 years, says
Sanctius; after which time Antiochus did sorely vex them, and interrupt their
peace, which they thought would be everlasting. So did Demetrius, Nicanor, and
others, as in the Macchabees is evident. The time remains for the complete
fulfilling of these words.

First, Observe.

God bears sometimes with the worst of men a long time.

After many days. God bears with Gog and Antichrist, the grand enemies of his
Church, worser than whom cannot be found or expected. His patience is large, he
is a God long-suffering. He bare with Antiochus that vile person, Dan. 11.21.
many days: Vessels of wrath are endured by Him with much long-suffering, Romans
9.22.

Secondly, Observe.

Though wicked men be spared long, yet at last they shall suffer.

After many days thou shall be visited. God may stay a thousand, yea 10000
days, and then visit. As there is a time for wicked men to fill up the measure
of their iniquities, so there is a time for God to fill up the Vials of his
wrath; and when they are once full, then they shall be poured out. God
sometimes is long before he hears the Prayers of his, but at length he
remembers them, Luke 18.7, 8. and sometimes he is long before he punishes the
wicked, but at last he visits them, he has his time for it, Jer. 49.8.

Verse. 9.
Thou shall ascend and come like a Storm, thou shall be like a Cloud to cover
the Land, thou and all thy Bands, and many People with thee.


THe manner of Gogs proceeding is here set down, and that, 1. Under the
similitude of a Storm. 2. Under the similitude of a Cloud.


Thou shall ascend, and come like a Storm.
A Storm comes suddenly, violently, with noise; and does much hurt, breaking
and bearing down all before it: such should the coming of Gog be. Dan. 11.40,
41. it is said, The King of the North shall come against the King of the South
like a Whirlewinde, he shall enter also into the glorious Land, and many
Countries shall be overthrown. This is spoken of Antiochus, whom diverse
Expositors make to be Gog. The word Shoah for a Storm, is from Shuah, which
signifies, to make a noise, to spoil, and to amaze; and so do Storms.

Thou shall be like a Cloud, to cover the Land, thou and all, etc.
Clouds are Vapors drawn up by the heat of the Sun, into the middle Region of
the Air, where by the Cold they are condensated, and so, spreading, make the
Heavens black, and intercept the Light. Gog with his Forces should be as a
Cloud spreading over the face of the Land, interrupting the peace and comforts
of the Godly, and by his hostile acts cause fear, sorrow, and mourning. By
these two Metaphors are set out the tumult, violence, spoil and multitude of
Gogs Army: or, by the Storm, their threats and cruelty; and by the Cloud, false
Opinions, flatteries, and allurements which they should use to pervert the
faith of the Saints.

First, Observe.

The Church and people of God are subject to calamimities.

He shall come like a Storm. Winds, clouds, storms, do trouble and terrify
men, and so do great Armies of Heathens, of vile and desperate persons, of
Goggites and Antichristians: when they come with fury and violence, they
plunder, spoil, and fill all with darkness, they cover the Land. Jer. 4.13.
Behold he shall come up as clouds, and his Charets shall be as a Whirlewinde:
his Horses are swifter than Eagles, Woe unto us, for we are spoiled. It Is
spoken of Nebuchadnezzar, and his Forces, who were to come up against
Jerusalem. The Church is often afflicted and tossed with tempest; but here is
some comfort; Storms, tempests, and clouds last not long, they cease after a
little time, and the Sun shines again.

Secondly, Observe,

The goodness of God in foretelling the Church what shall come upon it, Viz. A
Storm and Clouds, and perplexity.

Gog and all his Bands, and many people with him, shall come as a Storm, and be
as a Cloud covering the Land. It has been usual with God to foretell his
people what should befall them, as Genesis 15.13. Jerem. 32.28, 29. Dan. 10.14.
Math. 24. and in the Book of the Revelations, Christ does tell them, what sad
things are to come upon his, how potent, violent, subtle and destructive their
enemies will be: which he does not to discourage them, but to awaken them unto
Prayer, holiness of life, and living by faith.

Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13.
10 Thus says the Lord God, It shall also come to pass, that at the same time
shall things come into thy mind, and thou shall think an evil thought.

11 And thou shall say, I will go up to the Land of unwalled Villages: I will
go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without
Walls, and having neither Bars nor Gates.

12 To take a spoil, and to take a prey, to turn thine hand upon the desolate
places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the
Nations, which have gotten Cattle and Goods, that dwell in the midst of the
Land.

13 Sheba and Dedan, and the Merchants of Tarshish, with all the young Lions
thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? Have thou gathered
thy Company to take a Prey? to carry away Silver and Gold, to take away Cattle
and Goods, to take a great spoil?


IN these words we have, 1. The decree and purpose of Gog, v. 10, 11 which was
to Invade.

2. The inviting causes, v. 11.

3. The end of his invading, v. 12.

4. His assistance and Confederates in the work, v. 13.

Verse. 10. At the same time shall things come into thy mind.
In Hebrew it is, Words shall ascend, or come upon thy heart, Jagnalu debarim
gual lebabeca, which is an Hebraism, and imports a man's thinking and consulting
with himself: When men are meditating, various thoughts do rise in their
minds, as Luke 24.38. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Debarim signifies
words and things; the French is Paroles words: Thoughts, are the words and
things of the mind.

And thou shall think an evil Thought.
The Hebrew for to think is (...), Chashab, which notes such a thinking as
takes in the intention of the mind, and exercises a man's head and heart. Gog
should bend himself to excogitate something, and it should be an evil thought
or purpose. The French is, Tres maunaises cogitations, Very ill or wicked
thoughts.

Verse. 11. I will go up to the Land of unwalled Villages.
This was the wicked thought Gog had in his mind, he purposed in his heart to
go and invade the Land of the Jews, and that which invited and encouraged him
so to do, was,

1. Their unfortifiedness, they had no Walls about their Villages. Thought Gog.
I shall easily conquer and subdue the Jewish Nation, and add it to my
Territories, for they have no places of strength; Some Villages they have
built, but none of them are walled. The Jews were but lately returned out of
Babylon, newly re-planted in their Land, and could not fortify Towns or Cities
as formerly they were, before Nebuchadnezzar demolished them; being therefore
without Walls, they lay open to enemies, and obvious to all Incursions.

I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely.
2. Their security. The Jews being wearied with their 70 years Captivity, and
come again to their Land, had rest and safety, according to what God had
promised them, Jer. 30.10. and 46.27. Ezekiel. 34.25, 28. and so manifested their
dependence upon God, trusting in him to protect them, though destitute of Walls
and Military defenses: Well might they be at rest, and dwell confidently, as
the word signifies, to whom God had said, None should make them afraid: It Is to
be feared, many of them abused his Promise, degenerating into a sinful
security.

All of them dwelling without Walls, having neither Bars nor Gates.
Where there is fear of Enemies and Invasions, people do fortify themselves;
they wall about their Towns and Cities, they make strong Gates and Bars unto
them, and set Guards to look unto them. The Jews being fearless, did none of
these things. They observed not the counsels and actings of their bordering
Enemies; which they should have done, and for want thereof, they exposed
themselves to eminent dangers.

Verse. 12. To take a spoil, and to take a prey.
The Hebrew is, to spoil a spoil, and to prey a prey, this was the end Gog
propounded, viz. To impoverish the Jews, and enrich himself, to deprive them
of their Land, and add it to his own. Of the words spoil and prey, has
formerly been spoken.

To turn thine hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon
the people that are gathered, etc.
Nebuchadnezzar had made the Land of Judea desolate for many years, and the
Jews being returned from their Captivity, inhabited the desolate places of the
Land, rebuilt them, began to get something about them to live comfortably on;
but Gog now intended to come and lay his hand upon them that were spoiled
before, and to make another spoiling of them, and to bring them again into
bondage: This was the aim of Gog.

Which have gotten Cattle and Goods.
The Jews dealt much in Cattle, and by the increase of them, they got not only
necessaries to support them, but also wealth, and became rich; which made them
envyed.

That dwell in the midst of the Land.
For midst of the Land, in Hebrew, it is the Navel of the Land: Tabbur signifies
a Navel, also an high place, and the Jews would have the Land of Judah called
the Navel of the Earth, because it is the highest of Lands; but others, because
it is in the midst of the Earth, as the Navel is in the midst of man's body. It Is
said of Jerusalem, that she was set in the midst of Nations and Countries,
Ezekiel. 5.5. Hence the salvations God wrought in Judea and Jerusalem, are said to
be in the midst of the Earth, Isa. 4.12. Whether Jerusalem or Judaea be in the
middle of the World is doubted; by Navel, or midst of the land here, is meant,
the higher or more inward parts of the Land, where was most security.

Verse. 13. Sheba and Dedan, and the Merchamts of Tarshish.
These were Auxiliaries unto Gog, and helped forward that damnable design he
had to destroy the Church of God. By Shebah and Dedan, Polanus understands the
Ethiopians and Arabians; Junius, the men of the South and East, and by the
Merchants of Tarshish, the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Maritine Coasts, which lay
Westward; these all confederated with Gog, who lay Northward fom Judea: In the
27 Chapt. Sheba, Dedan, and Tarshish, were spoken of.

With all the young Lions thereof.
The Septuagint says, all the Villages thereof, the Chaldee, all the Kings or
Princes thereof; but Cephir is the Whelp of a Lion, or, a young Lion; Junius,
Piscator, and Polanus, make these young Lions, the Merchants, who were as
greedy of gain, as Lions are of their prey: Others make them Sea-pirates and
Robbers, but it is not improbable, that by young Lions should be meant the young
men of those parts, who are like Lions for strength and courage, as greedy of
prey as Lions are.

Shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? have thou gathered thy
Company to take a prey?
Seeing, O Gog, thou gatherest up Forces to war against the Jews, to spoil
them, and to make a prey of their wealth and Land; lo, we are for thee, we will
join with thee. Some would have it, that they envyed them, and were against
them; but 1 Match. 3. you shall find, that the Nations joined with Lysias who
was General of Antiochus his Army, v. 24 and how he took away Silver, Gold,
Women, Children, Cattle and Goods, Chap. 1.22, 23. to the 35. he robbed the
Sanctuary, and fired the City. This Antiochus, do Expositors make to be
Ezekiels Gog.

First, Observe.

God foreknowes and determines things to come, even those things which seem
most free and contingent, as the thoughts of men's hearts.

He says of Gog, long before his existence in the world, It shall come to
pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shall
think an evil thought: Some would have God to permit only things to come, not
to determine them; and conceive, that Gods decree of permission, supposes a
necessity of their futurition and coming to pass: but if God did only permit a
thing to come to pass, how could it come to pass without some action, and Gods
concurrence to that action? For there is no action or cause producing any
effect, with which God does not concur, Lament. 3.37. Prove. 21.1. Prove. 16.1.
Defects are permitted by God, not Effects; He concurrs to the production of
them, be they thoughts, words or actions, Gods wisdom, power and providence
has influence into them.

Secondly, Observe.

God does not only foreknow, but pre-discovers the purposes, counsels and plots
of his Churches enemies, to evidence his care thereof.

He made known the design of Gog many years before it came to pass. Thou shall
think an evil thought, and say, I will go up to the Land of unwalled Villages.
The enemies of Sion are full of evil thoughts and designs, to root out and
destroy the Inhabitants thereof, but God sometimes discovers them beforehand,
and often prevents them. Neh. 4.11. Our adversaries said, They shall not know,
neither see, till we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the
work to cease: These thoughts and designs of theirs were discovered and
prevented by the Lord. Herod thought and purposed to kill the Lord Christ when
he was in the Cradle; but the all-knowing God revealed it to Joseph, and
disappointed it. God is very vigilant over his Church, lest any hurt it; he
keeps it night and day, Isa. 27.3.

Thirdly, Observe.

The Enemies of the Church do watch, and take advantages against the Church,
they wait for, and seek occasions to ruin the same.

I will go up, (says Gog) to the Land of unwalled Villages, I will go to
them that are at rest, that dwell without Walls, Bars, or Gates: Because he
saw them unarmed and secure, a naked people, destitute of humane helps,
therefore he resolved to invade, plunder and destroy them. When Saul was
pursuing of David, the Philistims invaded the Land, 1 Samuel 23.27. And when
Elisha was dead, the Moabites did so, 2 King. 13.20. So Haman, because Mordecai
would not bow to him, sought advantages to destroy all the Jews, Esth. 3.6.
The wicked are so strong, spightfull, and vigilant, to seek and take advantages
against Gods people, that it were impossible for them to be in safety, had they
not a gracious God to take care of them. They are weak, and look not to arms of
flesh, but unto Jehovah the Rock of ages, who is their shield and safety; they
dwell without walls, but God is a wall of fire round about them, Zech. 2.5.

Fourthly, Observe.

Wicked ones will undertake great matters, and venture their lives to satisfy
their lusts.

Gog and the rest undertake a War, march many a mile, and put their lives in
their hands, and wherefore? to take a spoil, to get the prey, to carry away
Silver, Gold, Cattle and Goods. All was to satisfy a base, covetous humor;
Libido Dominandi and cupido Divitiarum, the lust after ruling, and desire of
riches, has stimulated many to attempt great matters, to hazard their lives
and souls to all eternity. Wherefore did the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount
Seir, undertake a difficult and dangerous War? Jehoshaphat tells you, It was
for Dominion and Wealth, 2 Chronicles. 20.11.

Fifthly, Observe.

The wicked, confederate and combine together, to mischief the Church of God.

Shebah, Dedan, the Merchants of Tarshish, with all the young Lions thereof,
fall in with Gog and his design. The seed of the Serpent are unanimous to
destroy the seed of the Woman. Ps. 83. Edomites, Ishmaelites, Moabites,
Hagarens, Gebalites, Ammonites, Amalekites, Philistims, Tyrians and Ashurites,
joined all together against Gods people, and said, Come, let us cut them off
from being a Nation, Ezra 4.7, 8, 9, 10. Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, Rehum the
Chancellor, Shimshai the Scribe, and the rest of their Societies, the Dinaites,
the Apharsathlites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the
Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Debanites, the Elamites, and the rest of the
Nations, did all conspire together, to hinder the building of Jerusalem, and
the Walls thereof. Wicked men are Thorns, and they cleave together, to scratch
and vex the righteous.

Verse. 14, 15, 16.
14 Therefore, Son of man, prophecy and say unto Gog, Thus says the Lord God;
In that day, when my people Israel dwells safely, shall thou not know it?

14 And thou shall come from thy place out of the North parts, thou and many
people with thee, all of them riding upon Horses, a great Company, and a mighty
Army.

16 And thou shall come up against my people of Israel, as a Cloud to cover the
Land: it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my Land,
that the Heathen may know me when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before
their eyes.


IN these words we have the place whence Gog should come, the manner of his
coming, the persons he should come against, the author, and event of his coming.

Verse. 14. In that day, when my people Israel dwells safely, shall thou not
know it?
When my people are come to their Land, dwell safely in Towns, without walls,
gates or bars? shall thou not know it? Yes, thou will take notice thereof, and
be encouraged thereby to come against them. The Septuagint says, (...), thou will be stirred up; this sense of the words some make: Others thus, Thou have a
wicked thought in thy heart, and do purpose to invade my people, being
unarmed, and dwelling safely, and shall thou not know? that is, Thou shall know
what it is to invade my people, thou shall feel my judgments, my fury will
appear and fall upon thee, to thy destruction, v. 16, 18. Piscator renders the
word thus, Annon experieris? Shall thou not have experience?

Verse. 15. Thou shall come from thy place out of the North parts, thou and many
people with thee, etc.
Some conceive, that Gog with his great Army, came out of Scythia, others out
of Babylon, which lay Northwards from Jerusalem. That he came from those parts,
is not clear: but most certair, that he came from the Northern parts, or sides
of the North; and having drawn many to his assistance, they all came riding
upon Horses. They were all Horsemen for speed; the charges of such an Army,
being all Horsemen, must be exceeding great: This Army came into the Land of
Israel, and covered it like a Cloud, as we heard, v. 9.

Verse. 16. It shall be in the latter days.
In the 8 verse. it was said, in the latter years, and here it is said, in the
latter days, or, as Montanus reads them, in novissimo dierum; or as Piscator,
in novissimis diebus, in the last days. In the latter days did Antiochus vex
the Jews, and in the last days shall Antichrist vex them and the Church.

When I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog.
God is said to be sanctified, when he manifests himself to be an holy and just
God, by inflicting punishment upon evil doers, whereby others are made to fear
and say, O what an holy, what a just, what a dreadful God is he who executes
such judgments! Ezekiel. 28.22. we had the same words.

First, Observe,

When Gods people are in Canaan, then have they safety.

In Babylon they had none, in Egypt they had none, in the Wilderness they had
little; but when in Canaan, then they had their greatest safety. In that day
when my people Israel dwells safely: They had a day, a time of safety, which
was when they were settled in Canaan. In Canaan was the Church; and where that
is in safety, there God is City, Walls, G^tes and Bars, himself: He is the
keeper of Israel, Ps. 112.4.5.

Secondly, Observe,

Th^se that design and attempt mischief against the people of God, they shall
experimentally know, that God is their Protector and the Revenger of their
wrongs.

Gog thought evil against Israel, and came up against it; And what says God,
shall thou not know it? This I Will make thee to know, that I am Isreal's Keeper,
and that thou have done wickedly to invade them. God made Senacherib know, what
it was to design and attempt evil against Jerusalem, when he smote 185000 of
his Soldiers in one night, Isa. 37.36. When the Ammonites, Moabites, and
Seirites, thought and attempted mischief against the Jews, viz. to cast them
out and possess their Land, did not God avenge his people of them, and manifest
himself to be their Protector, 2 Chronicles. 20.23, 24?

Thirdly, Observe,

The secret Plots and deep Designs of men, do at length break out into Action.

Gog had long thought of invading Israel, and at length he comes from his place
out of the North parts and puts his design into execution. Hidden things of
dishonesty sleep not always, they may be dissembled long, but at last they
issue into action. The Spanish-plot lay in the dark long, but at last it
visited our English Coasts; where they were made to see that their Armado was
not invincible. The Massacres of France and Ireland, were secret, though,
Plotts, at first, but in process of time they came to blood.

Fourthly, Observe.

The great enemies of the Church, have many Helpers and Adhaerents, and those
fitted to further their wicked Designs.

Gog had many people with him, and all of them riding upon Horses, a great
company and a mighty Army: so numerous they were, that like a Cloud they
covered the Land: So Antichrist now has many Assistants to promote his wicked
and bloody designs against the Saints. Rev. 19.19. I saw the Beast, and the
Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered together to make war against him
that sat on the Horse, and against his Army, that is, against Christ and his
Church.

Fifthly, Observe,

Though all people and Lands in the World be the Lords, yet some people and
Lands are his in a more peculiar manner.

Thou shall come up against my people, and against my land. Where God is owned,
his Ordinances and Worship set up, maintained in purity and power, His interest
and glory advanced; there is a people God calls his people, and a land God
calls His land; there God dwells, peculiarizing both People and Land to himself.

Sixthly, Observe,

God takes occasion from the attempts of the wicked, to execute his just
judgments upon them, and so to get glory to his Name even from Heathens.

Gog took occasion from the Jews weakness, (they were in unwalled Villages) to
invade and destroy them; and God takes occasion from his unjust invading the
Jews, to inflict dreadful judgments upon him and his, that the Heathen might
know him, when he should be sanctified in Gog: They seeing such just judgments
upon Gog, should fear the God of Israel, and learn righteousness. God is known
by executing of judgment, Ps. 9.16. Thereby he is known to be the most High
over all the Earth.

Verse. 17.
17 Thus says the Lord God, Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time by
my servants the Prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days many years,
that I would bring thee against them.


THe things concerning Gog, were neither Novelties, nor Incertainties, but such
as God foreknew would be, and the Prophets had Prophesied of, and that long
before; and not once or twice, but often, even many years. It is of grand
importance to inquire what Prophets h^ve spoken of Gog and his proceedings:
Some would have Moses to speak of him, Numb. 24.7. where it is said, his King
shall be higher then Agag, that is, Jacobs King shall be higher then Gog: The
S^ptuagint reads it Gog, and so does Symmachus, (...): His King shall be
exalted above Gog: Though Gog be great, yet shall he be greater. But in the
Original it is Agag, not Gog. Jerome has it Gog, and interprets it of
Antichrist. Some make David to be the Prophet prophesying of Gog, Ps. 9.5. Thou
have destroyed the wicked one; that is, thou shall destroy Gog, that, or the
wicked one, called by some Antichrist, whom Gog was a type of. To this accords
that in Isa. 11.4. With the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked; Gog in
the Type, and Antichrist in the Antitype, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Beside this place in
Isa. some fix upon Isa. 17.12, 13, 14. and make that a Prophecy of Gog. Some
took Ps. 68.14. When the Almighty Scattered Kings, i. e. Gog and Magog. Rivet,
in [Lat.] in locum. Jerem. 1 14. Out of the North an evil shall break forth
upon all the Inhabitants of the Land: It Is granted Gog was to come out of the
North quarters, v. 15. of this 38 of Ezekiel. and so was Nebuchadnezzar, Jer.
10.22. He speaks rather of Nebuchadnezzar, than of Gog: Moreover, his Prophecy
was but a little before Ezekiels days, and much of it in his days, whereas,
here it is said, Of whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the Prophets
of Israel: Others therefore referr it to the Prophecy of Enoch, mentioned Jude
14. who spoke of the Lords coming with 10000 of his Saints: but nothing of Gog
is there specified. That in Joel 3 is more satisfying as to the business in
hand, Viz. v. 2.9.11.14. I will gather all Nations, and will bring them down
into the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people,
and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the Nations, and
spoiled my Land, etc. This we may conceive was prophesied of Gog.

1. Because the Jews were to come out of Captivity into their own Land, before
this was done. It Is probable, that therefore Gog and the Nations conspired
together to invade and destroy them, because they were settled safely in their
Land, v. 1.

2. Because Gog was to fall upon the Mountains of Israel, to perish in the Land
of Judaea, Ezekiel 39.4. Thou shall fall upon the Mountains of Israel, thou and
all thy bands, and the people that is with thee. To which agrees that of Joel
3.12, 13. Let the Heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat:
for there will I sit to judge the Heathen round about; put ye in the sickle,
for the harvest is ripe, etc.

3. Because of the like effects. Ezekiel says, when Gog and his Army shall be
destroyed, there shall be a great shaking in the Land of Israel, v. 19. So Joel
3.15, 16. at the destruction of the Nations and their Princes, the Sun and the
Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining: The Lord
also shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heaven
and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the
strength of the Children of Israel.

If it be said, Joel is but one Prophet, and the Text speaks of Prophets, and
so of them, as if it were a common thing amongst them, to prophecy of or
against Gog. To this may be answered, that most of the Prophets might speak of
Gog, though they writ not of him; for, all which the Prophets prophesied, did
neither themselves nor others always pen; and here it is said, by whom I have
spoken, not by whom I have written: Moses spoke what was not written, Hebr.
11.24, 25, 26, 27. So Enoch, Jude v. 14, 15. as Christ himself did, Joh. 21.25.
By my servants, in Hebrew is, In or by the hand of my servants; and for, in
those days many years, it is in the days of those years they did prophecy of
Gog, that God would bring him upon the Jews.

First, Observe,

The Lord does infallibly k^ow things to come.

He revealed to the P^ophets of old this Gog here spoken of, hundreds of years
before he was; neither was God deceived, for in the time appointed, he came. He
whose understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. must needs know all things, past,
present, and to come; should any thing be unknown to God, his understanding
should not be infinite. Man's knowledge is borrowed from Creatures, to which he
gives neither being, nor operation; but, God's knowledge is from himself: He
knows all that is possible in his Power, and all that is future in his Will.
Creatures can neither be, nor operate, without Him. He has such clear vision
of all things, that his knowledge must needs be certain: Should he be deceived
in any particular, there should be darkness in him; but, He is light, and in
him there is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5.

Secondly, Observe,

The Prophets delivered many things which were not recorded.

The Prophets of Israel spoke of Gog, and yet we cannot find any direct
satisfying place in holy Writ, concerning him. In Mat. 27.9. you have words
cited for Jeremie's which you cannot find in all his Prophesies; the words are
these, Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying,
And they took the 30 pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom
they of the children of Israel did value. Matthew says not, that which was
written; but, that which was spoken. Jeremy had delivered these words, and many
other, doubtless, which are no where to be found. And if any ask, How came
Matthew by them? He had them by Tradition, say some; others, by Revelation,
which is safest to say. Solomon he spoke of Trees, from the Cedar-tree that is
in Lebanon, even unto the Hysop that springs out of the wall: He spoke also
of Beasts, and of Fowls, and of Creeping things, and of Fishes, 1 King. 4.33.
but what he said of these, is not to be found or known. Had not Paul helped us
to that blessed truth of Christ, It is more blessed to give than to receive,
Act. 20.35. we had never met with it.

Thirdly, Observe,

Those God sends to make known his mind to men, he owns, honors, and protects.

My servants the Prophets of Israel. Those had spoken against Gog, and made
known his mind, teaching him; God owns for his servants, honors them with this
Title, Prophets of Israel; and being his, he has a special care of them, Psalm.
105.15. Do my Prophets no harm. If the servants and Ambassadors of Earthly
Princes be honorable, and have protection from them; much more are the
servants and Ambassadors of the King of Glory honorable and under Divine
Protection. If David would not put up the wrong done to his servants he sent to
Hanun, 2 Samuel 10. Neither will God let the wrongs done to his servants the
Prophets of Israel go unpunished, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Fourthly, Observe;

Its not an accidental or casual thing, that enemies do come against the
Church.

The Lord brought Gog against this People, and the Prophets had prophesied many
years, that God would do so. They made it known to the world what God had
decreed to do. Gog could not have stirred or moved one foot toward the Land of
Israel, unless God had appointed and commanded it to be so, Lam. 3.37. Who is
he that says, and it comes to pass. When the Lord commands it not?

Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
18. And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the
land of Israel, says the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face.

19. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken: surely in
that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel.

20. So that the fishes of the sea, and the fouls of the heaven, and the beasts
of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the
men that are upon the face of the earth shall shake at my presence, and the
mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall
shall fall to the ground.

21. And I will call for a sword against him thorowout all my mountains, says
the Lord God: every man's sword shall be against his brother.

22. And I will plead against him with pestilence, and with blood, and I will
rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him,
an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire and brimstone.


THe time and manner of Gods proceedings with Gog, is set forth in these five
Verses.

Verse. 18. At the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel.
Time is not to be taken strictly for a day, or an hour; as if God should that
very day Gog set out, or invaded the Land, fall upon him by his judgments, and
destroy him; but largely, for the time of that enterprise, whilst he should be
upon that design, when he had filled up the measure of his iniquities.

My fury shall come up in my face.
Some read the words thus, My anger shall come up in my face; that is, I will
be furious, and manifest hot displeasure; for furor is fervor irae, the heat
and highth of anger. We read the words, My fury shall come up in my face. (...)
Af, signifies Anger, the face, the nose also, because Anger appears chiefly in
them. God speaking here after the manner of men, says, My fury shall come up
in my face. Luther by Fury or Anger, understands Gog himself, who was Vas Irae
Divinae, by whom God powered out wrath upon the Jews. Maldonate also makes the
Fury here mentioned, to be against the Church, but rather its against Gog; for
at the same time that Gog should come against Israel, at that time should Gods
fury come up in his face, he would be exceedingly displeased with Gog for
attempting the destruction of his people. And ver. 21. God will call for a
Sword against him.

Verse. 19. For in my jealousy, and in the fury of my wrath have I spoken.
The Lord being jealous over his people for their good; and seeing what
malicious designs Gog and his Confederates had against them, was provoked much
thereby, and said in his Jealousy and Fury; that is, Promised, or rather
Threatened the Destruction of Gog: and not only so, but confirmed it with an
Oath in the next words.

Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the Land of Israel.
These words Im lo carry the form of an O^th with them, as thus, If not, that
is if there be not a great shaking, let me not be God, let me not be faithful;
so sure as I am God and faithful, so sure and certain it is that there shall be
a great shaking in the Land of Israel, (...) raash signifies a Commotion, an
Earthquake, and in that day when Antiochus invaded Canaan, there was a great
commotion, a great shaking. And so there will be when Antichrist, who is Gog
mystical, shall invade the Church, which Maldonate says, will be in the end of
the world.

Verse. 20. So that the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Heaven, the
Beasts of the Field, and all creeping things that creep upon the Earth, and all
the Men that are upon the face of the Earth, shall shake at my presence.
Here is shown the greatness of his shaking, it should be such as should affect
and astonish all creatures, even the sensible and senseless. As Gog should come
like a storm, so Gods judgments should come upon him and his like a storm.
When storms are, the winds blow terribly, so that the Air and Fowls in it are
troubled, the Sea works and rages, so that the fishes in it are disquieted;
yea, some storms do so afflict the Earth, that Beasts, creeping things, and Men
themselves are made to quake. When God comes in a way of judgment, it is
grievous. All these expressions are ad significandam calamitatis vehementiam.
God would appear in some dreadful judgment against Gog, and thereby shake all.

The Mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall.
Sometimes in Scripture by Mountains are meant Men in eminent places, as Dan.
2.35. Isa. 40.4 Sometimes the Church and Kingdoms, as Isa. 2.23. But here some
take it literally, and affirm there should be such an Earthquake as should
shake down Mountains. Lavater by Mountains understands Towers built upon
Mountains, which then should be demolished. The word for steep places is
Hammadregoth, which Cant. 2.14. is translated stairs, the Septuagint has it
(...), valleys, the Vulgar is sepes, the fences; the translation* Vatablus
follows, says aggeres, Bulwarks. Piscator and the French say turres, Towers.
OEcolampad. and Lavater render it gradus, the steps, stairs, or ascents,
whereby they went up. Junius varies from them all, and turns the word
prcaeipitia, which is Steep places, by which he intends Rocks hanging as it
were in the Air. The sense is, that all Places of refuge and safety, seemed
they never so strong, should fail.

And every wall shall fall to the ground.
So terrible shall be the shaking, that the walls of Cities shall be
overthrown; all the Towers, Forts, and Defenses whatsoever, shall be levelled
with the ground and made useless. Some understand this of Gogs prevailing
against the Church, laying all waste, so that the people of God shall be in
that distress, till God come and execute judgment upon Gog and all his company.

Verse. 21. And I will call for a Sword against him throughout all my Mountains,
says the Lord God.
Sword here is put for Swordmen. God would call forth men, and stir up their
spirits to oppose Gog and his company, who filling all with fear, thought to
swallow up all; but throughout Judea, that mountainous Counrey, he should meet
with those would give check to his proceedings. Judas Macchabaeus, Jonathan,
Eleazer, and others, withstood Antiochus and his Forces, as you may see in the
Book of the Macchabees, and therein was this Prophecy made good say
Interpreters.

Every man's Sword shall be against his Brother.
Those of Gogs Army should, through the just judgment of God upon them, change
their thoughts, counsels, intentions; and, instead of killing their Enemies,
they should sheath their Swords in one another bowels. God would order it so,
that one should dest^oy another, as the Philistines did, 1 Samuel 14, 16. Behold,
the multitude melted away and they went on beating down one another, and Verse.
20. Every man's sword was against his fellow. They being full of discontent and
perplexity, thought it more honorable to dye then to fall into the hands of
Enemies.

Verse. 22. And I will plead against him with Pestilence and with Blood.
He shows here what judgments God would bring upon Gog and his Armies,
judgments from beneath, and judgments from above. The first sort here are
Pestilence and Blood, by the sword and slaughter. The Hebrew is, I will be
judged with him by Pestilence and Blood; they shall declare that I am a strong
and just God.

And I will rain upon him and upon his Bands, etc. an overflowing Rain, and
great Hailstones, Fire, and Brimstone.
The second sort of judgments are Rain, Hailstones, Fire, and Brimstone. These
words overflowing showers and great Hailstones, we had, Chap. 13.11, 13. In
the 10. of Joshuah, we read how God did cast down great Stones from Heaven upon
the Amorites, and slew more with Hail^tones then the Israelites slew with the
Sword, verse. 10. To this place it is conceived our Prophet alludes, foretelling,
that the Lord would deal with the Goggites as he did with the Amorites, sl^y
them with extraordinary great H^^lstones from Heaven; and not only so, but with
Fire and Brimstone, which is poena damnatorum, the punishment of the damned in
Hell, and was the punishment of Sodom and Gomorrha.

Some by these expressions understand manifold and grievous calamities, which
befell Gog and his; and will not have them to be understood literally, that so
the verification of them may fall upon Antiochus and his Forces, who suffered
very sad things: for he was smitten by God with an incurable and invisible
plague and torment in his bowels, he fell from his Chariot, and was bruised
with his fall; worms came out of his body in abundance, his rottenness and
stink was such as none could bear the same; and while he was alive his flesh
fell off for pain, 2 Macc. 9. Let it be granted that these words are not to be
taken literally, but metaphorically for heavy judgments befalling Gog and his,
it will not follow thereupon that Antiochus was the man, though he suffered
such grievous things: for it is said of Gog, that he should fall upon the
Mountains of Israel, he and all his Bands, that he and his slain should have
graves in Israel, Ezekiel. 39.4, 11. But as for Antiochus he dyed in his bed, and
that either in Babylon, as 1 Macc. 6. or at Ecbatane in India, as it is 2 Macc.
9. Neither was there any such vast destruction of Antiochus Forces, which came
into Judaea under Lysias, as these words hold out, and is more clearly
expressed in Chapter 39.12. Seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of
them. There must be a wonderful great slaughter which required so much time for
their burial. I conceive therefore, that these words may be taken in the
literal sense, and are yet to be fulfilled; and that induces so to judge, is,
what you have, Rev. 20.8, 9. where it is said, Satan shall gather Gog and Magog
together to battle, the number of whom is as the sand of the Sea, and they
went up on the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints
about, and the beloved City, and fire came down from Heaven and devoured them;
John saw this in Vision, and spoke of it as to come, and puts it after the
Saints rising and reigning a thousand years with Christ; That time being
expired, some grand Enemies shall arise against the Jews and people of God,
whom he will destroy, not only in an ordinary way, but miraculously also by
fire from Heaven.

First, Observe.

When wicked men are plotting and attempting the ruin of the Church, Gods
wrath is kindled against them.

When Gog comes up against the land of Israel, Gods fury comes up in his face.
Gog manifests himself to be an Enemy to Sion, and God manifests himself to be
an Enemy to Gog. Wicked men plot, act, proceed far oft-times, and afflict the
servants of God greatly; but, when they think to carry all, God appears, and
that in fury. In Nah. 1.2. it is said, He reserveth wrath for his Enemies; and
when they declare their enmity against him and his, he discovers his wrath
against them. Zerah had been long plotting against the Jews, at last he comes
against them with a thousand thousand, and three hundred Chariots, and thought
to devour Asa his Army and Land in a day, and whilst he had such
apprehensions, the Lord smote him before Asa, and Judah, 2 Chronicles. 14.8.12.

Secondly, Observe.

When mischief is intended against Gods people, his love and indignation are
manifested then; his love to his people, his indignation toward their Enemies.

In my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken. When Gogs Armies
were to harm the Jews, then was he jealous. In jealousy, there is ardent love,
and vehement indignation; the one is toward his people, the other toward them
that wrong his people. Zechar. 8. I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy,
and I was jealous for her with great fury. He had strong love to Zion, and
great fury against the Enemies of Zion; as a man has ardent love to his wife,
and indignation against any should offer her violence. God is jealous over his
Church, and therefore will never suffer it to be made a prey of, by the wicked.
Gods love, and indignation at such a time are so ardent, that he swears he will
be avenged on them that would wrong his, Surely in that day there shall be a
great shaking in the Land of Israel. Gog and all his Forces shall fall.

Thirdly, Observe.

The judgments of God are dreadful, they affect all Creatures, the Fishes of
the Sea, the Fowls of Heaven, the Beasts of the Field, all that creeps upon the
Earth; all men upon the face of the Earth shall shake; Mountains, Rocks, Walls,
shall fall.

This judgment upon Gog shall be such, as to astonish and trouble all sensible
and insensible creatures; so much of God shall be seen in it. When the Lord
destroyed Tyrus, it was a dreadful judgment, the Isles did shake at the sound
of her fall, the Princes of the Sea did tremble and were astonished, Ezekiel. 26.
But at the destruction of Gog, Heaven, Earth, Sea, all men, other creatures,
shall shake. There will be more of God seen in that judgment then in most
before; his presence, power, and severity will appear eminently in that
Judgment; it will speak aloud and fill the world with astonishment.

Fourthly, Observe.

God can easily raise Forces against his and the Churches Enemies, he can do it
without any trouble.

I will call for a Sword against him throughout all my Mountains; The Mountains
of Israel were the Lords, and all the Inhabitants of them, and if he did but
call, they came to his Standard presently. The Princes of the Earth find it an
hard business to get a great Army together, and wait long for it after great
consultation how to effect the same; but the Lord, only calls, and i^'s done,
He is the Lord of Hosts; he has command of spirits, and can with ease in a
little time gather a vast Army. The Centurion when he said to his servant,
Come, he came; and when God shall say to men, Come, they will come, they must
come, out of all parts, from all mountains.

Fifthly, Observe,

As God can easily gather Armies for the good of his Church; so he can as
easily ruin Armies which are against his Church: he can mingle a perverse
spirit amongst them, so divide them that they shall execute one another.

Every man's sword shall be against his brother. One Goggite should destroy
another; they thought to have destroyed Gods people, and they fell one upon the
other. 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. The children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, came
against Judah, and thought to destroy them, and take their possessions, but God
soon ruined their enemies, he set them one against another; for the children of
Ammon and Moab, stand up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir, utterly to slay
and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the Inhabitants of Seir,
every one helped to destroy another; the Ammonites destroyed the Moabites, and
the Moabites the Ammonites. This great multitude (for so they are called, ver.
2.) did the Lord cause to fall by their own swords. How easily did God scatter
the Army of the Syrians, which besieged Samaria! He made them to hear a noise
of Charets, and Horses, whereupon they fled for their lives, and left bag and
baggage, 2 King. 7.6, 7. Did not God at the prayers of a Christian Legion, in
the Army of Marcus Aurelius, Emperor, scatter and destroy that vast Army of
the Marcomanni and Quadi, which consisted of 977 thousand? He sent rain at the
same time to relieve the Emperors Army, which was in danger of perishing by
thirst; and also, thunder, lightning, and fiery hail, which ruined the enemies.
God can with great facility overthrow the greatest Armies.

Sixthly, Observe,

God has variety of means and ways whereby to destroy Armies, and punish
Enemies.

He has the pestilence, blood, an overflowing rain, great hailstones, fire and
brimstone, to do the same by. He had an Angel to destroy Sennacheribs Army,
Isa. 37.36. Stars to fight against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. The shining of the Sun
upon the water, undid the Moabites, 2 King. 3.22, 23, 24. The sound in the tops
of the Mulbery-trees did the Philistines no good, 2 Samuel, 5.24 God has Natural,
Casual, and Divine means, to plague his enemies with, though they be in great
Armies.

Seventhly, Observe,

Those who join with Great ones in wicked enterprises, must look to suffer
grievous things with them.

I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are
with him. They thought themselves safe under Gog, that they should get honor
and wealth in that enterprise; but, the undertaking was unwarrantable, Gog
could not justify his act, nor protect them: They were Co-actors in
wickedness, and so should be Co-sufferers. It Is dangerous to adhere to
Greatness in wicked designs. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be
unpunished, Prove. 11, 21. Let multitudes take Gog, and Great men by the hand;
let them follow their counsels, tread in their steps, do their wills; this
cannot secure them, they shall be punished. God is no respecter of persons, in
every Nation he that does wickedly, and they that join with him, shall be
punished.

Verse. 23.
23. Thus will I magnify my self, and sanctify my self; and I will be known
in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord.


THis Verse shows the end of Gods destroying Gog, and in such a manner, viz.
That God may be honored and known.

Thus will I magnify my self.
The Septuagint, and some others read the words passively, (...), I will be
magnified; but, Hith gaddilti, is, I will magnify my self, or, I will make my
self great; and that is done, when God does such things as declare his Power,
his Faithfulness, and his Justice; when the Lord should execute his dreadful
threatned-Judgements upon Gog, then his great Power would appear, that he had
the Command of all Creatures; that vast Armies are nothing to him: so, his
Faithfulness to his people, who owned him for their God, and his Justice in
destroying those would have destroyed his.

And sanctify my self.
God is not unholy or polluted at any time; but, he is said to Sanctify
himself, when he declares himself to be not Impotent, not Unfaithful, not
Unjust; but, a Powerful, Faithful, Righteous, and Holy God.

Observe.

The end of Gods judgments upon the wicked is, that he may be known and
acknowledged among the Nations, and so have a great and holy Name.

God is known by executing of judgments, Psalm. 9.16. Known not to be like unto
men, as they conceived, Psalm. 50.21. or, a God that sees not, as they said,
Ezekiel. 8.12. or, a God countenancing and preferring evill-doers, as they
affirmed, Mal. 3.15. But, to be a dreadful God, as when he visited Ananias and
Sapphira for their sins, Great fear came upon all that heard thereof, Act.
5.11. To be an holy God, as 1 Samuel 6.20. when he smote the Bethshemites, 50000
of them, with sudden death, it was said, Who is able to stand before this holy
Lord God, by his judgments he has made his Name dreadful among the Heathen!
What a great and holy Name did the Lord make to himself, by the destruction of
Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea?

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
1. Therefore, thou son of man prophecy against Gog, and say, Thus says the
Lord God, Behold, I am against thee, O'Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and
Tubal.

2. And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will
cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the
mountains of Israel.

3. And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows
to fall out of thy right hand.

4. Thou shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou and all thy bands, and
the people that is with thee, I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every
sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured.

5. Thou shall fall upon the open field, for I have spoken it, says the Lord
God.

6. And I will send a fire on Magog, and them that dwell carelessly in the
isles, and they shall know that I am the Lord.

7. So will I make my holy Name known in the midst of my people Israel, and I
will not let them pollute my holy Name any more, and the heathen shall know
that I am the Lord, the holy One in Israel.


EZekiel having begun a Prophecy concerning Gog and Magog, in the former
Chapter, he proceeds in this also therein, and tells you, 1. Of the severe
dealings of God with Gog, to the 25. ver. 2. Of his gracious favor and
goodness to his people, from the 25. to the end.


In these Verses, we have, 1. The great enemy of Gog, and author of his
overthrow, ver. 1. 2. The manner of it, ver. 2, 3, 6. 3. The place where it
should be, ver. 4, 5. 4. The greatness of it, ver. 4. 5. The certainty thereof,
ver. 5. 6. The end of God in so doing, ver. 7.


Verse. 1. Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and
Tubal.
These very words we had in the former Chap. ver. 2. and 3. He was a great
Prince, had great Command, many Confederates to take his part; yet, being
wicked and an enemy to Gods people, God declares himself to be an enemy to him.

Verse. 2. I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee.
These words, and leave but a sixth part of thee, are variously Interpreted.
Some say, I will kill five parts of thine Army, and leave but a sixth. Some, I
will seduce thee. Others, I will judge thee with six Judgments, viz. the
Plague, Blood, Rain, Hailstones, Fire, and Bimstone, as it is in the former
Chapter, ver. 22. The Hebrew Shis shethica, Montanus renders sextabo te, I will
sixth thee. For the meaning whereof, consider what has be said, Chapter 38.4. I will
turn thee back, and put hooks into thy chaws; the sense whereof was this, I
will not turn thee back, but bring thee out; and because of Objections,
Difficulties, and Remoraes, I will draw thee forth, I will put hooks in thy
chaws, and deal by thee as men do by fish in the Seas, or things fallen into
wells, draw thee out by hooks. The reason its conceived of this expression, is,
for that they used irons with six hooks upon them, to catch hold of things
fallen into waters, and to draw them out thereby. Hence it is, that the Lord
says, I will sixth thee, as the word signifies, or, draw thee out with hooks,
as the sense is.

And will cause thee to come up from the North parts, and will bring thee upon
the mountains of Israel.
Of Gog's coming from the North parts we heard, Chap. 38.15. God would cause
him to come out of those parts unto the Mountains of Israel; which we may take
Literally, though some do take them Metaphorically for the places where the
Church of God should be.

Verse. 3. And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and cause thine arrows
to fall out of thy right hand.
Bows and Arrows were much used in former days, both amongst the Jews and
Heathens also, as Isa. 66.19. Jer. 46.9. 1 Chr. 5.18. and when they handled
them, they held the Bows in their left hands, and Arrows in their right ones.
Now when these Goggites should attempt to shoot, and do execution by shooting,
God would disappoint them; causing a fear and faintness to fall upon them, so
that not only their Bows and Arrows, but all their Military Instruments, should
be useless; for by these mentioned, are meant all the rest: To smite or break
the Bow, imports the weakening of Forces, or making of warlike Instruments
inefficacious, as Psalm. 37.15. Psalm. 46.9. Hos. 1.5. Jer. 49.35. In these
places, Breaking of the Bow, notes, Blasting of their power, and making
frustrare all Military instruments.

Verse. 4. Thou shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou and all thy bands,
and the people that is with thee.
Not in places conspicuous to the whole Church, as some would have it; but in
the Land, and on the Mountains of Israel, which Antiochus Epiphanes did not, as
I showed formerly. And this verse gives warrant to depart from our Translation
of those words in the 2. verse, And leave but the sixth part of thee: For, Gog
and all his Bands, and Confederates were to fall upon the Mountains of Israel;
no sixth part of them were left.

I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of
the field to be devoured.
When great Armies are overthrown, sometimes their Carcasses lie unburyed, and
so are exposed to the fowls of heaven, and beasts of the field which pray upon
them; so should it be with Gog and his for a season: after they had layen a
season, they had burial, as appears, v. 11 The word for Ravenous bird is,
(...), Aiil, which signifies, a bird of prey, and differs from Tzippor, which
is, a small bird.

Verse. 5. Thou shall fall upon the open field.
The Hebrew says, Thou shall fall upon the faces of the field; that is, the
superficies, and so lie in open view. We had the same words in Chap. 16.5. and
32.4.

Verse. 6. And I will send a fire on Magog.
Some by Magog understand the Land of Gog: when Others, a distinct person and
Prince from Gog. Let Magog denote a Place or Person, God would send a fire, not
Metaphorical fire only, but Material fire, and so its said, Rev. 20.9.

And them that dwell carelessly in the Isles.
Pliny says, there be many Islands in the Scythian Sea, and it is likely such
people as dwell therein are careless, secure, fearing no dangers, yet God would
visit them with fire: But there be Islands nearer then those upon the Egae^n
and Mediterranean Seas which dwell confidently, as the word is.

Verse. 7. So will I make my holy Name known in the midst of my people Israel.
When great men go forth to War and obtain some eminent victory thereby they
become famous: so God by smiting Magog and all his Forces, would make his holy
Name known, that his people should confess him to be a holy God, and his Name a
Name of holiness; for so it is in the Original.

And will not let them pollute my holy Name any more.
When men say those things which are derogatory to the Name of God, as that he
sees not, he has forsaken the Earth, that he is unfaithful, unjust, etc. or do
such things as cause others to blaspheme and speak dishonorable of Himself,
his Word, Worship, and Providence; then are they said to pollute his holy
Name. After the destruction of Gog and Magog, God would order things so, that
his Name should not suffer.

First, Observe.

Those are Enemies unto the Church, God is an Enemy unto them.

Gog's thought and design was to invade the Land of Israel, and what says the
Lord, Behold I am against thee, O Gog; Had thou been a friend to my Church, I
would have been a friend to thee; but seeing thou art malicious and intendest
mischief against the Saints; lo I, even I the Lord of Hosts, that can shake
Heaven and Earth, and destroy the most puissant and politic Army in a moment,
am against thee. When thou touchest my people, thou touchest the Apple of mine
Eye, and I neither can nor will bear it, Exodus 23.22. I will be an Enemy unto
thine Enemies, and an Adversary unto thine Adversaries; Whoever set themselves
against Israel, have the God of Israel against them.

Secondly, Observe.

Wicked men may be in great honor and have great power.

Gog here, one whom the Lord declared himself against, was a Prince, a chief
Prince of Meshech and Tubal. Ahashuerus, an Heathen Idolater, had honor and
power enough, when he had 127. Princes under his command, Esther 1.1.

Thirdly, Observe.

There be seeming contradictions in holy Scriptures.

In one, God says, Behold I am against thee O Gog; In another, I will cause
thee to come up from the North parts, or sides, and will bring thee upon the
Mountains of Israel. God was with Gog, and against Gog; with him by his
Providence, to bring him forth to manifest his spleen and gall against the Land
of Israel; and against him, by his Power and Justice to destroy him for his
cruelty and bloudiness. Genesis 14.14. It Is said, Abraham pursued the Enemies unto
Dan. And Josh. 19.47. There was no Dan in Abraham's days, for it was so called
from Dan the son of Jacob, who was long after him; Moses who writ the Book of
Genesis, speaks of it as it was called in his days, not as it was called in
Abraham's days: Joh. 1 21. When John was asked the question whether he were
Elias, he said, I am not; but Mat. 11.14. Christ says of John, This is Elias
which was for to come; John denies himself to be Elias personally, which was
the sense of the Questionists, and Christ affirms that he was Elias mystically,
that Elias, Malachy spoke of chap. 4.5. There be many Scriptures seeming to
destroy one another; but if rightly understood, they do sweetly comply and
shake hands together.

Fourthly, Observe.

Gods hand is in the undertakings of Enemies against the Church.

I will cause thee to come and bring thee upon the Mountains of Israel; and if
thou lingerest, I have uncum seu avium, a sixth hooked-hook to draw thee. Wars
are not fortuitous but by a special hand of God; he brings forth Enemies as to
correct his Church by them, so to destroy them in the presence and view of his
Church, being corrected. Were not Gods hand there, they would ruin the Church,
and because his hand is in such things, therefore are they ruined. After
Pharaoh had afflicted the Jews the time appointed, God drew him on into the
Red Sea, and there, in the face and view of them, sunk him like lead into the
bottom of the deeps.

Fifthly, Observe.

It Is in the Lord to disable and disappoint Warriors when they are ready for
battle.

When Gog and his Soldiers should have the Bow in the left hand, and the Arrow
in the right hand, then I will smite the Bow out of the one, and the Arrow out
of the other hand, says the Lord. All military strength he can easily blunt,
and make all weapons of war inefficacious, he can take off the wheels of
Charriots, Exodus 14.25. He breaks the Bow, he blunts the Sword, and makes all
weapons formed against Israel unprosperous at his pleasure. Isa. 54.17. God
stopped Rhehoboam when he was going with a great Army to fight Jeroboam, and
bring the ten revolted Tribes to himself, 1 King. 12. God has often put such
fear into the hearts of Soldiers, that, when it has come to a pitched
Battle, they have presently thrown down their weapons and called for quarter.

Sixthly, Observe.

That in the same place where G d shows rich mercy to the godly, even there he
executes severe judgments upon the Enemies.

Thou shall fall upon the Mountains of Israel. Upon those Mountains in that
Land the Lord had showed mavelous kindness to his people, Psalm. 76 1, 2, 3,
4. and there should Gog fall. In the Red Sea God preserved the Israelites, and
destroyed the Egyptians; where the one met with signal mercy, there the other
had severe judgment; so Joel 3.2. I will gather all Nations, and will bring
them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my
people; God would punish them even there where he had done much for his, 2 Chronicles. 20 26. The Valley where Jehoshaphat blessed God for a Victory, it is
conceived to be here meant and called the Valley of J^hoshaphat. The powers of
darkness have often and still do invade the Mountains of Israel, the places and
persons among whom God does record his Name, and there God overthrows them.

Seventhly, Observe.

That Armies and others are exposed to public shame and miserable ends, is of
God.

Thou shall fall upon the open field, and I will give thee to the ravenous
Birds of every sort, and to the Beast of the field to be devoured. Want of
buryal is amongst Gods judgments, Jer. 8.2. and 14.16. To lie in open view
dead, and to be mangled, torn by Fowls, Beasts, Swine, and Dogs, is a
dishonorable and lamentable thing; but how dishonorable or lamentable so ever
it be, it is the Lords doings; He makes wicked Armies and Persons sometimes as
dung upon the face of the Earth; They lie unburyed, rotting and stinking.

Eighthly, Observe.

What the Lord speaks, that shall certainly take place.

Thou shall fall upon the open field, for I have spoken it, says the Lord God:
With God is not yea and nay; what he says, is truth, and must infallibly be
effected. As nothing can be done, unless the Lord speak; so nothing can fail of
being done when the Lord has spoken; Josh. 21.45. There failed not ought of
any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel: all came to
pass. God promised them to root out the Nations, to plant them in Canaan, and
to do much for them, and all God had spoken was made good; so, when God
threatens evil, whatsoever he speaks in that kind must be fulfilled, because he
is faithful and able to make good his word, whoever opposes.

Ninthly, Observe.

When God begins to visit the Enemies of his Church, he makes progress therein.

Not only shall Gog fall and all his Bands, and people, but God will send a
fire on Magog also, and upon the Isles that dwell carelessly: they thought
themselves invincible, being fortified by the Sea; but when God arises to
punish the Inhabitants of the Earth, who are Enemies to his, he goes from
Country to Country at Land, and from Isle to Isle at Sea. When God draws the
Sword, and gives it Commission, it proceeds from place to place, and is
restless till all at Sea and Land be cut off, who are numbered out for
destruction, Jer. 47.6, 7. O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere
thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still. How can it
be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Askelon, and against
the Seashore? there has he appointed it. God appoints the Sword to visit at
Land and at Sea: when he begins with the Enemies of his People, he will make an
end with them.

Tenthly, Observe.

When God shows mercy to his Church, and destroys the Enemies of it, then he
provides for his own honor, sanctifies his Name, and makes himself to be
known, distinct from all other gods.

When the Jews Church shall be at peace, Gog and Magog be destroyed, then God
will be glorious, all speak honorable of him, and acknowledge him to be the
holy One of Israel. When God led the Israelites through the Red Sea, and took
off the wheels of the Egyptian Chariots, the Egyptians said, Let us flee from
the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians. Here
they acknowledged Gods power, and that he was a God distinguished from all
their Idol-gods; a God fulfilling his promises and threats, a God able to save
and destroy, even the Holy one of Israel.

Verse. 8.
Behold, it is come, and it is done, says the Lord God, this is the day
whereof I have spoken.


HEre the certainty of Gog's overthrow, and the rest, with the time thereof is
pointed out, It is come, it is done, i e. This Prophecy is so certain, as if
it were come and done already. It Is usual among the Hebrews to put
preter-tenses for future, and to speak of things as past, which are certainly
to come.

This is the day whereof I have spoken.
God had spoken of Gog and Magog by his Prophets formerly, as was showed from
the 17. verse of the 38. Chapter, that they should come against Israel, and
utterly be destroyed in that attempt: which the Lord speaking of here as done,
says, This is the day, not designing the prefixed day when it should be; It
shall be, but when, that is hid.

First, Observe.

There is a certain time determined for the destruction of the Churches
Enemies, which God looks upon as present, and done.
Behold, it is come, it is done; that is, the day of Gog and Magog's ruin. God
fore-sees things to come as if they were present, not by a presence of
Existency from Eternity; but, in his Decree: on that, his foreknowledge and
the certainty of things is founded; we should therefore firmly believe the
same, and not give way to dubious opinions thereabout.

Secondly, Observe.

The particular time is hidden from m^n, and known only unto God.
M^n cannot say, This is the day, but the Lord can; He knew the very moment
when Gog and his should be destroyed, and the Church set at liberty. The thing
and time indefinitely were revealed to the Prophet, but not the particular
punctual time. The Lord kept that in his own breast, his Infinite Wisdom saw it
not meet to particularize the time; the Prophets had spoken of a day that would
be for Gog's invading the Land of Israel, and of his falling upon the Mountains
thereof, but the exact time they knew not. John, unto whom the Lord Christ
revealed much, tells you, that after 1000. years reign of the Saints with
Christ, it shall be, Rev. 20.7, 8, 9.

Verse. 9, 10.
9. And they that dwell in the Cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set
on fire and burn the Weapons, both the Shields and the Bucklers, the Bows and
the Arrows, and the Hand-staves* and the Spears; and they shall burn them with
fire seven years.

10. So that they shall take no Wood out of the Field, neither cut down any out
of the Forests: for they shall burn the Weapons with Fire, and they shall
spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, says the Lord
God.


THe great victory over Gog and Magog, begins in these verses, which is set out
by the burning of the Weapons, and spoiling them of their Goods. Who gate the
victory, is not mentioned; it is only said, the Jews shall go out of their
Cities and g^ther up the weapons, and burn them, etc. It Is conceived, the Lord
will deal with Gog and his Forces in some extraordinary way. Verse. 3. it is
said, I will smite the Bow out of thy hand. And Rev. 20.9. Fire came down from
God out of Heaven, and devoured them; but notwithstanding Gods extraordinary
dealing with them, the Jews were used of the Lord in this victory, for Chap.
38.21. I will call for a Sword against him throughout all my Mountains, says
the Lord God: so that all Israel shall be in the field against him, and be the
Conquerors.

Verse. 9. They that dwell in the Cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set
on fire and burn the Weapons.
After this great and famous Victory, the Citizens which dwell in the Cities of
Israel will go forth, Visendi and Spoliandi gratia, to see the slain, and to
get spoil; and among other things, they should take of their Weapons, and make
themselves Fire thereof. The word for Weapons is (...), Neshek, which notes any
kind of Weapon to oppose the Enemy. It Is not from nasak, to burn; but from
noshak, to ^rm.

Both the Shields and the Bucklers, the Bows and the Arrows, and the
Hand-staves and the Spears.
These latter were combustible; but how they should burn the Shields and
Bucklers, is not apparent, they being of solid metals. It Is like, something
combustible was annexed unto them.

And they shall burn them with Fire seven years.
It must needs be a numerous, or rather numberless Army, whose weapons should
suffice the Jews seven years for fireing. John says, their Number shall be as
the sand of the Sea, Rev. 20.8. which exceeds all Arithmetic. Some make it an
Hyperbolical expression, to show the greatness of their overthrow, and
multitude of their warlike Instruments. Others mind us of a certain time, put
here for an uncertain, viz. seven years put for a long time. The Jewish Writers
do take the words literally, concluding they shall have such a Victory over
their Enemies, as that for seven years they shall need no other materials to
burn then their weapons; and think their Messiah not come, because they have
not yet obtained such a Victory. Sanctius thinks not, that they were seven
years in burning the weapons, but that they had such store which might have
served them for seven years fuel; great store, and therefore it is said, they
should burn them with fire seven years. How this was verified in Antiochus, is
hard to show. It Is nearer to truth, to judge that this Scripture remains still
to be fulfilled.

Verse. 10. So that they shall take no Wood out of the Field, neither cut down
any out of the Forests.
These words taken absolutely, do strengthen the literal acceptance of the
former. We may take them comparatively thus, That in respect of what they did
use to take out of the Field, and cut out of the Forest, they should now cut
and take little: And why?

For they shall burn the Weapons with Fire.
They should so supply them for fuel, that little other wood should serve. This
burning of Enemies Weapons conduces much to peace. Where warlike weapons are
broken and burnt, not reserved; there Wars cease and Peace follows.

They shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them.
It Is incident to all People and Nations to spoil and rob the People of God;
and so these Goggites and their Confederates, they compassed the Camp of the
Saints, and the beloved City, says John, Rev 20.9. In all ages, the Church
has been made a prey of by one or other; but the time shall be when it shall
spoil her spoylers, and rob her robbers.

First, Observe.

God will give Victories to his Church and People, which seem incredible.

Here is pointed out such a Victory as is full of wonders and matters
incredible. Their number is as the Sand of the Sea, and all of them Horsemen,
and clothed with all sorts of Arms, Chap 38.4. yet conquered. Their weapons
serve for seven years firing, and their bodies are seven months in burying, as
it follows in verse. 12. Will not this be a wonderful Victory? Do not these
things seem incredible? God of old g^ve great and strange V ctories to his
People, as the drowning of Pharaoh in the Red Sea; the slaying of Senacherib's
vast Army in a night by an Angel. Great Victories, since Christ his time, have
been. The Christians have had signal Victories against the Turk: And Sanctius
tells you of a wonderful Victory which the Spaniards had against the Saracens,
when at one Battle they slew two hundred thousand of them, and lost but twenty
five men; but when ever this overthrow of Gog shall be, it will exceed all
former Victories.

Secondly, Observe.

The Lord makes that advantageous to his People, which their Enemies intended
to damnifie and ruin them by.

The Bows, Arrows, Hand-staves and Spears, shall serve the Saints for fuel with
which the Goggites thought to destroy them. The Sword of Goliath with which he
thought to have slain David, and many Israelites was afterward given into the
hand of David, and serviceable unto him, 1 Samuel 21 9. The wise and wonderful
Providence of God so overrules and orders things, that it makes Instruments of
death the comforts of life. The Chariots of Sisera* that came for destruction,
were to the Jews for use and recreation.

Thirdly, Observe.

After the overthrow of Gog and M^gog, Antichrist and his Adherents; the
Church of God shall have great peace.

All their weapons of war shall be burnt; they shall make head no more against
the Saints. After the devouring of Gog and Magog by fire from Heaven, Rev.
20.9. The gates of the New Jerusalem were never shut, Rev. 21.25. They feared
no Enemies, they had great peace.

Fourthly, Observe.

The People of God shall have a day of recompense for the wrongs and injuries
they have sustained.

They shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them. The
Goggites of the world do fleece the Servants of God, eat their flesh, suck
their blood, and gnaw their bones; but the day is coming, when the wicked shall
be a spoil and prey unto them; which sets out the righteousness of God in his
ways and judgments. What can be more equal then that he who spoils, should be
spoiled? See Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest and thou wast not spoiled;
and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when
thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an
end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

Verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
11. And it shall come to pass, at that day, that I will give unto Gog a place
there of graves in Israel, the Valley of the passengers on the East of the Sea:
and it shall stop the Noses of the Passengers, and there shall they bury Gog
and all his multitude, and they shall call it, The Valley of Hamon-Gog.

12. And seven months shall the House of Israel be burying of them, that they
may cleanse the Land.

13. Yea, all the people of the Land shall bury them, and it shall be to them a
Renown, the day that I shall be glorified, says the Lord God.

14. And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the
Land, to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the Earth,
to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.

15. And the passengers that pass through the Land, when any sees a man's bone,
then shall he set up a sign by it, till the Buryers have buried it in the
Valley of Hamon-Gog.

16. And also the name of the City shall be Hamonah: thus shall they cleanse
the Land.


HAving spoken of the great overthrow which Gog and his should have, and the
great spoil the Israelites should get thereby: Now the buryal of the dead
carcasses and their bones, comes under consideration; where we have the place
of the buryal, the time how long they shall be burying, the persons by whom the
name of the place.

Verse. 11. And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will give unto Gog a
place there of Graves in Israel.
When Gog and his Forces shall be slain, lie exposed to the Fowls of Heaven,
and Beasts of the Field for a season; then will the Lord give unto them a
burying place: they shall not always lie putrefying above ground, but they
shall be laid in graves; so that they shall neither be a prey to Fowls and
Beasts, nor offensive to Man always. This was favor, that God should give his
Enemies Sepulchers in Israel. The Vulgar and Septuagint have it, A place of
Name or Renown, putting Shem for Sham. It was honor enough for them to have
graves there in Israel. This honor had not Antiochus.

The Valley of the Passengers on the East of the Sea.
What Valley this was, is not agreed upon by Interpreters. Some affirm it to be
a Valley near unto the Lake of Gennezareth, or Sea of Tiberias; others inform
us it is about Jordan; some say it is on this side Jordan, some say on that side.
It Is most probable to be a Valley near the Salt or Dead-Sea, where the five
Cities, Admah, Zeboim, Segor, Sodom and Gomorrah, were consumed by Fire and
Brimstone; now called Lacus Asphaltites. There, as Junius notes, men passed
from Syria, Mesopotamia, Babylon, and other Countries, into Arabia foelix, and
Egypt: whereupon it was called the Valley of Passengers, and lay Eastward from
Jerusalem, as the next words show; on the East of the Sea, that is, on the
Eastern Sea. The Sea of Tyberias lay Northward, but Mare M^^tuum lay Eastward.

And it shall stop the Noses of the Passengers.
Such a stink shall be in that Valley as shall cause the Passengers to stop
their Noses or Mouths, or both. The Spirit of God may have some respect unto
the Lake Asphaltites, which sent forth poisonous and suffocating vapors: so
should the dead bodies of Gog and his, send out such a loathsome infecting
savor, as Travailers should stop their Noses as not being able to endure the
same.

There shall they bury Gog and all his multitude.
Though Gog had a buryal in the Land of Israel, yet it was not in the
Sepulchers of the Kings or Prophets; it was in the Valley of Passengers, near
the place of Gods remarkable judgment upon the sinful Cities.

And they shall call it, The Valley of Hamon-Gog.
In Jeremy, you read of a Valley of Slaughter, Jer. 19.6. Chap. 7.32. and it
was so called from the persons slain there by Nebuchadnezzars Forces, when
Jerusalem was besieged, and taken: And here is a Valley called the Valley of
Hamon-Gog, that is, of the multitude of Gog: so great a multitude were slain
and buried there, as gave denomination to the Valley. This Valley, Joel in his
days was pleased to call, The Valley of Decision or Threshing, as the word
Rechamte imports, Joel 3.14.

Verse. 12. And seven Months shall the House of Israel be burying of them.
Not some few, but the House of Israel, who were a great number, should be
employed seven Months in burying of them, which sets out the greatness of the
Victory; such a number slain as should set many thousands on work so long to
bury them: seven years in burning their weapons, and seventh months in burying
their dead. If a certain number be put here for an uncertain, as some will have
it, yet they were a long time about this work.

That they may cleanse the Land.
When a multitude are slain, their putrified bodies are apt to corrupt the Air
and Earth, and so to endanger the living. The Israelites therefore to prevent
such a mischief shall take great pains to bury them, and that without any
intention of honoring the dead thereby: When men bury the dead, usually it is
for an honor to them, but not so here; the end was, to cleanse the Land, which
was defiled with the Carcasses of these Goggites.

Verse. 13. Ye all the people of the Land shall bury them.
Before, he had said, the House of Israel; now he adds, all the men of the
Land: Some should give counsel, some should dig the graves or pits, and some
should bring and put the dead bodies into them. Some understand by the House of
Israel, and people of the Land, Christian people; who shall extinguish the name
of Antichrist, and bury it with all his stinking Errors, in the Grave of
Oblivion: and that they make the sense, of burying Gog and his.

And it shall be to them a Renown.
The Hebrew is, for a Name; They shall be renowned for this Victory, and for
their Humanity in burying of the dead. Their Enemies shall speak honorably and
well of them.

The day that I shall be gloryfied.
The Tigurine Translation has it thus; That day, wherein I shall be glorified,
shall be famous unto them; they shall have cause to remember that day for ever.
What day I shall destroy Gog and Magog with all their Forces, and so get glory
to my self, that day shall be a day of Name, of Renown, and of Memorial unto
them; that day shall be put into their Chronicles. The Hebrew stands thus, In
the day of Me to be glorified: and so may point at their glorifying God for
that great destruction of their Enemies.

Verse. 14. And they shall sever out men of continual employment.
Gog, and his, being beaten; diverse were scattered up and down the Land, and by
reason of their wounds, fell and lay unburyed in many places; whereupon they
chose out men of continuance, (so the Hebrew is,) who might go up and down from
one part of the Land to the other, to find out the dead.

To bury with the Passengers those that remain upon the face of the Earth, to
cleanse it.
As those Searchers went up and down, they met with Passengers, whom they
caused to assist them in the buryal of the dead they found. It Is probable, they
made the Passengers to take the bodies or bones of the dead, and to bury them;
because it was matter of defilement unto the Jews to touch dead bodies, Numb.
19.11. They that did so, were unclean seven days. These being to cleanse the
Land, would not defile themselves.

After the end of seven Months, shall they search.
Seven Months were the people of the Land in burying their Enemies, they were
busied about those that fell by heaps; When these Months were at an end, they
sent out their Searchers to examine Woods, Hills, Caves, Valleys, Highways,
and Ditches, where any dead corpse might lie; so careful were they to prevent
Infection.

Verse. 15. When any sees a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it.
Some bodies lying long, the Fowls of the Heaven, or Beasts of the Field
devoured their flesh, eat their bones, and left some fragments of them, which
if the Passengers and Searchers found, they were to set up a sign or mark by
them, to give notice thereof. Man's bone, is a singular number, put for a
plural, Men's bones. The word a sign is Tzijan, which signifies a Statue, a
Title, or Sign, setting near to a Grave, or a Way-mark; as Jer. 31.21. Set thee
up way-marks; the word is Tzijunim, and they were to direct people; so here,
They set up signs to direct the buryers what to do concerning those bones.

Till the Buryers have buried it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
Those appointed to bury, were to take the bones of men so discovered, and to
carry them to the Valley of Ham^n-gog, and bury them there. There were the
multitude of the slain buried, which gave that denomination to the place; and
with them, must the scattered and collected bones be buried.

Verse. 16. Also the Name of the City, shall be Hamonah.
What City shall be so called, is not set down; and therefore Interpreters do
vary thereabouts. Some believe there was a City near that Valley which had
another name, and upon this occasion of slaying Gog and his multitude, lost
that, and had this imposed by Hamonah, Her multitude; because a multitude of
Enemies were slain therre. The Septuagint calls it (...), Upon occasions names
have been given to places, as appears, Genesis 16.13. Chapter 26.20, 21, 22. Act,
28.19. Hos. 4.15. 2 Samuel 5.9. Chap. 6.8. Others judge this City to be
Jerusalem, reading the words thus, And her multuitde shall be a Name, (or for a
Name) to the City; so Junius: Or, The Name of the City shall be from her
Multitude; that is, the City Jerusalem; or, the Church shall be famous for her
Inhabitants, which slew such a multitude of Goggites: so Piscator. This sense
has more of truth in it then the other; for we find not any City called
Hamonah, since this Prophecy: yet those of that opinion say, It was fulfilled
in the time of Antiochus.

Thus shall they cleanse the Land.
The words are read by some, After they have cleansed the Land; by others, When
they have cleansed the Land, which is the same for sense. Gods giving them so
great a Victory over such a multitude of Enemies, and their not abusing, but
cleansing the Land after it, should be to them for a name, for their great
glory and renown.

First, Observe,

God disappoints the expectation of the wicked while living, yet sometimes
affords favor when they are dead.

Gog, and all his, expected to have had the Land of Israel in possession, with
all the desirable things thereof: but God disappointed his expectation; slays
him and his; and after death, gives him and the rest a place of buryal in that
Land; which was favor. Though they had not what they hoped for, yet they had
more then they deserved; for such grand Enemies to have a burying place in that
Land, which was Emanuel's Land, out of which they would have driven his people,
was no small favor; especially, if we add to it, that the place was named
after his name, The Valley of Hamon-Gog, and this recorded in the Book of God,
and to remain forever.

Secondly, Observe,

After great Victories, wherein many are slain, people should for public good
be careful to bury the dead; though it require time, be troublesome, and
chargeable.

Here they were seven months in burying the dead carcasses; they appointed men
to go throughout the Land to search for corpse and bones, which was a chargeable
business; and wherever they found any, to bring them unto the Valley of
Hamon-Gog, which was very troublesome, These things they were to do for public
good, that the Land might not be infected with those bodies, and so infect the
living.

Thirdly, Observe,

By great Victories over Enemies, God honors his own Name, and makes his
people to have a name.

It shall be to them a Renown, the day that I shall be glorified. That day, my
Power, my Faithfulness, my Justice, my Mercy, will be seen, acknowledged, and
so I shall be praised, made glorious; And in that day my People will be spoken
of for their Valor, Faith, and Humanity in burying the dead, and so will be
renowned. When God destroyed Senacherib's Army, God did not only make himself a
name, but he also made Hezekiah a name, 2 Chronicles. 32.23. He was magnified in the
sight of all Nations from thenceforth: and that which was his magnification,
was the magnification of all his People. The honor of the Head is the honor of
the whole Body: How renowned will New Jerusalem be, when Gog and Magog,
Antichrist and all that adhere to them, shall be taken away? When the Lord
shall destroy them by fire from Heaven, and multitudes be cut off by the Sword,
then shall those multitudes be for a name to the City.

Fourthly, Observe,

After conquering, there ought to be cleansing.

When Gog and his shall be subdued, then they must cleanse the Land; not a dead
corpse, not a bone must be left in it; such things did defile: We have had many
Victories; but, What cleansing has there been in this Land? Dead bodies,
limbs, and bones, of men have been buried; but, What dead works are cleansed
out of this Land? Do not all sorts of sins abound, yea, super-abound? Had we
cleansed the Land, for each Victory God has given us, but of one common sin;
by this time we had been spotless, we should not have had any visible
iniquities amongst us; but now we are like Golgotha, a place of sculls and
dead-men; like Sodom and Gomorrah, or the Valley of Hamon-Gog; we stink so
through our Blasphemies, Errors, and wicked Practices, that passengers stop
their noses, and shake their heads.

Verse. 17, 18, 19, 20.
17. And thou son of Man, Thus says the Lord God, Speak unto every feathered
Fowl, and to every Beast of the Field; Assemble themselves, and come, gather
themselves on every side to my Sacrifice that I do Sacrifice for you, even a
great Sacrifice upon the the Mountains of Israel, that ye may eat Flesh, and
drink Blood.

18. Ye shall eat the flesh of the Mighty, and drink the blood of the Princes
of the Earth; of Rams, of Lambs, and of Goats, of Bullocks, all of them
fatlings of Bashan.

19. And ye shall eat Fat till ye be full, and drink Blood till ye be drunken,
of my Sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.

20. Thus shall ye be filled at my Table with Horses and Chariots, with Mighty
men, and with all men of War, says the Lord God.


THese Verses speak of a great Feast, and the Invitation of Guests unto the
same: strange Guests! the Fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the Field: And
they have as strange Dishes provided for them, even the flesh of Mighty men and
Princes.

Verse. 17. Speak unto every feathered Fowl, and to every Beast of the Field.
The Hebrew for every feathered Fowl, is, Lezippor col canaph, To the Fowl of
every wing; that is, to what Fowl soever has wing, Let that Fowl be invited to
come and eat of the Feast prepared; and likewise, Every Beast of the Field,
which is a Beast of prey.

Assemble themselves, and come, gather themselves on every side.
The Fowls and Beasts being void of reason, could not understand what the
Prophet said; but God who had command over them as well as other creatures,
would cause them to come, as if they had had reason and understanding. This
shows the certainty and greatness of the Victory; the Fowls and Beasts are
called to come, and their coming shall not be in vain, they must come on every
side, and therefore great provision shall be made for them.

To my Sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great Sacrifice upon the
Mountains of Israel.
The Hebrew word for Sacrifice (...) Zebach, which signifies Sacrificium ex
mactata pecude: When a Beast was killed and to be offered up to God, that was a
Sacrifice properly. Sometimes it notes the killing of Men and Beasts, as here,
which metaphorically is called a Sacrifice: Gog with his Men and Horses were
slain, and these God calls his Sacrifice; a great Sacrifice which he prepared
for the Fowls and Beasts; a great Feast or Supper, and the place where this
should be, is, upon the Mountains of Israel.

That ye may eat Flesh and drink Blood.
In the former verse, he spoke of Gog's Funeral, and those that were slain with
him, even the dead bodies and the bones: How is it now that he speaks, of
eating their Flesh, and drinking their Blood, after the seven Months were
expired, and the Searchers had gone through the Land? It Is not probable, that
some were left unburyed, and so the Fowls and Beasts i^^^ted to eat their flesh
and drink their blood; but having touched a little upon this in the 4. v. he
re-assumes the Argument again in this, and the three next Verses, and speaks
more fully to it.

Verse. 18. Ye shall eat the Flesh of the Mighty.
The Septuagint says (...), of Giants, by these Mighty men, or Giants, the
Chief ones in the Army are pointed out, men of Power and Command.

And drink the Blood of the Princes of the Earth.
In this vast Army of Gog, there were the Princes of diverse Countries his
Confederates, Chap. 38.5.6. Their blood should the Fowls of Heaven and Beasts
of the Earth drink, being shed and spilt upon the ground. They should feed upon
not the vile and base ones, but the chiefest, and so drink their blood.

Of Rams, of Lambs, and of Goats; of Bullucks, all of them Fatlings of Bashan.
By these Metaphorical expressions are set out the dead carcasses of men, who
were of several dispositions and qualities: some were like Rams and Lambs;
others like Goats and Bullocks; some were sweeter and more tender flesh then
others. Rams and Goats, or great Goats, as the Hebrew word signifies, were
Leaders; Lambs, and Bullocks, were those under the Leaders. All of them were
well fleshed and fat like the Kine of Bashan. Bashan was an high Hill, Psalm.
68.15. beyond Jordan, which yielded strong Oaks, and fat Cattle, Ezekiel. 27.6.
Amos 4.1.

Verse. 19. And ye shall eat Fat till ye be full, and drink, etc.
The Fowls of Heaven and Beasts of the Field are resembled unto Men at a F^^st;
where having meat and drink which likes them, (...) eat and drink plentifully.
The fat, flesh, and blood of men is sweet; and so pleasing to Fowls and Beasts,
which should cram and fill themselves therewith.

Verse. 20. Thus ye shall be filled at my Table.
The word for Table is Shulcan from Shalach, to send, because it is sent out, or
extended at length: so that it may contain many dishes, and guests may sit down
thereat to feed upon those dishes. The Mountains of Israel were the Table here,
the Carcasses of Men were the Dishes, the Fowls of Heaven, and Beasts of the
Field the guests. Such plenty and variety of dishes they should have, as had
not been seen at any Table before; every Guest should be filled.

With Horses and Chariots, with Mighty Men, and all Men of War.
In the Hebrew it is, With Horse, with Chariot, with Mighty Man, and all Man of
War, all singulars, put for plurals; here is declared, who are meant by Rams,
Lambs, Goats, and Bullocks in the 18. verse, Horsemen, Chariot-men, Men of
Might, yea, all Men of War.

Says the Lord.
Lest it should be thought an incredible thing, the Lord ratifies it, saying,
Thus says the Lord God. Jehovah, who is able to make such preparations for the
Fowls of Heaven, and Beasts of the Earth, has said it, and will do it.

First, Observe,

That all Creatures are at the command of God, and ordered to do this or that,
according to his wise Providence.

Speak to every feathered Fowl, and to every Beast of the Field; Were not these
creatures at the beck of the Lord, and subject to his overruling Providence,
it had been in vain for Ezekiel to have spoken so unto them? In the 1 King.
17.4. God commanded the Ravens to feed Elijah, and they did come and bring him
meat; Morning and Evening duly, v. 6. Psalm. 50.11. It Is said, God knows all the
Fowls of the Mountains; and he calls them to what service he pleases; He called
tor Quails to satisfy the lustings of the Israelites, Numb. 11.31. God asked
Job the question, Whether the Eagle moun-fed up at his command, Job 39.27.
implying, that though man has no command over the Fowls of Heaven, yet himself
has. And so over Fishes and Beasts, Jon. 1.17. Chap. 2.10. The Whale came and
went at Gods command, and did the service he appointed. Levit 26.22. I will
send wild Beasts amongst you, which shall rob you of your children; And this he
did, 2 King. 2.24 The Lord caused two shee-Bears to come out of the Wood and
destroy 42. of their children. God is the Lord of Hosts, and can command an
Army of Creatures at his pleasure, to benefit his Servants, or to plague their
Enemies.

Secondly, Observe,

God does execute some great and signal Judgment, when he summons the
Creatures to eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Slain.

Oft-times the Bodies of Jews and Gentiles have been given for meat unto the
Fowls and Beasts, as Jer. 7 33. and Chap. 34.20. Ezekiel. 29.5. But they have not
been summoned and called by open Proclamation, as here it is: The Prophet must
speak to every feathered Fowl, and to every Beast of the Field, and say,
Assemble your selves, and come, Gather your selves on every side. Such a
Proclamation you have but twice more in all the Scripture, once in Jer. 12.9.
Come ye, assemble all the Beasts of the Field, come to devour; he speaks of
that great destruction of the Jews by Nebuchadnezzar. The other place is, Rev.
19.17. I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, Come and gather your
selves together, to the great Supper of the great God, that ye may eat the
flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the fl sh of Mighty Men, and the
flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them; and the flesh of all men, both
free and bond, both small and great. This place runs parallel with Ezekiel, and
sets out the greatness and signalness of Gods Judgments upon the Enemies of
the Church: And it is conceived by some to be the very same Judgment Ezekiel
speaks of, viz. that of Gog and Magog.

Thirdly, Observe,

It Is matter of delight and pleasure unto God, to destroy the Enemies of his
Church and People.

Come to my Sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you. The Jews took great pleasure
in sacrificing of Creatures unto God, 1 Chronicles. 29.21, 22. And God was well
pleased with Sacrifices, Genesis 8.20, 21. Here he calls the destroying of Gog and
Magog his Sacrifice, his Feast, or Table; he took as much delight in their
slaughter as in any Sacrifice, or in any Feast. Wicked men are Briars and
Thorns, and God has as much pleasure in the cutting down the one, as the
Husbandman has in cutting down the other. God delights in acts of Judgment,
as well as in acts of Mercy, Isa. 48.14. He will do his pleasure on Babylon,
and his arm shall be on the Chaldaeans; The destruction of Babylonians and
Chaldaeans, God calls, His pleasure; the Hebrew is Chephzo, Voluntatem ejus,
his will. It Is Gods will to destroy all the Enemies of Sion; and the doing of
it pleases him.

Fourthly, Observe,

God is impartial in his Judicial Dispensations, he punishes the great
Delinquents as well as the lesser.

Mighty men, Princes, those that ride in Chariots; Rams, great Goats, are
slaughtered and given to the Fowls, and Beasts, as well as the inferior sort,
the men of War, Lambs and Bullocks; They were all in the same confederacy, in
the same war against the Land of Israel; and God winked not at the greatest,
nor spared the meanest, but made them all a Sacrifice. God is a righteous God,
and executes his judgments without respect of persons. Let not great men
flatter themselves, they will not be exempted when God comes forth to
judgment, though they be Princes.

Fifthly, Observe,

Great men, and vulgar ones also, may be a prey to the Creatures, and lie
without burial for a season.

Princes, Mighty men, and others, after their death, lay upon the Mountains of
Israel, and had their flesh eaten, and blood drunk by Fowls and Beasts, which
was another judgment added to the former; and the greater to the Heathen,
because they thought their souls did wander up and down upon the Earth, nisi
corpora fuissent humata, as Tertullian says. The Athenians had the buryal of
the dead in such honor, that if a Captain neglected to bury the dead which
fell in war, they punished him with death for it. It is a great ignominy to
lie unburyed. Hence the Beast, when the Witnesses were killed, would not suffer
their bodies to be buried, but let them lie in the Streets, that so they might
be the more ignominious.

Sixthly, Observe,

God provides for the brute and dumb Creatures, and that abundantly.

Every feathered Fowl, and every Beast of the Fi^ld shall be filled at my
Table. God does not only feed the Creatures, but sometimes feasts them. This
World is Gods Family, whercin are millions of living Creatures, and not one of
them is neglected of God, Psalm. 145.15, 16. The Eyes of all wait upon thee, and
thou give them their meat in due season; they have their Breakfast, Dinner,
and Supper; and lest we should conceit, one has too much, another too little,
it follows; Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing; he satisfies the Fishes of the Sea, the Beasts of the Earth, and Fowls
of Heaven. How should this teach men to depend upon God, not giving way to
distrust, or discontent, Matthew. 6.26. Behold the Fowls of the Air, says
Christ, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into Barns, yet
their heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better then they? He says
not the Fowls of the House, they are cared for; but, The Fowls of the Air, that
have none to look after them, (unless it be Fowlers to take away their lives;)
neither do they know where to get the next meal, when they have gotten one, nor
what hole or bush to lodge in at night, yet their heavenly Father provides for,
and feeds them. Does he take care of such Creatures, and will he not take care
of you? Yes, certainly he will, and why? ye are better then they; ye are
rational, they irrational; ye are his sons, they his servants.

Verse. 21, 22.
21. And I will set my Glory among the Heathen, and all the Heathen shall see
my Judgment that I have executed, and my Hand that I have laid upon them.

22. So the House of Israel shall know, that I am the Lord their God from that
day and forward.


THe Lord having declared what destructive judgments he would bring upon Gog
and Magog; he comes here to make known the end of his so dealing with them,
viz. the manifestation of his glory amongst Heathens, and his own People.

Verse. 21. I will set my Glory among the Heathen.
I will give my Glory, says the Hebrew, that is, I will cause it to be evident
amongst them. By Glory understand the glory of his Justice and Power.

All the Heathen shall see my Judgment that I have executed.
These words give light to the former: The Heathen seeing the dreadful
judgments of God upon Gog and his, should acknowledge the Justice and Power of
God.

And my Hand that I have laid upon them.
They shall not only have a bare sight, but experimental knowledge; they shall
find themselves concerned therein, and feel the hand of God heavy upon them;
for the strength, wealth, liberty, and glory of the Heathen will be much
impaired, if not totally ruined by the overthrow of Gog.

Verse. 22. So that the House of Israel shall know that I am, etc.
They did know the Lord to be their God before: but this signal stroke of God
upon their Enemies, being a signal mercy unto them, should so engage them unto
God, that from that time forward they should afresh and eminently acknowledge
God to be their God, and none to be like unto him; that he will not desert them
in their streights, but be their Deliverer.

First, Observe,

The great end of Gods judgments upon sinful men, is, his Glory.

I will set my glory among the Heathens, and all the Heathen shall see my
judgment, etc. God does therefore execute judgment, that he may be glorified.
When sinful people will not give glory to God for his Mercies, he will fetch
glory out of them by his Judgments. They are the work of his hand, and what
ever that be, it is honorable and glorious, Psalm. 111.3. Not only his works of
Creation, but those of Judicial Providence. Upon what Nation soever, Army, or
Navy the Lord shall lay his hand, he will work out his glory thereby; that is
the end of all his works and judgments.

Secondly, Observe,

Dreadful judgments upon the wicked, are engaging mercies unto the godly.

So shall the h^use of Israel know that I am the Lord their God from that day
and forward. The hand of God upon Gog and his, should so affect their hearts,
that they should experimentally know, and say, The Lord is our God, he has
laid low our enemies: he has freed us from their Insultations, Threats,
Oppressions: he is our Deliverer, our Savior, our Redeemer, Isai 25.9. It
shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God: we have waited for him, and he
will save us. This is the Lord, we have waited for him: we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation. When God executed severe judgments upon the enemies
of his people, then were their hearts thus affected, and engaged unto the Lord:
then they rejoiced in God their Savior, and said, He will save. He has saved
us, and he will save us. When the godly see, that great judgments upon their
enemies, are great mercies unto them, their faith is advanced thereby, and they
are persuaded God will never leave them: their hearts are warmed, and they
cannot but own and praise him.

Verse. 23, 24.
23. And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity
for their iniquity, because they trespassed against me: therefore hid I my face
from them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies, so fell they all by
the sword.

24. According to their uncleanness, and according to their transgressions,
have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.


THe Heathen had base and blasphemous thoughts of God; they imagined he was not
able to keep his people out of the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, and his gods: to
vindicate himself, therefore, the Lord tells them the true cause why they were
carried into Captivity, namely for their iniquity. It was not Impotencie in
God, but Iniquity in them which caused it.

23. The house of Israel went into captivity for their Iniquity.
The Hebrew is, the house of Israel were led into Captivity in their
Iniquities. God took them in their Iniquities and carried them away into
Captivity in them, or, for them. Boavonam, the Septuagint says, (...), for
their sins, their crooked and perverse doings.

Because they trespassed against me.
The word Magnal, or Maal, signifies* Stubbornly and Contemptuously to sin: to
oppose him one ought to be subject unto: such transgsessours were the Jews:
they opposed God.

Therefore hid I my face from them.
To hide the face from them, imports, 1. The denying of them his Favor, his
Counsel, his Help: and Secondly, Declaring his Anger and Severity by sharp
judgments, Ps. 80 3. Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. God's
face was clouded, and hid from his Church; so that it had neither Favor,
Counsel, nor Help from him, but sad afflictions and judgments; for he was
angry with the Prayers of his people, he fed them with thc bread of Tears, and
gave them Tears to drink in great measure: therein he sorely afflicted them.

And gave them into the hand of their enemies.
This followed upon God's hiding his face: they felt acts of his displeasure:
he gave, or delivered them up into the hands of their enemies: he caused
Nebuchadnezzar to come, besiege Jerusalem, and to take it: and then God gives
into the hand of others, when his Providence acts and orders things, so, that
men come under their power.

So fell they all by the sword.
Some were carried into Captivity, some fled, some were left in the Land after
Nebuchadnezzar and his Forces returned to Babylon: How then is it said, They
all fell by the sword? The sense is, They were all brought under by the Power
of the sword, not all killed that were made subject; and some of all sorts
killed.

Verse 24. According to their uncleanness, and according to their
transgressions have I done unto them.
Here God anticipates what Jews and Gentiles might Object, viz. That he dealt
very harshly, yea cruelly with them in breaking them to pieces, in un-Churching
and un-Stating of them: but he tells them, What he did, was according to their
uncleanness, and their transgressions; he did nothing, but what they had
deserved.

First, Observe.

God does withold Mercies from his people, and lay sad judgments upon them
for their sins.

The house of Israel went into Captivity for their iniquities. Because they
trespassed against God, Therefore did he hide his face from them: Therefore did
he give them into the hand of their enemies: Therefore they fell by the sword,
and were brought into subjection. If God's own people sin, they shall smart for
it: he will not countenance them, hear their Prayers, give them Counsel, nor
put forth his hand to help them, Isai 59.1, Behold, the Lords hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear: but
your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid
his face from you, that he will not hear. Sin is of that nature, that it turns
away God's face from his own people, that it stops his ear against their
prayers, and shrinks up his arm, so that there is no help for them; And not
only does it keep good things from them, Jer. 5.25. but draw evils upon them,
Neh. 13.18. It was Isreal's sins brought judgment upon them, and their City.

Secondly, Observe.

God will convince his enemies of the true cause of his executing dreadful
judgments upon his people.

Thc Heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into Captivity for their
Iniquity, They thought there were other grounds for it, That God could not
preserve them against such a potent adversary as Nebuchadnezzar was; that his
Power and Wisdom was not such, as was in their gods: but the Lord made them
know, these were not the grounds why the house of Israel suffered such grievous
things, but that it was their Iniquities, Transgressions, and Uncleanness
which brought Judgments upon them. When Heathens saw what was done to
Jerusalem, and being unsatisfied, asked the Question, Wherefore has the Lord
done this unto this great City? What, is he unfaithful to his people? Could he
preserve it no longer? Are our gods stronger then the God of Israel? No, no;
these things are not the cause: Tell them, says he, what is the true cause;
It Is, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their God, and
worshipped other gods, and served them, Jer. 22.8, 9.

Thirdly, Observe.

None have just ground of complaint whatsoever Judgments are upon them,
howsoever God deal by them.

According to their uncleanness, and according to their transgressions have I
done unto them: their sins have been great, and I have executed great
judgments upon them. They filled up the Ephah with wickedness, and I filled up
the Vial with wrath. They drove me out of my Sanctuary, and I drove them out of
my Land: they turned their hearts from me, and I hid my face from them. Gods
judgments are righteous; he wrongs no man, no Nation; men have cause to
complain of their sins, not his judgments, see Lament. 3.39. and Psalm. 145.17.

Verse. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
25. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Now will I bring again the Captivity of
Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole House of Israel, and will be jealous for
my holy Name.

26. After that they have born their shame, and all their trespasses whereby
they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in their Land, and none
made them afraid.

27. When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of
their Enemies Lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many Nations:

28. Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, which caused them to be
led into Captivity among the Heathen: but I have gathered them into their own
Land, and have left none of them any more there.

29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my
Spirit upon the House of Israel, says the Lord God.


THe gracious goodness of God toward his people, appears in these verses,
where we have 1. The Reduction and gathering of them into their own Land, verse.
25, 27, 28. 2. The Causes moving God to do so, which are his Mercy, and his
Jealousy, v. 25. 3. The Time when they shall be reduced, v. 26. 4. The events
following the same; which are, 1. Acknowledgment of God to be their God, v. 28.
2. The Light of Gods Countenance, v. 29. 3. Pouring out of the Spirit.



Verse. 25. Now will I bring again the Captivity of Jacob.
If we referr these words to the Captive Jews in Babylon, the time was drawing
nigh of their deliverance, and therefore the Lord says, Now will I bring again
the Captivity of Jacob, that is, the Posterity of Jacob being in Captivity:
but, if we referr these words to what went before in the Chapter, the sense is
Gog: and Magog being destroyed, and their Funeral over; Now will I bring again
the Captivity of Jacob, the dispersed Jews, or Believers, who were the seed of
Jacob. A spiritual Reduction is here understood by some.

And have mercy upon the whole House of Israel.
Then God will have mercy, not, on two Tribes, but all the Tribes, on the whole
House of Israel; hitherto it has not been, but it shall be. God will forgive
the sins of the Jews in general, and bring them out of their forlorn condition
to glorious enjoyments and liberty. This word Richamti is from Racham, which
signifies Intimo commiserationis affectu aliquem amplecti, to embrace one with
a most inward affection of bowels, mercy, or compassion. God would be as
merciful to them, as a Mother to the fruit of her womb.

And will be jealous for my holy Name.
In the Hebrew it is, I will be jealous, or, zealous for the Name of my
Holiness; I will not suffer my Name to be polluted, as it is verse. 7. The
mercies I have promised shall be performed, whatever obstacle is in the way, my
holy Name is engaged for it; and the jealousy I have for my Name will provoke
me to do the same. Jealousy is such an ardent affection as will break through
all, would retard or frustrate an undertaking. It is given to God more humano,
and nothing shall let him from accomplishing what he has promised.

Verse. 26. After that they have born their shame.
The Jews being a people distinguished from other Nations by their laws and
worship, should have so lived, as never to have given God occasion to have cast
them off; but they sinning above the Nations, were scattered of God into
several parts of the World, and there they were reproached by the Heathens for
their God, their Worship, and their Laws, and so did bear shame: Or thus, Shame
may be put for the punishment of their shame, viz. their sin, that was their
shame; and sad judgments did they bear for the same, which was also their
shame.

And all their Trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me.
Trespasses here notes punishment; they trespassed against God in Canaan, and
he punished them for those trespasses in Babylon, and other places. After they
had born their shame and punishment the appointed time, God would visit them in
mercy, bring them back to Sion, and do great things for them.

When they dwelt safely in the Land, and none made them afraid.
They had much peace, were secure, feared no Enemies, nor Judgments, and
thereupon sinned freely, and multiplied transgressions without number. The word
for making afraid, is Charad, which signifies to be moved in body or mind. Fear
does distemper both; but the Jews had none to disaffect either, by frighting of
them.

Verse. 27. When I am sanctified in them in the sight of many Nations.
In Chap. 38. verse. 9. God says, he will sanctify himself, that is, declare
himself to be an holy God; and here the word is passive, When I am sanctified,
that is, when I am openly acknowledged to be just in punishing of them, and
merciful in delivering of them. Piscator carries the words actively, thus, I
will demonstrate my Holiness and Majesty, both by afflicting and by freeing of
them.

Verse. 28. Then shall they know, that I am the Lord their God, which caused
them to be led into Captivity, among, etc.
After their suffering grievous and long afflictions, and receiving choice
mercies, they shall know and confess that it was the hand of God which led them
into captivity, and not the hand of man: before, their eyes were upon men,
Nebuchadnezzar and his Forces, they looked not at God: but, when they should be
thoroughly purged in the furnace of affliction, and be brought out thence to
partake of special mercies; then they should see, know, and acknowledge that
God did all, that it was his hand did it; that Nebuchadnezzar could not have
done ought against them, nor Cyrus ought for them, without his Commission. So,
when the Jews shall be gathered out of all parts they are now in, they shall
know it to be the hand of God: The Hebrew, for which caused them be led into
Captivity among the Heathen, is, In my transferring them, or causing them to be
transferred to the Heathen.

And have left none of them any more there.
At the first gathering of the Jews out of Babylon, many were left there, Ezra
1.5. Not all the Fathers of Judab and Benjamin; but, the chief of the Fathers,
and such whose spirits God had stirred, came thence; not the rest: But here is
mention of such a gathering, as that none shall be left; None de
praedestinatis, says Maldonate. Not any one, V^lentem in Patriam redire, says
Mariana. But these senses do not come up fully to the words, which are, I will
not leave of them any more; formerly, many have been left, but there shall be
such a gathering as none shall be left; whole Tribes were then left in
captivity.

Verse. 29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them.
God hid his face seventy years from them in Babylon: and, since their
crucifying of Christ, he has hid it from them 1600. years. But he has a time
to let them see his face again, and never more to hide it from them; they shall
have his favor, his counsel, his help, and protection. They shall not be under
severe judgments, but enjoy sweet mercies.

For I have poured out my Spirit upon the House of Israel.
Junius has the words, Quum effudero, When I shall pour out my Spirit upon
them. In the Hebrew, it is a pretertense for a future, which is usual therein,
to show the certainty of the thing. The Septuagint says, (...), Because I have
poured out my wrath upon them; their sense is, Seeing I have uttered and
accomplished all my displeasure against them, they shall henceforth have my
face and favor. The word for my Spirit is Ruchi, the same with that in Chap.
36.27. which the Septuagint render there (...), my Spirit; and it is so to be
taken here. God makes the House of Israel a great promise, he will pour out his
Spirit upon the same. It shall have all spiritual blessings in abundance, and
the continuation of them.

First, Observe.

The afflictions of Gods People they may be long, and sharp; yet they shall not
be always, they shall have an end.

There is a time when they shall cease; Now will I bring again the Captivity of
Jacob. God brings his into captivity, and out again in due time. Some Vessels
must be longer in the fire then others, their dross and rust is so incorporated
into them, that they must not only be heatt, but melted; and, when they are
melted, then they are taken out of the furnace and new molded. The Jews were
long in the Wilderness, but at length they were brought into the Land of the
Amorites, Josh. 24.7, 8. The Gentiles must tread down the Holy City 42 months,
or 1260. days, and then it shall be freed, Revel. 11.2, 3. God may be wroth
with the Sheep of his Pasture, his wrath may be hot, may be long, but it shall
not be for ever, Psalm. 103.9. Let us be patient under long afflictions, and
wait for deliverance, it is drawing nigh daily, and the set time will come ere
long, Heb. 10.37.

Secondly, Observe,

There is a day of mercy to come for the Jews, even all of them.

I will have mercy upon the whole House of Israel; not one Tribe, two, or ten,
but upon the whole House of Israel, I will pardon their sins, gather them out
of the Nations, and make them a glorious people. This promise was but in part
fulfilled, when Judah, Benjamin, and some of Levi, returned out of Babylon; the
complete fulfilling of it remains yet. The Jews do expect the making of it good
to this day, saying, they are in vilissima and durissima Captivitate, and look
for such a gathering as none shall be left. Doubtless there is a time when God
will smile upon the Jews, show them mercy, and bring them unto Christ, and make
him Salvation unto them, Hos. 1.10, 11. Romans 11.15, 24, 25, 26, 27. Zech. 10.6,
7.

Thirdly, Observe,

The great things God does for his People, are not done for their worth, or
merits, but for his holy Names sake.

The bringing Jacob out of captivity, and having mercy upon the whole House of
Israel, is upon that account; I will be zealous, or jealous, for my holy Name.
God does all for his Name sake, Ezekiel. 36.32. Not for your sakes do I this,
says the Lord God, be it known unto you: lest they should think there was
something in them deserved at Gods hands, and moved him to do for them, he
openly declares against it, Be it known unto you, and to all the world, that it
is not for your sakes, for any excellency or good I see in you; but it is for
mine Own sake, for the honor of mine own holy Name, which is so dear and
pre^ious unto me, that I am jealous of any thing tends toward the
disparagement of it, and zealous to do whatever I have promised, and may
promote the Glory thereof, Isa. 9.7. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform
this, Kinath, the zeal or jealousy of the Lord will do it; he had made many
great promises before, of Christ and his Government for ever; and if any thing
should rise up to hinder the same, the Lord of Hosts would be zealous to see it
performed, otherwise his holy Name would suffer. Gods Name is the great motive
to him, to do for his. This Jeremie knew full well, and therefore presses God
to do for them upon that account, Chap. 14.7. O Lord, though our Iniquities
testify against us, do thou for thy Names sake; there was a great Famine, and
they deserved not a drop of rain, or bit of bread; but Gods Name was a strong
Argument to provoke him to do for them.

Fourthly, Observe.

Sin brings men to shame and punishment, which they must undergo one where or
other.

After they have born their shame and trespasses. They sinned in Canaan, and
were shamed and punished in Babylon, and other places. It Is only sin which
makes men blush and smart.

Fifthly, Observe,

In times of peace and safety, usually men forget God, and sin against him.

When the Jews dwelt safely, and none made them afraid, then they trespassed
against God. At such times, men are scornful and proud, Psalm. 123.4 they trust
in Mountains, Amos 6.1. they live sensually, verse. 4, 5, 6. they increase the
affl ctions of the afflicted, Z^ch. 1.15. When men are in peace, and without
danger, they have opportunities for hearing of Gods Word by his Servants: but
Jer. 22.21. says God, I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity; but thou said, I
will not hear. Jerusalem and her children had deaf ears, and obstinate hearts,
in their prosperity. Solomon who had peace on all sides round about him, 1
King. 4.24. forgot the Lord, married strange wives, and did strange things for
them; he built high places for their Idol-gods, and went himself after other
gods, 1 King. 11.15. and 7.10. Great is the danger of Prosperity, yet all
desire it. That caution which God gave his people, when they were to come into
Canaan, where they should have peace and plenty, is needful for all in a
prosperous condition, Deuteronomy. 6.12. Beware, lest thou forget the Lord: Men are
very apt then to forget him.

Sixthly, Observe,

The Lord by open delivering of his People from an afflicted condition, does
sanctify his own Name, and has it sanctified by others.

His gathering them out of Enemies hands, declared his power, his faithfulness,
his mercy; and thereby, he sanctified his own Name; and these Attributes being
acknowledged by those that are delivered, and by the Nations from whom they are
delivered, his Name is sanctified. Gods People are often under great and long
afflictions, and when ever he sets them at liberty, he sanctifies his Name, and
his Name is sanctified; he declares himself, and is declared by others, to be a
gracious God. When the Jews were brought out of Babylon, they said, The Lord
has done great things for us; and the Babylonians said, The Lord has done
great things for them, Psalm. 126.2, 3. Thus did God sanctify, and men
sanctify; the one, by declaring his Omnipotency* Faithfulness, and Goodness;
the other, by acknowledging the same.

Seventhly, Observe,

There is a time, when the Jews shall not only have mercy, but abundant and
lasting mercy.

God will gather them, pour out his Spirit upon them, and never hide his face
from them any more. This time will be an happy and glorious time: for the house
of Israel, to be enriched with the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, which are
excellent; and to have the light of Gods countenance shining upon them, and
that always; What can be more desirable? This condition, as Paul says, will
be life from the dead, Romans 11.15. Now they are like dead trees, without any
sap in them; but, then they will be like Trees well-rooted, full of sap, and in
their greatest glory; full of branches, leaves, blossoms, fruit; and the Sun
shining upon them.

The EXPOSITION continued upon the Remaining Chapters of EZEKIEL. CHAP. XL.
THat there be (...) in the Sacred Scriptures, these nine last Chapters as well
as the beginning of Ezekiel do abundantly testify; and such difficult things
are in these last, that they have made many men of the greatest parts to
tremble at the thought of Interpreting them. The Rabbis say, that the first of
Ezekiel, and these last Chapters, are, Arcana inexplicabilia and a nemine
intellecta; and therefore forbid Theirs to read them, adding, Cum venerit
Elias, solvet omnia. Jerome, that great light in his time, In Pr^oemio ad
Eustochium.
professes his trepidation hereat, that he did clausam pulsare januam. Gregory
the Great, when he went about this work, Prooem. in 2. l. super Ezekiel. praefat.
ad c. 40.
said, Nocturnum iter agimus. Maldonate affirms, that this last Prophecy of
Ezekiel, is so difficult and dark, ut vix intelligi posse videatur,
Oecolampadius tells us, that in the 42. Chapter, there is, Summa difficultas,
which ancient Expositors understood not, and he brings in Rabbi Solomon, who
writ upon the whole Talmud: saying, that he thinks there is not any thing
extant, Quod hujus adjuvet intelligentiam; and professes, that neither by his
own study, aid of Ministers, or by his own reading, he attained any help, in
Aedificio hco intelligendo, but only what he had from Heaven: and of himself,
he says, Chap. 45. Hoc loco praecipue pauperem meum intelligentiam profiteor.
Hujus loci mysteria tacitus vereor, etc. It is good to tremble at the Word of
God, both what we understand, and what we understand not, for all is of equal
authority; and to him that trembles thereat, the Lord looks, and will let in
light. The Vision is dark, but God dwells in darkness; the Temple, and City,
are dark, but Jehovah-Shammah, The Lord is there, whom we most humbly desire to
let out some beams of light, whereby we may come to understand something of the
incredible sweetness of these dark and deep things.

It Is not to be expected that I should proceed here as in the former Chapters,
by speaking to every verse. Some I shall pass over, Oecol. in c 42.
and say with Jerome, Scio quod nescio.

Some would have this Temple represented to Ezekiel, to be that built by
Zorobabel and the Jews, after the Captivity: but there is much to be said to
prove it not to be so.

1. That Temple was built in Jerusalem, in the place where Solomon's Temple
stood; but, this Temple Ezekiel saw, was to be without the City, as
Interpreters observe from the 45. and 48. Chapters.

2. That Temple was for the two Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin. This of Ezekiel,
is for the whole body of the Jews, all the Tribes are mentioned, Chap. 47, and
48. And strangers had Inheritance here amongst the Israelites, Chapter 47.22. Which
was not so in Moses, Solomon's, or Zorobable's time.

3. In Zorobabel's Temple there was no such River nor Trees yielding new fruit
every month, as is spoken of Ezekiel's, Chapter 47.12.

4. God promised Chapter 43.7. to dwell among the Israelites of this Temple for
ever, which cannot be verified of Zorobabel's Temple and City; for the Lord
forsook both, and delivered them up to the Romans, who destroyed them.

5. The Temple our Prophet speaks of, was not to be defiled; nor the holy Name
of God, by the House of Israel, which should then be, Chap. 43.7, 8. But
Zorobabel's Temple was defiled, as you may read in the Macchabees; and the J^ws
who returned from Babylon, defiled the Name of God by their Iniquities, as
appears* Neh. 13.

6. The twenty five thousand Reeds being the length of the holy Portion,
offered to the Lord, and the breadth ten thousand Reeds, Ezekiel. 45.1 cannot be
understood of any City or Temple which the Jews should build after their
captivity; for the twenty five thousand Reeds make forty five miles in length,
say some; fifty and upwards, say others: and the ten thousand, sixteen or
eighteen miles in breadth; never was any such City built.

There be many other things differing from what was in Moses, Joshuah, and
Solomon's days. The measures differ much from those of the Tabernacle and
Temple: The Land was not divided in Joshuah's time, as here it is to the
Tribes. The Priests and Levites had no portion of Land, as here they have;
There was no such Portion or Oblation for the Prince: Their Sacrifices and
Oblations are not after the same manner. The Altar, Chap. 41.22. differs from
the Altar of Incense, Exodus 30, 2. The cleansing of the Sanctuary, and putting
the blood of the young Bullock upon the posts and corners of the settle of the
Altar, Chap. 45.18, 19. is a new Ordinance, not to be found in Moses Law. In
Ezekiels division of the Land were no Cities of refuge appointed, there would
be no need of them, Ezekiel. 44.25.

This Vision therefore points out the Introduction of a better hope, viz. the
Church of Christ under the Gospel. Alapide tells us, that many Rabbis and Jews
referr this Temple, and City, to the Messi^h, expecting that he should build
them; and, because, this third Temple, and new City, are not yet built, they
think the Messiah is not yet come. Quod Messiah nondum venerit quia tertium
Templum nondum est aedificatum. In Apocal. 12. Sect. 33.
This argument was objected by the Jews to Galatinus, who answers it in his 5.
Book, Chapter 10. and concludes thus, Jerusalem and Templum de quibus loquitur
Ezekiel, mystice intelligenda esse. Of that mind is Viega, who says, This
Vision of Ezekiel's Temple and City, nullo pacto ad materialem illam
Hierosolymorum Vrbem, Templumque illud a Salomone aedificatum; sed ad Ecclesiam
a Christo in terris fundatam, pertinere: atque adeo non mystice sed secundum
litteram omnia quae de ejusmodi aedificiis a Propheta describuntur, de Ecclesia
esse intelligenda; quamvis in multis ad Civitatem illam materialem, Templumque
Salomonis, fiat allusio.

It Is conceived therefore, that in this Vision is represented the restitution
of the Jewish Church, their Temple, City, and Worship, after the captivity, not
simply, but as they were Types of the Church under the Gospel; for, as we must
not exclude these, so we must know, this is not the principal thing intended.
That which the Vision does chiefly hold out unto us, is, the building of the
Christian Temple, with the worship thereof, under Jewish expressions, which
began to be accomplished in the Apostles days, Act. 15.16. And that the
spiritual Temple, consisting of believing Jews and Gentiles, is chiefly
intended; we may see from that correspondency between Ezekiel, and John in his
Gospel and Revelation. There be many parallel places in them; as Ezekiel. 37.22.
Compared with Joh. 10.16. 37.27. Rev. 21.3. Ezekiel. 38.2. Rev. 20.8. 39.1. 40.2.
Rev. 21.10. 40.35. Rev. 11.1.21.15. 43.2. Rev. 1.15.14.2. 47.1, 2.12. Rev.
22.1, 2. 48.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Rev. 7.4 5, 6, 7, 8. 48.31, 32, 33, 34. Rev.
21.12, 13, 16.

There is one thing more also intended, viz. the restoring of the Christian
Church after its Apostasy and suffering in Spiritual Babylon under Antichrist:
Many are the breaches, rents, and ruins of the Christian Church to this day;
and we may see the Tabernacle of Christ is fallen. But it is expected, that he,
Whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a measuring line in his
hand, Ezekiel. 40.3. should come and raise it up, and build the ruins thereof,
bringing in the fullness of Jew and Gentile, that so the state of the Church may
answer those Prophesies made of it, Isa. 60.17, 18. Ezekiel. 45.8. There shall be
no violence, no oppression by Princes, or others. Hitherto there has been
little else but oppression in all lands; and the new Heaven, and new Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness, have not yet been created, but are to be expected
as things intended in this Vision.

Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. In the five and twentieth year of our Captivity, in the beginning of the
year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the City was
smitten, in the self same day the hand of the Lord was upon me, and brought me
thither.

2. In the Visions of God brought he me into the Land of Israel, and set me
upon a very high Mountain, by which was as the frame of a City on the South.

3. And he brought me thither, and behold, there was a Man, whose appearance
was like the appearance of Brass, with a line of Flax in his hand, and a
measuring Reed, and he stood in the Gate.

4. And the Man said unto me, Son of Man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with
thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall show thee: for to the
intent that I might show them unto thee, art thou brought hither: declare all
that thou see to the House of Israel.


WE are come now to the last part of Ezekiel's Prophecy which is a Typical
prophecy concerning Christ and his Church, set forth under the Vision of the
new Temple, City, and Kingdom, comprehended in these nine last Chapters: In
which we have,

1. The building of the new Temple, with the several appurtenances thereof, in
the 40, 41, and 42. Chapter.

2. The Ministry, Worship, and Ordinances of this new Temple, in the 43. and
44. Chapters.

3. The Restitution or Reformation of the whole Land, the Commonwealth,
Kingdom, and City, with several Ordinances for the Prince and People, in the
45, 46, 47, and 48. Chapters.

In describing of these, the Prophet uses, says Huff^nrefferus, words and
phrases suitable to the state of the Jews; he describes, as it were, the
Temple, Worship, and Land of the Jews: Whereas he aims at no such thing, but
intends the spiritual Kingdom of Christ and the Gospel.

The scope of this Vision was to comfort the afflicted Jews, who being in
captivity, lamented the desolation of the Temple, City, and Commonwealth of
Israel. To the Prophet therefore, the Lord shows in a Vision the restoration
of them again; and not only so, but greater things are held out and promised
under them, as the greatness and glory of the Church under Christ in time of
the Gospel, of which John speaks, Revel. 21.22. It Is not an earthly City,
Temple, Jerusalem, we are to look at here; but a spiritual City, Temple
Jerusalem viz. the Church of Christ, whose Name is Jehovah-Shammah.

In this Chapter, you have

1. A Preface, or Introduction, to the Vision.

2. A Narrative of the Wall, several Courts, Gates, the Porch, of this new
Temple; and the measures of them.

In the Preface are five things. The Time, the Manner, the Place, the Author,
and End of the Vision.

Verse. 1. In the five and twentieth year of our Captivity, in the beginning of
the year, in the tenth day of the Month.
Here the time is pointed out, when this Vision was presented to Ezekiel, which
was in the 25. year of his captivity; so long it was since he with Jehoiakim
was carried into Babylon, and kept there. His first Vision was in the fifth year
of his captivity, Ezekiel. 1.2. And this his last Vision was twenty years after,
in the beginning of the year, the tenth day of the month; which some make to
be in the Autumn, others in the Spring.

The fourteenth year after the City was smitten.
After Jehoiakim had been eleaven years in captivity, the City was smitten and
utterly laid waste, which was in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, 2 King. 25.2.
Jer. 39.2. and 52.5. From this period or Epoclea, is the Vision reckoned;
fourteen years after the desolation of the City, Ezekiel had it. Some would
prove this year to be the year of Jubilee, because it was the 50. from the 18.
of Josiahs reign, when the Book of the Law was found. But that year appears not
to be a Jubilaean year. Mestlinus makes the year of Jubilee to be in the 10. of
Zedekiah's reign; and if so, this year of the Prophets V^sion was but 16. years
after the year of Jubilee, and 34. years before the next Jubilee.

In the self same day.
The Hebrew is Beetzem haiom, in the bone, or essence of the day, in the body
of the day, or in the strength of the day, when the heat and light were
greatest; the same words are in Genesis 7.13. where the words are rendered, the
self same day, being an Hebrew form of speech.

The hand of the Lord was upon me, etc.
The Chaldee says, A Prophetical Spirit from the face of Lord resided upon me;
others, The strength, or divine virtue of the Lord was upon me. These words we
had in Chap. 1. v. 3. where they were opened. Here the manner of the Vision is
set forth: it was by the Spirit of God upon the Prophet enlightening and
informing his mind.

And brought me thither.
I was brought in mind, not in body, by the Spirit; thither, that is, to the
City that had been smitten, but now seemed to be rebuilt: and so it follows;

Verse. 2. In the Visions of God, brought he me into the Land of Israel.
In those great, glorious, and wonderful Visions of God, wrought in the Prophet
by the Spirit of God, he apprehended that he was in the Land of Israel,
beholding not only with the eyes of his mind, the things presented unto him,
but also with the eyes of his body.

And set me upon a very high Mountain.
The place where the Prophet had this Vision, was in the Land of Israel, and
upon Mount Sion, or Mount Moriah, where the Temple was built. Moriah is from
raah, to see; this Mount was the Mount of Vision, and on it had Ezekiel this
glorious Vision. Kimohi says, This Mountain is the Mountain of the Temple, and
this City is Jerusalem on the South. Lightfoot on the Temple, chapter 4. v. 13. The
Rabbis conceive the Land of Israel to be the highest of all Lands, and Mount
Sion, or Moriah, the highest of all the Mountains in that Land. It was a Type
of the Church of Christ, Heb. 12.22. and therefore it is represented here to be
a very high Mountain; and so it was unto John also, Rev. 21.10. which words
allude to these of Ezekiel. The Hebrew for set me, is, caused me to rest; when
the Prophet was brought to this Mountain, he had rest: there is no true rest
but in the Church, in the Mount of Vision.

By which was as the frame of a City on the South.
The Mount it self was South from Babylon, and the Cities was on the Southside
of the Mount, which was smitten there; now the Prophet sees in Vision, as it
were, the model or frame of a City; he had seen before the ruin of the City,
and now he sees the raising of it.

Verse. 3. And he brought me thither.
That is, the Spirit of God carried him in Vision to that Mountain, where he
saw an Idaea of a City.

And behold, there was a Man whose appearance was like the appearance of Brass.
Here the Author of the Vision is specified and described from his appearance,
the Instruments he had, and the place where he stood. This Man is made by some,
an Angel; by others, Christ. It was the Son of God appeared in the first Vision
unto Ezekiel, and so he does in this last; he was a Master Builder, and
appointed of God to build the House, Zech. 6.12, 13. Thus speaks the Lord of
Hosts, saying, Behold the Man whose Name is the Branch, that is, Christ, he
shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even
he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory: And that
this Man was Christ, his appearance declares; for it was like the appearance of
Brass; and so Christ, Revel. 1.15. is said to appear, His feet were like unto
fine Brass; and here his countenance, or whole body, appeared like unto Brass,
that is, free from spot, beautiful, bright, and shining: Christ was without
blemish, or spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26. He
was fairer then the children of men, Psalm. 45.2.

With a line of Flax in his hand, and a measuring Reed.
These be the Instruments which this man had; a Line, and a measuring Reed.
Such Instruments are proper to Architects, and Master Builders; and being in
the hand of Christ, do demonstrate him to be the chief Builder of the Church.
The line of Flax was to measure the great spaces of the ground viz. the Floors,
Court, and Compass of the Buildings, and Walls: The Reed was to measure the
Buildings; the thickness, length, and breadth of them. Of such a Line and Reed
is spoken of, in Zech. 2.1, 2. Rev 11.1. Chap. 21.15. A Reed is smooth, round,
and light, and therefore fit for measuring; they were plentiful in those parts.

And he stood in the Gate.
The Hebrew is, he standing in the Gate; His posture was Stabat, quasi ad
Ministerium, accinctus.
Standing, his place was in the Gate: He stood there to direct the Prophet, to
show him the measures of the Temple, and other things, to manifest, he has
command of the Temple, and may keep out, and let in, whom he pleased.

Vers^ 4. And the Man said unto me, Son of Man, Behold with thine eyes, etc.
In this verse, the end of the Vision is held forth, which is that Ezekiel
thoroughly understanding the things comprehended in it, might communicate them
to others. Here the Lord Christ is called Man, for that in time he was to be
incarnate, and the Son of Man, speaks to Ezekiel, and commands him two things,

1. To give the most diligent and best attention, as possible might be, and
therefore calls for not only the eyes and ears, but the heart also, Behold with
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall
show thee: his heart must go with his senses, and seriously ponder what was
presented. Some things were to be seen, some things were to be heard, and all
to be considered: and why? he was brought thither for that end.

2. To make known what he should see, hear, and observe, Declare them to the
House of Israel; he must not keep things to himself, but publish them to
others, to the Church and People of Israel.

First, Observe.

The Lord keeps an exact account of the time of his Church and Peoples
sufferings.

He is the best and most punctual Chronologer of all in Heaven and Earth. Men
and Angels may mistake, misreckon; but the Lord does not, cannot. In the 25.
year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the 10. day of the
month, in the 14. year after the City was smitten, in the self same day, Here,
the Years, the Months, and Days, of the Jews captivity was observed of the
Lord. When we are in misery, and suffering conditions, we think God forgets us,
Psalm 79.5. Psalm. 89.46. but he takes notice of every Hour, Day, Month, and Year.

Secondly, Observe,

When the Church is low, in the worst, most desperate, and deplorable
condition, even then, the Lord has a care of his Church.

Now the Temple, City, and Land of Canaan, were utterly laid wast, the people
many of them destroyed, the rest in Babylon without hope of ever seeing their
own Country, chapter 37.11. In this condition the Lord appears to Ezekiel, and
gives him a most singular and excellent Vision, concerning the Restoration of
the Church, the Extent, Dignity, and Glory of it; whereby he showed both the
Prophet and the People whose hearts were filled with sorrow. When the Church is
in the Wilderness, under persecution, in Egypt, or Babylon, the Lord is
solicitous for it. Zech. 1.14. I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion, with a
great jealousy.

Thirdly, Observe,

The Church is Mount Sion, or Mount Sion is the Church, wherein God makes known
his mind for the comfort of his.

Ezekiel was carried in spirit into the Land of Israel, and set there upon a
very high Mountain, viz. Mount Sion, which typed out the Church of God; and
there he had this glorious vision, there sweet consolation was given forth for
the afflicted. The Church is sometimes called a Garden and Fountain sealed, as
Cantic. 4.12. Sometimes a Vineyard, Mat. 20.1. Sometimes an House, 1 Timothy 3.15.
Sometimes a City, Psalm. 46.4. Isai. 60.14. Sometimes a Mountain, Psalm. 2.6. And
it is so called for the hieghth, the glory, and the strength of it. Mountains
are high, conspicuous and strong, and so is the Church. On Mountains is good
air, so likewise is in the Church; Hills are nearer heaven then other places;
they are below, the Church is above the World.

Fourthly, Observe,

The Church is well seated and well ordered.

Upon which was as the frame of a City: it is seated upon a Mountain, the
Mountain of Gods Decree, Power, and Truth; it is well ordered, for it is as the
frame of a City, where every thing is in his right place, and all fitly joined
together, Psalm. 122.3. Jerusalem is builded as a City, that is compacted
together: and the Church is a body fitly joined together, and compacted, Ephesians.
4.16. Hence strength and beauty are to the Church, it being so seated and so
united. The one made Christ say, The gates of hell shall not prevail against
it, Mat. 16. and the other made Solomon to say, It was beautiful as Tirzah, and
comely as Jerusalem, Cant. 6.4.

Fifthly, Observe,

The Man Christ, who is sinless and glorious, is the chief Builder, and exact
Measurer of the Church, and things belonging to it.

Behold a Man whose appearance was like the appearance of Brass, with a Line of
Flax in his hand, and a Measuring-reed. Christ without spot, full of glory, and
wisdom, is the Master Builder Mat. 16.18. chap. 21.33. Hab. 3.3. Prophets,
Apostles, Ministers, are his Servants, Underofficers, instructed, directed,
and rewarded by him. He is Architectus, the Line and Reed are in his hand, he
measures all the Trees and Stones used in this Building, the outward and inward
Courts with all their appurtenances: He was the Son of Joseph a Carpenter, and
some mystery might lie in that.

Sixthly, Observe,

The way into Sion, and unto the Father, is by Christ: he stands in the gate of
the Temple, ready to receive any should come and be found fit for entrance; he
had his Line and Reed in his hand to measure them. None unmeasured might enter.

Hence it is that Christ says, Joh. 14.6. I am the way, and no man comes to
the Father, but by me. And Joh. 10 9. I am the Door, by me if any man enter in,
he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find Pasture. Christ is the
Lord of the fold, and field; by him, they enter in; by him, they are led out to
the good Pastures, and led in again. He will not suffer any thing that
defiles, to enter into the Fold, the Temple, the New-Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27.

Seventhly, Observe,

The Lord Christ, when Divine things are presented unto us, would have us
Attent, Intent, and Apply the whole heart unto them.

Such things as are of weight, slightness and trifling about them are
intolerable; therefore it is said here, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
hear with thine ears, let thy senses be wholly taken up with these things, and
set thine heart upon all that I shall show thee; thine heart also must be fixed
upon every thing shown thee, thou must let nothing pass without due
observation. As Ezekiel was to do thus, about the things of his Vision; so
should all Ministers and Christians about the things of the Gospel, which are
Revelations of the mind of God by Christ. It Is often said therein, Who has ears
to hear, let him hear, Mat. 13.9, 43. Mark. 7.16. Luke 14.35. and in other
places: intimating that if men have either inward or outward ears, they should
hearken to the things of God. They are Divine, and may infinitely advantage, or
infinitely prejudice us, if they be not well heeded; if we be not attent unto
them, intent upon them, and heartily closing with them, better we had never had
them. It will be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha at the day of judgment, then
for such; let us mind therefore, and mind to purpose, all things shown us of
Christ; let us set our senses and whole hearts upon them.

Eighthly, Observe,

What the Lord Christ reveals unto his servants the Prophets and Ministers,
they must not reserve to themselves, but communicate to others for their
Instruction, Edification, and Comfort.

Declare all that thou see to the House of Israel; he must not see, hear,
observe for himself, but for the House of Israel, for the Church and People of
God. Mat. 10.27. says Christ to his Disciples, What I tell you in darkness,
that speak ye in the light; and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon
the house-tops: whatever I have imparted unto you, that do ye impart unto
others; take the best advantages ye can, to make the same known. The servants
of God and Christ, must not only utter what they receive, but utter All they
receive, Act. 20.27. Paul kept back Nothing was profitable for them, but
declared to them all the Council of God.

Verse. 5. And behold a Wall on the outside of the house round about; and in the
man's hand a measuring-reed of six Cubits long by the Cubit, and an hand
breadth; so he measured the breadth of the building one reed, and the height
one reed.
Great houses and Cities have walls 1 King. 3.1. and 6.5. so this house had a
Wall round about it. By this wall we may understand the wall of Gods
protection, which is round about the Church. This wall was in height and
thickness alike, 6 Cubits high, and 6 Cubits thick; it was strong securing the
house, Ezekiel. law: God who is stronger then all, is the defense of the Church,
Psalm. 125.2. Babylons wall which was 100. Cubits high, and 30. Foot broad,
sufficed not to preserve her from ruins; that wall was battred and levelled with
the ground: but Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts is the wall about this building, and
such a wall as all the powers of the World and Hell cannot shake or batter.
Zech. 9.8. I will encamp about thine house. And Zech. 2.5. I will be unto
Jerusalem a wall of fire r^und about, says the Lord. The Church of God having
such a wall, is secure and invincible.

The Church is called an House, not a Tabernacle, because of Gods inhabitation
of it, and his fixed abiding there, Psalm. 132.13, 14. The Lord has chosen
Sion, he has desired it for his habitation: This is my rest for ever; here
will I dwell, for I have desired it. Sion, notes the Church in all ages; there
is Gods house, there is the desire of his soul, there he rests, he has no rest
in all the world but in Sion.

The measuring reed in the hand of the man, is the same with the reed in John's
hand, Rev. 11.1. Those that exercise Architecture, use lines and reeds to
measure things therewith; and so does Christ here. The line and reed in his
hand, is the Word or Everlasting Gospel, which Rev. 21.15. is called a
golden-reed, right, strong, and inflexible; with this he measures the Church,
and all things belong unto it; by the Word he sets out the nature, greatness,
power. privileges, and characters of the Church; by this, he measures out the
qualifications, liberty, and power, of Members and Officers therein. Hence the
Word is called, a Rule or Canon, Phil. 3.16.

The Hebrew is Kene hammiddah shesh ammoth baammah vetophath, a reed of measure
of six cubits in a cubit, and of a hand breadth. Whether these words an hand
breadth, should be joined to the 6. cubits taken jointly, or to each cubit
distinct by it self, is doubtful: that in the 43. Chap. v. 13. seems to make
the hand's breadth to be added to each cubit, for it says a cubit is a cubit,
and a hands breadth. This we may understand of the Legal or Sanctuary cubit,
not the common one, which was less by a hands breadth then the other, this
being 5. the other 6. hands breadth. Hence some deny that the hands breadth
must be added to each cubit, for then there will be 7. cubits, those 6 hands
breadth making another cubit. They will have the reed 6 cubits long, and an
hands breadth over, the 6. part of a cubit more. A cubit is that length between
the elbow and top of the middle finger; now this space being longer in some
men, and shorter in others, no certainty can be determined: especially, when
men differ in their heads more then in their arms; for some make a cubit to be
5. handfulls, some 6. some a yard, and some an ell or else, some a foot and
half.

The line and reed are in Christ's hand, the virtue and benefit of them is from
Him. This line and reed being the Word, has it is efficacy from Christ, out of
his hand it is un-efficacious, un-beneficial: but being in his hand, his power
and spirit going with it, it measures out, and fits materials for this
spiritual Building. The book written within, and sealed with 7. seals, could
none open but Christ, Rev. 1.3, 5. and as none could open it but he, so none
can make it efficacious besides him. All the efficacy of the Word is from
Christ by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 10.4. Our weap^ns are mighty through God.

All things in the Church must be exact and according to Divine order; things
must not be jumbled, but fitly framed and joined together, Ephesians. 2.21. Chap.
4.16. nothing is left in this house to the Wills, Inventions, and Humors of
men; all things must be measured, and measured by the line and reed of Christ;
no men may bring their own reeds or lines to measure ought. Mat. 15.9. In vain
do they, etc. this is dangerous. Mat. 17.5. Hear him. Act. 3.23. Every soul
that will not etc. Timothy must not do what he pleased in the House of God, but
he must proceed according to rule, according to what Paul the Servant of Christ
had writ unto him, 1. Tim. 3.14, 15.

The breadth of the building one reed, and the height one reed.
Here were small beginnings at first, the building was but one reed in breadth
and height. This seems to point out the smallness of the Christian Church at
first, it was only in Judaea and Jerusalem. Of little breadth, and low in
gifts and graces; it knew little of the Mysteries of the Gospel: and so as
little in height, but after it extended in breadth and height.

Verse. 6. Then came he unto the Gate which looks toward the East, and went up
the Stairs thereof, and measured the Threshold of the Gate which was one read
broad, and the other Threshold of the Gate which was one read broad.
There is frequent mention of the Gates belonging to this Temple, and the
Courts of it; as the Eastgate, verse. 6, 32, 44. the North-gate, verse. 20, 35,
40, 44. the South-gate, verse, 24, 27, 28. And there were diverse East-gates,
North-gates, and South-gates, as there were diverse Walls and Courts; so in
Solomon's Temple; and in that built after the Captivity.

Christ came from the Gate of the outward Wall where he first stood, verse. 3.5.
and came to an inward Gate, which Expositors make to be the Gate of the Temple.
He passed through the first Court which some call the Court of the Gentiles,
and came unto the next Gate.

Why Christ came to the Eastgate, rather then to the North gate, this being
nearer the Gate of the Wall which he entered by then the other, is questioned?
It Is probable 'twas, because the face of the house looked that way, as it is
Chap. 47.1. The forefront of the house stood toward the East; and that Gate is
counted the principal, which stands before the face of an house.

The outward Wall had but one Gate, the other Walls of the inward Courts had 3.
Gates a piece, one Eastward, one Northward, and one Southward, but no Gate
was Westward. The Jews called the East anterior pars coeli, the forepart of
heaven; and the West, posterior pars coeli, the backpart of heaven: by the
first, they note spiritual things; by the second, temporal and earthly things.
Those that come into this Temple must mind spiritual things, they must not let
out their hearts unto the world and worldly delights, they are Western things,
and there was no door in the West. They must go upwards, not downwards; keep
within, not go out.

The Prophet being to measure the Gates, was brought first to those of the
outward Court, and first to the Eastgate; then to the North-gate; and lastly,
to the South-gate: but when he came to the Gates of the inner Court, he begins
with the South-gate, then the Eastgate, and last of all the North-gate. There
was a differing order in measuring these Gates, ver. 28, 32, 35.

These Gates do hint unto us the readiness in Christ, and God, to receive
comers; and the confluence of them from all parts. This Temple has many Gates,
and those looking to the several quarters of the world. If men come from any of
them, there is a Gate before them, and admittance for them, Isa. 60.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising: Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters
shall be nursed at thy side, etc. He goes on there, and shows what flowing, and
flocking, shall be to the Church, even as doves to a window; and verse. the 11.
it is said of this Jerusalem, Her Gates shall be open continually, they shall
not be shut day nor night: and that this is meant of New Jerusalem, John
satisfies us, Rev. 21.25. where he brings in these words, speaking of the New
Jerusalem; The Gates of it shall not be shut. It had 12. Gates, verse. 13. and
not one of them should be shut.

Went up the Stairs thereof.
There be Stairs, and Steps spoken of in the 6, 22, 26, 31, 34, 37, 49. verses.
The Temple being upon a Mountain, the ascent must needs be by Stairs, and
Steps; for the number of them, in the 6. verse. the Septuagint says they were
7. but the Hebrew mentions not the number in that place. In the 22. and 26.
verses, you hear of 7. Steps, and in the 31, 34, and 37. of 8. Steps; but these
were in several places, and served for several ascents. For that is the use of
Stairs and Steps.

Three things I conceive are bereby held out unto us,

1. That we come to the knowledge of Spiritual things by degrees; they are not
known at once, but successively. Temple-Mysteries we come unto by Steps. Christ
leads his on from one thing to another, from faith, to faith; from strength, to
strength. Those that come to the Temple proceed by degrees, first one step,
then another; Ezekiel was carried on in the sight of his Vision, gradatim; he
had not the sight of all at once, but one thing after another.

2. The knowledge of Divine things is not attained without labor and
difficulty. There be Steps, and Stairs, in this Temple; and those will behold
the glory, and understand the Mysteries of it, must go upward, first one step,
then another; and it is difficult to go up Stairs, and Steps: it has cost many
hot water who have been going up these Steps, to find out the Secrets
comprehended in this Vision.

3. In Temple-work we must make progress. It Is not sufficient to go up a Step,
a Stair, or two, and then stand still, or descend; we must go forward, go up
higher, to the top. It Is not enough to go up two or three Rounds in Jacobs
ladder, and look about; but if ever men will get into heaven, they must go to
the top of the Ladder, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father
in his throne. Christ overcame the difficulties, he went up all the Stairs; and
persevering to the end, was Crowned.

And measured the Threshold of the Gate, which was one read broad, and the
other Threshold of the Gate which was one read broad.
Here were two Thresholds, the lower, and upper, which the Grecians call (...)
and (...); that the foot goes over, and that the head goes under; and they
were very broad, each a reed or 6. cubits broad, and were to adorn, and
strengthen the Gate. Christ is the Gate, and Door of the Church, his humane,
and divine natures are the ornament and strength thereof.

Verse. 7. Very little chambers.
In this verse. and the 10, 12, 13, 16, 17, 21, 29, 33, 36, 38, 44, 45, 46,
verses of this Chapter, you read of Chambers. In middoth, it is said, the
Chambers were one above another, and so it is evident they were, Chapter 41.6.
OEcolampad. says, they were Domunculae, vel Mansiunculae, in usum Templi
factae; they were little Lodgings, made for the use of those served in the
Temple. Their number was great. In some of them, those that either kept the
Temple, or ministered, dwelt; in others, were laid up those things pertained to
the service of the Temple.

In the Chambers, they laid the Meat Offerings, the Frankincense, and the
Vessels, and the Tithes of the Corn, the New Wine, and the Oil, which was
commanded to be given to the Levites, and the Singers, and the Porters, and the
Offerings of the Priests. Neh. 13.5. the Tithes were laid up in Treasuries, and
Storehouses of the Courts, or in the Chambers thereof, Mal. 3.10.

Ezekiel. 42.13, 14. The use of the Chambers Northward and Southward, is said to
be for the Priests; They be holy Chambers where the Priests who approach unto
the Lord, shall eat the most holy things: there, shall they lay the most holy
things, and the Meat Offerings, and the Sin Offerings, and the
Trespass-offerings, for the place is holy. When the Priests enter therein, then
shall they not go out of the holy place, into the outer court, but there shall
they lay their garments, wherein they minister: for they are holy, and shall
put on other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the
people.

These Chambers may represent unto us. 1. The Mansions which are in heaven,
Joh. 14.2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions says Christ; he showed
Ezekiel these Chambers in this Visional-temple, and he told his disciples of
those caelestial Mansions, which he would prepare for them.

2. That intertainment, rest, and comfort, the Saints enjoy, and shall have in
the Church under Christ. If a man come to his friend's house, and he have never
a Chamber for his repose, it is poor intertainment, cold comfort, and little
ease, if he must lie on the ground; but, if he have variety of Chambers, and
Beds for him, his intertainment, rest, and comfort will be good; he shall not
need to fear wind or weather: when men come to the New Jerusalem, and are
Citizens thereof, they shall have good accommodation, sweet rest, and sound
comfort; There shall be no voice of weeping, or crying, Isa. 65.19. There shall
be no tears, no death, no sorrow, no crying, no pain, Rev. 21.4. In the world
is tribulation, but in Christ is peace, in Sion is peace; under the New
Jerusalem, the Devils shall be bound up, and there will be great peace, and
spiritual comfort in abundance.

3. These Chambers, less and greater, may note out the several Congregations,
or Churches, of the Gospel Times, be they little or great, all which are in the
Church of Christ, as these Chambers were in this Visional-temple.

Verse. 8. He measured also the Porch of the Gate within, one reed.
The Thresholds, and the Porch, were all of one measure, viz 6 cubits, and a
hands breadth. The word for Porch here is Vlam, and in the 10. v. is rendered
Posts, it signifies both. Porches were for the dignity of the house, and
commodation of strangers.

Verse. 9. Then measured he the Porch of the Gate eight cubits, and the Posts
therein two cubits.
In the verse before, it is said, The Porch was one reed, that is, 6. cubits;
and here we find the measure of it 8. cubits: In the former verse. he spoke of
the breadth, here of the length of it. The Posts, were the Pillars; artificially
placed on the one side, and on the other.

The Porch of the Gate was inward.
It was within the Wall, looking toward the house it self.

Verse. 10. And the little Chambers of the Gate Eastward, were three on this
side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the Posts had
one measure, on this side, and on that side.
The Eastern-gate as it had it is Porch, and Pillars, on each side of it: so it
had it is 3. Chambers on each side of it, and they were uniform, as the Posts or
Pillars were.

Verse. 11. And he measured the breadth of the Entry of the Gate, 10. Cubits,
and the length of the Gate 13. cubits.
The Hebrew word for Entry, is Pethach, and rendered a Door, verse. 13. and so
it is mostly taken in Scripture. If by Entry, be meant the Door; how is it said,
that its 10. cubits in breadth? when the Door is never wider then the
threshold; which in the 6. and 7. verse. is said to be but one reed broad, or 6.
cubits; Either it was some other Door, or the Posts to which the Door was
fastened, and shut to, were added to the measure. If we hold to the word Entry,
it may be the breadth of the space, between the outward Gate, and the inward.

The length of the Gate 13. cubits.
Length here, is the height of the Gate, it was 13. cubits high.

Verse. 12. The space also before the little Chambers was one cubit, and the
space one cubit on that side, etc.
There was gebul, a border, or space of a cubit, on each side of the Chambers;
and yet before them: and the Chambers on each side were alike, 6. cubits a
piece.

Verse. 13. He measured then the Gate from the Roof of the one little Chamber,
to the Roof of another: the breadth was 25. cubits, door against door.
These Chambers were not continued, nor contigual, there was the space of 5.
cubits between them; and of 25. cubits, in that breadth was between them, as
they stood opposite one to another.

Verse. 14. He made also Posts of 60. cubits, even unto the Post of the Court
round about the Gate.
Posts of this length some think incredible, and therefore divide these cubits,
between the Posts on each side the Porch, which reach up unto the Posts of the
outward Court, making them 30. cubits a piece. Some make these Posts of 60.
cubits, to be the Cloister, which being supported by Posts, was 60. cubits long.

Verse. 15. From the face of the Gate of the entrance unto, etc.
From one Gate to the other were 50. cubits, and the Porch of the Inner-gate
10. cubits: We are to make progress in the Temple, and not to stand still.

Verse. 16. Of the Windows.
There were several Windows in this Structure which was presented to our
Prophet, as appears verse. 16, 22, 25, 29, 33, 36. and Chap. 41.16, 26. These
Windows were narrow Windows, that is, narrow without, and broad within, that
they might receive, and let in the light more fully. Such Windows were in
Salomons Temple, 1 King. 6.4. skewed Windows.

By these Windows, is signified the Spiritual light should be in the Church of
Christ. He is called Mal. 4.2. The Sun. Isa. 9.2. A great Light. Joh. 8.12. The
light of the world. And by those Windows, the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers, he bath, and still does let in light into the Church.
The Promise was, that The earth should be full of the knowledge of the Lord,
Isa. 11.9. That he would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel, 2.28, 29. So
that their Sons, and Daughters should Prophecy, their Old men dream Dreams,
and their Young men see Visions; yea, Servants and Handmaids should have the
Spirit, and be full of light. This is in part fulfilled, and shall be more and
more; for when the New Jerusalem comes down from God out of Heaven, as it is
Rev. 21.2. then will the light be greater, And the Nations of them which are
saved, shall walk in the light of it, verse. 24. Then will the Lamb be the light
thereof.

Also, that spiritual joy should be in the Church, Act. 13.52. The Disciples
were filled with joy. Act. 9.31. The Churches walked in the comfort of the Holy
Ghost.

To the little Chambers.
The least Churches, and least Saints, shall not be without Windows; they shall
have light and joy, teaching, and comfort.

In the 17. verse. and 18. of this Chap. and 3. verse. of the 42. mention is made
of the Pavement of the outward Court. The Hebrew word for Pavement, is ritzpah,
which signifies a burning-coal. Isa. 6.6. The Seraphim had a live-coal,
ritzpath, in his hand; the Pavement was of stones that seemed like
burning-coals. If the Pavement of this Temple were so glorious, what was the
Temple it self? Salomons Chariot was paved with love; this Temple with love,
and zeal. These Stones which made the Pavement, may show what the meanest, and
lowest in the Christian Church should be, viz. shining, living, and lively
stones; humbly submitting to the cross, and content to be under, as a Pavement.

Of the outward and inward Court.
Thirty five times the terms of Court, outward and inward Court are repeated,
in the 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, and 46. Chapters.

The outward Court was for the People, the inward Court was for Priests, and
was holy; Ezekiel. 42.14. it is called the holy place. There was another Court,
it is observed by some, viz. the Court of the Gentiles; which it may be Ezekiel
points at, when he distinguishes the Sanctuary from the profane place, Chap.
42.20. But it is evident from the Scripture, that Salomons Temple had an outward
and inward Court, and so had This. The outward Court there, was great, 2 Chronicles.
4.4. and the compass of this Temple, and City which Ezekiel saw, was eighteen
thousand measures, Chap. 48.35.

The Courts of Salomons Temple were very large, which comprehended most of the
people of Israel, who came thrice a year into them to worship. 2 Chronicles. 23.5.
All the people shall be in the Courts of the house of the Lord. This Court,
called also the great Court, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. was between the Court of the
Gentiles the outward Court, and the Court of the Priests the inward Court, and
that great Court or Court of Israel, was the Court of Aid; so the word Haazerah
signifies. Thither they came, there they prayed for Aid; and had it from the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.4.

There seems to be another Court, belonging to the Temple of Solomon; for 2 Chronicles. 20 5. mention is made of a new Court. Some think this, the Priests
Court; so called, because of the Altar renewed therein by Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.8.
But others make it to be the Court of the women: the great Court of the people
being divided into two; one for the men, and the other for the women. It was
not so from the beginning.

In the outward Court, the people stood; and it represented the Nations, which
are out of the Church. In the inward Court, where was the Candlestick, the
Shewbread, and Altar of perfumes, were the Levites, and Priests; and this
Court represented the Church, where the Word of God does inlighten, and nourish
us, and Christ is our Altar of perfumes. The Sanctum Sanctorum represented
Heaven, into i^ the High Priest only entered; typifying our High Priest, the
Lord Christ, his entrance in there alone by his own power, to bring us thither.
So that the 1. signified the state of nature. The 2. the state of grace. The 3.
the state of glory.

Hereby, the greatness of the Church in the time of the Gospel, and especially
in time of the New Jerusalem, is pointed out. These Courts were of great
Compass, and had Gates looking to the several parts of the world. In Peter's
time, many thousands were added to the Church; there were Graecians as well as
Jews, Act. 6.1. The extent and largeness of the Church, is set out fully by
Isa. in his 60. Chap. So Rev. 7. from the 4. to the 10. and Chap. 21.24, 25,
26. The Nations of them that be saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the
Kings of the earth do bring their glory, and honor into it. And the Gates of
it shall not be shut at all, etc. This Church must needs be great; For, from
the rising of the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the heathen, says
the Lord of hosts, Mal. 1.11.

In Salomons time many Gentiles came to the Jewish Church, 153600. were found
there at once, 2 Chronicles. 2.17. Which shaddowed out the great access should come
to the Christian Church.

Of the Palm Trees.
There were many Palm Trees seen by Ezekiel in this Temple, verse. 16, 22, 26,
31, 34, 37.

Palm Trees are Trees of great height, and sink not with the weight of
burdens; but feruntur sursum, they are carried upwards; and being cut down,
grow up again from the root. The branches are fair, and always green: Philo
says, It is Arborum praestantissima, quae aspectu pulcherrima fructum quoque
fert optimum, and vitalem vim habet non in radicibus defossam, ut caeterae; sed
in summum, quasi cor, sitam in ramorum medio, a quibus circumquaque stipatur,
ceu Princeps a suis satellitibus. vid. Philo. l. 1. de vita Mosis. Plut. says,
Plut. in. Theseo.
Palmam esse (...): Folia habere firma. and perpetuo durantia, That the leaves
of it are firm, and always lasting. It was sigum Victoriae. When Theseus
instituted games in Delos, he gave the Conquerors Palms. The Proverb among the
Latins Palmam reportare, or obtinere, was used pro Vincere, to Overcome. It
notes out a flourishing condition.

These Palm Trees, were for ornament of this Temple, and the Saints in
Gospel Times being victorious, and flourishing, are to be the ornament of the
Church. Rev. 7.9. I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hand.
Psalm. 92.12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree. Rev. 3.12. Him
that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go
no more out.

Verse. 19. An hundred cubits Eastward and Northward.
The Floor, or Pavement, of the peoples Court, was an 100. cubits square.

Verse. 20. The measures of the North-gate, the Chambers, Windows, and Arches
thereof, were after the measure of the first Gate. verse. 21. that is, after the
measure of the Gate that looks toward the East. verse. 22.

Verse. 23. The Gate of the Inner Court, was over against, etc.
There were Gates in the Priests Court, and Gates in the Peoples Courts; and
they were one over against the other; and a 100. cubits distant, each from
another.

Verse. 24. After he brought me toward the South.
When we are in Temple-work, we must move according to the mind of the
Master Builder, and not of our own heads.

Behold a Gate toward the South.
The measures of this Gate, the Posts, Windows, and Arches, verse. 25, 26. were
as the former measures of the Gates; they were uniform.

Verse. 26. The South-gate had 7. Steps to go up to it, and so had the
North-gate, verse. 22. and the Eastgate, had it is Stairs. See before, v. 6.

Verse. 27, 28. The Prophet from the outward Court, is brought to the Inner
Court, and first to the South-gate; and the measures from Gate to Gate, as
before, were an 100. cubits, and the measures of the little Chambers, Posts,
Arches, and Windows belonging to the South-gate, verse. 19, 30, 31. to the
Eastgate, verse. 32, 33, 34. and to the North-gate, verse. 35, 36. were the same,
and without difference. There was neither defect, nor excess in these measures,
but equality.

Verse. 37. The going up to the North-gate of the Inner Court had 8. Steps, so
had the Eastgate, verse. 34. and the Southgate, verse, 31. The Gates of the
Outward Court had but 7. Steps.
The people that came thither were to be holy; but the Priests who came into
the Inner Court, were to be more holy. They who are nearest God, should be most
holy. They are to be a step, at least, above others.

Verse. 38. The Burnt-offering was washed.
Some by this washing of the Burnt-offering, do think Baptism to be prefigured;
which denotes the washing away the filthiness of sin, by the blood Christ. It
may note out to us the purity of that which is to be presented to the Lord:
Nothing unclean will be acceptable to him.

Verse. 39. Of the Table-offerings, and Sacrifices.
From the beginning of the 39. verse. to the 44. Ezekiel. tells you of the Tables
seen in this Temple; their number, situation, description, and use. Their
number was 8. some make them 12. Their situation was, by the side of the
Porches and Gates, 4. on one side, and 4. on another side. For the description
of them, They were of Hewn stone, a Cubit and half long, a Cubit and half
broad, and one Cubit high. The use of them was, to slay the Burnt-offering, the
Sin-offering, and the Trespasse-offering thereon, and to lay their flesh
thereon.

It Is not to be imagined, that under the Times of Christ, the Jewish worship
should be revived. These expositions of Tables, Offerings, and Sacrifices,
import some other thing, viz. the good, and plentiful provision should be in
the Gospel Church. Isa. speaks of the same, Chap. 25.6. The Lord of Hosts shall
make unto all people, a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees; of
fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. And Isa. 55.1, 2.
Christ has water, wine, milk, bread, and fatness in his house. The Gospel is
called A great supper, Luke 14.16. There was variety of dainties to satisfy the
souls of his. Ps. 22.36. The meek shall eat and be sati^fied: Christ has a
table well furnished, Prove. 9.2. Luke 22.29, 30. I appoint unto you a Kingd me,
as my Father has appointed unto me; that ye may eat, and drink at my table, in
my Kingdom. It Is a Marriage Supper Christ prepares for his. Rev. 19.9. In the
New Jerusalem is a Tree of Life, which bears 12. manner of fruits, and yields
her fruit every month.

Of the Singers.
In the 44. verse. and only there, the Singers of this Temple are mentioned.
There were Chambers of Singers.

There were Singers in Salomons Temple, 1 King. 10.12. 2 Chronicles. 5.12. and the
number of them was great, 1 Chronicles. 25. and they were to sing praises daily, 1 Chronicles. 23.30.

Some played on Instruments, some sang with Voices. Some conceive the
Israelites had a part in the Instrumental-musick; but none in the Vocal, that
was performed by the Levites only. Less then 12, their number was not at any
time, Lightfoot on the Temple.
but they might be as many as they would above 12.

These set out the Spiritual Joy, and Songs should be in the Church of Christ,
Isa. 65.14, 17, 18. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart: For
behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth: Be you glad, and rejoice for
ever in that which I create; For behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and
her people a joy. Her walls shall be salvation, and her gates praise, Isa.
60.18. In this Jerusalem will be an Holy Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual
praise, 1 Pet. 2.5. The Revelations speaks of Singers, Chap. 14.1, 3. There
were 144000 stood on Mount Sion, singing as it were a new song. And Chap. 15.2,
3. Those that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and
over his mark, and over the number of his name; sung the song of Moses, and of
the Lamb. Conquerors are full of joy, and much in singing praises; especially,
Spiritual Conquerors: Such are they, who, the Apostle John says, shall reign
with Christ 10^0. years, for they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, Rev,
20.6. And wherefore Priests? but to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, to sing
forth the praises of God and Christ, who has advanced them to a reigning
condition.

Verse. 45, 46. Of the Priests.
This Temple had it is Priests, who were The keepers of the charge of the house,
verse. 45. And keepers of the charge of the Altar, verse 46. In time of the
Tabernacle, there were men appointed to take charge of it, and the things
pertaining to it, Numb. 3.25. There were 8600. to keep the charge of the
Sanctuary, verse. 28. And what many of them did, you may see 1 Chronicles. 9.27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32. Chap. 23. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. So, in the Temple of Solomon,
the Priests had the charge of the things thereof, 2 Chro. 13.10, 11. When
Vzziah went into the Temple to burnt Incense, the Priests who had the charge of
things, thrust him our, 2 Chronicles. 26. These are said to be the Sons of Zadock.
Zadock was the first High Priest, who served in Temple of Solomon, 1 King.
2.35. And of such worth was he among the Priests, and of such esteem with God,
ut ex eo omnes posteri nominarentur. All in this Temple are called the sons of
Zadock; both Priests and Levites, Ezekiel. 44 15.

By these Priests, may be understood the Ministers of the Gospel, who have the
charge of the holy things, and persons. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. I give thee charge in
the sight of God, that thou keep this Commandment without spot. All the rules
he had given him, concerning the House of God, the Offices, Officers, and
Inhabitants thereof, he calls a Commandment; and lays upon them the charge of
keeping of it: So in Act. 20. Paul calls for the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus. verse. 17. and charges them to take heed to all the flock, v. 28. They
are the watchmen, the charge of souls is committed to them, and they must be
accountants for them, Heb. 13.17.

Or by these Priests all the godly ( Isa. 61.6. Ye shall be named, The Priests
of the Lord) may be pointed out, who are the Sons of Zadock, that is, of the
Just one. Christ our High Priest, is Zadock, the just one, Act. 7.52. Chap.
22.14. And he has not only made us Sons, Joh. 1.12. But Priests also, Rev.
16. Chap. 5.10. So that true Christians are Priests in this Temple, and have
some charge of the Holy things, and persons therein.

Verse. 45, and 46. The Chambers toward the South, and North, were for the
Priests, they were peculiar to them; they had their Garments, and Anointing
Oil, which others might not meddle with; and so their Chambers.

46. This coming near of these Priests unto the Lord, to minister unto Him,
points out the Priestly Office of Christ; who drew near to the Father, to make
atonement, and to intercede for us.

Verse. 47. So be measured the Court, etc.
The Lord Christ lets nothing pass without measuring, he does all things
exactly in his House, and his Servants should imitate him.

Verse. 48. He brought me to the Porch of the House.
This Porch joined to the Doors of the Temple, into which none might enter but
the Priests; says Alapide, it was covered, ut tutiessent apluvia, grandine
aestu, etc. Christ is a Porch to his, Isa. 32.2.

It Is Jerome's judgment, that whilst we are in this life we are in a
Porch-state; for Videmur Jeronymo in porticu agere, donec in corpore degimus,
says OEcolampad. Here we have a body of death, see all things imperfectly; but
when we enter into the Heavenly Temple, we shall be free, and know as we are
known.

The EXPOSITION continued upon the Remaining Chapters of EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLI.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
1. Afterward he brought me to the Temple, and measured the Posts, six Cubits
broad on the one side, and six Cubits broad on the other side, which was the
breadth of the Tabernacle.

2. And the breadth of the Door was ten Cubits, and the sides of the Door were
five Cubits on the one side, and five Cubits on the other side; and he measured
the length thereof forty Cubits, and the breadth twenty Cubits.

3. Then went he inward, and measured the Posts of the Door two Cubits, and the
Door six Cubits, and the breadth of the Door seven Cubits.

4. So he measured the length thereof twenty Cubits, and the breadth twenty
Cubits before the Temple, and he said unto me, This is the most Holy place.

5. After he measured the Wall of the House six Cubits, and the breadth of
every Side-chamber four Cubits, round about the House on every side.

6. And the Side-chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in order,
and they entered into the Wall which was of the House, for the Side-chambers
round about, that they might have hold, but they had not hold in the Wall of
the House.

7. And there was an enlarging, and a winding about, still upward to the
Side-chambers, for the winding about of the House, went still upward round
about the House; therefore the breadth of the House was still upward, and so
increased from the lowest Chamber to the highest by the midst.


THe measuring of the outward and inward Court being finished, here our Prophet
is brought to, and showed, the measures of the Temple it self, and the things
pertaining thereunto.

Verse. 1. He brought me to the Temple.
The Gates, Courts, and Porch, hitherto had taken up the Prophet; but now he is
at the Temple: from lower things he is carried to more sublime.

The Posts six Cubits broad.
The Posts themselves could not be so broad, but the Posts together with the
Cloisters, which they supported, were so.

The word Temple, is chiefly used in this Chapter, once it is mentioned in the
42. Chap. verse. 8. here seven times in the 1, 4, 15, 20, 23, 25. verses. It Is
convenient therefore to speak in this place of the Temple.

There be three considerable parts of the Temple. 1. The Porch. 2. the Body, or
Temple it self. 3. The Sanctum Sanctorum.

1. For the Porch, of that Ezekiel speaks in the two last verses of the 40.
Chap. And he brought me to the Porch of the House, etc. This Porch was twenty
Cubits in length, and eleaven in breadth; of the same length was the Porch of
Solomon's Temple; and Ezekiel's exceeded it in the breadth thereof one Cubit, 1
King. 6.5. For the breadth of Solomon's Temple was but ten Cubits. Nothing is
spoken of the height of this Porch; Solomon's was 120. Cubits, 1 Chronicles. 3.4.
and doubtless this was not short of it. The Hebrew calls the Porch (...) Vlam.

2. The Body, House, or Temple, it self (it is in the 1. verse.) was that part
which stood between the Porch, and the Sanctum Sanctorum. The length of this
was 40. Cubits, and the breadth 20. Cubits. Solomon's was 60. Cubits long, 20.
Cubits broad, and 30. Cubits high, 1 King. 6.2. But when it is said, Solomon's
was 60. Cubits long, the length of the Sanctum Sanctorum is reckoned in, for
that was 20. Cubits long, and so upon that account Ezekiel's Temple was 60.
Cubits long. They call the Temple (...) Hecal.

3. The Sanctum Sanctorum: Then went he inward, and measured the most Holy
Place, verse. 3. so it is called, and it was 20. Cubits in length, and 10. Cubits
in breadth; so that the Temple being as long again as broad, was quadrangulum;
and this being as broad as long, was quadratum, a perfect square. This they
call (...) Oraculum.

As the Court before the Temple was apiece, 100. Cubits long, and 100.
Cubits broad, Chap. 40.47. So the Temple it self, taken with all the appendices
of it, was so; the breadth of the Temple-courts, and thickness of the Walls,
etc. make 100. Cubits: and likewise the length of the Temple-courts, etc. make
100. Cubits, as Haffenrefferus exactly demonstrates.

Of the signification of this Temple.
Some make the Court belonging to it, to represent the World; and the Temple,
to represent Heaven. It may be considered, whether the Porch do not point out
the common Professor; the Temple true Saints, who are Temples of the Spirit,
and the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Saints in glory, the condition of those made
perfect.

The true representation of this Temple, I take it, is the Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ; both his Body Natural, and his Body Mystical, viz. the Church.

1. It Is a representation of his Natural Body, Solomon's Temple, and
Zorobabells, or the 2d. Temple was so. Joh. 2.19. says Christ, Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up: And why Ezekiels Temple, should
not type out Christ, I see no cause. There be many things wherein it fitly does
so.

1. This Temple was holy, verse. 3. This is the most holy place; hence it is
evident, the other part of the Temple was holy. The Hecal was holy, though not
so holy as the Devir; and the body of Christ was holy, Luke 1.35. That holy
thing, etc. Act. 13.35. Thou shall not suffer thine H^ly one, etc. 1 Pet. 2.22.
Chap. 1.19. Heb. 7.26. He was holy, harmless, und^filed, separate from sinners.

2. It was very lightsome and beautiful within; it was adorned with Cherubims,
and Palm Trees, verse. 18.19. so the Lord Christ was full of light: Col. 2.3. In
him were hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge: He was adorned with
all the graces of the Spirit; He was full of grace, and truth. Joh. 1.14. Cant.
5.10. Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer then the children of men.

3. By the Temple, they came to know the mind of God; one part of it was called
Devir, the Word, or Oracle; there God spoke: so by Christ, we come to know the
mind of God. Joh. 1.1. He is (...) the Word. He brought the mind of God to us,
and declared it to the world, Heb. 1.2. God has in these last days spoken unto
us by his Son. Christ was an Ambassador sent from God, to acquaint us with the
mind of the King of Nations: and he did it faithfully, Joh. 15.15. All things
which I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.

4. The Temple was God's delight: it is called an House, for God dwelt in it,
and manifested his glory there; Ezekiel. 43.4, 5. The glory of the Lord came into
the house: yea, the glory of the Lord filled the house. And Psalm. 29.9. In the
Temple does every one speak of his glory. There God's glory is seen: Is not
Christ such a Temple? Did not God come into the Temple of his Body. 1 Timothy
3.16. Col. 2.9. There the glory of God was seen fully. Joh. 1.14. The Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory, as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. The glory of God never
appeared so evidently, as in this Temple; and God delighted therein. Mat 3.17.
This is my bel^ved Son, in whom I am well pleased. See Rev. 3.12. Him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out: And I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the
City of my G^d, which is New Jerusalem. God is establishing, and will establish
New Jerusalem, with Pillars daily, more, and more; and therein is strength to
be found: not in the World, or in Babylon, 1 Timothy 3.15.

5. There were Cherubims, and Palm Trees in the Visional Temple, verse. 18, 19,
20, 25, 26. and in the Church of Christ there are Cherubims, and Palm Trees.
These Cherubims, may note the presence of the Angel in the Church, 1 Cor.
11.10. There were Angels in the Church of Corinth. And so in the Temple John
speaks of, Rev. 14.15, 17. Each Cherubim had two faces, one of a Man, another
of a Young Lion; to signify the wisdom, strength, and zeal of the Angels,
which are employed for the good of the Church. Or, by Cherubims, understand
those Christians, who were wise, stout, and zealous for the truth, and cause of
God; such as loved not their lives to the death, Rev. 12.11. But were beheaded
for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, Rev. 20.4. These Cherubims
looked to the Palm Trees, they were patient under all crosses, afflictions, in
hope of certain victory, Rom 8.35, 36, 37. Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ; shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword, etc. Nay, in all these things, we are more then
Conquerors, etc. Their eyes were upon the Palm Trees. And Rev. 9.7. they had
Palms in their hands, they were certain of victory, whereof Palms, and
Palm Trees are emblems.

There be several things, wherein the Saints do resemble Palm Trees.

1. They are always green, and growing; so are the Saints, Psalm. 92.12, 14. The
righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree: They shall still bring forth fruit
in old age.

2* Palm Trees cannot endure dung: Magnopere abhorrent a fimo, they hate it: So
the Saints, they hate Superstition, Idolatry, and all sin, as dung; they will
dye rather then worship the Beast, or his Image; rather then receive his Mark
in their foreheads, or their hands. Rev. 20.4. they watch and keep their
garments undefiled.

3. The Palm Tree bears up against all weight laid upon it; and the Saints do
the like in all their troubles, and afflictions: Paul met with sharp tryal's,
yet he fainted not, but found more strength, 2 Cor. 4.16. And Chap. 7.4. He
says, I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation:
And Romans 5.3. We glory in tribulation.

4. These Cherubims, and Palm Trees were the ornament of the Temple; and
Christians, who are wise, courageous, and patient under all trials, are the
ornaments of the Church of Christ.

5. This Temple, with the Porch, and Buildings belonging to it, was great, and
large, verse. 12, 13, 14, and 15. 100. Cubits in breadth, 100. Cubits in length.
So the Church of Christ is great, and large. In the Apostles times, there were
thousands of the Jews believed, Act. 21.20. It was Prophesied in Isays days,
that all Nations should flow unto the Mountain of the Lord, that is, the
Church, Isa. 2.2. And in Daniels days, Chap. 7.14. That all people, languages,
and nations, should serve Christ. And John in the vision saw it made good, Rev.
7.9. I beheld a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations,
kindred, people, and tongues which stood before the Throne, and the Lamb.

2. It Is the representation of Christ's Body Mystical, and that in several
things.

1. All things in this Temple were measured, as in the 40. also the 41, 42, 43,
and 47. Chapters appears: So in the Church, the Mystical Body of Christ, Ephesians.
2.21. Paul tells the Ephesians, that the Saints are a Building; and such a
building, as is fi^ly framed together: and so framed together, as to make a
Temple; all which could not be done without measuring. Psalm. 45.10, 11. Hearken
(O Daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear: forget also thine own people,
and the Fathers house. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for he is
the Lord, and worship thou him. Here was measuring of the Church and fitting of
her, for her beloved: So Rev. 11.1. John must measure the Temple of God, and
the Altar, and them that worship therein: All in the Church must be measured by
the Word.

2. Christ was in this Temple, and did all therein, and showed all to the
Prophet, (as in reading the former, this, and subsequent Chapters, is clear.)
So in the Church, Christ is there, and does all, Col. 1.18. He is the Head of
the Body, the Church, and the Head does all. All influence, all dominion, all
direction, is from him. Christ is in the midst of the Golden Candlestieks, and
walks up, and down, doing, and declaring, what he pleases there, Rev. 2.1.
Chap. 21.3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be
their God.

3. In this Temple were Chambers, Galleries, and Stories, noe above another, as
verse. 6, and 16. of this Chap. and verse. 3, and 6. of the 42. Chap. So in the
Church, there are several ranks, and degrees of Officers, and Members, 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. There be Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, Elders. 1 Timothy 5.17. Deacons. 1 Timothy 3.8. So for Membes, some are
Babes, 1 Cor. 3.1. some are little Children some Young men, some Fathers, 1 John 2.12, 13. In the Church of Christ, foam are higher then others, in gifts
and graces.

4. In this Temple were Posts and Pillars, strong and great; Chap. 40.9, 10,
14, 16, 21, 24, 26, 29, (...), 33, 34, 35, 37, 48, 49. and Chap. 41.1, 3, 21.
Chap. 43.8. Chap. 45.19. Chap. 46.2. In Solomon's Temple there were Pillars,
Jachin, and Boaz, by which was noted God's establishment of the Temple, and the
strength that was in it, 1 King. 7.21. 2 Chronicles. 3.17. And in the Church of
Christ are Posts, and Pillars. James, Cephas, and John, were Pillars, Gal. 2.9
And was not Paul a great, and strong Pillar, who had the Care of all the
Churches upon him, 2 Cor. 11.28. Are there not many Posts, and Pillars in the
Church of Christ?

Of it, also, Chap. 44.13, 45.
Of the Most Holy place.
In the 4 verse. it is described to be 20. Cubits long, and 20. Cubits broad;
parallel to the Sanctum Sanctorum in Solomon's Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3.8. Which was
20. Cubits broad, and 20. Cubits long, and 20. Cubits high, 1 King. 6.20. And
though there be no mention of the height of this Most Holy place, it is propable
it was of the same height with Solomon's, as well as of the same breadth, and
length. This was called the inward, or inward house, or house within, 1 King.
6.15. Ezekiel. 41.3. The Oracle, 1 King 6.20. And the Most Holy place, 1 King.
7.5. the inner house, the Most Holy place.

This place leads us to the consideration of Heaven, which is the Most Holy
Place. Psalm. 20.6. Deuteronomy. 26.15. Heaven is Holy, and God's Holy habitation, and
our happiness is there. Into this place the High Priest entered once a year, and
made intercession for the people, Heb. 9.7. And Christ is passed into the
Heavens, and there intercedes for his, Heb. 9.24. Chap. 7.25. From the Most
Holy place was the mind of God revealed. Psalm. 60.6. God has spoken in his
Holiness, in his Sanctuary, or Most Holy place. Some render it, There God
dwelt, between the Cherubims, and opened himself unto them, Psalm. 99.1. Number.
7.49. Moses heard the voice of one speaking to him, from off the Mercy Seat,
that was upon the Arc of Testimony, from between the two Cherubims. So from
Heaven, the Most Holy place, God makes known his mind. Nehem. 9.13. Thou
spakest with them from Heaven. Dan. 4.31. There fell a voice from Heaven. So
Mat. 3.17. Lo, a voice from Heaven. From thence came both Law and Gospel,
which is called the Word of God. Rev. 20.4.

In the Most Holy place the Glory of God appeared most, between the Cherubims,
and in the Highest and Most Holy Heavens. There the Glory of the Lord is most
conspicuous, most eminent among the Angels, and glorified Saints.

Again they used to pray, and lift up their hands toward the Most Holy place.
Psalm. 28.2 David prayed, and lifted up his hands toward the Holy Oracle, that
was, the Most Holy place; as is clear from 1 King. 8.6. And do not the Saints
in their Worship, especially in prayer, lift up their hands, and eyes unto
Heaven, that Holy place. Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as
Incense, and the lifting up of my hands, as the Evening Sacrifice.

Or, this Most Holy place, may prefigure the New Jerusalem; which was to be so
Holy, that nothing, staind corrupt and defiled, might come there. Ren. 21, 27.
There shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of Life. When Aaron entered into the Holy place he must be washed
with water, and be clad with Holy garments, Levit. 16. And all those that enter
into the New Jerusalem, must be cleansed from their sin, and clothed with
righteousness. Rev. 14.4. Those that stood with the Lamb, were not defiled
ones, but such as were clothed with white robes, Rev. 7.9.

Verse. 5, 6, 7. The side Chambers were in three ranks, one above another, and
the breadth of the house increased upward; there were winding-stairs, and the
higher they ascended, the wider was the house. Those in the Church are not all
of one rank, whether Officers, or others; some are of the lower rank, some in
the middle, and some uppermost: There be children, young men, and old men; and
the higher any get, the more enlargement, and greater breadth do they see in
the things of God, and this Temple; and notwithstanding this difference among
them, there is a sweet harmony between them, and they serve one another.

Verse. 8. The foundations of the side-chambers were a full reed of six great
cubits.
Of the great Cubit, see before, Chap. 40.5. Here was good measure. In things
belonging to the Temple, the Lord should have not common cubit measure, but the
great-cubit measure.

Verse. 9. The thickness of the Wall was five cubits.
The breadth, or thickness of the Wall, say some, was so many cubits from the
Wall of the House, not so thick in it self. But the Hebrew is, The thickn^ss of
the Wall was five cubits. It was substantial, and so should Temple-work be.

That which was left.
Quod derelictum domus, says Montanus; the empty, or void place, locus
derelictionis. There will be some void, and empty rooms, in the Church of God.

Verse. 10. Between the chambers, was the widness of twenty cubits.
Not between the side-chambers themselves, but between them, and those over
against them. Some had better entertainment then others; some were to be in the
chambers, others in the widness, or empty place.

Verse. 11. Toward the place that was left.
See before, verse. 9. It was five cubits round about.

Verse. 12. The building that was before the separate place.
Piscator makes the separate place to be, Spatium resectum. The Hebrew is ante
faciem segmenti, before the face of the Partition; for it was particula
respecta e suo atrio.

Toward the West.
Hebrew i, s the Sea, that is, the Mediterranean-sea, which lay Westward.

Verse. 13 14, 15. Containing the measures of the house, the building before the
separate place, the Walks, Galleries, and Porches of the Court, and they were
100. cubits in length, and 100. cubits in breadth. Every thing here was
measured, and nothing neglected; so exact was the Lord in Temple-work.

Verse. 16. The Windows were covered.
Solomon made for the Temple, Windows of narrow lights, but not covered.
Sanctius says, they were covered, Quia in retis modum erant fabricatae
cancellato ordine, aut in pertuso ligno frequentibus perfossae foraminibus.
They might be covered with lettises, shuttings, or curtains, which might be
removed at pleasure.

Verse. 17. Within and without by measure.
Hebrew is measures. Not only the outside, but inside also is measured, the
height, breadth, and length. The Lord Christ will measure Christians of what
height, breadth, and depth they are. Their actions, affections, and graces,
will be measured, Rev. 11.1.

Verse. 18. And it was made with Cherub^ms.
The Cherubims import the presence of the Angels in the Church, 1 Cor. 11.10.
Their Communion with the Saints in worship, 1 Cor. 10.20. Rev. 5.11. and 7.11,
12. Their Ministration unto, or for them, Heb 1.14. They are for the Lord of
the Temple, and those wait upon him there. They look toward the Palm Trees,
and their wisdom, and strength is laid out for their good.

Verse. 19. So that the Face of a Man was toward the Palm Tree on the one side,
and the Face of a Lion, etc.
Of the Cherubims faces, see Chap. 1.10. what is said there. In the 18, 19, 20,
25, 26. the Palm Trees are mentioned again, which are ever green, growing,
tending ^^wards though pressed down with weight, and signs of victory, and
great joy, being carried in the hand, or worn on the head; and are ornaments to
the place where they are, figuring what the persons in this Temple should be,
Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14. Joh. 12.13. Rev. 7.9. by sufferings, and pressures they
mount upwards, overcome, are filled with joy, 2 Cor. 1.5. Acts 5.41. and so are
great ornaments to the Church of God.

Of the Altar.
In the 22. verse. it is said, The Altar of wood was three Cubits high, and the
ength thereof two Cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and
the walls thereof were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the Table that is
before the Lord.

This Altar, was the Altar of Incense, and stood before the Oracle, or Sanctum
Sanctorum. Such an Altar was in Moses days made for the Tabernacle, Exodus
37.25. He made the Incense Altar. In the Temple of Solomon also, there was an
Altar of Incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. Vzziah went into the Temple of the Lord, to
burn Incense upon the Incense-Altar.

This Altar was a representation, or Type, of Christ, who is said to be our
Altar, Heb. 13.10 and in many things it did represent him.

1. Though it were of wood, yet it was Of Shitten wood, Exodus 30.1. which the
Septuagints render (...), of incorruptible wood. So Christ his humane nature
was incorruptible, (...), it saw no corruption, Act. 13.35.

2. This Altar of Incense which Ezekiel. saw, was larger then that under the Law,
it was two Cubits in length, that but one; it was three Cubits in height, that
but two; as appears Exodus 37.25. This held out that the worship of God in
Christ's time should be enlarged, it was among the Jews only before, but then
it should be among the Gentiles also. Mal. 1.11. From the rising of the sun,
unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and
in every place Incense shall be offered to my name. 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men
pray every where; Under Christ, the Incense-Altar was to be every where.

3. Sweet Incense was offered up to God, pure Incense Exodus 37.29. upon this
Altar, Exodus 30.7, 8. where the people prayed, the Priest offered Incense, Luke
1.9, 10. and when we pray, Christ offers up our prayers, with the Incense, and
perfume of his merits, Rev. 8.3, 4. The prayers of the Saints, ascend up before
God, out of the Angel's hand, who was Christ. The Golden Altar, for so the
Altar of Incense is called, Number. 4.11. Christ perfumes the prayers, and
services of his Saints, with his merits, and so presents them unto his Father.
It Is said Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has given himself for us, an offering, and a
sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. So that what ever he presents to
the Father, or is presented in his Name from the Saints, is pleasing, and
acceptable to him. All the imperfections, and impurities of them, are done away
by him.

4. Upon this Altar was incense, morning and evening; it was a perpetual
Incense, Exodus 30.7, 8. So Christ, our Altar, offers up prayers perpetually for
us, Heb. 7.25. He ever lives to make intercessiom for his.

5. This Altar of Incense had horns, Exodus 30.2, 3. At every corner thereof was
an horn, which sets out the strength, and power of Christ. Rev. 9.13. I heard a
voice from the four horns of the Golden Altar, which was Christ, whose power is
in all the quarters of the World. Christ's intercession with the Father, is
powerful to descry the enemies of his people, and to deliver them.

This Altar is said to be the Table that is before the Lord. There is something
in this expression worthy consideration.

1. That poor, sinful, weak, unworthy creatures, may come to Christ, not only
as an Altar, to have their prayers presented unto God, but as a Table, to have
refreshing for their souls. There the hungry may have meat* and the thirsty
drink: He is the bread, and water of life, His flesh is meat indeed, his blood
is drink indeed, Joh. 6 35.55. He has a Kingdom, and a Table for his, Luke
22.30. He feeds them, and leads them to living fountains of water, Rev. 7.17.
He has hidden Manna for his, and a Tree of Life to refresh them with, Rev.
2.7, 17.

2. That the Lord himself is delighted, and satisfied in, and with Christ; as
we are with a Table full of dainties, having the choicest meats, and choicest
drinks. Mat 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in wh^m I am well pleased; with his
person, with his graces, with his offices, with his actions, with his
sufferings, with his meri s and with the prayers of the Saints he presents unto
me, I am well pleased: Christ is the Altar, the Table, the Sacrifice, and the
meat and drink upon the same. So is the Lord taken with the intercession, and
merits of Christ, that his soul delights in him, Isa. 42.1. If any of the
children of God sin, and thirst for pardon, and peace; we have an Altar, a
Table before the Lord. 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins.
The Father is so pleased with him, that for his sake presently he grants us
pardon, and peace.

Of the doors of the Temple.
Verse 23. The Temple, and the Sanctuary had two doors, which are described in
the 24. and 25. verse.

These doors were to open, and shut at pleasure; and by them the entrance was
into the Temple, and Sanctuary, or Most Holy place. What else do these suggest
unto us, but the Media salutis, the means whereby we come to be in, and of, the
Church of God? The Gospel, and it is ordinances, faith, repentance, and baptism,
are the means to salvation; by them we obtain entrance into the communion of
Saints, the Favor of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven. Christ is said to be the
way, Joh. 14 6. and the door, Joh. 10.7. because he has given us the means,
which are the way, and door to the Church, and unto life. These doors are to be
open for the sheep, and to be shut against the goats: We may also understand by
these doors, the Ministers dispensing the Gospel. and the ordinances thereof;
who are to be holy, vigilant, and zealous, as the Cherubims; and constantly
green, growing, and flourishing, as the Palm Trees, verse. 25.

Verse. 26. On the Windows, Posts, Chambers, and thick Placks, were Palm Trees,
on the one side, and on the other.
They had Palm Trees wrought, or engraven on them on both sides; implying that
the materials of Christ's Temple must not be common, but curious, and carved
work; if all the Walls of Solomon's house, were carved round about with carved
figures, of Cherubims, and Palm Trees, and open flowers, within, and without, 1
King. 6.9. much more must the house of Christ, and every thing in it, have
carved work upon it, viz. the ingravings of God's Spirit, Psalm. 45.13. Rev.
21.18, 19.

The EXPOSITION continued upon the Remaining Chapters of EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLII.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
1. Then he brought me forth into the outward Court, the way toward the North,
and he brought me into the Chamber that was over against the separate place,
and which was before the building toward the North.

2. Before, the length of an hundred Cubits was the the North door, and the
breadth was fifty Cubits.

3. Over against the twenty Cubits, which were for the inward Court, and over
against the pavement, which was for the outer Court, was Gallery against
Gallery in three Stories.

4. And before the Chambers, was a Walk of ten Cubits breadth inward, a Way of
one Cubit, and their Doors toward the North.

5. Now the upper Chambers were shorter, for the Galleries were higher then
these, then the lower and then the middlemost of the building.

6. For they were in three Stories, but had not Pillars, as the Pillars of the
Courts: therefore the building was straightened, more then the lowest, and the
middlemost from the ground.

7. And the Wall that was w^thou^, ^v r against the Chambers, toward the outer
Court, on the forepart of the Chambers, the length thereof was fifty Cub^ts.


IN this Chapter, progress is made in the descrip^ion of the Temple, Chambers,
Walks, Ways, Galleries, Walls, Priests, Garments, Holy Things, and the outward
Courts, are here spoken of.

Verse. 1. Then he brought me forth into the outer Court.
Difference there is amongst Expositors, what Court this was; whether the
utmost Court of all, which was the Court of the people, or the next Court to
that which was the Priests Court, or the Court the Temple stood in, where the
separate building was; called the outer Court, in respect of the Temple, into
which he was brought out of the Temple: The 7, 8 9, 14. verses speak of outer
Court, and this outward Court was that where the Temple stood, as Sanctius, and
others, observe.

Formerly has been spoken of the outward Court, representing the amplitude of
the Church; here it is conceived to hold forth the visibility of the Church;
that which is outward is visible. The Church whilst it is in this world, is the
outward Court. It Is not the outward Court which is the profane place: It Is not
the world, but the outward Court; which is a place separate from the world, yet
visible in the world. The Church of Christ is prefigured in Scripture, and set
out by visible things. Sometimes by the Arc of Noah, as 1 Pet. 3.20. sometimes
by a Mount^in, as Is. 2.2. sometimes by a Vineyard, and Vine, Isa. 5.1. Psalm.
80.8, 9. sometimes by a City, Psalm. 122.3. Rev. 21.2. sometimes by a Ship, Luke
5.3. sometimes by a Candlestick, Rev. 1.20. sometimes by a Dove-house, Isa.
60.8. sometimes by a Garden, and by a Spring, Cant. 4.12. sometimes by a Bird,
Ezekiel 16.8. sometimes by a Flock, and a Fold, Psalm. 78.52. Joh. 10.16. sometimes
by a Temple, 2 Cor. 6.15. All these are visible things, and set out the
visibility of the Church eminently.

Verse. 3. For the inner Court.
As the Church visible, is by the outward Court represented; so the Church
invisible, the Mystical Body of Christ, is by the inner Court.

Verse. 4. Before the Chambers, was a Walk of ten Cubits breadth inward, a Way
of one Cubit.
There is a broad way, and a narrow way; a ten Cubit-way, and an one Cubit-way.
The Church in this world is under various dispensations: at one time it has
prosperity, and freedom; it is in a Walk of ten Cubits br^adth. It Is not
straitened at all, as in Salomons, Hezekiahs, and Josiahs days; So in part of
the Apostles days, the Church had rest throughout all Judaea, Galalaea, and
Samaria, and were edified, and, walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Spirit, were multiplied, Act. 4.31. At that time the
Churches had liberty, and prosperity, they had ten Cubits breadth; and the time
will come, when the Church shall have greater latitude, liberty, and
prosperity, than ever she yet had.

At another time, the Church is in streights, afflictions, darkness,
temptations, persecutions, etc. it is in a Way of one Cubit, verse. 4. Such a way
is narrow, and straight, and that is the way the Church is often, if not most,
in. Was not the Church in the way of a Cubit, when Elijah could see none but
himself in that way?

The Lord Christ told his Disciples of such a way. Mat. 7.14 Narrow is the way
which leads unto life. it is a way of one Cubit, and few do find it; there be
sharp afflictions Fiery Serpents. Wild Beasts, Thorns, Briars, Pits, Stones,
Rocks, Thieves, and Robbers, in this way; all which the Church of God meets
with sooner or later. Rev. 7.14. These are they came out of great tribulation,
these suffered heavy, and many things for Christ's sake; they were in the
one-Cubit-way.

Verse. 5. The Galleries were higher then these.
The Hebrew is, did eat up, or prevaill; that is, as Montanus renders the word,
Capiebant angulos ex ipsis, they took away some room from the uppermost
Chambers. There is difference between particular Churches; some are higher,
some are larger then others.

Verse. 6. Had not Pillars.
The strength of this Temple was not every where a like, some parts had
Pillars, some had none, or not equal to others; the Chambers had not Pillars,
as the Pillars of the Court. So in the Church of Christ, some parts of it have
strong Pillars, eminent Teachers, whereas other parts are destitute, wholly, or
have such as are weak; the Church at Jerusalem had strong Pillars in it, all
the Apostles who were full of the Spirit, and taugh infallibility. Other
Churches had not such Pillars. Those in Macedonia wanted help, and therefore
Paul had a vision of a Macedonian in the night, begging of him to come thither,
and help them, Act. 16.9. The Primitive Churches had able, gracious, and wise
Officers, such as were Pillars of a truth; in them and sometimes since have
been strong Pillars in some parts of the Church, Pillars of Marble, Brass, yea,
Gold; but in others, none, or weak ones.

The Building was straightened more then the lowest, and the middlemost from the
ground.
Some Buildings are broadest at the top, this was not so, but more strait
upwrtds. It Is harder with some parts of the Church then others. Those are
highest in the Church, meet with more storms, troubles, temptations, then those
are lower; the upper parts of the house are more obnoxious to winds, and
weather. Paul was high in the Church, and what hardships, what tempests did he
meet with? See 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Chap. 11.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

These Chambers were some greater, some lesser, verse. 5, 6. plainly intimating
that in the Church of Christ, from what part soever men came, there should be
entertainment, and suitable accommodation for them. If the Kings of the East
come in, Rev. 16.12. there shall be Chambers for them. Let men come from North,
South, or West, there be Gates to let them in, and Chambers to receive them
when they are in. Isa. 60 8. Men shall come flying from all parts, as Doves to
a Dove-house, in which are many Lookers, Holes, or Chambers, for all the Doves:
So in the Church of Christ when men come thither, they shall find Chambers,
good accommodation.

Verse. 7. The Wall over against the Chambers, the length thereof was fifty
Cubits.
This Wall was answerable to the Chambers, which were fifty Cubits in length,
verse. 8. The Wall of God's protection extends as far as the Church does, or any
part thereof.

Verse. 8. Before the Temple were an hundred Cubits.
Fifty Cubits in the inner Court, and fifty in the outer Court, says Junius.

Verse. 9. The entry on the East Side.
Some read the words thus, When he that brought me from the East. The Prophet
was led by a Divine hand, from one place to another, Chap. 40.3.

Verse. 10, 11, 12. There, Chambers toward the East, North, and South are
mentioned. These Chambers were some greater, etc.

Verse. 13, 14.
13. Then said he unto me, The North-chambers, and the South-chambers, which
are before the separate place, they be Holy chambers, where the Priests that
approach unto the Lord shall eat the most Holy things: there shall they lay the
most Holy things, and the Meat Offering, and the Sin-offering, and the
Trepass Offering; for the place is Holy.

14. When the Priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the Holy
place into the outward Court, but there they shall lay their garments, wherein
they minister, for they are holy: and shall put on other garments, and shall
approach to those things which are for the people.


Of the Chambers, and the Priests, in the 13, and 14. verses.
The Chambers, and the Priests, are the two principal things in these verses.

1. For the Chambers, they are described, 1. From their situation, they were
North, South, and before the separate place. 2. From their Holiness, they were
Holy Chambers. 3. From their use, which was, 1. For eating of Holy things. 2.
For custody of Holy things,



2. For the Priests, here is 1. Their duty, which is, 1. To approach unto God.
2. To lay up the Holy things
2. A direction what garments they are to Minister in, how to dispose of them,
and what they must use at other times.


The building, where these Chambers were, was very large, as appears from
Chap. 41.12. it was seventy Cubits broad, and the Wall of the Building five
Cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety Cubits, and it was
before the separate place. Some make the separate place the Temple, but it is
better understood of the space of ground at the West End of the Temple; and lay
next to the Chambers joined to the Temple, or between those Chambers, and the
Priests-chambers.

In time of the Gospel, great numbers in the Western parts, from Jerusalem,
have come in to Christ, and embraced the Gospel; which was prefigured by the
great Building, and the separate place, which were at the West End of Ezekiel.
Temple, and ever since the Gospel came into these Western parts; and Christ
has had a Church here: there has been a thick wall of protection about it, so
that neither Heathenish, nor Antichristian Powers could destroy it.

Here be many things considerable about the Ministers of the Gospel, who are
represented by the Priests, what they did, and had.
The Priests did approach unto the Lord: it was their office to do so, and to
minister unto him, Ezekiel. 43.19. Aaron and his Sons ministered unto God in the
Priests office, Exodus 28.1, 41, 43. And it is the office of the Ministers under
the Gospel to approach unto the Lord, to offer up prayers unto him for the
people, 1 Timothy 2.1. They are so near unto God, that they are called his
Stewards, Tit. 1.7. H s Servants, Act. 16.17. They approach unto God as
Stewards and Servants, to their Lords and Masters. The Elders were near the
Lamb, and had golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints,
Rev. 5.8. they presented the requests of the Saints unto the Lord: In all
administrations of the Gospel, the Ministers appro^ch near unto God; and in all
their approaches, he looks to be sanctified by them.

The Priests who were in God's service, had good accommodations; they had
Chambers, and were to eat of the most holy things: this signified, the care God
would have of the Ministers in the days of Christ, and the good provision he
would make for them, they should not be without accommodations, and means; Gal.
6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in
all good things. Here is large Provision made for the Gospel Ministers,
Whatever good things people possess, they ought to communicate a part thereof
to their Teachers; something is due to the Teachers, and it is duty in the
Taught, to pay it. The Ministers are to have Meat; and Chambers, accommodations
to eat their Me^t in. 1 Cor. 9 13, 14. Do ye not know, that they which Minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they
which Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Here is a Divine Ordinance
for Minister's maintenance. It Is also here hinted to us, that the Priests were
to eat of the best of the most holy things; that it, the Tithes, and Offerings,
which were to be of the best, Mal. 1.8, 14. And certainly, under the Gospel,
the Ministers of it, are not to be turned off with the meanest, and worst of
things; if you have choice spirituals from them, is it not equal they should
have answerable temporals from you?

Holy things were to be laid in holy places; holy offerings, and holy garments,
were not to be laid any where, but in the holy place. Under the Law, some
places were holy; but under the Gospel, holiness of places is taken away,
according to what was Prophesied, Mal. 1.11. From the rising of the sun, even
unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and
in every place Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: And
according to that Paul gave out, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands; he makes all places alike, for the outward Celebration
of Worship; yet the Truths, and things of the Gospel, are to be laid up in holy
places, that is, in holy Hearts. James 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw
nigh to you, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double
minded. Holy hearts are fit places for God, Christ, Spirit, Gospel, and all the
Ordinances of it, James 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. 1 Cor. 11.28. Heb. 10.22. These
pl^ces show that holy hearts are requisite for holy things. So, that of Christ,
Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine; their hearts are foul, and so incapable of holy things;
they are not fit repositories for such things.

Here is, in the 13. verse, mention made of three Offerings, The Meat-offe^ing,
the Sin offering, and the Trepass Offering.

1. The Meat Offering, it was of fine Flower, Oil, and Frankincense, or only
of fi^e Flower, and Oil; and then it was to be B^ked, Fried, or Sodden; no
Leaven, or Honey was to be used therewith; but every Meat Offering was to be
seasoned with salt, see Levit. 2. per totum. Or it was of Ears of Corn, the
first fruits, Ears dried by the fire, even Corn beaten out of full Ears, verse.
14. Part of this Meat Offering the Priests were to burn upon the Altar, for a
sweet savor; and the rest they were to eat in the holy place, Levit. 6.15, 16.

2. The Sin-offering, whether a Bullock, or any other beast, was most holy,
yea, whatsoever touched the flesh thereof, was holy. Some of the blood of it,
was to be brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to reconcile
withal, in the most holy place, which was not to be eaten, but burnt. The
Priests, and all the Males among the Priests, were to eat of this sacrifice,
etc. Levit. 6.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

3. The Trepass Offering. There was one and the same Law for this, and the
Sin-offering; it was to be killed where the Burnt-offering was, and the blood
to be sprinkled round about upon the Altar; what was to be burnt, and what to
be eaten by the Priests, you may see Levit. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5* 6, 7.

These Offerings were types of Christ, who is our true Meat Offering, the bread
of life, the nourishment of every hungry, and thirsty soul. His flesh, and his
blood, are meat and drink indeed; at his Table we feed upon him crucified, and
so our Meat Offering; he is our Sin-offering, and Trepass Offering, 2 Cor.
5.21. He was made sin for us, that is, a Sin offering, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. See, Heb. 10.12, 14.

In the 14. verse. it is said, The Priests must not go out of the holy place,
into the outward Court, which comprehends this mystery in it, viz. That the
Ministers of the Gospel, those have given up themselves to Christ, and the
Church, ought not go out from their spiritual employment unto the world, and
worldly affairs, but to mind that great work they are called unto. For, who is
suffici^nt for such things, 2 Cor. 2.16. Paul instructed Timothy, and in him,
all others in this truth, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth intangleth himself
with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be
a Soldier. When men are called to be Soldiers, they must mind their
Soldiery, not other things; it will not please their Captains, and Comm^nders,
they cannot discharge their trust: So Ministers, having a great Captain, and
Commander, the Lord Christ who has chosen them to be his Soldiers; they must
mind their spiritual Soldiery, they must not trouble, or distract themselves
with the cares, or affairs of the world; if they do, they can neither be
faithful to their interest, nor please their Lord, and Master. Romans 12.7. Those
that Minister, must wait on their Ministering, and those that teach, on their
teaching; they must not wait upon, or meddle with other things, Col. 4.17.
Publicis insudare debent, qui nomen dedere militiae, Soldiers might not
entangle themselves about Husbandry, Cattle, Merchandising, or other affairs,
but they were to mind the public.

The Priests when they approached to God, had other garments on, then at other
times; they had holy garments on them; they might not come nigh God, but in
holy garments: afterward they changed their garments, when they were to deal
with the people. Which informs us, that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to
have other frames of Spirit in them, when they are nearer unto God in the
duties of his worship, then at other times; then they are to put on holy
garments, they should be clothed with zeal, fear, and other holy affections.
They are to discharge their office with gravity, and authority, that their
Ministry be not despised. God will be s^nct^fied in them, that come near unto
him; they must not come in their old garments, with old ordinary spirits: but
with holy garments, holy spirits, s^nctifying God in their hearts, making him
their fear, and dread, and car^y themselves as Ambassadors of God, standing,
and pleading for him. But when they are out of public administrations, they
may put on other garments; they must be clothed with humility, love, bowels of
mercy, meekness, long-suffering, as 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. In common conversation,
and converse with the people, they ought not to be high, and haughty, lording
it over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. but to be ensamples to the flock, of wisdom,
charity, patience, faith, and holiness They are to become all things to all
men, that they may win some to Christ.

Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
15. Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me
forth toward the Gate, whose prospect is toward the East, and measured it round
about.

16. He measured the East Side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds with
the measuring reed round about.

17. He measured the North-side, five hundred reeds, with a measuring reed
round about.

18. He measured the South Side five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.

19. He turned about to the West Side, and measured five hundred reeds, with
the measuring reed.

20. He measured it by the four sides, it had a Wall round about five hundred
reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation between the Sanctuary,
and the profane place.


THe 15. verse. shows us, how exact a Building the Church is, it is an house
measured within, and without; When Christ had done measuring the inner house,
he comes forth and measures the outward parts. Nothing is left unmeasu^ed;
Solomon's House, or Temple, was not so exactly built, and measured, as the
Church of Christ is. That is God's Building, 1 Cor. 3.9. and he exceeded
Solomon in wisdom, and so in building. See what a structure the New Jerusalem
is, Rev. 21.10. etc. which makes good that Psalm. 102.16. When the Lord shall
build up Sion he shall appear in his glory.

There is difference among Interpreters about the reeds, mentioned in the 16,
17, 18, 19. verse. Some would have them to be so many cubits only, from that in
Ezekiel 40.47. where it is said the Courts was an hundred cubits long, and an
hundred cubits broad. Others would not have five hundred reeds, or cubits to be
on any one side, but that all the sides measured, made up the sum; be it five
hundred cubits, or five hundred reeds. But most interpreters are of the mind
that, each side was not only of five hundred cubits, but five hundred reeds.

The words for measuring reed, are Bickushi hamiddah, In calamo mensu^ae, which
was the great reed, says Alapide, of six cubits, whereas the vulgar reed was
only of five cubits; that this reed was six cubits is clear from Chap. 40.5.
So that the five hundred reeds, were three thousand cubits, and the four sides
came to twelve thousand cubits; which shows how spacious, and vast, the Temple
was: From these verses are presented to us,

1. The Extent, and latitude of the Church which should be, in all quarters of
the world, under Christ: He measured the Gate to the East, and the East Side,
to make known the Eastern people should be of the Christian Church. He measured
the North-side, showing thereby that the Northern parts should come thither. He
measured the South, and West-sides, assuring us thereby, that the people of
those parts should come unto Sion. Christ sent his Apostles to all N^tions Mat.
28.19. They went East, West, North, and South, enlarging the borders of the
Gospel, inviting, and bringing in the Gentiles daily, Mark. 16.15. Go into all
the world, and Preach the Gospel to every creature: The Church of Christ is all
the world over, The sound of the Apostles went into all the earth, that is, all
parts of the earth, and their words to the end of the world, Romans 10.18.

2. The Stability, and Firmness of the Church. The Temple here measured was a
perfect square, five hundred reeds on the East Side, five hundred reeds on the
West Side, five hundred reeds on the North-side, and as many on the South Side.
Buildings which are four square, are most stable, firm, and lasting: Things, or
persons, who are firm, constant, and complete, are termed (...). Such is the
Church, it is stable, and permanent; The gates of Hell cannot prevail against
it, Mat. 16.18. It Is built upon Christ the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. And
is established in righteousness, Isa. 54.14.

3. The Luster, and Beauty of the Church. Great buildings in the form of a
Square are beautiful, and gloriors; such was that Ezekiel saw, it was a
Quadrature, every side proportionable, holding forth beauty, and glory. Cant.
6.4. says Christ of his Church; Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah,
comely as Jerusalem. Tirzah, and Jerusalem were chief Cities in Canaan; for at
one, Kings of Israel kept their Courts, 1 Kings 14.17. And at the other, Kings
of Judah dwelt. These Cities had much beauty, and comeliness in them, and unto
them Christ likens his Church. Certainly, the Church is the most beautiful, and
glorious thing in the world, to them who have eyes to see it; many saw no
beauty in Christ, Isa. 53.2. but Christ was beautiful, and glorious, to them
who had eyes to see it, Joh 1.14. And many see no beauty, no glory in the
Church of Christ; but where spiritual eyes are, there they are seen. The Church
it set out by a Golden Candlestick, Rev. 1.20. and that has luster, beauty,
and glory. It Is set out by a woman clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.1. and what
luster, beauty, and glory can there be wanting? It Is set out by a Bride, the
Lambs Wife. When the Bride of a great Prince, has on her royal apparel, and is
decked with all her Ornaments, and Jewels; Is she not beautiful, glorious and
shining? Such is the Church arrayed with fine linen, the righteousness of
Saints, Rev. 19 8. Such is New Jerusalem, having the glory of God, Rev. 21.9,
10, 11.

4. The Safety of the Church. This Temple had a wall round about, five hundred
reeds long, and five hundred reeds broad, sufficient for the defense of it on
every side. And the Church in the Gospel Times has a wall about it, long, and
broad; a wall thai reaches from East, to West; from North, to South; a wall
higher then the Heavens, deeper then Hell, and broader then the Earth, viz. The
power, and providence of God. Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, lest any hurt
it, I will keep it night, and day. Here is a wall better then that of Wood,
Ezekiel. 41.22. then that of Stone, Prove. 24.31. then that of Iron, Ezekiel. 4.3.
then that of Brass. Jer. 1.18. Such walls have been battered, and broken,
undermined, or climbed over; but this wall is not subject to any of them. The
wall of New Jerusalem, is great, and high, Rev. 21.12. sufficient to secure all
that be within.

5. The Sanctity of the Church. This wall, as it was a wall of security, so of
separation; it was, to separate between the Sanctuary, and the profane place;
that those in the profane place might not come into the Sanctuary, where the
holy ones, and holy things were. The Church of God is a company called out of,
and separate from, the world; who have given up themselves unto God, and
Christ. The Corrinthians were called out of the world to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2.
And the Macedonian Churches gave up themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. So that
all the Churches of God are a chosen generation, an holy nation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
Cant. 4.7. Unholy ones, who are without in the profane world, should not enter
into the Church. God has set a wall of discipline to keep them out, that the
Church may not be defiled by them. It Is said of the New Jerusalem, That there
shall in no wise any thing enter into it, that defiles: the Angels will keep
them out, for at the twelve Gates thereof will be twelve Angels, Rev. 21.12.
who will let none in but Saints, so that all her people shall be righteous,
Isa. 60.21.

The EXPOSITION continued upon the Remaining Chapters of EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLIII.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. Afterward he brought me to the Gate, even the Gate that looks toward the
East.

2. And behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the East:
and his voice was like a noise of many waters, and the earth shined with his
glory.

3. And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, even
according to the vision that I saw, when I came to destroy the City: and the
visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my
face.

4. And the glory of the Lord came into the house by the way of the Gate, whose
prospect is toward the East.

5. So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner Court; and behold,
the glory of the Lord filled the house.

6. And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house, and the man stood by me.


THIS Chapter, and the next in general speaks of the Ministry, and Sacred
Worship of the new Temple; more particularly in this 43. Chapter we have 1. A
New Vision, in the first 6. verses. 2. The speech of the Lord unto the Prophet,
from the 7. verse to the end of the Chapter.
Concerning the New Vision, things considerable are; 1. The time when it was.
2. The place where it was. 3. The object of this Vision: where we are to note,
1. The place whence it came. 2. The sign of it. 3. The effects of it. 4. The
resemblance of it. 5. The receptacle of it.
4. The Consequents of it, which are 1. The Spirit's raising up the Prophet. 2.
His leading him into the inner Court. 3. The filling of the Temple with glory.
4. The Lord's speaking to the Prophet.
5. The presence of Christ with the Prophet.


For the 1. When it was that Ezekiel had this Vision. Not at his first coming
to the Temple, but after he had been led from place to place, seen the several
Gates, Courts, Chambers, Parts, Appurtenances, Ornaments of the Temple, and all
exactly measured within, and without, after those things he had this Vision.
Which insinuates thus much, that, after men have waited upon Christ, followed
him, and learned the nature, and condition of the Church invisible, and
visible; then the Lord affords Visions of himself, and his glory: when men come
first to Sion, enter into Church Fellowship, they must not think to see the
glory of God, till they are acquainted with the inward glory, and outward
beauty of the Church, till they understand the measuring of Christ therein.
Those that are in the Church, in due time see glory. It Is good to be there, and
to wait being there.

2. The place was at the Eastgate. He was brought from the West Side of the
Temple to the Eastgate, where he had this Vision coming out of the East.
Christ is Sol justitiae, the Sun of righteousness; and the Sun's motion is from
the East, Westward; So here, this glorious Vision came out of the East, and
entered by the Eastgate, which led directly to the Sanctum Sanctorum. It Is the
Lord Christ brings us out of darkness to light, and shows us the way into the
Temple, and Most Holy place.

3. The object, Glory. Behold! the glory of the God of Israel! That was, some
figure, image, or manifestation, representing the glory of God: In Chap. 1.26,
27. Ezekiel. saw the likeness of a Throne, of a man of fire. And Chap. 8.4. Chap.
10.18. There were visions, where he beheld the glory of the God of Israel, and
the glory departing; that is, some representation of his glories, which was
leaving the Temple, and them; signifying that God was wroth with them, and
departing from them. But here the glory was coming to them, importing that
God's wrath was laid down, their sins pardoned, and he graciously reconciled
unto them. It was sin caused the glory to depart; man's wickedness draws the
glory away, but nothing in, or of man, caused the glory to return. It Is said,
the glory came, it came freely, un-deservedly, un-expectedly; there was cause
of great mourning, when it departed; and there was as great cause of rejoicing,
when it returned.

Whence came it? from the way of the East. Christ's star was seen in the East,
Mat. 2.2. His coming was from thence, Zechar. 3.8. Chap. 6.12. Christ is called
Tzemach, which the Septuag. render (...), the Vulg. Oriens, that is, the East:
Because Christ should come from heaven, and inlighten the dark world, as the
Sun does, when it rises in the East. Luke in his 1. Chap. verse. 78. calls
Christ (...), which we render the Dayspring, and may be rendered the East, for
the day springs in the East first; be it East, or dayspring, it is from on
High. Christ came from heaven to bring light into the blind world. Hence says
Christ, Joh. 8.12. I am the light of the world, the great light, the Sun of it;
which, r^sing in the East, shines into the utmost parts of the West.

The next thing it, the sign of the glory. And that was a voice, such a voice,
as was like the noise of many waters; in the 1 Chap. verse. 24. When the
Cherubims went, the noise of their wings, was like the noise of great waters.
As the voice of the almighty waters, use to roar, and make a great noise, Jer.
31.35. and 51.55. Such waters are strong, and there is no resistance of them;
men cannot row, or sail against them. This voice minds us of the voice of
Christ, in the Gospel; The sound whereof went into all the earth, Romans 10.18.
and Rev. 1.18. Christ's voice is said to be as the sound of many waters; it was
strong, and irresistible. He taught them with Majesty, and Authority, Mat.
7.29. They were not able to answer him, Mat. 22.46. Joh. 8.9. not to withstand
the wisdom, and truths he put into his disciples, Luke 21.15. Act. 6.10. Rev.
11.5. Christ's voice in the Gospel, is an efficacious voice.

The Effects of it, were two. First, The earth shined with his glory. Before
the coming of Christ, the world was full of Heathenish, and Hellish darkness;
and Canaan was full of Types, Ceremonies, and Shadows; there was little light,
or luster, There. But, when Christ came, the Oracles of the Heathen ceased, and
the Jewish shadows vanished, and the earth shined with the glory of the Gospel.
Mat. 4.16. The people which sat in darkness, saw great light: and to them
which sat in the region, and shadow of death, light has sprung up. When the
Jews were under clouds, and darkness; then Christ came, and brought the
glorious Gospel to them. When Christ was born, Luke 2.9. there was glory shone
round about the shephards; signifying, that the glory of the Lord would fill
the earth, yea, all the world.

Or, this may refer to the destruction of Mystical Babylon, and coming down of
the New Jerusalem from Heaven: for of the one, it is said, Rev. 18.1, 2. An
Angel came down from heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened
with his glory. And he cried mightily, with a strong voice, Babylon is fallen,
etc. And Chap. 21. of New Jerusalem, it is said v. 23. The glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. When these things be, the earth
will be filled, and shine with glory.

2. Ezekiel fell upon his face. The luster of Divine glory, sense of his own
frailty, and weakness, caused him to fall upon his face; here I might enlarge,
but of this falling on his face, was spoken Chap. 1.28. and the Observations
rising thence are there to be seen.

The 4. thing concerning this glory, is the resemblance of it, verse. 3. And it
was according to the appearance of the Vision which I saw, even according to
the Vision that I saw, when I came to destroy the City, etc. The Prophet being
sent of God to prophecy the destruction of Jerusalem, says here, when I came
to destroy the City. The Chaldee is, when I prophesied, then had he such a
vision as this was, Chap. 1. That which he declared to be done, he says he
d^d. The Prophet was in Babylon, when the City was destroyed, he did not put
forth a finger toward destruction of it, he only prophesied against it. So
Jeremie was set over Nations, and Kingdoms, to root out, to pull down, and to
destroy; this he did by prophesying against them, not otherwise.

The same Vision, which at first appeared to the Prophet in a way of judgment,
appears now to him in a way of merit; before, it prefigured the destruction,
here the restoration of the Temple, City, and Land. The Vision for outward
appearance, was like what he saw in the 1, 8, 9, 10. Chapters; but in the end,
and use, totally differing from, yea, contrary unto, the same. There he saw God
angry, the glory departing from the Temple, and going out at the Eastgate:
Here he sees God smiling, and the glory returning the same way it went out;
Here he beholds sweet reconciliation between God, and the Church, made up by
Christ.

The 5. thing is the Receptacle of this glory, and that was the Temple, or
House which had been measured, verse. 4. And the glory of the Lord came into the
House. This House, or Temple, as has been showed before, signified both the
Body, and Church of Christ; for his Body-natural, that was the Receptacle of
glory, Col. 2.9. Joh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16.

For the Church, his Mystical body; that is a Receptacle of Glory also. Isa.
60.1. The glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. And verse. 19. The Lord shall be
unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God, thy glory. There is an estate of
the Church to come, wherein it shall be very glorious In Solomon's Temple there
was glory, but glory in a cloud, 1 King. 8.10, 11. But in Ezekiel's Temple,
there was glory without a cloud, a greater glory, even such a glory as made the
earth to shine. This is the glory which the Saints look for, and shall see in
due time: Rev. 21.3. Behold! the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them, and be their God.

What is said of the Church, is to be understood also of every believer, who is
a Receptacle of glory, a Temple of the spirit of Christ, and God, 1 Cor. 6.19.
1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 13.5. Who ever Christ has measured out to be a Temple,
shall receive glory. 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the light to shine ^ut of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, says Paul, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. The Gospel is a
Glass; in it we see the face of Christ, and in his face the glory of the Lord:
and are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. It Is
observable here, that when the glory of God departs from a Church, or people,
it is not for perpetuity, but for a season. The glory went out of the Temple,
and City, at the beginning of Ezekiel. prophecy; but he saw the same returning,
before the end of his prophecy. The Arc, when taken by the Philistines,
caused Phinehas wife to name her Son Ichabod, saying, The glory of departed
from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.21. But after seven Months, the glory returned again to
Israel, Chap. 6. The Arc was sent home, God caused it to return again. Long
have the Jews now been without an Arc, and without glory: but in due time the
glory of the God of Israel will return unto them, for Romans 11.26. There shall
come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And
when the scaling of the 144000. out of all the Tribes shall be, Rev. 7. then
shall they stand on Mount Sion with the Lamb, and so the glory will be in the
midst of them, Rev. 14.1.

The consequents of this Vision, or Glory returning, come next to be
considered: and the first is, the Prophets raising, verse. 5. So the spirit took
me up. He was fallen upon his face, as not able to behold the brightness of
that glory appeared; and being in that posture, the spirit took him up, In Chap
2.1, 2. the Spirit spoke to Ezekiel, being down upon his face, entered into him,
and set him upon his feet. But here he took him up, he dealt with him, as a man
does with his friend fallen: Hence springs this consideration, that those are
humbled, and humble, with sense of their own vileness, and weakness, through
apprehension of glory, and greatness; shall soon be raised, and comforted.
Sight of glory is an humbling thing. Ezekiel. Chap. 1.28. And here again, he was
humbled upon that account; he saw so much luster in that glory, so much
greatness in the Lord, that, convinced of his own vileness, and nothingness, he
falls down upon his face, as being wholly unworthy to behold such a sight, to
partake of such mercy; but presently the spirit being full of love, bowels, and
compassion, steps to him, and takes him up. He suffers him not to lie
affrighted with glory, or affected with misery, but is a speedy comforter unto
him. The humble find mercy, and are raised; when the proud meet with judgment,
and are thrown down.

The 2. consequent is, The Spirit leading of him, and that was into the inner
Court. He had led him into several places, and now leads him into the inner
Court; whereby he came to understand the mysteries of, and behold the glory in
the Temple, which none are able to do, without the leading of the Spirit. None,
destitute of the Spirit, can enter into the Church, to understand the things
thereof, and behold the glory thercin. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. 2 Cor. 3.18. It Is the
Spirit makes men discern spiritual things, it is the Spirit that leads us from
knowledge to knowledge, from mystery to mystery, and from glory to glory; he
leads into the Temple, and into the inner Court, he reveals the deep, and
glorious things of God unto the Saints.

The 3. is the filling of the house, and that with glory, verse. 3. Behold, the
glory of the Lord filled the house. There was abundance of glory in it, the
Temple, and Sanctum Sanctorum, were full of it. This leads us to consider, not
only the Temple, rebuilt after the Babylonish Captivity, which the Lord said
by Haggai, Chap. 2.7. that he would fill it with glory: And that the glory of
it sh uld be greater then of the former house, verse. 9. which was fulfilled in
Christ's bodily presence there; but it leads us also unto Christ, who was
fil^'d with the glory of the Spirit, and fullness of the Deity, Col. 2.9 and
unto the Church of Christ, which is filled with the glory of the Gospel; (for
it is glorious, and has shining light in it, 2 Cor. 4.4.) but chiefly unto the
New Jerusalem, wherein a greater glory is expected to be seen, then has ever
yet been; there will be abundance of grace, and glorious effusions of the
spirit. See how glor^ous the New Jerusalem is, Rev. 21.

The 4. thing, is the Lord speaking unto Ezekiel verse. 6. And I heard him
speaking unto me. The Hebrew is, I heard a Saying to me from the house, a
saying from the glory, or from the Lord; being in that Glory which filled the
house. The Temple says Vatablus, the Sanctum Sanctorum says Maldonate; but we
understand it of both. As the glory was in the Temple, so the voice came from
the Temple. The Lord spoke not of the Temple, as Lyra would have it; but from,
or out of, the TempIe.

The thing pointed out hereby, is this; That God reveals, and makes known his
mind in his house, in the Church; he speaks from the Temple unto his, Isa.
66.6. A Voice from the Temple, a voice of the Lord. There God discovered his
displeasure toward his enemies, and his good will toward his servants. In
Judah is God known, Psalm. 76. There his mind is known, The law goes forth out
of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. Where his Church
is, there is his presence, there he utters his voice, there he opens his mind.
Why did David desire to dwell in the house of the Lord, all days of his life;
but to behold the beauty of the Lord, which appeared there eminently; and to
inquire in his Temple, because the Lord there spoke, and answered the desires
of his servants, Psalm. 27.4. When he was troubled at the prosperity of the
wicked, what did he then? but, enter into the Sanctuary of God, and there he
was resolved, he understood their end, Psalm. 73.17. The Spirit, and Christ,
spoke in the Churches, and to the Churches, Rev. 2. and 3 Chap. And in the 16.
Chap. verse. 1. A great voice was heard out of the Temple.

And the Man stood by me.
The Hebrew is, And a Man was standing by me. Some make this Man, to be an
Angel; but it was he, mentioned Chap. 40.3. The Man whose appearance was like
the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring-reed.
This was Christ, the Master Builder. Zech. 6.12. Behold the Man whose name is
the Branch, he shall grow up out of this place, and he shall build the Temple
of the Lord. This Man stood by Ezekiel. to assist, encourage, and interpret things
unto him.

Whence comes this Observation,

That the Lord Christ, who is the chief Architech in Temple-work, stands by his
Prophets, and Servants who are employed therein.

When the Temple was first built, many were employed therein, but they were not
left to their own wisdom, and skill. Solomon was princip^l therein; he was
present, counseled, directed, and assisted; therefore it is said, he built the
house of the Lord, 1 King. 6.2. So in Ezekiel's Temple, a Type of the
Gospel-Temple, Christ was present, he counseled, directed, assisted; he stood
by the Prophet, he stood by the Apostles. Mat. 28.20. Lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world. He stood by Paul, Acts 18.10. I am with thee,
so Chap. 23.11. And Paul does acknowledge it, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. All men forsook
me, they showed their unfaithfulness; Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me,
and strengthened me; he was about Temple-work, for it follows, that by me the
Preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might fully hear.
Christ was with him, to instruct, encourage, and bless him, and his labors.
Christ walks in the midst of the Churches, and holds the stars thereof in his
right hand, Rev. 2.1. And Chap. 5.6. it is said, In the midst of the Elders
sto^d a Lamb.

There be two things worthy notice, from the 5, and 6. verses considered
together.

The 1. Is the distinction of Subsistences, in the Divine Nature, and Essence.
Here are 3. distinct Ones named. 1. The Spirit which took up Ezekiel. 2. The
glory of the Lord, whom he heard speaking out of the house, which was the
Father. 3. The Man standing by him, which was Christ. Here is the Spirit,
Father, and Son, who as they have distinct personalities, so distinct
operations. The Spirits work, is raising up; the Fathers, speaking; and the
Sons, assisting, or standing by.

The 2. thing, is the gradual proceedings of God, in carrying on his, from
mercy to mercy. Here be 5. steps of mercy.

The 1. Is the Spirit taking up the Prophet, being fallen upon his face. Had
any one come, and raised the Prophet, being down; it had been kindness.
Especially, if Daniel, Zorobabel, or some Elder of Israel had done it; but one
greater, and better then them all did it, viz. the Spirit of God. This was
great mercy.

The 2. Is the Spirit leading of him into the inner Court. He did not raise
him, and then leave him, but led him. And whither? not into the outward Court,
but into the inner Court. This was a further mercy, a choice mercy, to be
brought so near the Temple.

The 3. Step, was a sight of glory, he saw the glory of the Lord filling the
house; this was a grand mercy, which none of the Jews besides himself saw: As
when Christ was transfigured, and the Mountain shined with the glory of his
transfiguration, Peter, and John saw it, whch was a favor unto them, to see
such glory, and the greater, because none of the other Apostles did see the
same.

The 4. Step, is the Lords speaking unto him, being compassed about with glory.
To have heard the voice of an Angel had been mercy; but to hear the voice of
the great, and glorious God, out of the Temple; this was a height of mercy,
such as Moses had, Exodus 33.11.

The 5. and last Step, is the presence of Christ; he stood by him. Here was
another mercy, and no mean one; Christ In whom were hid all treasures of
wisdom, and knowledge, Col. 2.3. So then here was the whole Trinity employed
at once about Ezekiel; which was transcendent, and superlative mercy. Those are
called to be agents in Temple-work, have need of the whole Trinity: help of the
Spirit to raise, or led them; of a sight of glory, to darken all humane, and
mundane glory before their eyes; of hearing God speak, that they may be taught
of him; and of having Christ present with them, that they may be enabled to go
through their work. John in the Revel. was led from mercy to mercy, from vision
to vision, as appears throughout that book, and especially in the 21. Chap. 1,
2.3 etc. The time will come when the Spirit will lead the Saints into the inner
Court, where they shall see the glory of God, hear his voice, and find Christ
standing by them.

Verse. 7, 8, 9.
7. And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place of
the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel
for ever; and my holy name shall the house Israel no more defile, neither they
nor their Kings by their whoredom, nor by the carkeises of their Kings in
their high places.

8. In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their post by my
posts, and the wall between me, and them, they have even defiled my holy name
by their abominations, that they have committed: wherefore I have consumed them
in mine anger.

9. Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carkeises of their Kings far
from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.


The 2. part of this Chap. being the speech of God to the Prophet, begins at
the words read: and in them we have, 1. A promise of Gods abiding with his
people, and the effect thereof, viz. Sanctification. 2. A declaration of the
cause why God formerly departed from them. 3. A duty, or charge laid upon them,
verse. 9.


The promise of Divine presence, and continuance, is partly in the 7. verse,
viz. in these words, The place of my Throne, and the place of the soles of my
feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever; and
partly in the 9. verse, the last words of it, viz. I will dwell in the midst of
them for ever.

By the place of God's throne, and of the soles of his feet, is meant the
Temple, and City of Jerusalem, where God had formerly dwelt. Jer. 17.12. A
glorious high Throne, from the beginning is the place of thy Sanctuary; it was
God's Throne, and it was the footstool of God, 1 Chronicles. 28.2. It Is granted by
all, that Jerusalem having the Temple in it, represented the Church of God
under the Gospel, in which the promise here is, that God will dwell for ever.
The Christian Church shall have the presence of God in it, and abiding with it
for ever: Mat. 28.20. I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.
John fixes this presence of God in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.2, 3. When New
Jerusalem came down from heaven, then he heard a voice, saying, behold! the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. So Chap.
22.3. The Throne of God, and of the Lamb, shall be in it: There both God, and
Christ will be, and dwell.

This sets out the great esteem God had of, and the great complacency he had
in, Jerusalem; he esteemed it as his Throne, and took delight in it, as in his
chiefest dwelling. Isa 69.1. God says, Heaven is his Throne, and earth his
Footstool; this is the honor he puts upon heaven, and earth, and the same he
puts upon Jerusalem, and now puts upon the Christian Church; It Is his Throne,
his Footstool, the place he esteems above all others, the place he takes more
complacency in then all others. Such shall be the presence of the Lord in it,
that it shall be called Jehovah-Shammah, that is, The Lord is there, Ezekiel.
48.1. And such shall be his content, and delight therein, that Jeremy tells
you, it shall be called the Throne of the Lord, Jer. 3.17. At that time they
shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, and all the Nations shall be
gathered unto it.

The effect of God's presence, viz. sanctification, is comprehended in these
words, My holy name shall the house of Israel no more defile, neither they, nor
their Kings by their whoredom, etc.

Of profaning, and defiling God's holy name, was spoken Chap. 36.20. To let
that pass, the sense here is, they shall avoid all things which do defile; and
sanctify God's holy name, they should keep the worsh p of God, keep from
idolatry, and all arbitrary inventions of men, which Jerome, and Maldonate
refer to the state of heaven, ad Templum Coeleste, and not to the Temple built
after the Babylonian captivity, because that was often defiled by Antiochus,
Pompey, and Titus, and deserted by the Lord. Others refer it, as is here said,
to that Temple; because, the Jews after their captivity, did for ever hate
idolatry, and serve the true God, though not in a right manner. If these words
do in part refer to the state of the Church after the captivity, yet
principally they refer to the state of it after Christ, and that time too when
New Jerusalem shall be extant; for Antichrist has greatly defiled the holy
name of God with his idols, and will worship; but then, nothing that defiles
shall enter, Rev. 21. 27. then shall be made good that in Zech. 14.21. In that
day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord; they shall
be all true Israelites.

Nor their Kings by their whoredom.
By whoredom, the Prophet understands Idolatry, which is spiritual whoredom,
of which has often been spoken. Not only the people, but even Kings, and
Princes were given much to idolatry in Israel, and in Judah: they caused idols,
and altars to be set up in most places and countenanced them; they imitated the
very heathens, and became like, yea worse then them, Ezekiel. 5.6, 7. Chap. 16.47.
2 King. 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9. It Is said of Jehoahaz or Jehoiakim, and
Jehoiakim, that they did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that
their Fathers had done, they defiled Jerusalem what lay in them: But of the New
Jerusalem, it is written, Kings shall bring their glory, and honor into it,
Rev. 21.24.

Nor by the Carkeises of their Kings in their high places.
The word for Carkeises is Pegerim, from Pigger, which signifies to be without
strength, sloathful; so Carkeises are deprived of all strength, and move not;
they lie where they are fallen; cadaver a cadendo. The Rabbis tell us, that
the Kings of Judah had an house near to the Temple, yea, joining to it, and
that they were wont to bury their dead in a Garden belonging to it. There they
say, Manasses and Amon were buried, which they gather from 2 King. 21.18, 26.
and that by their Carkeises being so nigh the Temple, it was defiled. But the
places cited do not say, it was in the Garden of the House of the Lord, they
say it was in the Garden of Vzzah; neither do they affirm that this Garden
joined to the Temple.

The Vulgar reads the words in ruinis Regum, in the ruins of the Kings; and so
some Expositors refer it to what we find done by J^siah, 2 King. 23.12, 13. The
Altars which were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the Kings of
Judah had made, and the Altars which Manasseh had made in the two Courts of the
house of the Lord, did the King beat down, and broke them down from thence, and
cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron: And the High Places, which were
before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption,
which Solomon the King of Israel had builded for Ashtoreh the abomination of
the Z^donians, and for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milchom
the abomination of the children of Ammon, d^d the King d file: And he brake in
pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and filled their places with the
bones of men, verse. 14. These Altars, and H^gh Places which Ahaz, Manasseh, and
Solomon made, were utterly destroyed by Josiah, and thereupon called, The ruins
of Kings.

Another exposition of these words, is to understand them of the Children which
were sacrificed to Idols, and passing through the fire: Both Kings, and others,
did so by their children, 2 King. 16.3. Chap. 17.17. Chap. 21.6. Jerem. 19.5.
Chap. 32.35. Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. This p^^ctise of theirs greatly provoked God, and
therefore he says Jerem. 16.18. I will recompense their iniquity and the r sin
double, because they have defiled my land, they have (...) ^ine inheritance
with Carkeises of their detestable, and ^b^minable things. They are called
Carkeises of their Kings, either from the example of Kings, who offered their
children; or from their authority, commanding it; or from the names of their
Idols, which were called Mol^ch, Milcom, and Malchum, 1 King. 11.7. 2 King.
23.13 Zeph. 1.5. which signifies a King. Moses calls Idols Carkeises, Levit.
26.30. and such they are because liveless, Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7. and loathsome
Gillubin, Ezekiel. 22.3. dunghill-gods, and Ehikkutzim, 2 Chronicles. 15.8.
abominations in the abstract. The Carkeises therefore of their Kings, it is not
amiss to expound of those Idols, they caused to be set up, and countenanced.

The Annotations on this place, say, The Jews did deifie their dead Kings, and
kept their bodies for adoration, but as Sanctius says, Nullum, quod ego
viderim, extat in Scriptura, tam impiae atque insanae adorationis vestigium.
That place they cite Psalm. 106.28. is impertinent, They ate the sacrifices of
the dead, that is, things offered to Baal Peor, a dead God.

Verse. 8. In their setting of their Threshold by my Thresholds, and their Post
by my Posts.
The latter part of the former verse, Neither they, nor their Kings, etc.
together with this verse, declare the cause of God's former departing from
them; God did not account the Temple defiled, because the Kings had houses near
unto it, in which they did wickedly, whereas they should have been more holy,
for their proximity to the Temple. This sense some fasten upon the words. But
that has more weight in it, is, Manasses built Altars in the house of the
Lord, and set a graven image of the grove there, 2 King. 21.4, 7. In, or near
the house of God, there was the image of jealousy, Tammuz, and other
abominations, Ezekiel. 8.5, 10, 14, 18. so 2 King 16.11, 12, 14. Ezekiel. 23.39 These
were the Threshold by God's Thresholds, and the Post by God's Posts; these
things caused God to go far off from his Sanctuary, verse. 6.

The precepts, and traditions of men, with their inventions, and additions to
the worship of God, are styled Posts, and thresholds. The Authors of them, do
lean, and stand much upon them, and set them in the way, to hinder others from
enjoyment of Temple-priviledges, unless they will own, and comply with them;
but such Posts, and Thresholds are rotten, and faulty. The Lord's institutions,
and appointments, are sound and good; they bear up his name, and worship; they
are strong, and standing things; and by them we have entrance into his presence.

To make any thing like the institutions, and appointments of God, is
prohibited, Exodus 30.32, 33, 37, 38. None might make anointing oil, like the
holy anointing Oil, which God had appointed; if they did, they were to be cut
off: And men may not make Thresholds, and Posts, like the Lord's Thresholds,
and Posts; much less set them up with the Lord's impose them upon the
conscience, as the Lord's, giving them equal honor, and authority with them.
This is defiling the worship, and holy name of God, which he will avenge; for
he will admit no rival, or proprietorie in the things of his worship; he says,
My Thresholds, My Posts; he will have no adding to, or diminishing from what is
his, Deuteronomy. 12.32.

The scope of God in these words is this, that the worshippers in the new
Temple, shall do nothing of their own private spirits, of their own heads;
there shall be no superstition, idolatry, or humane invention, added to the
worship of God; there shall be no heresy, no false doctrines, no traditions,
or devices of men. Such Thresholds, and Posts, shall not be set up by the
Lord's, they are defiling things, and such things must not enter into the New
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27. neither shall they by their sins cause God to depart
from them; but shall do all things according to the line of his word, and apply
themselves wholly to do his good pleasure.

And the wall between me and them.
There is but the wall between my Sanctuary, and their houses, I am but a
little distanced from them, and yet they have done these things; they have
forgotten me, and defiled my holy name; or, their Altars, Idols, Traditions,
Inventions are a wall between me and them, so that they neither come at me, nor
I at them. Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you, and your God;
they are a partition wall, so thick, and high, that there is no seeing, or
hearing one another.

Wherefore I have consumed them in my anger.
By their will worship, and idolatry, they so displeased the Lord, that he
departed from them, was wroth with them; and so wroth, that he consumed them by
sad, and severe judgments: but under the new Temple, or Gospel Church it should
not be so; being reconciled to his people therein by the Lord Jesus, he will
not leave them, be wroth with them, or consume them. Sin causes separation,
wrath, and consumption.

Verse. 9. Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carkeises of their
Kings, etc.
Junius reads the words in the future tense, Nunc long amovebunt scortationem
suam, Now they shall remove their whoredom far off. The Lord tells Ezekiel
what converted Jews, and others, under the Gospel should do, They should put
all superstition, idolatry, and will worship away, and serve the Lord in all
purity, and so he would dwell amongst them for ever, Rev. 14.1, 4, 5. Rev.
7.14, 15. God is holy, and he will dwell amongst holy ones. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17,
18. God will not leave this Temple as he left the former, but be in it, and
dwell in it for ever. This is his promise, and it is a great, and precious one.
The Sun's presence in the day is a great mercy, but it is gone in the night, and
then all is dark, and doleful. In the Church of Christ, the New Jerusalem,
there will be no night, Rev. 21.25. There the sun will always shine, God will
be present, and perpetually present in it, everlasting light, and glory unto
it, Isa. 60.19.

Verse. 10, 11, 12.
19. Thou son of man, show the House to the house of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their iniquity, and let them measure the pattern.

11. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of
the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings
in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all
the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write i^ in their sight, that
they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do
them.

12. This is the law of the house, upon the top of the mountain; the whole
limit thereof round about shall be most holy: behold! this is the law of the
house.


In these verses we have given out, 1. The Prophet's duty, which is to show the
Israelites the house, with the adjuncts, and appurtenances of it. 2. The house
of Israel's duties; which are, 1. Humiliation for their sins. 2. Measuring of
the pattern. 3. Keeping, and observing the forms, and ordinances of the house.
3. The law of the house, which is holiness, v. 12.


Verse. 10. Thou son of man, show the house to the etc.
The Lord commands Ezekiel to show the house to the house of Israel; he had
seen the house, with all the forms, ordinances, and adjuncts of it; he had seen
the measuring of it, within, and without; he well understood both the frame,
and the house, and the things belonging to it, and so must show it to the Jews.
The Prophets must first see themselves, before they show to others; they must
first be taught of Christ, before they teach others; they must be well
acquainted with Temple-work, know the inside and outside, the forms, and laws
thereof, first themselves, and then make the same known to others. John first
saw New Jerusalem, and the measurings of it, and after that revealed it to
others, Rev. 21. And what they have seen, that they reveal, that they show, and
nothing of their own. Ezekiel must show the house he had seen, and only that.
Ministers under the Gospel should know the form, and ordinances of Christ's
house, and show them, and them only to the people.

That they may be ashamed of all their iniquities.
This Vision was to be shown unto the Jews in captivity, to let them know that
there should be a restoration of the Temple, and Church State, again; and
under it, the state of the Church under Christ was typed out, and this was done
to bring them to repentance. The word for Shame is Calam, which notes, shame
for things in themselves shameful, filthy, and loathsome: The words may be
read, And they shall be ashamed; or thus, And let them be ashamed.

Observe,

When God reveals mercy, and shows kindness to a sinful people, they ought to
be ashamed, and repent of all their former iniquities. See Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, 63.
Chap. 36.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And here they must be informed of this
Vision, and the mercy held out in it toward them, that they might consider
their idolatries, superstitions, and other iniquities, and so be ashamed, and
confounded in themselves. The house of Israel, all Israel, were to be ashamed
of their iniquities, of all they had done amiss in Church, and State. And so
should the House of England be ashamed of all done amiss in Church, and State;
of all corruptions, abominations, and oppressions, which are in the same, we
should be ashamed of them, 1. As acts of filthiness. 2. As acts of folly. 3. As
acts of unkindness, and ingratitude. 4. As fearing a just reproof. 5. As
fearing, God's servants, cause, and name, will suffer by them.


When our shame is of this nature, it is right; if upon other grounds, and
considerations, it is worthless.

Let them measure the pattern.
uJnius reads the words, Vt metiantur universe, that they may measure
universally. Others, let them measure: Fabricam, says the Vulgar; Exemplar,
says Montanus. The showing of them the house, was that they might measure it;
that is, that they might endeavor to understand the measures of it, and so
have the knowledge of it, and the Christian Church, exactly in their minds. It
was a spiritual measuring, which Ezekiel had; and such a measuring they were to
make, to look at the true marks of the Church, which are essential, and
spiritual; not external, and accidental.

Observe,

Those have humbled themselves for their former sins, are fit to be spiritual
Mathematicians.

The house of Israel must first be ashamed of her iniquities, and then measure
the pattern. When we reflect upon our sinful ways, and are brokenhearted, that
we have displeased the Lord; then are we fittest for the knowledge, and
understanding of spiritual things. Daniel 9.13. It Is clear, that humbling of
the soul for sin, Vetus homo exundus est, ut nova sint omnia, and rationem
hujus Templi possimus assequi. Vatab.
and turning from it, makes way for understanding of the truth: The old man is
to be put off, that all things may be new, and so we may attain to the
knowledge of this Temple. Men of corrupt minds, and practices, are unfit for
Temple-work, and the measurings thereof, which must be according to the Word.

Verse. 11. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the
form of the house, and the fashion thereof, etc.
These words seem to contradict what is in the former, ver. where it is said,
Show them the house, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; And here
it is, If they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the
house. In the first; sight of the house is required, as precedaneous to
humiliation; and here, humiliation is required as precedaneous to sight of the
house. The answer to this seeming contradiction is easy: The sight of the
house first, was mercy, and that made way for humiliation; and then their
humiliation upon that, made way for further mercy. First, they had a general
sight of the house, which caused shame; and being thoroughly ashamed, they had a
more distinct and particular knowledge of the same.

The forms, and fashions of the house.
In an house, there be several parts, as Walls, Windows. Doors, Posts, Lintels,
Galleries, Stairs, Chambers, etc. And these are of several forms, and fashions,
which he must show to the house of Israel, even all the forms; which is twice
mentioned: and notes the outward, and inward forms, of the Church.

The outward, lies in profession, in the union, and harmony of the parts; in
the greatness, and extent of the whole; in the discipline, and government of it.

The inward forms consist in those gracious principles; and qualifications are
in those professors, make up the house, and body of Christ, in the power of
godliness, and the cordial closing one with another, in the life, spirit,
purity, and power of Ordinances. There is beauty, and glory in the outward
forms, but most in the inward. Psalm. 45.13. The King's daughter is all glorious
within, and her clothing is of wrought gold: The Church shines without, but is
very glorious within, all-glorious. The Kingdom of God is within men, Luke
17.21. and that is, in righteousness, peace, and joy. Paul had an eye to both
forms, when he told the Colossians, He rejoiced to see their order, and faith,
Col. 2.5.

And the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof.
There were several Gates in this Temple, and they were to come in at one, and
go out at another. Those came in at the North-gate, must go out at the
South-gate; and they came in at the South-gate, must go out at the North-gate,
and not at the Gates they come in by, Ezekiel. 46.9. In this Temple there was no
turning back, but going forward; when the Tabernacle was up, there was looking,
and turning back to Egypt: When Solomon's Temple stood, there was of them who
went backward, and not forward, Jer. 7.21. Isa. 1.4. Jer, 15.6. But in this
Temple they were to go forward, and not backward. Isaiah Prophesied that the
People of this Temple should be all righteous, Isa. 60.21. And the righteous
hold on their way, Job 17.9.

All the ordinances, and all the laws thereof.
The Hebrew word for Ordinances, is Choke, from Chakak, to ingrave upon Wood,
or Stone, and that for Law, is Torah, from Jarah, to instruct, or teach; so
that this latter imports the instruction of the mind, the former the impression
of truth upon the hearts, and affections. Suarez says, De legib. lib. 1. c. 5.
that a Law, properly so called, is illuminative; reforming, and directing the
judgment; and impulsive, moving the heart, and will to action. Some by these
Ordinances, and Laws, understand the rites, and rules they were to observe in
re sacrificali; for it is probable being 70. years in captivity, they had
forgotten them in part, if not wholly: but not only these are here intended,
for then the scope of the vision would extend no further then Zorobabel's
Temple, whereas it refers chiefly to the Temple, and worship of Christ under
the Gospel, as has been showed. The Ordinances, and Laws thereof are here
likewise included, and what the worshipers are to do; when, and how, and which,
belong to the Temple.

First, Observe.

That to repentant men ashamed of all their evil doings, the ways of God's
house are to be made known by the Prophets, and Ministers.

If they be ashamed, show them the form, and fashion of the house, etc. If they
were not humbled for, and ashamed of, their abominations, which caused the
destruction of the first Temple; they must not be informed in the mysteries of
this Temple, either by word, or writing. Impenitency excludes from
Temple-mercies; but shame, and hearty sorrow for sin, makes way for such
mercies. To them so affected, must the forms, and fashions, the comings in, and
goings out of the house; all the outward and inward forms, all the ordinances,
and laws thereof, be made known, by word, or writing, or both; they are to be
admitted to the mysteries, and secrets of the Temple: As for dogs, holy things
are not to be communicated unto them.

Secondly, Observe.

Temple, and Church-work, must not be according to men's phansies, but according
to the mind of God, and that pattern He gives forth.

God set a pattern before Ezekiel, he must set it before the house of Israel,
and they must build, and order the Temple answerably; they must keep the whole
form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof; they might not add to, nor
detract from, what God had prescribed. Moses in the Tabernacle-work, must do
all after the pattern given him, Exodus 25.40. Chap. 39.42, 43. Noah, in his
Ark-work, must keep to what God appointed, Genesis 6.14, 15, 16. 1 Chronicles. 28.11,
12. 13. Solomon, in his Temple-work, was tied to the pattern given out by the
Spirit to David. In the Gospel Church it is so, Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to
observe all things which I have commanded you. Nothing is left to their
liberty, God's appointments only must be in his house, neither antiquity, nor
custom, nor convenience, nor prudential considerations, nor show of holiness,
nor any pretext whatsoever, will warrant any humane invention, brought into the
Church, and Worship of God.

Thirdly, Observe,

That the Temple, and Church of Christ, has distinct, and peculiar laws of
it is own.

Ezekiel must show them the Laws, and O^dinances of the house; not those of
nature, or nations. Aliae sunt leges Caesarum, aliae Christi; Caesar's, and
Christ's laws do differ; his are Civil, and Christ's are Sacred; He rules in
Sion, and man's laws have no place there.

Fourthly, Observe

The Church in due time shall be such a Temple as here it is represented by this
Vision.

It shall be one large, strong, and full of glory, as this visional Temple was.
When God gives forth visions, it is in the thoughts of his heart to make them
good. How shall the house of Israel, the true Christians, keep the laws, and
ordinances of his house, if it never be built? God has not only purposed, but
promised to build it, Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. I will set my Sanctuary in the midst of
them for evermore: My Tabernacle also shall be with them; yea, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. And John saw it accomplished in vision,
hearing God uttering parallel words, Rev 21.2, 3. And doubtless the time is
drawing near for the building of it. Now, men see a difference between the
stones of Babylon, (which must neither be corner, foundation, or wall-stones,
Jem. 51.26.) and the stones of Sion, which are precious, and living; they begin
to creep out of the dust of contempt, and to appear like the stars of the
morning; now, there is a spirit of prayer more then formerly, and more then
ordinary, for the accomplishment of this vision, and great expectation raised
in many to see such a spiritual Temple.

Fifthly, Observe,

The end of making known the laws, and ways of God's house is, that they may be
observed, and practiced.

Ezekiel must show them, and write, in their sight, the forms, laws, and
ord^nances of the house, that they may keep, and do them. God propounds not
divine things only to be known, but chiefly to be done. It Is not enough to
know virtue, but men must endeavor to have it, and to do virtuously. Did a man
know all the forms, comings in, and goings out of God's house, all the laws,
and ordinances thereof, and not observe them, it would not advantage him at
all, but make his condemnation the greater. The end of humane laws, and
ordinances is observation, else they are no better then ciphers: So the end of
God's laws is keeping, and doing of them; it is not knowing, nor hearing, nor
praising, but practice which commends them. Disobedience is a dishonor to God,
to his house, to his laws; Let us hearken to James in this case Chap. 1.22. his
counsel is good, Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
own selves.

Verse. 12. This is the law of the house, upon the top of the mountain, the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy, etc.
Sanctius reads the words thus, This is the law of the house, upon the top of
the mountain and there makes the distinction from the following words. Others
make it before, and refer the words upon the top of the mountain, to the latter
words, not the former. There is no considerable difference, whether the note of
distinction be in the one, or the other place, For the house was upon the top
of a mountain, Chap. 40.2, 6.

The law of this house, viz. the fabric, mountain, and whole compass thereof
was holiness; It Is here said to be most holy. The Hebrew is Sanctitas
sanctorum, The holiness of holiness. The Hebrews do double the word when they
intend a superlative, as a Servant of Servants, Genesis 9.25. that is, most
servile; a King of Kings, Ezra 7.12. that is, the most eminent, and greatest of
Kings; and here the holiness of holiness, that is, the most holy. Such was this
house, and the mountain whereon it stood, and the compass of it round about,
which was by a wall of 500. reeds long, and so many broad, or, thereby was the
separation made, between the Sanctuary, and the profane place, Chap. 42.20.
This house was to be the habitation of God his Throne; a representation of New
Jerusalem, and Heaven it self; therefore it is styled not only hold, but most
holy.

First, Observe.

The Church of God has a good Foundation.

It Is an house upon a mountain, and that is strong, Job. 39.28. Rocks, and
mountains are strong places, they stand immovable. The rock, or mountain, on
which the Church is founded, and built, is the Lord Christ himself, 1 Cor.
3.11. called a mountain, Dan. 2.35. A precious corner stone, a sure foundation,
Isa. 28.16. A rock, 1 Cor. 10. 4. The strength of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.29. The
root of David, Rev. 22.16. and upholder of all things, Heb. 1.3. He upholds the
world, and the Church.

Secondly, Observe,

The Church of God is eminent, and conspicuous.

It Is on the top of a mountain, and that mountain was very high, Chap. 40.2.
where he saw this Temple: which holds forth the visibility, and eminency of the
Church under the Gospel. Isa. 2.2. It shall come to pass in the last days, that
the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it. When one mountain is laid upon another, the uppermost must be very
eminent; the Church here is called a mountain, and this mountain is seated upon
the top of another mountain, even that mountain that fills all the earth, Dan.
2.35. It must therefore of necessity be high, and be seen of the nations; for
it is Prophesied that all nations shall flow unto it. This suits with that, Rev.
21.24.

Thirdly, Observe.

The whole Church of God is to be made up of holy materials.

The house upon the top of the mountain, the whole circuit thereof round about,
shall be m^st holy. There must not be one part of the house profane, another
part holy; but the whole house, and every part thereof must be holy. Isa. 35.8.
There shall be the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it; the
purity of that way will be such, as wicked ones will not dare to tread in it.
Joel 3.16, 17. The Lord shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the heavens, and the earth shall shake: terrible doings there
shall be, but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the
children of Israel. So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in
Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, that is, all Jerusalem
shall then be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any more, to
pollute and defile her. Then shall every pot in Jerusalem, and Judah be
holiness unto the Lord, as Zech. speaks Chap. 14.21. Then shall be shut out all
dogs, sorcerers, whoremongers, mu^derers, Idolaters, and lovers with makers of
lies, as John says Rev. 22.15. and whatever defiles, Rev. 21.27. Peter calls
them of this Temple lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. John calls them sealed ones,
Rev. 7.4. Such as had the Fathers name written in their foreheads, Rev. 14.1.
Precious stones, Rev. 21.19. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.22.

Fourthly, Observe,

The law of this house which is holiness, is specially to be observed.

The verse begins, and ends alike. This is the law of the house, bebold! This
is the law of this house. Hujus domus, so Vatablus. Istius domus, so Junius. As
the house is emphatical, so is the law of it set out with an Ecce, Behold! This
is the law of it, holiness of holiness. All in this house has a law of
holiness writ in it, or upon it. If any thing, or person could come in here
without holiness; such things, and persons would be cast out as unclean, as the
man was who came into the Marriage-Supper without a Wedding Garment, Mat.
22.12, 13. They violate the law of holiness, and must suffer for it: but such
shall not be suffered to enter, Rev. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into
it any thing that defiles; no false doctrine, no humane inventions, or
will worship shall be there, no profane person, no formalist, or hypocrite
shall get in there, but they who are written in the Lambs book of life, verse.
12. there is an Angel at every gate to keep out the unworthy, Isa. 52.11.

Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
13. And these are the measures of the Altar after the Cubits; the Cubite is a
Cubite, and an hands breadth; even the bottom shall be a Cubite, and the
breadth a Cubite, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round about shall
be a span, and this shall be the higher place of the Altar.

14. And from the bottom upon the ground, even to the lower settle, shall be
two Cubits, and the breadth one Cubite; and from the lesser settle, even to
the greater settle, shall be four Cubits, and the breadth one Cubite.

15. So the Altar shall be four Cubits, and from the Altar and upwards shall
be four horns.

16. And the Altar shall be twelve Cubits long, twelve broad, square in the
four squares thereof.

17. And the Settle shall be fourteen Cubits long, and fourteen broad in the
four squares thereof, and the border about it shall be half a Cubite, and the
bottom thereof shall be a Cubite about, and his stairs shall look toward the
East.


IN the 41. Chapt. 22. verse mention was made of an Altar, which was of the
Altar of Incense: Here another Altar is presented to the Prophet, which is,
Altar Holocausti, the Altar of Burnt-offering, which with the appurtenances of
it is described, and measured by the Cubit; not the common Cubit, which
consisted of twenty four fingers breadth; but the large, or Royal Cubit, which
was an hands breadth more, and is here said to be the Cubit that is a Cubit and
a hands breadth, by some called palmae Cubitus. This Altar was a perfect
square, in length and breadth equal, each was twelve Cubits; the bottom,
breadth, and border, with the lesser, and greater Settles, have their several
measures, and distances; it had Horns, and Stairs.

The 15. verse in Hebrew is thus, And the mount of God, four Cubits, and from
the Lion of God and upwards four Horns, so it is in the Margent Hareel, the
Mountain of God. Some understand Focus Altaris, the space where they put the
wood which burned the Sacrifice: Others make it the body of the Altar, which
being between two Settles, or Benches; was so termed, appearing like a little
Mountain. Haariel, the Lion of God, or of the strong God, it is conceived was
the Grate upon which the Holocaust was laid; and this Grate was of the form of
a Lion, as Villalpandus says; but rather it was so called, because, as a Lion
tears, and devours the prey, so the fire of this Altar did eat up the
Sacrifices laid upon this Grate. Whether the Apostle has not some respect unto
this, or Solomon's Altar for Burnt-offerings, when he says, Our God is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. is considerable.

This Altar had Stairs to go up unto it, yet God had forbid Steps, or Stairs to
be make unto his Altar, and gives a reason for it, Exodus 20.26. which was to be
observed of men when they made Altars unto God; but when the Lord prescribed
the form of an Altar for himself, he might according to his own good pleasure,
have it with Steps, or without. It Is probable Solomon's Altar had Steps, being
ten Cubits high, as Sanctius, and the Annotators observe: the Priests also were
to wear linen breeches when they were sacrificing.

These Stairs looked toward the East. That so when they sacrificed, and
worshipped God, their backs might be toward the East, and their faces
Westward, which the wise God ordered so, that he might keep his people from
conforming to, and symbolizing with, the Idolatrous Nations, who with their
faces Eastward worshipped the Sunrising.

This Altar for Burnt-offerings was a type of Christ, as those of Moses, and
Solomon were, Exodus 27.1. 2 Chronicles. 4.1.

1. This Altar was but one, so Christ is our Altar, and our only Altar, Heb.
13.10. The Christian Church knows no other.

2. It had a Grate, whereon the Sacrifice was laid; and fire put to it, whereby
it was burnt. So Christ had a cross, whereto he was fastened; and there the
fire of God's anger did fall upon him, which was due to us for our sins, Isa.
53.5. Mat. 27.46.

3. It had four Horns at the four corners thereof, which signified the
strength, and sufficiency of Christ, for all who should come unto him from the
four corners of the earth. When men were in danger of their lives, they fled to
the Altar, and took hold on the Horns thereof, 1 King. 2.28. Exodus 21.14. and
if they were not willful, and presumptuous sinners, they were safe. What
sinners soever shall come from any part of the world unto Christ, and take hold
of him by the hand of faith, he shall be safe. The four corners of his Altar
are his wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and He is able to save them take hold of him to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25.

4. This Altar was to be seven days cleansed, and purified, verse. 26. of this
Chapt. and Exodus 29.37. and so it was holy, and whatsoever touched it was holy.
Herein is figured the perfect holiness of Christ, who was most holy, Dan. 9.24.
and sanctified himself for the service of the Church, and whoever touches him
by faith is made holy, and whatever is offered up to God upon his Altar
likewise is holy. This Altar sanctifies the gift, Mat. 23.19. Heb. 13.15.

5. It was glorious, and durable, being of Shittim-wood, and Brass, Exodus
27.12. Of Cedar, and pure Gold, 1 King. 6.20. And herein it represented the
Diety of Christ, which is most glorious, and eternal, Heb. 1.3. Chap. 9.14.

6. It was called the mountain of God, being on Mount Sion; he did as it were
dwell there, and took pleasure in the sacrifices offered on it: And is not
Christ Hariel, the mountain of God, is not he the Altar in the mountain of the
Lord's House, Mat. 10 11. Heb. 13.10. Isa. 2.2. Does not God dwell in him, Col.
2.9. Was he not a Sacrifice well pleasing to God, Ephesians. 5.2. Are not we the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Ephesians. 5.20.

And not only so, but the Lion of the strong God: And is not Christ Haariel
the Lion of the mighty God, He is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. The
Lion of God, to whom God has given all power in heaven, and earth, Mat. 28.19.
This Lion has rescued us out of the mouth of that roaring Lion, who intended,
and endeavored to make a prey of all mankind, 1 Pet. 5.8. Heb. 2.14. This Lion
has spoiled principalities, and powers, Col. 2.15. Purged away sin, Heb. 1.3.
Made reconciliation to God, Dan 9.24. Abolished death, and brought life, and
immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10.

The exact measuring of this Altar dictates this, that Ministers should have,
and hold forth the full knowledge of Christ, and especially of him crucified,
as an offering for sin; for therein lies the benefit of sinners to know Christ
crucified. Hence Paul 1 Cor. 2.2. professes he determined not to know any
thing among the Corinthians, (that is, to make known any thing, to preach any
thing) save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. That should be his work to measure
out Christ to them: So Philip preached Christ to the Samaritans, Act. 8.5. And
Peter preached Christ unto the Jews, and others, Act. 2. The virtue of Christ
crucified is to be made known fully.

Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
10. And he said unto me, Son of man, thus says the Lord God: These are the
ordinances of the Altar, in the day when they shall make it to offer
Burnt-offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.

19. And thou shall give to the Priests, the Levites that be of the seed of
Zadock, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, says the Lord God, a
young Bullock for a Sin-offering.

20. And thou shall take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four horns of
it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the border round about:
Thus shall thou cleanse, and purge it.

21. Thou shall take the Bullock also of the Sin-offering, and he shall burn it
in the appointed place of the house without the Sanctuary.

22. And on the second day, thou shall offer a Kid of the Goats without blem^sh
for a Sin-ffering, and they shall cleanse the Altar, as they did cleanse it
with the Bullock.

23. When thou have made an end of cleansing it, thou shall offer a young
Bullock without blemish, a Ram out of the flock without blemish.

24. And thou shall offer them before the Lord, and the Priests shall cast salt
upon them, and they shall offer them up for a Burnt-offering unto the Lord.

25. Seven days shall thou prepare every day a Goat for a Sin-offering, they
shall also prepare a young Bullock, and a Ram out of the flock without blemish.

26. Seven days shall they purge the Altar, and purify it, and they shall
consecrate themselves.

27. And when these days are expired, it shall be that upon the eighth day, and
so forward, the Priest shall make the Burnt-offerings upon the Altar, and the
Peace Offerings, and I will accept you, says the Lord God.


HAving prescribed the form of the Altar, the Lord gives out to Ezekiel, the
Ordinances thereof, the L^ws, and Rites which concerned the Sacrifices, and
Priests, showing him what Priests he would have employed in the service of this
Altar, as also what Sacrifices, and how the Altar is to be purified, which
things extend to the 27. verse. and therein the daily work, and worship of the
Altar is appointed.

Although the chief scope of this Vision be to set out the glory, and greatness
of the Church under the Gospel, and among the Gentiles; yet, because the Jews
at this time being in Babylon were to return unto Jerusalem, therefore the Lord
alludes to Ordinances* Rites, and Ceremonies which were well known among the
Jews holding out under them the spiritual worship of the Gospel.

The Priests to be in the service of this Altar, and to draw near to God, were
to be of the seed of Zadock. David being on his deathbed, Abiathar the
High Priest sided with Adonijah the eldest Son, to make him King, but Zadock
was for Solomon; whereupon after the death of David, Solomon obtaining the
Kingdom, Abiathar was put out of his place, and Zadock made High Priest, 1
King. 2.36. Zadock was constant and faithful, a just and upright man, as his
name signifies; and such men were to serve at this Altar, such as are constant
to Christ, faithful, just, sincere, ought to be in Gospel administration, and
to draw near to God in these Ordinances which belong to the Gospel, which
differ from the Judaical.

Here are three sorts of Sacrifices mentioned, the Burnt-offering, the
Sin-offering, and the Peace Offering, verse. 18, 19, 27. of which, and their
different Rites you may read, Levit. 1. per totum, Levit. 6. from the 24. to
the end, Levit. 3. per totum, with Chapt. 7. from the 11. to the 22. These
Sacrificee were not sufficient to expiate sin, but they were media cultus,
leading them unto Christ. So Baptism, and the Supper are not of great
validity, as to purge away sin, but they are means of worship leading unto
Christ, who only is the expiatory Sacrifice for sin, Heb. 7.27. Chap. 10.10,
11, 12, 14.

Concerning the Bullock for the Sin-offering, two things are proposed,

1. That the blood thereof be taken, and put upon the four Horns of the Altar,
and upon the f ur Corners of the Settle, and upon the Border round about, v^rs.
20. And the like was to be done with the Kid of the Goats, verse. 22. This
presignified the abundant shedding of the blood of Christ, which cleanses from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. and that Christ crucified should be preached to
the four corners of the earth, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 1.23.

2. This Bullock was to be burnt in the appointed place of the house without
the Sanctuary, which shadowed out the place of Christ's suffering, as it is
written Heb. 13.11, 12. The Sin-offering was burnt without the Camp. Wherefore
Jesus also that he might sanctify the pe ple with his own blood, suffered
without the Gate, even in the place appointed, Luke 23.33.

As for the Burnt-offering of a young Bullock, and a Ram out of the flock, both
without blemish, the Priests were to cast salt upon them, verse. 23, 24. In
Leviticus they were commanded with all their Offerings to offer salt, Chap.
2.13. Salt makes all things savory, and preserves from corruption, by the
heat, and sh^rpness of it; and therefore salt was accounted an emblem of
duration, and eternity, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Number. 18.19. We read of a covenant of
salt which notes an inviolable, incorruptible, and perpetual covenant. Sanctius
thinks salt was used in Sacrifices, because it notes prudence, and wisdom;
without which, Sacrifices are unsavory. Without question it notes the wholesome
doctrine of the Gospel, gracious words, and seasonable reproofs, Col. 4 6. Ephesians.
4.29 which are savory to God, and Man. This salting the Sacrifices by the
Priests, types out the office of Gospel Ministers, who are styled by the Lord
Christ, The salt of the earth, Mat. 9.13. and are to season others with
wholesome doctrine, and sharp reproofs. Titus must rebuke the Cretians sharply,
that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.13. The salt of the Gospel will eat
out those ill humors are in men. Christ says Mark. 9.49. Every ^ne shall be
salted with fire, that is, with the fire of the Spirit, the fire of
affl^ctions, or the fire of hell; and every Sacrifice shall be salted with
salt, that is, with grace, and especially the grace of mortification, which
will eat out, and consume those lusts which are offensive to God, to
themselves, and others; and the grace of zeal which will make the affections
mount up to the Lord. True Christians are sacrifices well seasoned, incorrupt
doctrines will make incorrupt souls, and bodies, the salt makes both immortal:
men soundly salted with Gospel Truths shall never perish.

Vres. 26. They shall consecrate themselves.
The Hebrew is, They shall fill their hands. Some by hands understand the sides
of the Altar, because Jad signifies both a hand, and a side; others take hands
for the hands of the Priests, which should be filled with Sacrifices, that is,
with sacrificing-work, and so prefigured the full employments the
Gospel Ministers should have. But the Hebrew word (...) sometimes signifies to
consecrate, as learned Hebricians observe, Exodus 28.41. Thou shall anoint them,
and consecrate them; the Hebrew is, thou shall fill their hand, so Exodus 29.9.
Nu^. 3.3. 1 King. 13.33. Judge. 17.5. In these places the Hebrew is, filled the
hand, which notes consecration according to the Hebrew dialect, and so it
imports the Ministers consecrating, and dedicating themselves unto the work of
Christ, under the Gospel.

The 27. verse speaks of the daily sacrifices, and work of the Altar. One
Sacrifice, or other, was to be offered daily. Two Lambs, one in the morning,
another in the evening, were to be offered daily, Exodus 29.38, 39. these were
for the Burnt-offering, verse. 42. Besides which, here is mention of a
Peace Offering, of which they were neither to eat the fat, nor the blood,
Levit. 3.17. signifying, that those who are at peace with God through Christ,
ought neither to be carnal, nor cruel; but to mortify their carnal lusts, and
to be meek as Christ was. The daily sacrificing of the Priests here, showed the
daily, and constant work of the Ministers under the Gospel; Preaching,
Administering of Sacraments, Praying, and Praising of God, is to be their daily
work; which being done according to rule, and in the name of Christ, makes
them, and the people accepted.

Verse. 28.It shall be upon the eighth day.
Here is foretold, says Master Shepherd, the continuance of the Sabbath in
Gospel-days. The eighth day from the Creation being the first of our
Redemption, Noah is called the eighth, 2 Pet. 2.5. who was the first in regard
of his years, and dignity of person, and first entered into the Ark, Genesis 7.7.
And so the Lord's day may be the eighth in one sense, and the first in another.

The EXPOSITION continued upon the Remaining Chapters of EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLIV.
Verse. 1, 2, 3.
1. Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward Sanctuary, which
looks toward the East, and it was shut.

2. Then said the Lord unto me, This gate shall be shut, it shall not be
opened, and no man shall enter in by it, because the Lord the God of Israel
has entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

3. It is for the Prince, the Prince he shall sit in it to eat bread before the
Lord, he shall enter in by the way of the Porch of that Gate, and shall go out
by the way of the same.


THIS Chapter treats of the Priests, and diverse Ordinances concerning them.

1. Sundry things are presented to Ezekiel touching the Priests. 1. The
privilege of the High Priest, in the three first verses. 2. A reproof of the
Priests for their profaness, and neglect, from the beginning of the 4. verse. to
the 9. 3. The exclusion of some, and deposing of others from the Priest's
office, from the 9. to the 15. 4. What Priests God will accept of, verse. 15, 16.
2. The Ordinances which concern the Priests, are laid down from the 17. verse.
to the end.
Verse. 1. Then he brought me, etc.
The Prophet having seen the Altar for Burnt, Sin, and Peace Offerings, with
the Ordinances thereof, is brought back to the Eastgate, or Gate of the
outward Sanctuary, that which separated the Priest's Court from the peoples, or
the outmost Gate of all. We must follow Christ, which way so ever he leads us,
be it backward, or forward, he has something to reveal unto us which will be
for our use.

Verse. 1, 2. It was shut.
What Gate so ever this was, it was shut; and therefore shut, because the Lord
had entered in by it, and no man might, but the Prince only.

Some take Prince literally for the governor of the people, but the best
Expositors take it for the High Priest, who was preferred above, and so Prince
of all the rest: For in this Chapter he speaks of the orders of the Priests.
This Prince, or High Priest, was a type of Christ. The High Priest was to be
without blemish, anointed with holy oil, to be covered with clean linen, and
clothed gloriously; on him was a plate engraven with holiness to the Lord, he
had the Vrim, and Thummim, he bare the names of the 12. Tribes of Israel upon
his Breast, and Shoulders; as appears, Levit. 22.13 Exodus 29.7. Exodus 28.2. and
42.36. and 30.9. So Christ, our High Priest was without blemish, Heb. 7.26.
Anointed with the Spirit, Isa. 61.1. He was holy, glorious, yea, Holiness
altogether, Luke 1.35. Mark. 1.24. He had all perfection, Col, 1.19. Chap. 2.3.
He bears all Israel in his Breast, and on his Shoulders, Isa. 40.11. Heb. 7.25.

What is meant by the Gate shut, is necessary to inquire. It was not the Womb
of the Virgin which was shut up after the birth of Christ, as Popish
Interpreters expound it. Some of the Ancients make it to be Heavenly mysteries,
which none know: but (...) the Father, and the Son: Some make it the Scripture,
or Book sealed with seven seals, Rev. 5.1. which none could open but Christ.
This Gate shut, rather notes the Gate or Entrance into heaven, which Adam by
his fall had shut, so that no man whatsoever being sinful could open it, or
enter; only Jesus Christ our High Priest has opened it, and entered, Heb.
4.14. We have a great High Priest, who is passed into the heavens: He has
broken all the bars, locks, and bolts, which kept it shut, and has opened the
same; so that now sinners may have access to God. The High Priest once in a
year entered into the Most Holy place, the door opened to none but him; this
typified Christ's opening of heaven, and entrance in thither, as is clearly
expressed, Heb. 9 7, 8, 11, 12, 24. The Tabernacle, and Temple, were
representations of heaven, and so was this Vision of Ezekiel; and as the Gate
here was shut, so was the Gate of heaven, till the Lord Christ, the Archbishop
of our souls, opened the same, and entered. No man has ascended up to heaven,
but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven, Job.
3.13. No man ever by his own virtue, or power, ascended up to heaven, but
Christ; Henoch, and Elijah, neither ascended, nor entered by their own strength,
grace, or goodness. Christ's merits were the Key which opened heaven for them,
and others. Christ is the door, and the way, and no man comes to the father,
but by him, Job. 14.6. It Is by Christ alone, that we come to the knowledge, and
fruition of the Father; he reveals him, and his mysteries, and brings us unto
the enjoyment of him.

Quest. If Christ have entered in by this Gate, why is it still shut, why stands
it not open? for verse. 2. It Is said This Gate shall be shut, it shall not be
opened, and no man shall enter in by it: and why? because, the God of Israel
has entered in by it; therefore it shall be shut.

Answ. 1. It is shut In Principis dignitatem, for the honor of the Prince:
Great persons, and Princes have their Gates shut, all must not come at, and see
them; it was an honor to the Spouse, that she was A Garden enclosed, a Spring
shut up, a Fountain sealed, Cant. 4.12.

2. In Principis usum, that he might go in, and out, at his pleasure; that he
might let in, and keep out, whom he pleased; the wise Virgins were let in by
the Bridgroom, but the foolish were kept out, for the door was shut, Mat.
25.10, 11. In the New Jerusalem, no unclean thing could enter, though the Gates
stood open: and out of heaven no clean thing shall be kept, though the Gate be
shut. Christ has the key to open it for Saints: He opened it for Stephen, Act.
7.56. Behold! I see heaven opened, and the Son of Man standing at the
right hand of God. He opened it for Peter, Act. 10.11.

3 It may be said to be shut, in regard of Christ's long continuance there
before his return: It Is said verse. 3. He shall enter by the way of the Porch of
the Gate, and shall go out by the way of the same. Christ will come again, he
is entered into heaven, and there he will, and must abide, till the time of
restitution of all things. Act. 3.21. Act. 1.11. Heb. 9.28.

Christ who entered by this Gate, was not only Man, but God: he was the Lord
God of Israel, Jehovah, that he might open heaven for sinners; and man, that he
might enter himself.

This Gate was for the Prince, that he might sit in it to eat bread before the
Lord. Aaron the High Priest, was to eat sacred flesh, and bread, in the door of
the Tabernacle, Levit. 8.31. Exodus 29.32. This sitting, and eating bread there,
and that before the Lord, leads us to a double consideration of Christ.

1. His sitting in heaven at the right hand of Majesty, Heb. 1.3. Having
finished the work was given him to do, he ascended oh high, and had the
greatest glory; he sat at God's own right hand in heavenly places, far above
all principalities, and powers, and might, and dominion, and every thing that
is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, Ephesians.
1.20, 21.

2. His communion with, and happiness in the Lord; which is held forth in his
eating bread before the Lord. The communion, and happiness the Saints have
with, and in Christ, is set out by eating, and drinking, Luke 22.29, 30. I
appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may
eat, and drink at my Table, and sit on Thrones, etc. so Mat. 26.29. That is,
that ye may have sweet communion with me, and be happy in the fruition of me,
as I am in the fruition of my Father, and communion with him.

Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
4. Then brought he we the way of the North gate before the house, and I
looked, and behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord, and I
fell upon my face.

5. And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine
eyes, and hear with thine ears, all that I shall say unto thee, concerning all
the Ordinances of the house of the Lord, and all the Laws thereof; and mark
well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the Sanctuary.

6. And thou shall say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel. Thus
says the Lord God, O ye house of Israel; Let it suffice you of all your
abominations.

7. In that ye have brought into my Sanctuary, strangers uncircumcised in
heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my Sanctuary to pollute it; even my
house, when ye offer my bread, the fat, and the blood, and they have broken my
covenant, because of all your abomination.

8. And ye have not kept the charge of my holy things: but ye have set keepers
of my charge in my Sanctuary for your selves.


BEfore, the reproof of the Priests, the 2d. thing considerable in the Chapter:
Here, be 3. things to be minded concerning Ezekiel.

1. His sight of glory. 2. The effects of that sight. 3. The command laid upon
him.
1. For the sight of Glory, being brought to the North-gate, he saw the glory
of the Lord filled the house; that was some visible sight of his glorious
presence: touching this, was spoken in the 43. Chap. verse. 5.

The effect was, He fell upon his face, as before; the sight of glory humbles,
and prepares to receive the commands of the Lord. When the glory, and Majesty
of God is seen, and apprehended, the heart is stricken with awe, and reverence
of God; and the party so affected, is humbled before God, and so made fit for
impression of Divine commands: As here it follows.

Verse. 5. And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold, etc.
In the 40. Chap. verse. 4. we had the substance of this verse, and partly the
very words. Here God requires the inward, and outward parts, the heart, and
senses. Those words, Mark well, are in the Hebrew, Set thine heart: so that the
heart, the ears, and eyes, are to be attentive, and incentive, on what God
commands. The heart must not wander, the ear be heavy, nor the eye rove, when
God speaks, and Temple-work is in hand. The holy God, and holy things, are
exactly to be observed, and heeded by all; but, especially by those are
officers in his house, as Ezekiel was; they must attend to all the Ordinances,
and Laws of God's house; for they must make them known to others, and walk by
them themselves; they must know how to behave themselves in the house of God,
and te^ch others so to do. Especially, they must mark well, the en^^ing of the
house; that is, they must be careful who they admit to be in it, and to partake
of the Ordinances of it, lest both it, and they be defiled; they must mark
every going forth of the Sanctuary, so that none go out at the same door they
entr^d; that they go forwards, not backwards, that they leave not the house of
God, but be looked after.

Verse. 6. And thou shall say to the rebellious, even to the house, etc.
Ezekiel being prepared, must go, and execute the command of God; which was to
reprove the house of Israel, and chiefly the Priests. The sins they are
reproved of, be 1. Rebellion. 2. Abominations. 3. Bringing in unworthy persons
into the Sanctuary, to pollute it. 4. Their sinful Sacrificing. 5. Breaking of
Covenant. 6. Neglecting of their charge, and committing the same to others.


Of the Rebellious house of Israel, and their abominations, formerly has been
spoken. It Is said here verse 6. Let it suffice you of all their abominations;
that is, they are not few, or leight; but many, and grievous: And it is time
now, that ye should be ashamed of, and humbled for them, and turn to the Lord
from them. Him have you provoked bitterly by them, and he has made you suffer
long, and sharply for them. O sin no more, cease from idolatries, and unjust
practices; let what is past suffice: So Peter 1. Epist. 4. Chap. 3. verse.
says, The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles.

The 3. sin, was the introduction of strangers into the Sanctuary, and they
were men uncircumcised in heart, and in flesh. The Gentiles were not
circumcised in flesh, they ought not to have entered into the Sanctuary, Lament.
1.10. Paul was accused for bringing Greeks into the Temple, Act. 21.28. The
Heathen might come into the outward Court, or profane place, as Ezekiel styles
it, Chap 42.20. But into the Temple they might not come, it was a polluting of
it. Sanctius thinks, the Priests received Sacrifices, and Oblations from the
hands of the Heathen, which they offered to God in the Temple, which was
contrary to the Law, Levit. 22.25. The Jews were circumcised in flesh, but many
of them were uncircumcised in heart; they were without faith, they followed
their own lusts, and imitated the Heathens. Such Priests were admitted into the
Sanctuary, as were profane. The Priests, says God, have violated my law, and
have profaned mine holy things, they have put no difference between the holy,
and profane, Ezekiel, 22.26. Elies sons were wicked, even sons of Belial, 1 Samuel
2.12. Vrijah the Priest made an Altar like that of Damascus, and sacrificed on
that, according to the command of the King, 2 King. 16.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
but contrary to the command of God. Such should not have had any place in the
house of God, because they were abomination unto him; they polluted the
Sanctuary, and Sacrifice, by taking the bread, fat, and blood to themselves,
which was against the Law, Levit. 39.10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17. Chap. 21.8. or by
offering them with defiled hands, and hearts; they also broke the Covenant,
that is, the Laws which God had given them, concerning the way, and manner of
sacrificing; they kept not, but violated the same; their own wills were set up,
and God's Laws laid aside.

The last sin, is their neglect of their charge, verse. 8. Ye have not kept the
charge of my holy things. All things belonging to the Tabernacle, and Temple,
were holy; and the charge of such things was committed to the Priests, and
Levites, 1. Chron. 9.27, 28, 29, 39, 31, 32. and 1 Chronicles 23. 28, 29 30, 31, 32.
and they ought to have had special care of them themselves, but they have
suffered strangers, and uncircumcised ones to be in the Sanctuary, to meddle
with the holy vessels, and to offer Sacrifice, and this they did for their own
ease, and ends, not for God's glory; for they did the same of their own heads,
contrary to the rules, and laws of the Sanctuary; which, by so doing, they made
no better then a den of thieves, or wild beasts; which place was only for
whom, and what, God himself appointed, and so for his honor, and glory alone.

Observe hence,

That those have the charge of holy things, ought to be exact, ohserving the
order, and rules God has given, and not to deviate from them, doing any thing
of their own heads.

These men did not keep the charge of the holy things, they should have
observed the laws of God's house, which they neglected; themselves should have
done all things according to Divine order, they set others about the work.
God's work must be done by those he appoints, and in the manner he prescribes.
Jeh^iadah observed what was written in the law of Moses, and appointed offices,
and officers in the house of God acordingly; he durst not vary from what God
had given out by Moses, 2 Chronicles. 23.18, 19. Timothy was charged to keep the
command given him by Paul concerning the house of God, and the holy things
thereof, without spot, un-rebukeable* until the appearing of our Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. He might not spot the same with his inventions, additions, or
detraction. It Is great presumption in men, to take upon them to alter what the
infinite wise God has prescribed; as if they were wiser then God, and knew
what were fitter for his worship, and service, then himself: Men in so doing,
do equalize their will worship, to his Divine worship; they set their Posts by
his, Ezekiel. 43.8. But this provokes, and makes way for judgment; when Nadab,
and Abihu brought strange fire, such as God commanded not; Kitchen-fire, not
Altar-fire; their own fire, not God's fire: though it were for nature the same,
and would have done what the other did; yet, because it was not the appointed
fire, God was wroth, and sent out fire which devoured them, Levit. 10.12. When
they carted the Ark (which should have been carried upon the Levites shoulders,
Number. 4.15.) and Vzzah without warrant from God, staid it up with his hand, did
not the Lords anger kindle to such an height, that he smote him dead, 2 Samuel
6.6, 7. David acknowledged this evil, 1 Chronicles. 15.23. saying, The Lord our God,
made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order. Men may
seek God, and yet if they seek him not in a due order, even that order he has
prescribed, they may be far from mercy, and near unto judgment.

Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
9. Thus says the Lord God, No stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor
uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that is
among the children of Israel.

10. And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went astray,
which went astray away from me after their idols, they shall even bear their
iniquity.

11. Yet they shall be ministers in my Sanctuary, having charge at the Gates of
the house, and ministering to the house; they shall slay the Burnt-offerings,
and the Sacrifices for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister
unto them:

12. Because, they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house
of Israel to fall into iniquity: therefore have I lift up mine hand against
them, says Lord God, and they shall bear their iniquity.

13. And they shall not come near unto me to do the office of a Priest unto me,
nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the Most Holy place: but they
shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.

14. But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the
service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.


IN the 9. verse. strangers are excluded from the Sanctuary, and the service of
it. In the rest of the verses those had abused the Priestly office are deposed
from it, yet admitted into inferior services.

In Deuteronomy there was a law which prohibited the Ammonites, and Moabites
from entering into the house of God, which was grounded upon special reasons,
Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4. But here s a general law, prohibiting all strangers whatsoever
to enter into the Sanctuary, and bear office there; none ungodly, uncircumcised
in heart, or flesh would he have to enter, or minister unto him. And not only
so, but the Levites themselves which were corrupted, must be put from their
offices. Many of the Priests after the ten Tribes revolted, set up Calves, and
Idolatrized; complied much with them, and the sinful practices of the Times,
and were defiled with the pollutions of them; and so went far from God, and his
pure ways, hearkening to the commands of wicked Kings, 2 Kings 16.11. therefore
they must be thrust from the dignity of Priesthood, into the covert service of
the Sanctuary, they must bear their iniquity, the punishment of their sins,
viz. loss of their places; they must no longer minister unto God, be Sacerdotes
Dei, but Ministri populi; they must be Porters of the Gates, Slayers of the
Sacrifices, and Keepers of the Utensils belonged unto the Sanctuary. These were
inferior, and mean offices. Their departing from God's ways, their drawing the
people to sin, and offending the Church, made God swear against them, (for so
that expression, I lift up my hand against them, is to be understood,) lay
shame upon them, and cause them to serve in the basest sevices; wherein mercy
appeared also, in that he did not absolutely reject them. Those sin through
infirmity, and repent, do find mercy.

Verse. 15, 16.
15. But the Priests, the Levites, the sons of Zadock, that kept the charge of
my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray from me; they shall come
near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before me, to offer unto
me the fat, and the blood, says the Lord God.

16. They shall enter into my Sanctuary, and they shall come near to my Table
to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.


THE other Priests being said aside from all Priestly performances, for their
Apostasy from God, and for their pollutions; here it is declared what Priests
God would accept of, viz. The sons of Zadock, who was the first High Priest in
Solomon's Temple, whose posterity was faithful, and constant, in evil, and
Apostatizing times. When the ten Tribes went a whoring from God, and many
Priests, the sons of Ishamar were led aside, by the commands of Ahaz, and
Manasseh. These kept the charge of the Sanctuary, and would not for fear,
flattery, or favor, depart from the laws, and rites of God's house; these were
the men must come near to God, and minister unto him in the Sanctuary.

Come near to my Table.
By Table is meant the Altar, Ezekiel. 41.22. The Altar of wood is said to be the
Table before the Lord, and not only the Altar for Incense was God's Table, but
that also which was for Burnt-offerings, Mal. 1.7, 12. that was a Table for
God's bread, and meat.

First, Observe,

The Lord takes notice of those serve in his house, who are false, and who are
faithful, in corrupt and apostatizing times.

The sons of Zadock, they kept the charge of my Sanctuary, when the children of
Israel went astray from me. Those forsook me followed Jeroboam, and the Calves;
but the others would not leave my house, my service, they kept their stations,
and were constant. This was their honor, that they were steadfast in the way,
and work of the Lord; and it was a blot, and reproach to them that fell off:
for Lord brands them to be Revolters, Hos. 5.1, 2.

Secondly, Observe,

God takes pleasure in, and honors those are faithful, and constant in his
service.

The sons of Zadock were such, and God says of them They shall enter into my
Sanctuary, they shall come near unto me, they shall stand before me, they shall
minister to me at my Table, they shall keep my charge. By these expressions
they are much honored, and God's pleasure in them much manifested: Those
Priests, Prophets, Ministers, who are back-sliders, revolters, Apostates, are a
dishonor to God, and burden to his Spirit. Of such, though they repented, it is
said v 13. They shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a Priest unto
me, nor to come near to any of my holy thing, in the Most Holy place: but they
shall bear their shame, and their abominations, which they have conmitted. God
will neither honor them, nor have any pleasure in them; he honors, and takes
pleasure in those have been true to him, and faithful.

Verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
17. And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the Gates of the
inner Court, they shall be clothed with linen garments, and no wool shall
come upon them, whilst they minister in the Gates of the inner Court, and
within.

18. They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen
breeches upon their loins: they shall not gird themselves with any thing that
causes sweat.

19. And when they go forth into the outer Court, even into the outer Court to
the people, they shall put off their garments, wherein they ministered, and lay
them in the Holy Chambers; and they shall put on other garments, and they shall
not sanctify the people with their garments:

20. Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long,
they shall only poll their heads.

21. Neither shall any Priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner Court.

22. Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, or her that is put away:
but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that
had a Priest before.


HEre, and in the following verses, are certain rules, and instructions given
forth for the Priests: and the first is Concerning their Vestures, and attire:
When the sons of Zadock come to minister unto the Lord, they must be clothed
all in linen, no woollen garments must be upon them, as it was in Moses days,
Exodus 28 42, 43. Exodus 39.27, 28, 29. Levit. 16.4. They had linen bonnets,
linen breeches, linen girdles, and linen coats; woollen was not permitted
them, because, Quod l^neum est minus purum est, quam quod lineum: And as those
linen garments which Aaron, and his sons had, noted out the purity, and
innocence of Christ; so these the sons of Zadock had, noted out the purity, and
innocence of the Ministers under Christ, and the Gospel. The twenty four Elders
were clothed in white raiment, Rev. 4.4. And those served the Lord in his
Temple, were arrayed with white robes, Rev. 7.13, 15. The Ministers of Christ
ought to be holy, chaste, unblameable, and patterns of virtue unto others, 1 Timothy 4.12. 2 Timothy 2.22. Tit. 1.7, 8. When they savor the things of the flesh,
they are brutish, and have on woollen garments, which should not be. They are
to avoid all things may make them infamous, and to hear ill; Sweat is an
unsavory thing, they must not wear any thing causes that, signifying they must
do nothing may justly cause an ill savor. Their loins must be girt with
sincerity, and their conversations such as may be in offensive before God, and
men.

Of putting off their garments, and putting on others, when they go out from
their ministration, wss spoken, Chap. 42.14. And they shall not sanctify the
people in their garments. Common things were made holy, by the touching of holy
things, according to the Law, Exodus 29.37. The Priest's therefore put them off,
lest going out in them, the people might touch them, and so being sanctified,
be necessitated to leave their callings, Vid. Diodate. OEcolampad. says,
Sanctificare hoc loco est velle haberi sanctum: And so the Priests were not to
go forth in their garments, that the people might esteem them holy. The Chalde
is, Non commiscebuntur cum populo, They shall not mingle with the people, being
in those holy garments, and so profane them. Pintus has it to good purpose,
thus, Non exibunt in vestibus sacerdotalibus ad benedicendum populo; They shall
not go out in their Priestly garments to bless the people, but do it in their
common garments. They must be in another frame of spirit in their approaches to
God, than in common dealings with the people.

The 2. Rule given them, is concerning their heads, They must not shave them
nor wear long locks, but poll their heads* Ths Heathens used to shave their
heads, especially their idolatrous Priests; and God would not have those
ministered unto him, to conform unto idolaters. His must not shave their hair,
then it would be too short; nor nourish it, then it would be too long; but poll
the same, keep a medium between both. The Ministers of Christ must not shave
their heads, lest they shouid symbolize with Antichristian Monks, and Friars;
nor wear it long, which is the garb of luxurious, barbarous, and military men;
they must neither neglect their hair, nor be effeminate, in the length,
powdering, or curling of the same; but have such a care of that, and their
habit, as becomes the Gospel, and the servants of Christ.

A 3. Rule is, the prohibition of Wine: nor simply, but when they enter into
the inner Court. This was a law laid upon Aaron, and his sons, Levit. 10.9. Do
not drink wine, nor strong drink, thou nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, lest ye die: It shall be a statute for
ever, throughout your generations. Notwithstanding this law, the Priests, and
Prophets were faulty, and complaint is made, Isa 28.7. The Priests and
theProphets have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine;
they are out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision, they stumble
in judgment. The Jewish Priests were absolutely forbidden wine, it is
conceived, lest it should cause them to speak, or do undecently in their
ministrations; but wine is not wholly prohibited to the Ministers of the
Gospel, Paul bids Timothy drink wine, 1 Timothy 5.23. Here temperance, and
sobriety are commanded, and commended unto the Ministers of Christ, they must
not be men given to wine, Titus 1.7. but sober, verse. 8.

A 4. Rule is, touching their marriage; they are not forbidden to marry, but
are cautioned about the same, and showed who they must not marry, not a widow,
or one d^vorced: And Moses mentions two more, Levit. 21.14. a profane one, and
a harlot, which they might not take; a Virgin or a Priest's widow they might,
and these must be of the seed of the house of Israel. Strange virgins, or
strange widows, they might not join themselves unto. The scope of the words is,
that they should marry them were modest, chaste, pious, sober, and well
educated, that so they might be a comfort, and an honor to their husbands in
that office. The Priests were Types of Christ, and the Ministers of the Gospel
are in Christ's stead unto the people; and marriage represents the mystical
union and marriage between Christ and his Church; therefore of all men they
should see to it what wives they take, even such as will be subject in all
things, as the Church is unto Christ, Ephesians. 5.24. and so mind others of their
duty.

Verse. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
23. And they shall teach the people the difference between the holy, and
profane, and cause men to d scern between the unclean, and the clean.

24. And in controversy they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge it
according to my judgment: and they shall keep my laws, and my statutes in all
mine assemblies, and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

25. And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for father
or mother, or for son or for daughter, for brother or for sister that has had
no husband, they may defile themselves.

26. And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

27. And in the day that he goes into the Sanctuary, unto the inner Court to
minister in the Sanctuary, he shall offer his Sin-offering, says the Lord God.


MOre Rules are prescribed here, for the Priests of this new Temple.

The 1. is, that they, putting difference in things, and persons; between the
holy, and profane; the clean, and the unclean, should teach the people the
same. This was the Priest's duty of old, Levit. 10.10, 11. And because it was
neglected, God complains of the Priests, Ezekiel. 22.26. They have violated my
law, they have profaned my holy things: they have put no difference between the
holy, and profane, neither have they showed (that is, to the people) difference
between the clean, and the unclean. But now it should be otherwise, the
Ministers of the Gospel should teach the people sound, and discriminating
doctrine, so that they should know truth from error; men sound in the faith
from such as were corrupt, and heretical. Paul taught Timothy to discern
between men having a form of godliness, and the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. And Titus he taught to distinguish of persons, Chap. 1.10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. And John put difference between the clean, and the unclean,
Rev. 21.27. And Christ taught his Apostles, and in them all others, that holy
things must not be given unto dogs, Mat. 7.6.

The 2. Rule is, about Controversies, and what they are to do therein: When
controversies arise, they are to hear, judge, and determine them by the law of
God. verse. 24. In controversies they shall stand in judgment, and shall judge
according to my judgments; not according to their own wills, desires of
others, or laws of men, but as God's laws direct, and command. Christians
should bring their differences to these Ministers, and Church Officers, that
they may make, and maintain peace between them, judging, and determining their
controversies according to the Word of God. Paul blamed the Corinthians, that
brother went to law with brother, and that before unbelievers, and brought not
their cases unto the Church, 1. Cor. 6.6. Ecclesiastical differences onght to
be decided by Ecclesiastical persons, and other differences too, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9,
10, 11.

The 3. Rule, is about the solemn assemblies, and Sabbaths, they shall keep my
laws and my statutes in all mine assemblies, and they shall hallow my Sabbaths.
God would not allow the Priests, though never so knowing, or holy, to do ought
of their own heads in his worship: as they might not prescribe worship it self,
so they might not alter it, nor the laws, rites, or manner of performing the
same. Religion, and worship are such sacred things, that nothing humane must be
intermingled with them, all things therein must be done according to the mind
of God exactly, they shall keep my laws, and statutes. This the Ministers of
Christ are to do themselves, and to teach others to do the same; they are to
sanctify the Sabbaths, and to see others do so too: Sancte observabunt, and
observari curabunt, says Sa upon the place.

A 4. Rule is, direction about their dead kindred, whom they might bury, and
mourn for, viz. Father or mother, son or daughter, brother or sister, a virgin.
To these six they were limited, and forbidden to be at the funerals of all
others: Ne quid ex mortuis contrahant, quod aliis fastidio futurum sit. For
those of their consanguinity they might mourn: God would not have them
unnatural; yet in their mourning they might not be immoderate, nor disfigure
themselves by baldness, shaving their beards, or cutting their flesh, Levit.
21.5. They must be patterns of patience unto others, and quietly submit unto
the hand of God, in pulling away their near relations; and because it is hard in
such cases to keep within bounds, and not transgress; therefore they were to
offer a Sin-offering before they came to public administrations, showing that
singular purity is required in the Ministers who are to draw near unto God.

Verse. 26. After he is cleansed, etc.
The Lord indulged them so far that they might defile themselves, verse. 25.
that is, touch and mourn for their near kindred, but after this they must
cleanse themselves according to law, Number. 19, 11, 12, 13. And Number. 6.9, 10, 11.
they were to be holy, especially when they came to minister before the Lord.

Verse. 27. He shall offer a Sin-offering.
When we have indulgence from God in any thing, especially in matter of our
affections we are apt to exceed our bounds, therefore here the Lord provides a
remedy.

Verse. 28, 29, 30, 31.
28. And it shall be unto them for an inheritance; I am their inheritance: and
ye shall give them no possession in Israel; I am their possession.

29. They shall eat the Meat Offering, and the Sin-offering, and the
Trepass Offering, and every dedicate thing in Israel shall be theirs.

30. And the first of all the first fruits of all things, and every oblation of
all of every sort of your oblations shall be the Priests: ye shall also give
unto the Priest the first fruit of the dough, that he may cause the blessing to
rest in thine house.

31. The Priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of it self, or torn,
whether it be foul, or beast.


THe Priests, and Levites were to have no inheritances in the land of Canaan,
Number. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 10.9. and 18.2. God was their inheritance, and provided for
them, he gave them the sacrifices which were due to himself, Josh. 13.14. Only
unto the Tribe of Levi he gave no inheritance: The Sacrifices of the Lord God
of Israel made by fire are their inheritance. And so here God was the
inheritance of the Priests of this new Temple, and gave them the offerings due
unto him, and all the dedicate things; yea, he ordered that the first fruit of
all the first fruits of all things, and all the oblations should be the
Priests, and the first of their very dough, hereby pre-signifying that the
Ministers of the Gospel ought to be maintained by the people they preach unto.
It Is a Divine Ordinance, that one of their estates, and means, the Ministers
should be provided for. See Mat. 10.10, 11. Luke 10.7, 8. Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor.
9.13, 14. 2 Cor. 11.8.

Here is a special reason given, why they should be maintained, and that
comfortably; it is in the 30. verse. That he may cause the blessing to rest in
thine house. Junius reads it, Vt statuam, And Piscator, Vt collocem; that I may
appoint, or settle a blessing in their house. Where the faithful Ministers of
Christ are well provided for by the people, there God singles out blessings for
their families, and causes them to rest there. Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord
with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase: So shall
thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst with new wine, so
Mal. 3.10. God had bl^ssings for them under the law, who were forward to uphold
his worship, and maintain his servants; and so he has for those in these
Gospel Times, who do the like, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully.

For the last verse which forbids the Priests to eat fouls, or beasts which
dyed of themselves, or were torn by others; The same was prohibited the people
also, Exodus 22.31. Levit. 17.15. Deu.t 14.21. God would have both Priests, and
people holy, and not defile themselves with such meats. And here it may present
unto us the care Ministers should have of what they eat. Though all creatures
be good, and lawful to eat, yet all are not wholesome, and expedient for them
who are employed in sacred things to feed upon. Or thus, they are to be
hospital, and should not provide of the worst to intertain the people of God.
Such creatures dyed of themselves, are torn by dogs, beasts, or vermim, what
ever is unsightly, unwholesome, or unsavory, should not be at their Tables, or
distributed at their doors.

Or thus, this not eating such things may note sanctification in the Priests:
they were not to be covetous, or cruel, but to be unblameable, abstaining from
evil, and the appearances thereof.

The EXPOSITION continued upon the Remaining Chapters of EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLV.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall
offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the land; the length shall
be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and the breadth shall be ten
thousand: this shall be holy in all the borders thereof round about.

2. Of this there shall be for the Sanctuary five hundred in length, with five
hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty Cubits round about, for the
suburbs thereof.

3. And of this measure shall thou measure the length of five and twenty
thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand, and in it shall be the Sanctuary,
and the Most Holy place.

4. The holy portion of the land shall be for the Priests, the Ministers of the
Sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the Lord, and it shall be a
place for their houses: and an holy place for the Sanctuary.

5. And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of
breadth, shall also the Levites the Ministers of the house have for themselves,
for a possession for twenty Chambers.

6. And ye shall appoint the possession of the City five thousand broad, and
five and twenty thousand long, over agatnst the oblation of the holy portion:
it shall be for the whole house of Israel.


HAving laid down the Platform, and Measures of the Temple he comes now to the
division, and measureings of the Land. Wherein things are dark, difficult, and
deep, not to be attempted by humane strength, but by the help of Christ's
Spirit, which makes dark things light, difficult things easy, and sounds the
greatest depths.

In this Chapter are two principal parts, 1. The Partition of the Land, which
is in the 8. first verses. 2. Ordinances Political, and Ecclesiastical, to the
end of the Chapt. from the 8. verse.


For the First; the division of the Land is fourfold.

1. A Portion for the Sanctuary, and the Priests, in the 4. first verses. 2. A
Portion for the Levites, verse. 5. 3. A Portion for the City, or People, verse.
6. 4. A Portion for the Prince, verse. 7, 8.
For the Second, The Political Ordinances which concern the Prince, are from
the 9. verse to the 13.

The Ecclesiastical, which concern the People, the Prince, and the Priests; are
from the 13. to the end of the Chapter.

There was a distinction of the Land of Canaan in Moses, and Joshuah's days,
Number. 34. and 35. Chap. Josh. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and 21. Chap. But
this division differs much from the same, And when the Jews returned from
Babylon, there was no such division made of the land. Had it been, Ezra or
Nehemiah would have made mention thereof. This division therefore, is not to be
understood literally, but spiritually; and the completing thereof to be
looked for in the Church of Christ, not in the Jewish State, or Temple. Here
then seems to be a spiritual lotting, and bringing men out of Judaisme, and
Heathenisme, into the Kingdom of Christ, and fellowship of the Gospel.

These words, When ye shall divide by lot, the land for inheritance, are thus
in the Hebrew, When ye shall make the land to fall into inheritance; that is,
when ye shall make the lot to fall upon the land, to divide it into
inheritances. He alludes herein to the ancient division of the land by lot.
That which is by lot, is free; when the lot fell upon Matthias it was free, and
declared whom God had chosen, Act. 1.24, 26.

The work of grace, and bringing of men into the Church, is free; nothing in
man, or from man, procures it, 2 Pet. 1.1. To them who have obtained like
precious faith with us. The word for obtain, is (...), which notes, Aliquid
sine debito cuipiam obveniens; That which comes freely to a man, that which,
being no debt, nor desert, is lotted out to a man; as, God gives faith to whom
he pleases: We have nothing disposes us for grace, or intitles us to any
heavenly inheritance. Col. 1.12. It Is the Father who makes us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. He regenerates, adopts,
and sanctifies, and so makes us meet for spirtual, enjoyments and privileges,
and then lots them out for us, and us for himself; so that true believers are
God's lot, portion, and inheritance.

Ye shall offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the land.
The Hebrew is, Ye shall Elevate an Elevation unto the Lord; that is,
consecrate, or dedicate a portion of the land unto the Lord, that it may be
holy. This portion of land was large, five and twenty thousand reeds in length:
not so many Cubits, as some would have it; For the measuring was by a reed of
six Cubits, Chap. 40.5. And ten thousand reeds in breadth: And of these, five
hundred in length, and five hundred in breadth, were for the Sanctuary, with
fifty Cubits round for the Suburbs thereof. This holy portion of land, as it
was for the Sanctuary, so for the Priests, and their houses; the Levites, and
their Chambers.

Here the first care is for the house-service, and servants of the Lord. It Is
the duty of Christians to promote the worship of God in the first place, and to
provide for those are officers in his house, who are not to be non-resident,
but to live in the houses near to their charge.

Some Expositors, as Junius, and Polanus, inform us, that a new form, and state
of the Church is here represented unto us, viz. the abrogation of the Jewish,
and bringing in of the Christian; which was done by Christ, and his Apostles.

By the portion of land, the holiness, and amplitude of it; we may understand
the Church under the Gospel, with the holiness, and largeness thereof.

1. The Church is holy, and an holy Offering unto God, Ye shall offer an
oblation unto the Lord. Sanctitatem de terra, Holiness from the earth, that it
separate from the same; or, Holiness of earth, that is, holy earth. Such is the
Church, holiness from the earth, or holy earth, Ephesians. 5.27. It Is the most
glorious, and pure part of the world, it consists of those are virgins redeemed
from the earth, whose mouths are guileless, and persons faultless, before the
Throne of God, Rev. 14.4, 5.

2. The largeness of it; under Christ the Church is greatly enlarged, and
extends to all parts. The Thessalonians faith spread far, 1 Epist. 1.8. And
Paul says, That in every place they called upon the name of Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 1 2. Peter brings Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia, within
the bounds of the Church, 1 Pet. 1.1. Not only Asia, Europe and Africa, but
even America, has Sanctitatem de terra, some holy ones to be an Offering to
the Lord: Rev. 7 9. there were some out of all Nations.

We may also here Observe,

That in the Church of Christ, there is provision, and protection for his.

There is a portion for the Priests, possessions for the Levites, and the whole
house of Israel; there be portions of land for them* with Houses, Chambers, and
a City. Those who come to Sion shall not be destitute, but meet with
maintenance, and safety. Jer. 31.12. They shall come, and sing in the height of
Sion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord. He will be their
shepherd, and provide for them wheat, wine, and oil; that is, bread, and
water of life, with the comforts of the Spirit, and make their souls as a
watered garden; green, and growing; fat, and flourishing; fruitful, and very
fruiful; and being in that condition, he will defend them from wild beasts, and
spoil of any: they are his garden enclosed, and fenced about with his power,
see Ezekiel. 34.26, 27, 28.

Again Observe,

The true Church State takes not away propriety, neither consists of levelling
principles; it preserves men's rights, and the different degrees, and orders
that are set amongst men.

Here was a portion of land for the Priests, a portion for the Levites, and a
portion for the Citizens, the one might not seize upon the others: here be
distinct orders of Men* Priests, Levites, People, and Prince. The order of the
Gospel is to preserve order, not to bring in confusion, or levelling, Act. 5.4.
Chap. 28.30. Philem. 1.8. 1 Cor. 12.28, 29, 30. 1 Timothy 2.2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

Verse. 6. And ye shall appoint the possession of the City.
Provision being made for the Church, and these served in it; the next care
here is for the People, they must have their portion, and possession: The
Lord's goodness extends to them, as well as those are nearest to him in office.

Verse. 7, 8.
7. And a portion shall be for the people on the one side, and on the other
side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession of the City,
before the oblation of the holy portion; and before the possession of the City
front the West Side Westward, and from the East Side Eastward, and the length
shall be over against one of the portions, from the West-border unto the
East-border.

8. In the land shall be his possession in Israel, and my Prince shall no more
oppress my people, and the rest of the land shall they give to the house of
Israel, according to their Tribes.


THe Prince was to have a portion as well as the rest, and it was to be on both
sides, on the West Side, and on the East Side; it was to compass in the other
portions, intimating to us thereby, that the Prince, and his estate, should be
for the preservation of the whole. A Prince is to be Reipulicae defensor, and
murus, The Defendor, and bulwark of the Commonwealth; himself, and his estate,
should rather suffer then it.

Who this Prince was is doubted; for, after their return from Babylon, they had
neither Kings, nor Princes. Zerubbabel was Governor of Judah, not King, or
Prince, Hagg. 2.21. Some make him to be the High Priest, and the 17. ver.
induces to believe so* for it says, It shall be the Princes part to offer
Burnt-offerings, and Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, in the Feasts, and in
the New Moons, and in the Sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel:
He shall prepare the Sin-offering, and the Meat Offering, and the
Burnt-offering, and the Peace Offering, to make reconciliation for the house of
Israel. To sacrifice was Priest-work, not Prince-work; Civil Princes might not
sacrifice; had they had them. In the time of the Macchabees, they had
Highpriests, who were over them both in Church, and State Affairs, and these
here it is conceived are honored with the Title of Prince. But it is
questionable, whether the High Priest be the Prince here spoken of, because in
Chap. 46.2. the Prince there is distinguished from the Priest. It is better to
understand it of Christ, who was the great High Priest, Heb. 4.14. And Prince
of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 1.5. Rabbi David, in his commentary upon this
place says, that the Hebrews interpret this Prince to be the Messiah; so does
Jerome, and some late Expositors: And Chap. 34.24. God had promised the Jews,
that his servant David should be a Prince among them, that was Messiah.

This insinuates thus much unto us, that the Church is Christ's portion, and
Christ the Protector of it. His possession lies in the land of Israel: the
Saints, the true Israelites, are his portion, his possession; he is on the one
side, and on the other of them, even from West to East: He reigns, and is round
about the Church, he compasses it with his favor, and his power. New Jerusalem
had a wall about it, Rev. 21.17. Christ the Prince he is the wall to the whole
Church, and all he parts of it; to Apostles* Pastors, and People: Not Peter,
Popes, or Priests, are Protectours thereof.

My Prince shall no more oppress my people.
These Princes (whether, those be chief in the Church of Christ, or those be
chi^f in the Civil State) they shall not be covetous, and oppress the people.
This was too common before the Captivity, as appears, Mic. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Zeph. 3.3. Amos. 4.1. Jerem. 6.13. Ezekiel. 1.22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28. And after the Captivity, the Nobles, and Rulers exacted upon their
brethren, and oppressed them, Nehem. 5.7, 8. But there must be a time for
fulfilling this truth, that Princes shall no more oppress the people. Hitherto
it can hardly be made out, that ever there were such Princes, or times, wherein
the people were not oppressed. But such are promised, as shall be far from
oppression, as shall not take away, but give unto, the house of Israel
according to her Tribes. The house of Israel is the whole Church of Christ, and
the Tribes thereof are the particular Churches therein; and those Princes are
the Lord's (for he says my Princes) shall give unto Him their Titles, Rights,
and Privileges; they shall acknowledge the Lord Christ to be Prince, and
submit unto him, Rev. 21.24.

Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.
9. Thus says the Lord God, Let it suffice you, O Princes of Israel: remove
violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, and take away the
exactions from my people, says the Lord.

10. Ye shall have just balances, and a just Ephah, and a just Bath.

11. The Ephah, and the Bath shall be of one measure, that the Bath may contain
the tenth part of an Homer, and an Ephah the tenth part of an Homer: the
measure thereof shall be after the Homer.

12. And the Shekel shall be twenty Gerahs, twenty Shekels, and twenty Shekels,
fifteen Shekels shall be the Maneh.


THese verses contain Political Ordinances, which are for just, and righteous
proceedings between Prince and people, and people amongst themselves.

Verse. Let it suffice you, O Prince of Israel.
Ye have been long given to covetous practices, and thereby increased your
revenues to the prejudice of others; but now let what is past suffice you, let
there be no more such doings amongst you: The Political Estate must be
reformed, and with you Princes the reformation must begin. The Princes of
Israel were very covetous, Isa. 1.23. Thy Princes are rebelli^us, and
companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards.
They were no better then thieves, robbing the people, perverting all justice
through their covetousness. This God complained of them, and minds them of it
here, saying, Let it suffice; or, thus the words may be taken, Be content with
the revenues, legal tributes, and customs; thirst after no more, rest
satisfied with what you have, and covet no more; let the portion you have
please you.

Remove violence and spoil.
When Princes use violence to fetch in their Revenues, Taxes, Customs, and to
satisfy their desires, spoil follows upon it; men suffer in their estates by
those who are employed by them, and, often are undone. Naboth loses his Vineyard,
and life too, through the violence of Ahab, Jezabel, and the instruments they
set on work; but in this new Political estate it must be otherwise, Isa. 60.18.
Violence shall no more be heard in thy land; wasting, nor destruction within
thy borders.

Execute judgment and justice.
Princes and Magistrates are God's deputies, they ought to be like unto him,
and to act for him; they should be men of knowledge, able to judge in
controversies, to discern where the right lies, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. And men of
courage to rule for God, executing judgment, and justice impartially. As David
did, 2 Samuel 8.15. He reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment, and
justice, unto all his people, and this was one of his last words, He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3. And when
men rule so, there will be no place for injustice, and oppression. Such we have
warrant to expect; for the Lord has said, I will make thine officers peace,
and thine exactors righteousness, Isa. 60.17.

Take away the exactions from my people.
The Vulgar reads the words, Separate confinia vestra a populo meo, Separate
your confines from my people. When Princes, and great men have fields, and
inheritances lying near to their inferiors grounds, as Ahabs did to Naboths,
they covet the same, and find out ways to get the same, and in time eat up
their possessions; therefore, to prevent this, the Lord calls upon them to
separate their borders from their neighbors. Junius, and Polanus, read the
words, Tollite depastiones vestras. They force men out of their houses, and
inheritances; as it is Mic. 2.2. They covet fields, and take them by violence;
and houses, and take them away: So they oppress a man, and his house; even a
man, and his heritage: These were exactions as we read it. And of the great
ones exactions, you may see 2 King. 15.20. Chapter 23.35. sometimes under pretense
of law, and necessity, they did exact of the people. But these must cease, and
when the new heavens, and new earth come, there shall righteousness be in them,
no exaction, or oppression, 2 Pet. 3.13.

Verse. 10. Ye shall have just balances.
In this, and the other two verses, Ordinances are given out, about Weights,
Measures, and Money.

1. Concerning Weights, the balances must be just: In former days they did
pervert, or falsify the balances, by deceit, Amos 8.5. Which was abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 20.10. There was a law in Deuteronomy. against the same, Chap.
25.13, 14, 15. it was against diverse weights, and diverse measures, tying them
to one, and that perfect, and just; so here just balances are required; God
wou^^ have the people just, and equal in their dealings, not defrauding one
another.

A just Ephah, and a just Bath, etc.
The Measures of the Hebrews were of dry, and liquid things, both which are
here mentioned. To begin with the Homer, which was the greatest measure they
had, and signifies an Heap it held so much. Some make the quantity to be what a
Camel, or an Ass could bear, and carry. The Homer is the same with that
measure called Cor, or Corus, as the 14. verse shows; each of them containing
ten Baths, or ten Ephahs. A-lapide makes the Bath, and Ephah, to contain three
Bushels a piece, and so the Homer to be thirty Bushels: But if we make M^dius
to be but half a Bushel, then the Ephah, and Bath, contain one Bushel and an
half a piece; and the Homer fifteen. But Ainsworsh upon Levit. 27.16. makes the
Homer to be ten Ephahs, that is, ten Bushels; so that the Ephah, and the Bath,
held the measure of a Bushel.

The Ephah was a measure for dry things Wheat, Barley, Meal, Flower, 1 Samuel
17.17. Judge. 6.19. Number, 5.15. And it was the common-measure, and reliquarum
omnium mensurarum, quasi fundamentum.

There is a seeming contradiction, between what you have in Exodus 16.36. where
it is written, An Omer is the tenth part of an Ephah; and what you have here in
Ezekiel. who says, An Ephah is the tenth part of an Homer. For answer; Know, the
words Omer, and Homer, in the Hebrew differ: The first, is (...), Omer with
Ain, which signifies an Handful, Levit. 23.10. Ye shall bring a sheafe of the
first fruits. The Hebrew is an handful, an Omer. It Is conceived the wheat
beaten out of that sheafe did fill the Omer, which contained above a pottle,
about five points; and so was the tenth part of an Ephah, which contained of
our English-measure seven gallons, and an half, which makes our Bushel.

The second word, Homer, is written with (...) Cheth, and is that great-measure
containing ten Ephahs, of which is spoken.

The measure called a (...) was of liquid things, and contained as much as the
Ephah, seven gallons, and an half, the tenth part of an Homer; Wine, and Oil
were usually measured by it, as 2 Chronicles. 2.10. and Ezra 7.22. In Isa. 5.10. we
find these words, Ten acres of vineyard shall yield one Bath. God would so
blast their vines, that ten acres planted with vines should not yield ten
gallons, they should fill but one Bath; and the seed of an Homer, that is, ten
Bushels, should yield an Ephah, that is, one Bushel. Here the Bath is the
measure of Wine, and the Ephah the measure of Corn.

And the Shekel shall be twenty Gerahs.
Having spoken of the measures, he proceeds to the Money, that it might be of a
just value. The Shekel must be twenty Gerahs; a Gerah was to weigh sixteen
Barley-corns, so that twenty Gerahs amounted unto three hundred and twenty
barley corns, and so much the Shekel was to weigh; of it was spoken Chap. 4. v.
10. and 8.60. Shekels made the Maneh, or pound. Some pieces of their money were
twenty Shekels, some twenty five, some fifteen, and these together made their
Maneh.

First, Observe,

Princes, and Magistrates commonly are covetous, and cruel.

The Princes of Israel used violence, and spoil; they exacted upon the people.
Zeph. 3.3. Jerusalem's Princes were roaring lions, her Judges evening wolves,
they were greedy of the prey. Nero was a lion to the people of God, 2 Timothy
4.17. Nebuchadnezzar was both a lion, a bear, and a dragon, Jerem. 51.34. says
Jerusalem, He has devoured me, he has crushed me, he has made me an empty
vessel, he has swallowed me up like a dragon, he filled his belly with my
delicates, he has cast me out. His belly was so bigg, his desires so enlarged,
that he eat up Cities, Kingdoms, and Nations. -- As it was said of Pompey,
Nostra miseria, tu es Magnus; so of most Princes in the world may the people
say, By our miseries ye are become great.

Secondly, Observe,

Christianity does not overthrow, but establish Magistracy.

The Lord here speaking what reformation should be under the Messiah, does not
take Magistrates away, but corrects their exorbitances, saying Remove violence,
and spoil, take away exactions. He abridges them not of just power, but decrys
their Tyranny; Paul approov's of Magistrates, Romans 13. and 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and
tells us, They are the Ministers of God for good, they are appointed for
public good, to be a terror to the wicked, a shield to the godly, a husband
to the widow, a father to the orphan, a patron to the poor, and a refuge to the
oppressed. Such Magistrates we expect, and pray for.

Thirdly, Observe,

The great thing required of them, is to do justice, execute judgment and
justice, do wrong to none, neither suffer wrong to be done.

They should see, there be no false weights, measures, or moneys, to deceive
the people withal. Magistrates are in God's stead, and they should be righteous
as God is; He rules so, that he makes appeal to his people, saying, What have I
done to thee, wherewith have I wearied thee, testify against me, Mic. 6.3. So
did Samuel, Behold! here I am witness against me, before the Lord, and before
his Anointed, Whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have
I defrauded? whom have I oppressed! or of whose hand have I received any bribe,
to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it, 1 Samuel 12.4. Here was a
righteous judge, a man of integrity. Such an one was Nehemiah, Chap. 5.14, 15.
When Magistrates are righteous, and do righteous things; respecting every man's
cause, and no man's person: they are the glory of heaven, the ornament of the
earth, the joy of the just, the desire of all, and blessed themselves, Psalm.
106.3.

Fourthly, Observe.

Princes are not to rule by prerogative in an arbitrary way, but they
themselves are tied to the laws of God, and bound up by them.

The Lord, who is the great lawgiver, says, Let it suffice you, O Princes of
Israel, remove violence, etc. He gives them Laws here, and his Word; which are
binding, and ought not to depart from them. If they proceed by their own wills,
and lusts, they become Tyrants, and shall have their reward, Psalm. 55.22. Prove.
28.17. and 14.11. Job. 18.15. Therefore Kings are commanded to be wise, Judges
to be instructed, to serve the Lord, kiss the son, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. and to
keep to the law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.18.

Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
13. This is the oblation that ye shall offer, the sixth part of an Ephah of an
Homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an Ephah of an Homer of
barley.

14. Concerning the ordinance of oil, the Bath of oil, ye shall offer the
tenth part of a Bath, out of the Cor, which is an Homer of ten Baths, for ten
Baths are an Homer.

15. And one lamb out of the flock out of two hundred, out of the fat pastures
of Israel, for a Meat Offering, and for a Burnt-offering, and for
Peace Offerings, to make reconciliations for them, says the Lord God.

16. All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the Prince in
Israel.

17. And it shall be the Princes part to give Burnt-offerings, and
Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, in the Feasts, and in the New Mons, and
in the Sabbaths, in all solemnity of the house of Israel: he shall prepare the
Sin-offering, and the Meat Offering, and the Burnt-offering, and the
Peace Offerings, to make reconciliation for the house of Israel.


THe Political Ordinances being declared, now he comes to the Ecclesiastical,
wikh concern Sacrifices, and Oblations. Of the Homer, Ephah, and Bath, has
been spoken in the former verses. The Cor is the same measure for quantity with
the Homer.

1. Here is laid down the things to be offered, Wheat, Barley, Oil, a Lamb,
and other offerings.

2. The proportion of the dry, and liquid things, the sixth part of an Ephah of
Wheat, and Barley, and the tenth part of a Bath of Oil, and so of the Lambs,
one out of two hundred, and so of other cattle; and these must not be poor lean
ones, but such as came from the fat pastures of Israel, and might be fit for
offering up to God. The sixtieth part of dry things, the hundredth of liquids,
and two hundredth of cattle, were to be given.

3. The persons who were to give them, and that is, All the people, verse. 16.
The Hebrew is, All the people of the land shall be in that Oblation to the
Prince in Israel. And then the person who is to offer them, verse. 17. and that
is the Prince, or High Priest.

By the Wheat, Barley, Oil, and Lambs, the Oblations, Offerings to be given to
the Prince in Israel, are intended the spiritual Sacrifices, which the Saints
under the Gospel do give to Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 5.8, 9, 10. Chap. 7.10.
Chap. 14.3. Heb. 13.10. Chap. 8.3. Romans 12.1. Chap. 15.16. The persons,
prayers, and praises of the Saints, are to be given up to Christ, and by him to
the Father.

It is a dispute amongst Expositors, who is meant by Prince; some would have it
the Secular, or Civil Prince; some the High Priest, because of his offering
Sacrifices, the Jews are here at a stand, not knowing which to determine. But
OEcolampadius points out very resolutely who it is, saying, Nos de rege Messia,
qui idem est summus Sacerdos non dico arbitramur, sed scimus, intelligendum:
nam penes, inquit, Principem erit, non penes sacerdotem. He understands it of
the Messiah, he was both a Prince, and High Priest; not a common Prince, for he
would not be made King by men, Joh. 6.15. Not a Levitical High Priest, after
the order of Aaron; but an extraordinary one, after the order of Melchizedeck,
Heb. 7.11, 12, 13. And of another tribe then Aaron was viz. the tribe of Judah,
verse. 14. which imported that Christ should put down Levitical worship, and set
up another way of worship in the place thereof, which was prefigured in this
Vision of Ezekiel.

All the Oblations here, and Sacrifices, were types of Christ. The Wheat, the
Barley, the Oil, the Lamb, the Sin-offering, the Meat Offering, the
Burnt-offering, and the Peace Offering, all represented Christ, and were
fulfilled in him. He was the expiatory sacrifice, and purged away our sins,
Heb. 1.3. He was the Propitiatory sacrifice, and made the atonement for us,
Romans 3.25. and 5.11. He was the Pacificatory sacrifice, he made peace between
us, and God, Romans 5.10. Col. 1.20. He is the Eucharistical sacrifice, or
Thank-offering, he gave thanks to God for his favor, mercy, and goodness to
us, Mat. 11.25. Joh. 11.41. He had the virtue of all the sacrifices in him, and
far more. Heb. 9.23. the words (...), Better sacrifices, are spoken of Christ.
He was the one, and only Sacrifice, and once offered, Heb. 10.12. Chap. 7.27.
and yet was sacrifices, because they all signified him, and he had the
strength, worth and benefit of them all in himself; yea, he was better
sacrifices then they all: for they were imperfect for a season, and of little
efficacy, but Christ was a perfect Sacrifice for ever, and most efficacious,
Heb. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. Chap. 10.12. He has made reconciliation for the house
of Israel, and maintains it; for he appears in the presence of God for us, Heb.
9.24. And lives for ever to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. He does that
always which the Priests did in the Feasts, New Mons, Sabbaths, and
Solemnities; the virtue of this sacrifice is ever useful.

Verse. 18, 19, 20.
18. Thus says the Lord God, In the first month, the first day of the month,
thou shall take a young Bullock without blemish, and cleanse the Sanctuary.

19. And the Priest shall take of the blood of the Sin-offering, and put it
upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the
Altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner Court.

20. And so thou shall do the seventh day of the month, for every one that
erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile the house.


HEre we have an ordinance for cleansing the Sanctuary, much like that
ordinance in the 43. Chap. for cleansing the Altar of Burnt-offerings. There
was no such ^rdinance among the Mosaicals, as Jerome, Sanctius, and others
observe. This was a new ordinance which the Levitical-law knew not, and speaks
out the newness of all under the Gospel, the cleansing of the Church by the
blood of Christ, who in due season, being without sin, was made sin for us, 2
Cor. 5 21. And by his blood washed away the sins of his, Rev. 1.5. Heb. 13.11.
and (...) it made way for entering into the Holiest, Heb. 10 19. And whereas the
posts of the house, and posts of the gate, and four corners of the settle of
the Altar, were all sprinkled with blood; It tells us that all, great, or
small, whencesoever they come, from East, West, North, or South, cannot be
cleansed, or saved, but by blood, even the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.22, 23. It Is
nothing in man, or from man himself; not his righteousness, free will, or
sufferings, which does cleanse him from his sin; that only is from the virtue
of Christ's blood, 1 John 1.7.

The 20. verse leads to speak of sins of ignorance: Under the law there was a
sacrifice for the men sinned ignorantly, Levit. 5.17, 18. He was to bring a ram
to the Priest, and by the sacrificing of that, his sin was forgiven him; and
peace made. Here the ordinance differs from that. In stead of a Ram, must be a
young Bullock sacrificed; signifying that the blood of Christ is for the
erroneous, simple, ignorant, as well as others. When men sin wilfu^ly, it is
dangerous, Heb. 10.26, 27. But for those are simple, and through ignorance do
err, there is a remedy provided, 1 John 2.7. My little Children I write unto
you that ye sin not, (that is impossible they might have replied, For in many
things we sin all, James 3.2) And if any man do sin (that is, through weakness,
ignorance, simpleness, strength of corruption, or temptation) we have an
advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sins. This remedy Christ holds out in the Gospel to such sinners, and
would have his Ministers do the like, Gal. 6.1. If a man be overtaken in a
fault* ye which are spiritual restore such an one; bring him to Christ, cause
him to look upon Him crucified, and expiating his sin with His own blood, and
then he will weep for his error, his simplicity; and so he is restored.

Verse. 21, 22, 23, 24.
21. In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the
passover a feast of seven days, uncleavened bread shall be eaten.

22. And upon that day shall the Prince prepare for himself, and for all the
people of the land, a bullock for a Sin-offering.

23. And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a Burnt-offering to the Lord,
seven Bullocks, and seven Rams without blemish daily, the seven days; and a Kid
of the Goats daily, for a Sin-offering.

24. And he shall prepare a Meat Offering of an Ephah for a Bullock, and an
Ephah for a Ram, and an Hin of Oil for an Ephah.


IN these verses are ordinances for keeping the Passover, etc. Of the Mosaical,
you may see Exodus 12. and Levit. 23. from which, this diffe^s in many things,
as Polanus notes, and presents unto us. Christ our Passover who was sacrificed
for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. The Passover was In the first Month, the fourteenth day,
when the Moon was at the Full, and the Sun ascending, all things began to
revive; which showed, that Christ was not to be sacrificed presently after his
birth, but when the fullness of ceremonial light was come; and that by his
death Jewish shadows being abolished, true light, life, and reviving, came
into the world. The feast of unleavened-bread showed how we are to keep the
feast of the Christian-Passover, viz. not with old leaven, that is, our old
corrupt hearts; neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness, but with the
unleavened-bread of sincerity and truth: Men should not come to his Ordinance
with old, malicious, or wicked hearts, but with hearts sincere, and true; all
corrvution of nature, doctrine and manners, should be purged out. And
Christians should live their whole life, (noted by the seven days here) free
from hypocrisy, lying, malice, and unrighteousness; they should study, and
endeavor to be holy, as God is holy.

It Is said verse. 22. that the Prince must prepare for himself, and for all the
people, a Bullock for a Sin-offering. This Prince therefore seems not to be
Christ, but the High Priest, who was sinful, and offered first for himself, and
then for the people, Heb. 7.27. Christ had no sin, and so could not offer
Sacrifice for himself.

For answer hereunto, know, that Christ considered in himself was an immaculate
Lamb without blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. An High Priest, holy, harmless, undefiled,
Heb. 7.26. But consider him as our surety, as head of the body, so he had sin;
His own self did bear our sins in his own body, 1 Pet. 2.24. He was made sin
for us; 2 Cor. 5.21. He was offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. The
Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. And was numbered with
transgressors, verse. 12. Our sins were imputed to him, so that he stood as a
sinner, and malefactor in our stead; and offered up himself a Sacrifice for
himself, that is, for his body the Church. Thus nothing hinders, but by Prince
here we may understand Christ.

The Burnt-offering, and Sin-offering, which were to be daily, set out the
virtue of Christ's death, and intercession, which is not for a day, or a few
years, but for ever; or they may acquaint us with the Saints their total, and
constant dedication of themselves unto God, and his service,

An Hin of oil.] Of the Ephah, Bath, Homer, and Cor, was spoken in the former
part of the Chapter. An Hin was for liquid things, and contained as much as
twelve Logs, and each Log contained six Eggs; so that an Hin held as much Wine,
or Oil, as seventy two Eggs; and according to some is three quarts of our
English-measure.

Verse. 25. In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall he do
the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the Sin-offering,
according to the Burnt-offering, and according to the Meat Offering, and
according to the Oil.
Passing over the feast of Pentecost, without any mention thereof, he comes to
the feast of Tabernacles, which was to begin The fifteenth day of the seventh
month, Levit. 23.34. And as it was in the feast of the Passover, so it must be
here; but it was not so in the time of Moses, Levit. 23.39, 40.

This feast of Tabernacles, or Booths, cannot be understood literally, for
there is a Prophecy in Zach. 14.16. That those left of the Nations which came
against Jerusalem, should come to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to
keep the feast of Tabernacles; which in the litteral sense was peculiar to the
Jews, It figures out therefore the gathering of the elect into particular
Churches in this world, into which they should come, and in which they should
have fellowship with the Saints, and partake of the grace of God.

By these feasts, and sacrifices also, we are minded of the spiritual joy the
Saints have in their communion together under the Gospel, and
spiritual-sacrifices they offer up to God by Christ The primitive Christians
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to
house, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart, praising God,
Act. 2.46, 47.

CHAP. XLVI.
Verse 1. Thus says the Lord God, The gate of the inner Court, that looks
toward the East, shall he shut the six working days; but on the Sabbath it
shall be opened, and in the days of the new mood it shall be opened.

2. And the Prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate without,
and shall stand by the post of the gate; and the Priest shall prepare his
burnt-offering, and his peace offering, and he shall worship at the threshold
of the gate: Then he shall go forth, but the gate shall not be shut until the
evening.

3. Likewise the people of the Land shall worship at the door of this gate
before the Lord, in the Sabbaths, and in the New Mons.

4. And the burnt-offering that the Prince shall offer unto the Lord in the
Sabbath day, shall be six Lambs without blemish, and a Ram without blemish.

5. And the meat offering shall be an Ephah for a Ram; and the meat offering
for the Lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil to an Ephah.

6. And in the days of the New Mood, it shall be a young Bullock without
blemish, and six Lambs and a Ram, and they shall be without blemish.

7. And he shall prepare a meat offering, an Ephah for a Bullock, and an Ephah
for a Ram; and for the Lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and an
hin of oil to an Ephah.

8. And when the Prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of
that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.


THis forty sixth Chapter contains, 1. Ordinances about several gates, the
Prince and Peoples going in and out by them with their Oblations and Worship,
from the beginning to Verse 16. 2. Certain Laws are laid down concerning the
Princes gifts unto his Sons and Servants in the 16, 17, and 18 Verses. 3. A
description of the Courts and places where the Priests and Levites were to boil
and prepare the Sacrifices, from the beginning of Verse 19. to the end of the
Chapter.


The first Verse speaks of the Eastgate in the inner Court, that was the gate
next to the Temple: By this gate the glory of the Lord, came into the Temple,
Chap. 43.1, 2, 4. and it was to be kept shut all the six working days, and
only to be opened on Sabbaths and New Mons. In Chap. 44. we have the reason
why it was to be kept shut, ver. 2. Thus says the Lord, This gate shall be
shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the
Lord, the God of Israel has entered by it, therefore it shall be shut: That is
for the Prince, etc. and here it is, The Prince shall enter by the way, etc.

The things here required, are not to be found in the Mosaical Law; they
represented things under the Gospel; that Jewish Worship should go down when
Christ appeared in the flesh.

The shutting of the gate the six working days tells us, that on those days we
are to follow our callings, and earn our daily bread: Christianity does not
open a door to idleness; We command and exhort, says Paul, that with quietness
men work and eat their own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. Under Moses God allowed them
six days to work, Exodus 20.9. and the same allowance they have under the
Gospel, Luke 13.14. Some pervert Gods Order, and make all days alike, either
all working days, or all Sabbaths, resting days; but God has distinguished
them: As there be working days wherein we must not rest; so there be Sabbaths
wherein we must not Work.

The opening of the gate on Sabbath days and New Mons, signifies unto us, that
the gate of Heaven is open unto us, when we have solemn and public Meetings
on the Lords day, and other special occasions to worship God: When all the
Disciples were gat together to serve and seek God, then came a sound from
Heaven, and the Spirit fell upon them like fiery tongues, Acts 2. So when Peter
preached unto the great multitude, the gate of Heaven was opened, and power
came down from above to convert three thousand, ver. 41. So when there was a
solemn Meeting in the Centurions house, the Word being preached by Peter, the
gate of Heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the Word,
Acts 10.44. Such times are times of grace and mercy, God opens Heaven, and
gives out blessings.

These six days may denote the term of man's life here, which is a time of
labor and sorrow Job 5.7. and 14.1. He tumbles, or is tumbled up and down from
condition to condition, and has no rest; but at the end of his life Heaven
gate is opened, and he has a Sabbath, an eternal rest, where is no labor, sin
nor sorrowing, Heb. 4.9, 10. Then the gate of the inner Court is opened unto
him, and then he shall see as he is seen, and know as he is known, 1 John 3.2.
1 Cor. 13.12. Here we see and know little, and that little darkly, as in a
glass; but then shall we see clearly, and know perfectly the mysteries of this
and other Visions and things.

The second Verse tells us of the Prince his entering by the way of the porch,
and standing by the post of the gate; where he was to worship, but come into
the Court he might not.

If we understand this of the Secular Prince, four things are here considerable:

1. That the Prince must not enter into the inner Court; he must not meddle
with the Priestly Office, or things of God. Princes may not change any thing in
the Worship of God, abrogate or institute ought by their wills or power: Vzziah
was smitten with the leprosy for meddling, 2 Chronicles. 26. and Ahaz for his
adding, 2 Kings 16. his altering, detracting and abrogating, 2 Chronicles. 28. was
branded for his wickedness: They kept not at the post and threshold of the
gate, but entered into the inner Court.

2. They are to countenance and maintain the Worship of God: The Prince must
stand at the post of the gate, and see the Priests do their Office. He found
the Burnt, Peace, and Meat Offerings; and the Priests prepared them, that is,
fitted them for Sacrifices. The Princes and Powers of the Christian World
should countenance, preserve, propagate and maintain the true Worship of God
in their Territories. When Joash was made King, he had the Testimony given
unto him, 2 Chronicles. 23.11. that was, the Book of the Law; And why was this given
him? It was to inform Princes, that they should rule according thereunto; that
they should countenance, preserve, propagate, and maintain the same, and the
Worship it held forth.

3. That Princes must worship the Lord publicly on Sabbath days, and when
special occasions are, as well as other people.

He shall worship at the threshold of the gate:
Let Princes be never so great, rich, learned, wise, yet they must fall down at
Gods footstool, serve him with fear, and kiss the Son; they must observe the
times of Gods Worship, bow to him, and not leave all to their inferiors.

4. They must not impede the Worship of God: The Prince shall go forth, but the
gate shall not be shut where he has worshipped, he must not hinder others. It
was a vile practice in those who shut up the doors of the Lords house, and
would not let the people or Priests come there to worship, 2 Chronicles. 28.24.
Princes should see to it, that the door be open for public Worship, not only
at the appointed times, but upon special occasions.

If we take the Prince here to be Christ, as Oecolampad. and Polanus do, then
his coming to, and standing by the post of the gate, his sacrificing and
worshipping, do prefigure his coming in the flesh, and his standing at the gate
of Heaven for us, offering up Prayers and Supplications for us, with strong
cries and tears, Heb. 5.7. Luke 22.44. and whereas it is said, The Priests shall
prepare his burnt-offering, and his peace offering; this presignified the
Priests delivering up Christ to be crucified for us, Luke 24.^0. The chief
Priest and Rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and crucified him who
was the Prince of life, Acts 3.15. yet he laid down his life freely, Joh.
10.17, 18. And for his worshipping at the threshold of the gate, it may point
out that time when Christ being on the Cross, said, It is finished, and so
bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost, John 19.30. Now was he at the threshold
of the gate; for he said to the Thief immediately before, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. Then his soul went forth of its earthly
tabernacle; and shortly after reassuming that, he left the world, and went to
his Father, John 16.28.

The gates standing open until evening, that so the people might come and
worship at the door of the gate before the Lord; this some interpret of the
door of Mercy and Reconciliation which Christ has set open for sinners, during
this life; and if they come not thither before death and worship God, then its
shut for ever against them. On Sabbath days men should draw near to God, seek
Reconciliation with him; for on such days the gate is widest open for Grace and
Mercy: On the six days its shut, that is, comparatively shut. Christians do
celebrate Sabbaths and New Mons, when they have inward spiritual rest in their
souls, through faith in Christ, and do receive light from him to see what is
evil, and so to avoid it; and what is good, and so to practice it.

In Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. the Offerings, Oblations and Sacrifices of the Prince,
for the Sabbath days and New Mons are mentioned: The Ola^, or Burnt-Offering
for the Sabbath was to be six complete Lambs without blemish, and one Ram,
which differs much from the appointment in Moses days, Numb. 28.9. then there
were but two Lambs, here six are appointed: And so the Meat Offering is larger
here then there; but for the Offering in the day of the New Mood, it was short
of that in Moses time; for then two Bullocks, seven Lambs, and one Ram were
appointed; and here one Bullock, six Lambs, and one Ram are nominated for the
Offering; which shows, the Levitical Worship was to be changed.

And taking the Prince for one of the Princes of the earth, it tells us, he
ought to provide for the Worship of God; But if we take this Prince to be
Christ, then it imports that Christ has ordained more spiritual, pure, and
efficacious Worship on Sabbaths under the Gospel, then was under the Law, and
more extensive then was before; also, that Jewish shadows are fled away by the
coming in of the glorious light of the Gospel; that old things are past away,
and all things become new, Neomen^^ nostra est spiritualis, est novum in
Christo seculum, says Polanus.

These Sacrifices do point out Christ; he was instar omnium; he was the Lambs,
the Rams, the Bullock, the Meal, the Flower, and the Oil: This Prince
sacrificing of himself, did more by that one and once Sacrifice, then all the
Sacrifices from the first to the last, Hebr. 10.14.

Verse 5. As he shall be able to give.
The Hebrew is, the gift of his hand, and so its in the Margent; in Verse 7. it
is thus, as his hand shall attain unto; and in the eleventh, as he is able,
that is, as God has blessed him: God in that dispensed with men's disabilities
in Moses Law, Lev. 5.11. and 14.21. if they were poor, and not able to bring
Lambs, or two Turtle Doves, they must bring one Lamb, or the tenth part of an
Ephah of flower; something he would have, and to such a proportion: But here
its left to man's liberty, to give according to his ability, no proportion is
prescribed; so men give freely, what ever it be, it shall be accepted. God
looks not for much where little is: The grace and favor of God under the
Gospel, exceeds what was under the Law.

Verse 6. And in the day of the New moon.
New Mood days were holy, and had special Sacrifices, as in this, ver. 8. Numb.
28.11. on those days they might not buy or sell, or do worldly work, Amos 8.5.
but they were to look unto Christ, of whom those days were shadows, Col. 2.16,
17. and to meditate of that light, grace and comfort comes by him. The gate of
the inner Court was to stand open on these days, as well as on Sabbaths, ver.
1. And Isaiah prophesied, Isa. 66.23. That all flesh should come to worship
before the Lord, from one New Mood to another, and from one Sabbath to another;
intimating thereby, that God in times of the Gospel, would accept of true and
spiritual Worship, performed in the name of Christ, in all places, and at all
times, as he did the Jewish Worship at Jerusalem, and on the Solemn Feast days.

Or these New Mood days and Sacrifices, may point out the renewing of the
Church, and the joy thereupon. The Church after Christ's time, was often in the
wane, in a suffering and declining condition; but when it has rest,
edification, comfort, and multiplication, Acts 9.31. then its New Mood with it,
and in a short time it becomes fair as the Moon, Cant. 6.10. and shall be
filled with light and joy, as says Isaiah, Chap. 60.20.

The eighth Verse is an Ordinance about the Princes going in by the porch of
the gate, and going out by the same way. There were diverse gates to enter into
the inner Court, by the North-gate, the South-gate, as well as the Eastgate;
and this gate was both for the Prince and the Priests to go in and out at.

Hence two things are observable:

1. That Princes are to walk according to Divine Appointment, especially in
matters of Worship; they must look unto God, who has prescribed the way they
should walk in; it had been sinful for them to have gone to the North-gate, or
South-gate and worshipped; their Princes must not do ought of their own wills
in the things of God: It might seem a bondage to be tied up to the Eastgate
only, and never to have ingress and egress at the other; but however, Princes
themselves must be subject to the Ordinances of Heaven.

2. That Princes and Priests, Magistrates and Ministers, should mutually mind
and care for the things of God; countenance and encourage one another therein,
and each put to their helping hand to preserve the purity and power of
Religion: When the Pavers go one way, and the true Ministers of God another
way, Religion does not shine; when Josiah and the Priests went together hand in
hand one way, then there was great Reformation in Israel, the Worship of God
was pure, and Religion did flourish.

Supposing this Prince to be the Lord Christ, whose ingress and egress was at
the same gate, then it notes his coming from Heaven, and returning thither
again, according to that of John 6.62. and 3.31. and 16.28. Acts 1.11.

Verse 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
But when the people of the land shall come before the Lord in the solemn
Feasts, he that enters in by the way of the North-gate to worship, shall go
out by the way of the South-gate; and he that enters by the way of the
South-gate, shall go forth by the way of the North-gate; he shall not return by
the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth over against it.

And the Prince in the midst of them when they go in, shall go in; and when
they go forth, shall go forth.

And in the Feasts and Solemnities, the meat offering shall be an Ephah to a
Bullock, and an Ephah to a Ram, and to the Lambs as he is able to give, and an
hin of oil to an Ephah.

Now when the Prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt-offering, or
peace offering voluntarily unto the Lord, one shall then open the gate unto him
that looks toward the East; and he shall prepare his burnt-offering, and his
peace offerings, as he did on the Sabbath day: Then he shall go forth, and
after his going forth, one shall shut the gate.

Thou shall daily prepare a burnt-offering unto the Lord of a Lamb of the first
year, without blemish; thou shall prepare it every morning, or as the Hebrew,
morning by morning.

And thou shall prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the sixth part of
an Ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flower;
a meat offering continually by a perpetual Ordinance unto the Lord.

Thus shall they prepare the Lamb, and the meat offering, and the oil, every
morning for a continual burnt-offering.


THe ninth Verse contains an Ordinance concerning the peoples coming to, and
departing from the public Worship; they must not come to the Eastgate, but
the side-gates, the North and South they might; and this order they were to
observe; viz. to go out at that gate was over against the gate they came in at;
he that entered by the North-gate, must go out by the South-gate; and he that
entered by the South-gate, must go out by the North-gate.

Hence observe,

1. The Lord expects not only Prince and Priests to worship him in a public
way, but the people also.

When the people of the land shall come before the Lord in the solemn Feasts.
God looks not for great ones, learned ones, rich ones, but all sorts, and all
of all sorts to come before him, to acknowledge him to be their God, Cre^tor,
and Lawgiver; he is honored by the worship of the meaner, if sincere, as well
as by the worship of ^^e Prince or Priest; he is no respecter of persons.

2. That the way of Gods servants is a strait and right-forth way: There is no
crookedness in it, Isa. 26.7. the way of the just is uprightness; there is no
turning aside to the temptation of Satan, to the beggarly elements of the
world, to the enticing delights of the flesh, or any vanity whatsoever: That
soul that is in Gods way, must not look back to Sodom, as Lots wife did, and
suffer for it, but it must go forward: Matthew being called from the receipt of
Custom, into the way of Christ, Mat. 9.9. might not return, but follow Christ;
For whosoever puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is not fit for the
Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. Such an one must not look back to his old courses,
customs, company, principles or errors; but leaving them, must go strait on in
the way of God, from darkness to light, from imperfection to perfection: Those
that come to be the Lords servants, must continue in his service, and perfect
holiness in his fear, 2 Cor. 7.1. Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. Phil. 3.13, 14.

3. The shortness of man's life is here represented unto us; he enters into the
world, goes on a little way, and then goes out of it again: So that man's life
is quasi transitus quidam a porta una ad alteram; they came in at a North-gate,
went on a little while, and a little way, and then went out at a South-gate,
etc. its no long passage from the doors of the womb, to the gates of death,
Psalm. 103.15, 16, Job 14.1, 2.

The tenth Verse is an Ordinance for the Prince, showing when he is to come to
the public Worship, and when he is to depart from it: When the people go in
at the gate appointed for them, then must he go in at the gate appointed for
him; and so when they go out, he must go out. Those words, In the midst of
them, are not to be taken as if the Prince went in the midst of the people to
the Sanctuary; but they denote, that he went at that time, and when come
thither, he was there with them, or among them, or at the Eastgate, which is
between the Nort^ and South.

1. Here we may see Princes are bound to be present at the public Worship of
God; and not only to be present, but to be present at the beginning, and to
stay till the end thereof: They may not come and go at their own pleasure, but
at Gods appointment. The presence of great persons at the Worship of God, is of
much concernment, and has great influence into the people; it encourages them
to come to hear, to stay, when greater then themselves do so; people are led
much by example of Superiors; therefore Kings and Judges are commanded to serve
the Lord with fear, and to kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.

2. Here we are informed, taking the Prince for Christ, that he is in the
Assemblies of his people; when the Saints meet together to worship the Lord, he
is in the midst of them. He made a precious promise when he was here on earth,
and makes it good daily, though he be in Heaven; its that Mat. 18.20. Where two
or three are gathered together in my name, I am there in the midst of them; to
observe, to reward and punish. The Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. and
Christ is said to sing praise unto God in the midst of the Church, Heb. 2.12.
He being King of Saints, loves to be with and among them, he was in the midst
of the 144000, Rev. 14.1.

The eleventh Verse treats of the Meat Offering, which was to be at Feasts
and Solemnities, directing the particulars and quantities. In Moses time the
tenth part of an Ephah of flower, and the fourth part of an hin of oil was
required, Numb. 28.5. Exodus 29.40. but here its otherwise, an whole Ephah of
meal or flower is appointed to a Bullock, an whole Ephah to a Ram, and an whole
hin of oil to each, only the Lambs, flewer or oil to be offered, was left to
liberty or ability.

This may teach us, that seeing our light and mercies are greater under the
Gospel, then theirs was under the Law, therefore our obedience and service to
the Lord should exceed theirs; if they gave him but the tenth part of an Ephah,
we ought to give him an whole Ephah; if they gave him the fourth part of an
hin, we must give him an whole hin: The more God communicates to us, the
greater returns should be to him.

The twelfth Verse minds us of the Princes Freewil-offerings: Besides what was
enjoined, he might voluntarily prepare a Burnt-offering, or a Peace Offering at
his pleasure; and at his coming one was to open the Eastgate unto him, and at
his going forth one was to shut the gate. God looks for more from Princes and
great ones, then what is ordinary, then what is commanded; he looks for
voluntary Sacrifices, Freewil-offerings at their hands. Its said of Josiah,
that he gave three thousand Bullocks, three thousand Lambs and Kids for
Passover-offerings, and all of the Kings substance; and that the Princes gave
willingly, 2 Chronicles. 35.7, 8. so free and bountiful they were, that the Lord
took notice of it, and has recorded it in his Word, that there was no Passover
like to that kept in Israel, from the days of Samuel the Prophet, neither did
all the Kings of Israel keep such a Passover as Josiah, Verse. 18.

We may interpret this Verse of Christ, and so it presents to us not only that
Christ has freely and voluntarily offered up himself a Sacrifice to God for
us, Hebr. 9.14. and 10.9, 10. but that he is the substance and quintessence of
all Sacrifices; and that the Father has opened the gate of Heaven unto him;
and that by virtue of his merits and intercession, the door of Reconciliation
stands open unto us continually; but should he leave Heaven, that door should
be shut. No Patriarch, no Prophet, no Apostle, no Martyr, no Saint, no Angel,
ever had this honor, to have the door of Mercy and Grace opened and shut at
their pleasure: This is an honor peculiar to Christ.

The thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth Verses, declare what the daily
Sacrifices should be every morning, viz. A Lamb of the first year without
blemish for a Burnt-offering, and a Meat Offering with it, the sixth part of an
Ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil. The daily Sacrifice here, differs
from that in Numb. 28.3, 4, 5, 6. Moses requires two Lambs, the tenth part of
an Ephah of flower, and the fourth part of an hin of oil: Ezekiel speaks but of
one Lamb, the sixth part of an Ephah of flower, and the third part of an hin of
oil: And here is no mention of the evening, which alterations imports that
Mosaical Rites and Sacrifices should expire; and that notwithstanding, God
would have a daily Sacrifice in the days of Christ; that he would be
worshipped, not only on the Christian Sabbath, but other days also, as was
fore-prophesied, Psalm. 72.15. Prayer shall be made unto him continually, and
daily shall he be praised.

Verse 16, 17, 18.
Thus says the Lord God, If the Prince give a gift unto any of his Sons, the
inheritance thereof shall be his Sons; it shall be their possession by
inheritance.

But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall
be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to the Prince, but his
inheritance shall be his Sons for them.

Moreover, the Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance by oppression,
to thrust them out of their possessions; but he shall give his Sons inheritance
out of his own possession, that my people be not scattered every man from his
possession.


THese Verses contain Laws to direct the Princes bounty, and to keep him from
oppression. 1. Here is a Law about giving to his Sons, ver. 16. What he gives
them, must be their inheritance and possession for ever. 2. Here is a Law about
giving to his servants, ver. 17. If the Prince give a gift to any of his
servants or subjects of his inheritance, it must not be theirs for ever, but
only to the year of Liberty, that was the year of Jubilee; for among the Jews,
every fifty year was a year of Jubilee, Levit. 215.10. Ye shall hallow the
fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land, unto all the
inhabitants thereof; it shall be a Jubilee unto you, and ye shall return every
man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.
Whatsoever of men's possessions were sold or morgaged, returned to the owners in
the year of Jubilee; see ver. 13. and Levit. 28.25. and whatever the Prince
here should give away to any but his own sons, should return to him again at
the year of Jubilee.

The Law to prevent oppression in the Prince, is in ver. 18. When Princes give
gifts of inheritance to their sons and servants, and are expensive in their
buildings, feastings and revellings, usually they fetch it out of the people,
by squeezing and oppressing them; but the Law is, the Prince shall not take of
the Peoples inheritance, lest he should alienate the inheritance come by
Parents, from their posterity, unto strangers, and so cause them to desert
their Country, and to scatter abroad. God would have Princes to live upon, and
give of their own, and by no means to oppress the people. These Laws were not
amongst the Mosaical ones. And if the Prince here be taken for the Princes of
this world, where, when, and by whom has this Prophecy been fulfilled? where
dwells the Prince, and what is his name, who has not oppressed the people? We
may find the accomplishment of it in Christ, rather then in any of them: But
for them we may observe here;

1. That Princes should be liberal and bountiful; and not only to their
children, but to their servants and subjects, they may deserve well at their
hands, and if they be not rewarded and encouraged, men will have no hearts to
public, honorable, and difficult employments. When David shall have Saul's
Daughter, he will venture upon the Philistines, 1 Samuel 18.

2. That Princes being bountiful, must give of what is their own: It Is
injustice and dishonorable to them, to give away what is another.

3. They ought to be well content with their own estates, and not to covet and
take away from others their goods, houses, or possessions; they should not
spoil their subjects of their right, thrust them out of their possessions, take
away their Privileges, to make themselves great, rich, dreadful: When Princes
do so, they become Tyrants, and Oppressors, and their ends will be breaking,
Psalm. 72.4. He shall break in pieces the oppressor.

To speak somewhat of this Prince, as pointing out Christ: He has sons and
servants, to the one he gives graces, to the other common gifts: To his sons he
gives a Kingdom, Luke 22.29. to the wicked who are his servants, he gives a
portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14. And at their death the time of liberty, and
at the time of Restitution of all things, the gifts return to the Prince again;
but the Graces and the Kingdom are the Saints for ever, they are their
inheritance. This Prince gives of his own; for all that the Father has are
his, John 16.5. and he is heir of all things, Heb. 1.28. and he gives
bountifully, he pours out his Spirit upon his Sons, and fills them with joy
glorious and unspeakable.

Verse 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
After he brought me through the entry which was at the side of the gate, into
the holy Chambers of the Priests, which looked toward the North, and behold
there was a place on the two sides Westward.

Then said he unto me, This is the place where the Priest shall boil the
Trepass Offering, and the Sin-offering, where they shall bake the
Meat Offering, that they bear them not out into the utter Court to sanctify
the people.

Then he brought me forth into the utter Court, and caused me to pass by the
four corners of the Court, and behold in every corner of the Court there was a
Court.

In the four corners of the Court, there were Courts joined of forty cubits
long, and thirty broad; these four corners were of one measure.

And there was a new building round about in them, round about them four; and
it was made with boiling places under the rows round about.

Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil, where the
Ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifices of the people.


THe Courts and places where the Priests and Levites boiled, baked, and made
ready the Sacrifices, are here described unto us. On the North-side of the
Priests Court, into which the Prince and People were not to enter, were the
holy Chambers; and Westward from them was a place as far from the Eastgate as
might be, where all things were fitted for boiling and baking the Sacrifices;
in that place were the Kitchins for such service. Hither was the Prophet
brought to see these, and from hence he was carried into the utter Court. Some
make this utter Court the Gentiles or Peoples Court; others, the middle Court,
called the utter Court, because it was so to the inner Court.

And in the four corners thereof, there were four Courts.
According to the Hebrew thus, A Court in a corner of a Court, a Court in a
corner of a Court; and these little Courts were for the Levites, where was a
building with boiling places, and there the appointed Officers boiled the
Sacrifices of the people.

That they bear them not out to sanctify the people.
In Chap. 44. ver. 19. They shall not sanctify the people with their garments,
was laid down: What may serve here, unless by sanctifying we understand
defiling, as Sanctum does? for the Hebrew word Kadash signifies sometimes to
pollute, as Deuteronomy. 22.9. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with diverse seeds, lest
the fruit of thy seed which thou have sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard be
defiled.

The holy Chambers here spoken of, and the four Courts in the four corners of
the Court, do seem to hold out the particular Churches which are in all parts
of the World; and that these being committed to the Ministers of the Gospel,
they ought to preach Christ unto them, and especially Christ crucified, who is
the Trepass Offering, the Sin-offering, and Meat Offering: They must be
careful to whom they give holy things; they might not ^ear out the Offerings
into the utter Court, where all sorts of people were; they would have thought
themselves holy, by touching holy things, though they had defiled them: As many
now by having the Supper of the Lord, think themselves holy, whenal they have
defiled the Ordinance and themselves the more, by their unworthy receiving. The
Ministers of the Gospel therefore should be very circumspect and careful to
whom they give holy things; the profane, ignorant hypocrites should not share
in them; those who are true Repentants, and true Believers, are meet to partake
of them: Holy things must be kept intra limits sanctitatis, and not extended
further then God has appointed.

Again, its the Ministers who must boil and bake; they are spiritual Cooks, and
must prepare wholesome food for the people: The people might bring Sacrifices,
but not prepare those themselves were in part to feed upon, that was the work
of the Priests and Levites: And now under the Gospel, it is the work of Pastors
and Teachers to prepare boiled and baked meat, boiled in the furnace of
Meditation, and baked in the oven of the heart by spiritual heat. Such meat
will nourish and strengthen, make fat and flourishing.

CHAP. XLVII.
Verse 1.
Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the House, and behold waters
issued out from under the threshold of the House Eastward: for the forefront of
the House stood toward the East, and the waters came down from under, from the
right side of the house, at the South Side of the Altar.

2. Then brought he me out of the way of the gate Northward, and led me about
the way without, unto the utter gate, by the way that looks Eastward, and
behold there run out waters on the right side.

3. And when the man that had the line in his right hand went forth Eastward,
he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters
were to the ancles; or, waters of the ancles.

4. Again, he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters
were to the knees: Again, he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the
waters were to the loins.

5. Afterward he measured a thousand, and it was a River, and I could not pass
over; for the waters were risen, waters to swim in a River, that could not be
passed over.


IN this Chapter are two principal parts: 1. A Vision of waters, and the
description of them, from Verse 1. to Verse 13. 2. The bordering and dividing
the Land, from Verse 13. to the end.


Concerning the waters, they are described, 1. From their Original or Place
whence they spring and flow, ver. 1, 2. 2. From their increase, ver. 3, 4, 5.


The man with the measuring line in his hand, having led our Prophet up and
down to view the Temple, the parts, and appurtenances of it, brings him again
to the door of the House, that is, to the door of the Temple or Sanctuary.

And behold waters issued out from under, etc.
Vilalpandus makes these waters to be those subterraneal waters which were
carried in pipes under ground, and issued forth into the Priests Court, to wash
the Sacrifices, and purge away the blood, excrements and filth, occasioned by
the slaying so many Sacrifices; for certainly had there not been aquaeducts
about Solomon's Temple, to have cleansed the places where the Sacrifices were
slain and prepared, it would have been an unsavory and unhealthful place.
These waters issued forth, some from the threshold, some from the South Side of
the Altar, and so ran away. From these waters, the Lord takes occasion to speak
of spiritual waters.

The Water came down from under, from the right side of, etc.
The Temple was upon an high Mountain, Ezekiel. 40.2. therefore the waters are
said to come down; and they came from the right side of the House, that was the
South Side; for the front of the House standing toward the East, when a man
stood and looked Eastward, his right hand or side was toward the South.

The Altar for Burnt-offering was before the porch of the Temple, and at the
South Side thereof did these waters run.

Our Prophet having seen the spring and rice of the waters, is led out of the
inner Court, by the way of the North-gate, and brought to the uttermost
Eastgate, where he first entered; and it was to behold how the waters ran out
there on the right side also: The words in Hebrew are, Maiim mepaccim, aquae
phialantes; peccah, signifies to flow, but lent tanquam e phiala manando, he
saw the waters run there gently and pleasingly; they run not fiercely as a
torrent, but gently, as oil poured out of a vial.

These waters, though they run gently, yet increased mightily; for upon Christ's
measuring out a thousand cubits, they became waters of the ancles; upon his
measuring out the two thousand cubits, they rose to be waters of the knees;
upon his measuring out the third thousand of cubits, they ascended to be waters
of the loins; and upon measuring the fourth thousand, they became waters for
swimming, they could not be waded through, they were so deep, even a great
River impassible.

What these waters do signify is worthy enquiry: Some make these wate s to
signify the prosperity of the Church, that great happiness which the Jews had
after their return from Babylon. This was an outward mercy, and but for a
little season, for they suffered great and grievous things by Antiochus and
others, in the Maccabees times: But here some spiritual mercy is intended by
the waters; others therefore understand by them, the waters of Baptism, which
Christ instituted, and so came from the Altar, viz. the side of Christ; but
these waters are too shallow to be Ezekiels waters. A third sort make them to
be the Spirit, and gifts of the Spirit: Its true, the Spirit is said to be
poured out, Joel. 2.28. but its not to be understood of the person of the
Spirit, which is infinite, indivisible and immovable; but of the gifts and
graces of the Spirit, with such, with him who says, Per aquas istas gratiae,
and benedictiones divinae quibus in Ecclesia dei frumitur, designantur. A
fourth sort interpret these Waters of the Gospel, the glad tidings touching
man's salvation by Christ, which is compared to water frequently in Scripture,
Isa. 11.9. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the Sea: The knowledge of the Lord Jesus shall abound, as the waters of
the Sea; see Joel. 3.18. Zech. 14.8. We may take the Gospel, with the gifts and
graces of the Spirit to be these waters; for the Gospel is veliculum Spiritus,
the ministration of the Spirit, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.8. And the
Spirit, with the graces and gifts, are often compared to water as well as the
Gospel; See Ezekiel. 36.2. Isa. 44.3. and 41.18. Acts 2.17. John 4.14. and 7.37,
38, 39. Now it remains to show wherein they are like unto water.

1. Water cleanses, it purges away the filth of the body, and other things: So
does the Gospel, with the gifts and graces of the Spirit, cleanse the souls of
men, and purge their hearts from sin and filthiness, John 15.3. Now ye are
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Christ spoke unto them the
Gospel, and that was the word, together with the Spirit, which made them clean
from their unbelief, disobedience, and other sins, 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have
purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit: The Spirit
accompanying the Gospel, purified their souls, and made them obedient to the
truth, Ezekiel. 10.36.25.

2. Water moistens and softens the earth, which before was dry and hard, so
that there was no entrance for the plow; but being well watered with the rain
of Heaven, its soft, and fit for the plow: So the Gospel, the Doctrine of
Christ, moistens and mollifies hard and heavy hearts. Those that put Christ to
death, were hard-hearted sinners; but when they heard Peter preach the Gospel,
and some of that water fell upon their hearts, they were softened, and became
sensible of what they had done; They were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Acts 2.37. So Paul was a stout and stubborn
fellow, but the water of the Gospel did so supple him, that it made him yield
and say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6.

3. Water cools heat; the heat of the earth and air in Summer, and heat of the
body in hot weather: Many bathe themselves in the water, to cool them: Dives
begged a little water to cool his tongue, Luke 16.24. The waters of the Gospel
have a cooling virtue in them, they cool the heat of persecution, Mat. 5.11,
12. they cool the heat of our passions* James 3.20. Mat. 5.22. they cool the
heat of temptations, Romans 16.20. 1 Cor. 10.13. James 12.12. they cool the heat
of our lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11. Romans 8.13. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. they cool the scorchings
of a guilty Conscience, and fire of Hell, Matthew. 12.31. and 11.28. 1 John 1.7.

4. Water makes the earth fruitful: When they wanted rain, there was barrenness
and famine, Jer. 14. but when they had the former and latter rain, all things
flourished and abounded, Ezekiel. 34.26, 27. I will cause the shower to come down
in his season, there shall be showers of blessings; and the tree of the field
shall yield her fruit, etc. Literally these words are true, and spiritually
also, and set out the fruitfulness of those who were to live under the sweet
showers of Gospel Doctrine. They should be like a watered garden, Jer. 31.12.
The doctrine of the Lord is as the rain and dew, which falling upon the tender
herbs and grass, causes them to grow, Deuteronomy. 32.1. When Zacheus was watered with
this water, he became very fruitful, and gave half of his goods to the poor,
Luke 19.8. others sold all, and laid the money down at the Apostles feet, Acts
4.35. They were abundant in love, and in good works.

5. Water quenches thirst, satisfies and revives the thirsty soul: It was
their drink in the infancy of the World, and is still in some hot Countries.
Sampson, when like to perish for thirst, having some water out of the jaw bone
of an Ass, he revived, and was satisfied, Judge. 15.18, 19. The waters of the
Gospel have this property also, when the soul is a thirst, there is no water
quenceth that thirst, but the water of life, which the Gospel shows and
conveyeth unto us. The Gospel has this water of life in it: Christ and the
Spirit, which it makes men partakers of. The great and precious promises are
satisfying things; the righteousness and Spirit of Christ are satisfying and
reviving things. Peter found it so, when he said to Christ, Lord, to whom
should we go? thou have the words of eternal life: Let others go to what
Brooks, Pits, or Cisterns they will, to quench their thirst, we will never go
from thee, who have the words of eternal life; who art the Fountain of living
Waters, and can satisfy us for ever, John 6.68. This Water quenches
unlawful desires, and satisfies Spiritual desires.

6. Some waters have a curing and healing virtue: The Pool of Bethesdah healed
all manner of diseases, Joh. 5.4. There be waters in our Land which have
healing virtue in them: Such be the waters here mentioned, for they healed
other waters, v. 8. Gospel waters will heal sick souls and bodies. The
Centurion said to Christ, Lord, speak thou but the w^rd only, and my servant
shall be healed, and it was so, Mat. Mat. 8.8, 13. Christ cast out Devils with
his word, and healed all that were sick, ver. 16. The Gospel is not only a
pattern of wholesome words, but of healing words; also there is no spiritual
disease in the soul, but the Gospel has healing virtue to cure it, therefore
it is called the Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. and the power of God unto
Salvation, Romans 1.16.

7. Some waters are very cordial, and do greatly comfort the spirits of man:
None more then the waters of the Gospel, by which the Spirit, the true, solid
and eternal Comforter flows into the heart. The Gospel, and good things of it,
are set out by Water, Milk and Wine, Isa. 55.1. all which are comforting
things: The Gospel is glad-tidings, and affords strong and everlasting
consolation to the soul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. 2 Cor. 3.5. Jeremiah says, the Word of
God was the joy and rejoicing of his soul, chap. 15.16. David professes, he had
perished in his affliction, had he not drunk of these Cordial Waters, Psalm
119.92.

To come to those Observations which we may pick out of these Verses.

Observe. 1. That as it is Christ who makes known the things of the Temple; so
he does the same not all at once, but he makes known some at one time, some at
another.

Formerly Christ had revealed much to the Prophet, and here he brings him again
to the door of the House, and shows him waters he had not seen before. We are
not capable of much at once; like children, we must have line upon line,
precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little. Ezekiel is instructed
a little in one place, and a little in another place, as he was capable: So
Christ the wise and chief Builder of the Temple, deals with him, and revealed
one thing after another unto him; and so he dealt with his Disciples, John
16.12.

Observe. 2. The waters of the Gospel, the gifts and graces of the Spirit, do
fl^w from Sion, from Jerusalem, where Ezekiel had his vision, Chap. 40.2.

The bitter waters of the Law flowed from Mount Sinai, but the sweet waters of
the Gospel flowed from Mount Sion. Isaiah long before prophesied whence these
waters should come, Isa. 2.3. Out of Sion shall go forth the Law; that is, the
Law of Faith, not of Works, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. So in
Zach. 14.8. And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, that is Eastward; and half of
them toward the hinder sea, that is Westward: In Summer, and in Winter shall
it be, there shall be no time wherein these Jerusalem-waters shall cease
flowing. It is not Rome, or any other City in the World, which has the honor
to send out these waters, but Jerusalem only, where was the true Church of God.

Observe. 3. These spiritual waters, although they flowed from Sion and
Jerusalem, yet Christ himself was the Fountain and Original of them; they came
from the door and threshold of the house.

Christ tells us, He is the the door, John 10.7. All spiritual water is in him,
all Heavenly Doctrine, all gifts and graces: When the Spirit moved holy men to
speak, as it is 2 Pet. 1.21. it received of Christ, and showed unto them, John
16.14. and all the waters which flowed from the Apostles, they received from
Christ: The Spirit was given them to fill their vessels, and fitted them to
carry these living waters from Jerusalem to all parts, Acts 2.8. and Christ
sent them forth to preach the Gospel; all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are in him, Col. 2.3. and he that believes in him, receives living waters from
him; all gifts, graces and divine truths, are from him: The waters of the
Sanctuary, flow from the Lord of the Sanctuary.

Observe. 4. God would not have his Worshippers to conform to, and comply with
the Worlds Worshippers.

They worshipped with their faces toward the East, that was the Nations
practice. The Heathen Idolaters had their backs to the West; but here the front
of the House stood Eastward, that when they came to worship the true God,
their backs might be toward the East, and their faces toward the Sanctum
Sanctorum, which was Westward. When some Jews, degenerated into Heathenish
customs, did worship with their faces toward the East, Ezekiel. 8.16. and their
backs toward the Temple, God counted it an abomination, it did greatly provoke
him, causing him to deal in fury with them, and to show them no pity, Ezekiel.
8.17, 18. God must be worshipped according to his own order, and not after the
rites and customs of others.

Observe. 5. The Gospel spread first into the Eastern and Southern parts of the
World; it is said, the waters issued out Eastward, and came down from the
South Side: They were dry and hot Countries, and God took special care of them,
that they should be first watered. In Galilee did Christ first preach the
Gospel, Mat. 4.23. and so all Judea over; and after from Jerusalem, these
Gospel-waters flowed into all Nations, Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations,
Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature:
The Apostles were spiritual clouds, and they were to water, not only Jerusalem
and Samaria, but the uttermost parts of the earth, Acts 1.8.

Observe. 6. Those who are Preachers of the Gospel, must look for hardship, for
travel and trouble, for much heat, much cold, for many storms and tempests.

They that carry these waters, must travel into all quarters, East, South,
North, where be fierce winds, parching heats, terrible storms: Preachers must
expect temptations, persecutions, reproaches, accusations, imprisonments, etc.
And notwithstanding these, they must go on and carry Sanctuary-waters to all
places. Endure hardness, says Paul to Timothy, as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ: Gospel Preachers must not be dismayed at Northern or Eastern blasts, nor
faint at Southern heats.

Observe. 7. Sanctuary-waters, are no common, but choice Mercies, they are
Right-side Mercies, South Side Blessings.

The Gospel is a right hand mercy: Some mercies are left hand, and left-side
mercies, they are those of an inferior nature: Others are right hand mercies,
and such are those of the highest nature, amongst which is the Gospel, Rev.
5.1. I saw in the right hand of him who sat upon the Throne, a book written
within, and on the backside sealed with seven seals; and ver. 7. Christ, who
was the Lamb, took this Book out of the right hand of God, and so handed it
over to us, acquainting us with the mysteries and mercies in it.

Observe. 8. The glorious and blessed truths of the Gospel, do come from Christ
Jesus, as Mediator, and making Reconciliation for us with God the Father.

These waters are said to flow from the Altar, which was a type of Christ: The
Sacrifices offered upon the Altar, were for Reconciliation; and Christ being
both Altar and Sacrifice, has reconciled man to God; and as he does this, so
the Waters flow from him, so Gospel Truths are given out by him. The Gospel is
the purchase of the death of Christ, sealed with his blood, and holds out
strong arguments of our being reconciled to God; and therefore it is called The
Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.

These are the Observations from the two first Verses: Now for those that flow
from the other three Verses.

Observe. 1. The Lord Christ, as he is the Ahchitector of the Church, so the
Measurer of all things belonging unto it.

He is the Man in this Vision with the line in his hand, nothing is to be done
in his spiritual Temple, but according to his will and direction. Moses
measured out all in the Tabernacle, David and Solomon all in the Temple, but
Christ is the only Measurer in this House. Gospel-measurings are committed to
the Son, Heb. 1.2. God has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son; and
he is over his own House, Heb. 3.6. to order and dispose all things as himself
pleases.

Observe. 2. The motion of Sanctuary-waters is not accidental, or Humane, but
according to Divine Appointment.

Christ goes forth Eastward, measures a thousand cubits, and then the waters
flow that way; and then he measures a thousand cubits more, and so they flow
another way: That way Christ went with his line measuring, the waters still
flowed; which imports, that the preaching of the Gospel in one place, and not
in another, is not casual, or as man will, but the Appointment of Christ: He
forbad his Disciples to go into the way of the Gentiles, and into the Cities of
the Samaritans, but rather go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat.
10.5, 6. Christ here measured out the cubits, where these Gospel waters should
flow. Paul and those with him, being forbidden to carry these waters into Asia,
and not suffered to go with them into Bythinia, whither their wills were bent,
at length by a Vision they are directed into Macedonia, assuredly gathering,
that the Lord had called them to preach the Gospel there, Acts 16.6, 7, 8, 9,
10. Christ had measured out a thousand cubits there, for these spiritual Waters
to flow. It is at the Appointment of Christ what Countries, what Cities, what
Towns, and what Families shall have these waters.

Observe. 3. That as it is at Christ's Appointment to what places these waters
shall flow, so likewise how far therein they shall flow.

So many cubits as Chr^^^ measures out, so far they shall flow, and not
further: If he measure out a thousand cubits, they shall extend so far; if he
measure out but five hundred cubits, or one hundred only, the waters shall run
to the borders thereof, and not one cubit beyond, nor one short: So far as
Christ's line is stretched over any place, so far the waters of the Sanctuary
will and must flow.

Observe. 4. The Doctrine of the Gospel is never rightly understood, unless we
be taught it by Christ.

He led Ezekiel into the waters of the Sanctuary; so is the Hebrew bammaiim,
and we read it, through them: He instructed him in the nature and qualities of
them. Whosoever understands the Gospel savingly, is led into that knowledge by
the Spirit of Christ: The Apostles themselves had not understood the Gospel,
had not Christ sent them his Spirit, John 16.13. When he the Spirit of truth is
come, he will guide you into all truth; that is, he will make you know all
truth savingly. The truths of Christ are spiritual, and without the Spirit they
are not discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. Many wade into these spiritual waters
without Christ and his Spirit, and they are of those who are said to be ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.7.

Observe. 5. The Doctrine of the Gospel, conversion of sinners, and graces of
the Spirit, proceeds gradually.

1. For the Doctrine of the Gospel, that went out gradually, like water out of
a fountain, which may be covered with ones hand, or a dish, but running a
little way increases; the waters hereafter a little time and motion, were up to
the ancles, after to the knees, and then to the loins: The Gospel was not given
out all at once, but one truth thereof after another: Christ himself first
preached one part of the Gospel, and then another; he was four years and
upwards in letting that sacred water run out of his lips, it came from him by
degrees: And so the Apostles, who were Co^^uits of this Fountain, let out that
water little by little; they went up and down preaching here and there, writing
an Epistle to one place, and an Epistle to another place, till they filled the
World with these waters. If you read the Book of The Acts of the Apostles, you
may see how the Gospel spread from place to place, and what great progress it
had in the world. Paul says, Romans 10.18. their sound went into all the earth,
and their words unto the ends of the world; and to the Colossians, Chap. 1. v.
6. he declares, the Gospel was come unto them, and to all the world; from small
beginnings here was great increase.

2. The conversion of sinners is a gradual work: Now one is converted, then
another, afterward a third, not all at once. Though the Waters of the Sanctuary
be living waters, yet they do not beget life in all who taste of them: Many
Scribes, and Pharisees, and others, heard Christ preach the glad tidings of the
Gospel, and speak as never man spoke, yet were not converted; some few were
wrought upon in Christ's time, in Judea and Jerusalem; some by the Apostles in
several places where they came, as at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus,
Philippi, and other places; but the most part remained unconverted, even in
Jerusalem it self; which made Christ weep over it, Luke 19.41. and say, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as an Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Mat. 23.
Conversion-work went out slowly in Christ's days; it was quicker in Peter's time
then ever since, three thousand souls converted at a Sermon; now three thousand
Sermons hardly convert one soul. Paul gat at one time a Lydia, at another a
Jailer, at a third time a Fugitive servant; and so by degrees the waters of the
Sanctuary did good.

3. The graces of the Spirit have a gradualness in them: Their knowledge, their
faith, their hope, their love, are little at first; but in time they increase,
they grow from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, from hope to hope,
and from love to love: None are filled with Sanctuary-water at first, they come
into us little by little, drop by drop: Apollos was more perfectly instructed
in the way of God by Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18.26. There be several ages in
Christianity, Babes, Children, Young Men, Fathers: Babes are only sprinkled
with these waters; in Children, they are come to their ancles; in young men, to
their knees; and in Fathers, they are up to their loins, and drawing near to
their chins, they are almost come to perfection; but they and the others must
still grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
till they all come to a Perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the
fullness of Christ, Epes. 4.14.

Observe. 6. The Gospel has such depths and mysteries in it, as no Humane
understanding can sound or comprehend.

The waters of the Sanctuary did rise so high, become so deep, that they could
not be passed over: Swim in them Ezekiel might, but he could neither find the
bottom of them, nor get over them. The Gospel is among the deep things of God,
1 Cor. 2.10. it is the richest box of the knowledge and wisdom of God, and
there is a depth in those riches, Romans 11.33. it is the unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3 8. it is wisdom from above, Jam. 3.17. it is a Doctrine of
heavenly things, John 3.12. Heb. 8.5. it is not known without the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. neither Christ nor his Doctrine are known
without Revelation, Mat. 16.17. Gal. 1.16. The flesh taught the Pharisees to
call Christ Samaritan, and to say, he had a Devil, John 8.48. but it is the
Spirit which teaches men to own and acknowledge Christ for a Lord, 1 Cor. 12.3.
Are not these mysteries and depths in the Gospel, that three should be one, 1
John 5.7. that two should be one, and yet continue two still! that the Maker
should be one with the thing made! that he who blesses all, should himself be
a curse! that the Prince of life should dye! that the debt should be paid, and
yet pardoned; the fault be punished, and yet remitted! that the Head and
Members of the same Body should be in Heaven, and on Earth, and in the several
quarters of the World, at the same time! that God who is infinite, should dwell
in man! These, and such like deeps are in the Gospel. Is not the Revelation
alone a great River, which none of our spiritual Mariners can sound or sail
over! That one place, Rev. 13.18. has put the skilfullest of them to it: Let
him that has understanding count the number of the Beast, for it is the number
of a man, and his number is 666. In Daniel there be depths; and Peter says,
That in the Epistles of Paul, there be (...), things hard to be understood, 2
Pet. 3.16.

Observe. 7. The Doctrine of the Gospel is pure, and sufficient of it self, it
needs no tradition or invention of men.

The waters of the Sanctuary are holy waters, and a River great and deep, which
none can pass over: No waters are like these for purity and perfection; they
are not like the muddy waters of Egypt, or puddle waters of Rome; they are
pure, without all mixture, and sufficient for all that belong to the Sanctuary:
So that men need not run to pits or cisterns of their own, or others. The
Doctrines of men are muddy waters, compared to these, and not sufficient to
quench the thirst of any thirsting soul; but these Gospel-waters are most pure,
sufficient and satisfying.

Observe. 8. From this Vision of the waters, That Sanctuary-waters afford
comfort unto the Saints in their afflictions, yea in their deepest distresses.

Ezekiel had this Vision in the time of his captivity, and it was to comfort
him and the Captives in Babylon with him; and so to presignifie to us, that the
waters of the Gospel would yield choice comfort to the Saints in their sad, yea
saddest conditions: they are living waters, and do refresh dying souls; the
promises are bottles of this water; and when those that are in the greatest
afflictions, drink the cordial water contained in them, they forget their
misery, and are like Giants refreshed with wine. The comfort of the Scriptures,
is choice comfort, Romans 15.4. That in Psalm. 46.4. is verified in these
Gospel-waters; There is a River, the streams whereof shall make glad the City
of God: Let the City of God be in never so great straights or distresses, the
River of the Sanctuary, Gospel-waters, will make it glad.

Verse 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
And he said unto me, Son of man, have thou seen this? then he brought me, and
caused me to return to the brink of the River.

Now when I had returned, behold at the bank of the River, were very many trees
on the one side, and on the other.

Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the East Country, and go
down into the Desert, and go into the Sea; which being brought forth into the
Sea, the waters shall be healed.

And it shall come to pass, that every thing that lives, which moves,
whithersoever the Rivers shall come, shall live, and there shall be a very
great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they
shall be healed, and every thing shall live whither the River comes.

And it shall come to pass, That the fishes shall stand upon it, from Engedi,
even unto Eneglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish
shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great Sea, exceeding
many.

But the miry places thereof, and the marshes thereof, shall not be healed,
they shall be given to salt.

And by the River, upon the bank thereof, on this side, and on that side, shall
grow all Trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit
thereof be consumed; it shall bring forth new fruit according to his months,
because their waters, they issued out of the Sanctuary; and the fruit thereof
shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine.


WE have heard whence these Visional waters did spring, and of their great
increase into a River; and here we have a description of this River.

1. From the trees were about it, with their leaves and fruit, ver. 7, 12. 2.
From the place into which it flows, ver. 8. 3. From the effects, in ver. 8, 9,
10. 4. From the fishers and nets, ver. 10. 5. From the adjunct places, ver. 11.
In Verse 6. the Lord puts a question unto Ezekiel, and it is this, Son of man,
have thou seen this? Have thou seen these waters whence they spring? Have thou
seen which way they flow? Have thou seen their great increase and
unpassibleness? If thou have not, see now fully, and observe them more exactly;
that is the intent of the question. There is a Corporal fight, and there is an
intellectual sight; see with the eye of thy body, and with the eye of thy mind.

Note hence, That the waters of the Sanctuary have that in them which is
observable to be considered, and seriously weighed.

Have thou seen this? How suddenly these waters break forth? how they have
followed the measuring line, which way soever it went? how in a little time
they have risen up to a River, and such a River as is impermeable? Have thou
seen the mysteries contained in these waters? As the waters abound, so the
mysteries thereof abound. The Gospel is full of mysteries and depths; the
beginnings, increase, and success of it are wonderful things, and ought to be
minded; the spreading, converting, and edifying power of the Gospel, Christians
should take special notice of, rejoice at, and bless God for: It is a choice
mercy to have the waters of the Gospel in a land, or in a town; and what a
mercy is it when these waters prove waters of life, to convert and edify those
that are there? If Middletons and Thames waters are observable, much more
mystical waters.

After this question comes action; the Lord brought him, and caused him to
return to the brink of the River, or tip of it. Hitherto he had seen the
waters; now the Lord would have him to see what was upon the banks or sides of
the River; for as there were things considerable in the waters, so on the banks.

Observe. 1. Christ reveals and makes known the mysteries of the Sanctuary by
degrees, and one after another.

Ezekiel sees the waters, and being taught something concerning them, he is
brought to the brink of the River, and has new mysteries presented to him; he
is held from seeing the waters of the Sanctuary, to behold the trees thereof.

Observe. 2. The Scholars of Christ ought to be content with what it pleases the
Lord Christ to make known unto them, and to rest satisfied therewith.

Ezekiel troubles not himself or Christ about the depth of the River, the
multitude of waters, and several measurings; but being set down on the brink of
the River, he is content to see and hear what the Lord should show him, and
speak unto him. There is an itch in man to know things kept secret and hidden:
Many through curiosity prying into such things, have prejudiced themselves and
others; Genesis 3.6. Eve did so. Let us acquiesce in what Christ reveals, and not
thirst after hidden secrets, lest we meet with Satanical delusions, and be
given up to believe lies.

In Verse 7. the River is described from the multitude of trees on each side of
it. There was (...) Etz cab meodh, lignum multum valde, or arbor multa valde;
very much wood, or very many trees, as Piscat. or very great trees, as Junius
and Tremellius has it. As the watres were mystical, so are these trees, and
they have a mystical and spiritual signification: They signify the Saints
under the Gospel, those that are true Christians, and such are not unfitly
compared to trees, for they resemble them in many respects.

1. Trees have life in them; so true Christians have life in them. When the
Romans were become Christians; then they were alive unto God through Jesus
Christ, Romans 6.11. before they were dry and dead trees, as the Ephesians were,
Ephesians. 2.1. When men are once true Christians, they have life from Christ, John
10.10. and 20.31. 1 John 5.12. Gal. 3.20.

2. Trees are rooted in solido, in the firm earth, in Rocks and Mountains; and
true Christians are rooted in Christ, who is a firm and solid Rock. The
Colossians were ooted in Christ; not in Plato, Aristotle, or Humane Philosophy,
but in Christ and his Doctrine; they were established in the faith of Christ,
so that none could pull them from him, John 10.28.

3. Trees draw sap, moisture and virtue from the earth, and the waters they are
near unto, Jer. 17.8. Psalm. 104.16. The trees of the Lord are full of sap, they
draw strongly: And so it is with true Christians, Metaphorical trees, they draw
sap from Christ, Virtue from his Promises, and Moisture from his Ordinances.
Faith and Love are like the little fibers which are upon roots; those strings,
veins or sinews draw mightily, and communicate to the whole; so does Faith and
Love abundantly bring in spiritual sap into the soul, John 1.16. Of his fullness
have we all received, John 15.5.

4. Trees do grow upwards, Genesis 2.9. every tree grew: and the Saints are of a
growing nature, Psalm. 92.12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree,
he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Palm Trees and Cedars especially grow
very high, Amos 2.9. their tops reached to Heaven: And did not the
Thessalonians grow exceedingly in Faith and Charity? 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. Did not Paul
grow greatly, when h^s Conversation was in Heaven daily? Phil. 3.20. The Saints
grow up into Christ in all things, Ephesians. 4.15.

5. Of Trees, some are strong, some are weak; some are high, some are low: So
is it with Saints, some are strong and high, as the Centurion, Mat. 8.10. the
Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.28. James, Cephas and John: Gal. 2.9. some are low,
and weak, as the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.1. and the Hebrews, Heb. 5.12, 13. John
has ranked these spiritual trees into three sorts, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. Little
Children, Young Men, and Fathers.

6. They are fruitful, and bear several kinds of fruit. Hence the tree of the
field is said to be man's life, Deuteronomy. 20.19. that is, it brings forth fruit of
several kinds, whereby the life of man is preserved; and true Christians are
not barren trees, or trees which bring forth sour or corrupt fruit; but they
are fruitful, and their fruit is good fruit. The Philippians were filled with
fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1.11. Dorcas was full of good works and
alms-deeds which she did, Acts 9.36. the Churches of Macedonia abounded in
liberality, 2 Cor. 8.2. and the Church of Corinth in every thing, v. 7. some
had tongues, some interpreted, some wrought miracles, and some prophesied.
Those Widows which were to be taken into the Church had fruit, much and variety
of it; they brought up children, they lodged strangers, they washed the Saints
feet, they relieved the afflicted, and they diligently followed every good
work, 1 Timothy 5.9.

7. Some trees are very fragrant, well sented; they perfume the air where they
grow, Hos. 14.6. His smell shall be as Lebanon. In Lebanon, which was a great
Mountain and fruitful Forest, were fair trees, Cedars, and Almuggin trees,
which filled the air with a sweet sent; and like unto Lebanon Israel should be:
And Christ says of his Spouse, Cant. 4.11. The smell of thy garments is as the
smell of Lebanon: The Churches garments are the graces and gifts with which the
Spirit has adorned her, as Knowledge, Faith, Love, Humility, Zeal, Wisdom,
etc. These yield a good savor: From the Church of Philippi was an odor of a
sweet smell, Phil. 4.18. The Church of Rome in Paul's days had a good sent, her
faith was spoken of throughout the whole World, Romans 1.8. Gaius was a tree very
fragrant, 3 John 2, 5, 6. and Demetrius alone had the smell of Lebanon, of
Firre-trees, Cedars, and Almuggins; for he had good respect of all men, and of
the truth it self, v. 12.

8. Trees are exposed to all winds, weathers, storms, to heat and cold; so are
Saints, Jer. 17.8. The man that trusts in God, shall be as a tree planted by
the waters; and what though heat and drought come? he shall be prejudiced by
neither; his branch is green before the Sun, Job 8.16. There will be scorching
heat and terrible blasts: Christians do meet with Satan's fiery darts, and the
Dragons floods, reproaches, afflictions, tempations, troubles of all sorts they
are exposed unto, Psalm. 34.19. 2 Timothy 3.12.

Verse 8. These waters issue out toward the East-Countrey, and go down into
the Desert.
These are the places into which the waters of the Sanctuary did run. Some
render the Hebrew words Haggelilah hakadmonah, into Galilee of the East;
Montanus Arith ad revolutionem orientalem, or terminum orientalem, to the
Eastern border. Galilee was Eastward from Jerulem, and in it was Lacus
Asphaltites, the Lake of Sodom, or Mare mortuum, so called, because no fish
could live in it, nor birds fly over it, but dyed, so deadly were the waters
and vapors thereof. Hither the Sanctuary waters came, and they went down also
into the Desert, that is, say some Expositors, into the Mediterranean Sea,
which was in the West, suitable to which interpretation seems that in Zach.
14.8. where living waters are said to go out from Jerusalem, half of them
toward the former sea, that is, the Salt or dead sea; and half of them toward
the hinder sea, that is, the Mediterranean sea. Others conceive these waters of
Ezekiel did run only Eastward, first into the dead sea, and then out of that
into the Deserts or Plains of Moab; for here is not mention of several seas,
but there is of rivers, ver. 9. Nachalaim, duo torrentes.

The effects of these waters are,

1. Healing: When they came into the dead sea, they healed the waters thereof;
the Sanctuary waters made those deadly waters salubres and utiles, wholesome
and profitable, as the bitter waters of Marah were healed by a tree thrown in,
Exodus 15.25. and the waters of Jericho by a cruse of salt, 2 Kings 2.20, 21.

2. Production of Fishes, and them in abundance: These waters were fruitful
waters, ver. 9. they begat life in dead creatures, and caused Fish to abound as
the Fish of the Sea, exceeding many, as it is in the end of ver. 10. By Fish
understand, those that are wrought upon, and brought in by the Gospel: And they
are so called,

1. Because as Fish are generated of Spawn, or Seed and Water; so Believers are
born of Water and the Spirit, John 3.5.

2. Fish its conceived were not under the curse that fell upon the earth, and
things upon it, not on the waters and fish therein; so Believers are not under
the curse of the Law: Unbelievers are under condemnation and wrath, John 3.18,
36. but Believers are free from both.

3. They keep fresh in salt and brackish waters; and true Converts do so: When
there are brackish, corrupt doctrines abroad, hot and fierce persecutions, by
reason of them, the sound Believer is not tainted with them; Arianism,
Pelagianism, Familism, Rantism and Quakerism do not corrupt them; and the
greater troubles they meet with, the more lively they are.

4. Some Fish swim constantly against the stream: Such are true Christians,
they swim against the stream, they are not led by the multitude: There be
several streams, one of Profaneness, another of Flattery, a third of
Superstition, a fourth of Lukewarmness and Formality, a fifth of Carnal policy,
a sixth of Self-seeking: Against all these, and many others, does the sincere
Christian swim and row daily.

5. Fish live in and by the waters, they cannot live in arido, they presently
dye without water: And true Christians they live in and by the waters of the
Sanctuary, they live in and by the Spirit, they drink in the waters of the
Gospel: These spritual Fish cannot live without them, Rev. 22.1. there is a
pure River of water of life, wherein these live and swim.

6. Fish of the same kind do sort together: It is so with true Converts, they
leave their old company, and sort with those that are regenerate and godly.
David says, Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee. Christ's
Disciples gate together, Acts 1.15. Peter and John went to their own company,
Acts 4.23.

Verse 10. The fishers shall stand upon it from Engedi, even unto Eneglaim.
Engedi was a Town near unto the Dead Sea, upon the coast of it, having
strongholds, 1 Samuel 23.29. called Hazazon-Tamar in Jehoshaphats days, 2 Chronicles.
20.2. which A lapide interprets urbs Palmarum, a City of Palm Trees, because
they flourished there: ^t had several Vineyards belonging to it, Cant. 1.14.
From this place to Eneglaim, should the Fishers spread their nets.

Eneglaim was seated at the mouth of the Dead Sea, where Jordan emptied it self
into it, as Junius and Piscator observe; and it was in the Eastern part, as
Engedi was in the Western.

Before we proceed further, take some Observations from Verse 7, 8, 9, 10.

Observe. 1. The waters of the Sanctuary, the Doctrine of the Gospel, does
powerfully and speedily beget and bring men to God.

Such was the virtue of the waters Ezekiel saw, that presently they brought
forth trees on each side their banks: There were trees of Righteousness
presently, viz. true Christians. When Christ preached and the Apostle^, their
Doctrine was received, and diverse believed, John 4.41. and 7.31. and 8.30. and
12.42. Acts 17.11, 12 and 18.8. The waters of the Gospel turn Thorns and
Thistles into Vines and Fig Trees, and make an Orchard for God, where none was.
This was foretold by Isaiah, Isa. 41.18, 19. I will open rivers in high places,
and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of
water, and the dry land springs of water: I will plant in the wilderness the
Cedar, the Shittah-tree, and the Myrtle, and the Oyl-tree: I will set in the
Desert the Fir Tree, and the Pine, and the Box-tree together. The meaning is,
God would cause the Gospel to be preached in dry and barren places, and there
should some of all sorts come in, believe and grow up like trees of God: Isa
44, 3, 4. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring; and they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse. This water brings forth trees, and makes them good being brought
forth.

Observe. 2. The waters of the Gospel have, and will have their course; they
issue out; who can keep them in? and being out, they go toward the East
Country, and go down into the Desert, and so into the Sea; who can stop them?

When the Gospel began first to be preached, it spread, Mark 1.27, 28. What new
Doctrine is this? for with authority commands he even the unclean spirits,
and they do obey him: And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the
Region round about Galilee: The Gospel did run like water, from Country to
Country, and from Sea to Sea, 2* These. 9.1.

Observe. 3. That people without the Gospel, are like unto the Dead Sea, that
lake of Sodom, into which by our Apostasy from God, we have cast our selves.

The Dead Sea in a spiritual sense is the lake of our sins, where all things
are loathsome, dead and deadly; whence nothing but corrupt and pestilent vapors
do flow. Men are children of wrath by nature, dead in sins and trespasses,
Ephesians. 2.1, 3, 5. All men are gone astray, and altogether become filthy: Psalm.
14.3. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, etc. See Romans 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. they send forth mire and dirt as the Sea does, Isa. 57.20. and
nothing that is good lives in them; they stifle all good motions, being dead in
sin, abominable and reprobate to every good work.

Observe. 4. The waters of the Sanctuary have curing and quickening virtue in
them.

Where they came, the waters were healed, and every thing lived: When they
flowed into the Dead Sea, that was healed by them, ver. 8. and every thing
lived whither the River came, ver. 9. People in Scripture are compared to
waters, Rev. 17.1, 15. but they are unsavory, corrupt waters, like the Dead
Sea, sending out noisome vapors; but when the Doctrine of the Gospel comes in
power, with the merits of Christ, and graces of the Spirit, it purges the head
from infectious errors, the conscience from dead works, the heart from vile
lusts, and the life from base practices, and begets life in the dead soul. The
Corinthians were a Sodomitical people, given to uncleanness, and all manner of
wickedness: 1 Cor. 6. having reckoned up a catalogue of sinners in ver. 9, 10.
he says in ver. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and hy the
Spirit of our God. How came they to be so? it was by Paul's Preaching the
Gospel, Acts 18.1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. he brought Sanctuary waters unto them,
which cured and quickened these Corinthians. In the Pool of Bethesda God put
forth his power, and healed by those waters all manner of bodily diseases, John
5. and in these Sanctuary or Gospel waters, he puts forth his power, and heals
all spiritual diseases, and quickens those that are spiritually dead, ver. ^5.
These waters are living waters, Zach. 14.8. and they beget life, and increase
life, John ^^ 14. and 10.10.

Observe. 5. The waters of the Sanctuary are fruitful waters, they breed trees
on each side, and abundance of fish.

The Doctrine of the Gospel breeds Christians and Believers in abundance, Acts
1.15. the number of Disciples was about a hundred and twenty; Acts 2.41. Three
thousand souls were added unto them; Acts 4.4. the number of believers were
about five thousand; Acts 5.14. multitudes both of men and women were added to
the Lord; Acts 21.20. Thou see how many thousand Jews there are which
believe, (...), how many ten thousands; and Rev. 7.9. I beheld, and lo a great
multitude, which no man could number. The trees and fishes multiplied so much
in a little time, that they exceeded man's Arithmetic.

Observe. 6. The Preachers of the Gospel are fishers.

Verse 10. The fishers shall stand upon it, that is, the river and fish there.
Ye know Christ chose Fishmen to be his Apostles, and told them, That he would
make them fishers of men, Mark 1.17. Men are the fish, and the Gospel is the
net; the Promises are the bait, and Preachers a^e the Fishers. Peter threw the
net on the right side, when he caught three thousand fishes at once, Acts 2.41.
which was prefigured in the great draught of fishes he took, Luke 5.56. The
preaching of the Gospel is compared to a net, Mat. 13.47. its good casting this
net into the waters where there be store of fish, and wise is that man who can
catch them, Prove. 11.30. he that wins souls, is wise: Some Fishers toil all
night and catch nothing; but where there is wisdom to handle the net, and bait
the hooks well, some fish will be caught.

Observe. 7. These spiritual fishers have large waters to fish in, and are to be
frequent in fishing from Engedi even to Eneglaim.

They shall be a place to spread forth nets from East to West: They are to fish
the whole Sea; Go and teach all Nations. The whole world is a Sea of fish, and
the nets must be spread, not lie still: The Fishers may dry and mend their
nets, but then they must throw them into the deep, and be fishing for their
Lord and Master. Paul charges Timothy, to preach the Word, to be instant in
season, and out of season, to take all opportunities to catch fish with the net
of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.2.

Observe. 8. These Gospel Fishers do catch some fish of all sorts, some great,
some small; some old, some young.

When they spread forth their nets, their fish shall be according to their
kind; some of every kind shall be caught in their nets: Mat. 13.47. says
Christ, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a net cast into the Sea, and
gathers of every kind. The Gospel preached gains upon all sorts of people;
the Priests, Acts 6.7. and Sergius Paulus, Acts 13.12. were great fishes caught
in this net; but Lydia and the Damsel, Acts 1.6. with Onesimus and many others,
were little fishes: Nicodemus, John 3. the Eunuch, Acts 8. and the Elect Lady,
2 John. were great fishes; and though not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called, and caught with this net, yet some are:
Some Jews, some Gentiles, some Bondmen, etc.

Verse 11. But the myrie places thereof, and the marshes thereof, etc.
Near unto Rivers and Seas are myrie places, and marshes, and they being at a
distance from the channel where in these waters of the Sanctuary run, were not
healed, made wholesome and useful for fish, but they are left to barrenness;
which is the sense of these words, They shall be given to salt; for salt
causes barrenness, and is a sign thereof, Deuteronomy. 29.23. Judge. 9.45. Psalm.
107.34. He turns a fruitful land into barrenness; the Hebrew is, saltness.
Those that are slothful, impenitent, that go on in filthy practices, trust to
their own righteousness, refusing and neglecting these waters, shall never be
healed, but be barren, fruitl^ss, and accursed.

Verse 12. Upon the bank shall grow all trees for meat.
It is a known thing to Historians and Travelers, that on the banks of the
Dead Sea, or Lacus Asphaltites, the place where Sodom and the other Cities were
destroyed, do grow trees which in show yield goodly fruit, yet not edible; for
being touched, it proves ashes and smoke, deceiving the expectation of him that
gathers the same; but these waters coming hither, beget better trees, and
better fruit, even trees for meat: Neither tree nor fruit should disappoint
them, for the leaves of these trees should not fade; they should always be
green and flourishing, neitheir should the fruit be consumed; they should
always have fruit upon them: For as the sap and greeness of those trees
continued, so the fruit would continue, no rottenness would cause it to fall,
no winds or storms should blow it down.

It shall bring forth new fruit according to its months.
Every month should these trees bring forth new fruit: The word jebaccer is
rendered by some primo genita edeut aut primo genitabunt, they shall yield their
first-begotten; not only shall they yield fruit monthly, but excellent and
choice fruit, ripe fruit, fit for meat: And because this seems strange and
impossible, that trees every month should have ripe fruit, he shows in the
next words whence it is.

Because their waters, they issued out of the Sanctuary.
These waters were no ordinary waters, but such as had a fructifying virtue in
them, beyond all other waters, and made the trees about it to bear twelve times
a year; representing that crystal River that proceeded out of the Throne of
God and of the Lambs, on either side of which grew the tree of life, which bore
twelve manner of fruits, and yielded fruit every month, Rev. 22.12.

And the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaves thereof for medicine.
He shows the excellency of these trees: They shall have nothing useless, Their
fruit is for meat, and their leaves for medicine. The good works and holy lives
of Believers are for meat and medicine unto others.

Observe. 1. Wicked men are myrie and muddy Creatures.

Those that are ungodly, are no better then myrie places, and marshes, which
are unsavory, loathsome, and dangerous, breeding Frogs, Toads, and other
Vermin. Such are all wicked men; their throat is an open Sepulcher, Romans 3.13.
their words are corrupt, deceitful, and poisonous, themselves are loathsome,
Prove. 13.5. they trust in their own righteousness, which is as filthy rags,
Isa. 64.6. they have corrupt minds, as Jannes and Jambres had, 2 Timothy 3.8.
they are full of noysom lusts, subtilty and all malice, as Elymas was, Act.
13.10. they have eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. they are swine, and love
to wallow in the mire, ver. 22. they breed nothing but vermin, base thoughts,
vile affections, and produce only what is evil. Paul describes them fully unto
us, Romans 1.29, 30, 31. and in 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5.

Observe. 2. Those places and persons to which the waters of the Sanctuary do
not come; or coming, do not heal, are designed to barrenness, and so to
destruction.

Verse 11. But the myrie places thereof, and the marshes thereof shall not be
healed: Either the waters came not to them; or if they did, they refused, they
neglected them, and so were given to salt, made like Sodom, barren and
accursed. Some places have not the waters of the Sanctuary, the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and they are barren, and perish for want of the same, as Tire and
Sidon: Some places have them, and because they are impenitent, unbelieving, and
will not receive the truth with the love of it; because they will not drink
these waters, therefore they are given to salt, they are barren, and must
perish. So it was with Capernaum and Jerusalem, Mat. 11.23. and 23.37, 38. and
so is it with many places in this Nation, I fear: John 3.19. This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
then light, because their deeds are evil: They stick in the mud and filth of
their own sins, and will not receive the soul-saving truths of the Gospel.

Observe. 3. That the Saints, true Christian Believers, are not barren, but
fruitful trees.

Every one of them is a fruitful tree, and yields good fruit: All the trees are
for meat, their fruit is for meat; For whom? for Christ, Cant. 4.16. Let my
Beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits: Cant. 6.2. He is
gone to feed in the gardens; that is, to feed upon the fruit of his Churches:
And for others, even all men, Gal. 6.10. their fruit is good, Mat. 5.16. and
7.17. they are acceptable to God and man, through their fruitfulness, Phil.
4.18. and an honor to the place where they grow.

Observe. 4. True Christians are always fruitful, and nothing can hinder their
fruitfulness.

They are trees that bring forth fruit according to their months and seasons;
neither heat nor cold does blast their leaves; no wind or weather does consume
their fruit, but they go on, and are fat and flourishing, and still bring forth
fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.14. they are daily adding to their faith, virtue; to
their virtue knowledge; to their knowledge temperance; to their temperance
patience; to their patience godliness; to their godliness, brotherly kindeness,
and to that charity: These things are in true Saints, and abound in them, 2
Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. The Corinthians abounded in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor.
15.58. Christians must always profess godliness, and always practice it; their
leaf must always be green, and their fruit always ripe; there should not be a
day, or an hour, wherein they should not be doing good, or ready to do good,
and bear new fruit, Jer. 17.8.

Observe. 5. The true cause of fruitfulness, and such fruitfulness in
Christians, is the Doctrine and Grace of the Gospel.

Every tree brought forth fruit according to his month, because the waters
issued out of the Sanctuary: Other waters had not such virtue, such efficacy in
them; those sit under the heavenly dews and droppings of the Gospel, they feel
the influences of the Spirit, they are most fruitful.

Observe. 6. The holy profession, and gracious language of true Saints are
medicinable, they heal the sores and bruises of sinners.

Their examples, their savoury speeches, do good like a medicine: Prove. 12.18.
The tongue of the wise is health; and Prove. 15.4. A wholesome tongue is a tree
of life, it yields good fruit: And Women who are gracious, win their husbands
to the faith, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. by their examples and good conversations, and so
they are healed, and brought to Christ; their leaves are for medicine.

Verse 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Thus says the Lord God, This shall be the border whereby ye shall inherit the
land, according to the twelve Tribes of Israel: Joseph shall have two portions.

And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: Concerning the which, I
lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: And this land shall fall unto
you for inheritance.

And this shall be the border of the land toward the North-side, from the great
Sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad.

Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus, and the
border of Hamath, Hazar, Hatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.

And the border from the Sea shall be Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus, and
the North Northward, and the border of Hamath; and this is the North-side.

And the East Side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from Damascus, and from
Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from the border unto the East
Sea; and this is the East Side.

And the South Side Southward from Tamar, even to the waters of Strife in
Kadesh, the River to the great Sea; and this is the South Side Southward.

The West Side also shall be the great Sea from the border, till a man come
over against Hamath; this is the West Side.

So shall ye divide this land unto you, according to the Tribes of Israel.

And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot, for an inheritance
unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you, which shall beget
children among you; and they shall be unto you, as born in the Country among
the children of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the Tribes
of Israel.

And it shall come to pass, that in what Tribe the stranger sojourneth, there
shall ye give him his inheritance, says the Lord God.


THese Verses are the second part of the Chapter, and contain, 1. The bordering
of the Land, from ver. 13. to ver. 21. 2. The dividing of it, from verse 21. to
the end.


Something was said of the Land, Chap. 45. and here that subject is proceeded
in. Verse 13. speaks in the general, and says, the order whereby they were to
inherit the Land, must be according to the twelve Tribes of Israel, East, West,
North and South. It is true, that Levi had no border, no possession, Ezekiel.
44.28. yet twelve lots are spoken of, because the Sons of Joseph, Ephraim and
Manasseh, come in for portions, Josh. 14.4. The children of Joseph were two
Tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in
the Land: See Josh. 17.17, 18. 1 Chronicles. 5.12. They had two portions, the Hebrew
is, Lines, because the portions were measured out by lines.

Verse 14. And ye shall inherit it one as well as another.
The Hebrew for one as well as another, is, a man as his Brother, which is
usual among the Hebrews: For when they speak of two or more in the masculine
gender, they say, vir and frater ejus; and when they speak of two or more in
the faeminin gender, they say, uxor and soror ejus; the sense here is, that
they should all aequo jure possess the Land, and each Tribe have an equal
portion, which differs much from the division made of old; for Numb. 33.54. Ye
shall divide the Land by lot, for an inheritance among the families; and to the
more ye shall give the more inheritance; and to the fewer ye shall give the
less inheritance: And if we grant with some, that it was so here, that a
greater portion of land was given to the greater Tribe, yet it is conceived
from these words of Ezekiel, that every one in each Tribe had an equal portion,
which was not so of old.

Concerning the which, I lifed up mine hand, to give it, etc.
Of the Lords lifting up his hand, mention was made, Ezekiel. 20.56. and 15.28.42.
and 36.7. and 44.12. and it notes Gods swearing, that he would give the Land of
Canaan unto their Fathers, as Exodus 6.8. I will bring you in unto the Land
concerning which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaak, and Jacob; the
Hebrew is, I did lift up my hand.

Verse. 15. This shall be the border of the land toward the North-side, from,
etc.
He describes first the borders of the whole Land, and so makes way to the
division of it more particularly: He begins with the North border, which was
from that part of the great Sea, viz. the Mediterranean Sea, which lay
Northward, and so proceeded to Mount Hor, and from thence to Hamah, and so to
Zedad-Ziphron, and terminated in Hozar-enan, Numb. 34.7, 8, 9. which was in the
North-East. In this description of the Northern border, more Towns are
mentioned then in Numbers, as Hethlon, Berothah, Sibraim, Hazer, Hatticon,
Henram, and Damascus, but the extension is the same, from the great Sea to
Hazar-enan, ver. 15, 16, 17.

The East border is laid down ver. 18. and that is, that space which lies
between Hauran, Damascus, Gilead, and the Land of Israel by Jordan, from the
border to the East Sea; that is the Lake of Sodom, or Dead Sea, as some
interpret it: But Numb. 34.11. it is extended to the Sea of Chinnereth
Eastward, which is the Sea of Tiberias, or Lake of Genesaret, John 6.1. Luke
5.1.

The South border is set forth unto us in ver. 19. and it is from Tamar, which
Maldonate makes Jericho: Others a Town near the Dead Sea; and from hence to
Meribah, or the waters of Strife in Kadeh, in the Wilderness of Zin, Numb.
20.13. and 27.14. and so to the River which led to the great Sea; that River is
called Sihor, Josh. 13.3. Jer. 2.18. and the River of Egypt, Numb. 34.5. and
di^tinguished the Tribes of Simeon and Judah from Egypt, as Sinetius says, and
ran into the Mediterranean Sea, which is the great Sea; so called, in respect
of the Sea of Galilee, or Tiberias, and of the Dead Sea, which were little ones
to that: To this great Sea came the South border.

The West border is in ver. 20. from the border of the great Sea, that is, from
the place where the River of Egypt exonerates it self into the Mediterranean
Sea, which by Geographers is called Rhinocura, and so to Hamah in the
North-West toward Mount Hor. This tract by the Sea was the West border, Numb.
34.6.

The Prophet being shown the borders of the Land in the foregoing Verses, is
brought here to see the division of it in the three last Verses: And the
division was to be according to the Tribes, ver. 21. and this division was to
be not ad placitum, but per sortem, the lot was to fall upon it, ver. 22. Ye
shall divide it by lot; the Hebrew is, ye shall make it fall, that is, under
lot: They might not pick and choose what part of the Land they had a mind unto,
but take their portion where the lot fell; and here it is ordered, that
strangers and their children shall not be excluded from inheriting: Not all
strangers were to have this privilege; but those that should come and dwell
amongst them, and beget children: It was not so in the division of the Land by
Moses and Joshua, strangers might not inherit amongst them; which clearly
intimates there was to be a change of the Mosaical state.

Strangers might come into any of the Tribes, which Sanctius understands of
Proselytes, whose number was great, as he says: And into what Tribe soever
they come, there they were to have inheritance; so that now the difference
between strangers and natives, Jews and Gentiles, was to cease, and they both
had the same privilege.

Having given you the litteral sense of the words, now let us see what may be
the spiritual sense of them; for in the letter they were not fulfilled after
the return from Babylon, but mystically under the Gospel they were.

1. Then here is held out unto us, The great extent and largeness of the Church
under Christ and the Gospel. The Land mentioned, signifies the Churches state;
and the bordering of it out, North, East, South, West, the extent of it into
all parts. The Christian Church is larger then the Jewish; that was shut up in
one Nation, now it reaches to all Nations, Mat. 28.19. neither Asia, Africa,
Europe nor America are excluded, Mat. 24.14. Luke 20.47. Rev. 15.4. The Church
under the Gospel is universal and invisible.

2. Those that are Subjects or Members of this Church, are not Hypocrites, but
Israelites. Those that were not Israelites, and true Israelites, were not to be
in this Church: Hypocrites, scandalous, ignorant, and unregenerate persons, are
often in, if not the major part of particular visible Churches; but of the
universal Church of Christ they are not; that consists of true Israelites, such
as Nathaniel was, John 1.48. of Jews inwardly, such as are circumcised in heart
and spirit, Romans 2.29. of such as are enrolled in Heaven, Heb. 12 23. of sealed
ones, Rev. 7. and these stood with the Lamb on Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1. These
made up the Church and body of Christ.

3. The privileges of this Church do equally belong to all the members of it,
ver. 14. Ye shall inherit it one as well as another: None has pre-eminence
above others in the things of Christ and God: As the Jews could not say, This
Land is more mine then yours, I have the privileges, you have not; so a Saint,
a Christian, a true member of the universal Church, cannot say, The Church, or
privileges of it, are more mine then others who are in the same; for all are
one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. and there is but one Body, one Spirit, one
hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6. it is one and the same grace of God, one and the same righteousness of
Christ, one and the same eternal life which they are interested in.

4. The state of Christians in the Church, and all the spiritual blessings they
have therein, are of free grace, and mere mercy. This land shall fall to you
for inheritance, verse 14. and, ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance
verse 22. It was freely given them, and what good soever was there, in all the
milk and honey thereof: In like manner, the bringing of men into Sion, to be
members of Christ's Body, and all the spiritual milk and honey they enjoy in
that state, is of mere grace and good pleasure: Says Christ himself, No man
comes unto me, except the Father draw him, John 6.45. God has given unto
Christ some men, John 17.2. and those God has given to Christ, he brings them
to Christ, from whom they have milk, wine and honey.

5. The Church of God under the Gospel, consisted of Gentiles as well as of
Jews. This appears from this, That strangers might sojourn amongst them. The
Gentiles were strangers, being neither of the seed of Abraham, nor of the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. but they were under Ch is it to be in
Canaan, that is, in the Church, John 10.16. Of these Christ spoke when he said,
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, that is,
into the fold. It was prophesied in Isa. 49.22. that the Gentiles should come
in, Thus says the Lord God, behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and
set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms,
and thy daughters shall he carried upon their shoulders, etc. The Gentiles and
their children should believe, and come into the Church of Christ: And Isa.
56.6, 7. Also the sons of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord to
serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, etc. eve^ them
will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my house of Prayer.
Isa. 65.1. Zach. 2.11. Many Nations shall be joined unto the Lord in that day,
and shall be my people: T^ese Prophesies, and many other to the same purpose,
are made good, and the Gentiles are in and of the Church of God: The Gentiles
had repentance granted to them unto life, Acts 11.18.

6. The tenders of mercy, and invitations to Sion, were first to the Jews, and
after to the Gentiles. The Land of Canaan was first for Israelites, and then
for Sojourners. Christ first tendered himself, and all Gospel means unto the
Jews, John 1.11. Mat. 23.37. he sent his Disciples first to them, Matthew. 10.5,
6, 7. afterward to the Gentiles, Mat. 28.19. Hence said Paul and Barnabas,
Acts 13.46. It was necessary that the Word of God should first be spoken unto
you* but seeing ye put it from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles. The Jews were
the seed of Abraham, the friend of God, Isa. 41.8. They were his firstborn,
Exodus 4.22. They were the children of the Prophets and of the Covenant; and to
them God first sent his Son to bless them, Acts 3.25, 26.

7. That one and the same inheritance belongs to the beleiving Jew and Gentile;
the same land was both the Jews and the strangers to inherit, which prefigured
their being in one and the same Church, their having the same privileges, the
same interest in Christ; there is one and the same inheritance to both, Col.
1.12. Give thanks to the Father who has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. All the Saints have but one inheritance,
and that is reserved in heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. This inheritance was typified by
the ^ and of Canaan: So then the partition wall is broken down between Jews and
Gentiles, all former differences are taken away, and they are no more two but
one; they are both one, one new man, one body, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. Jew and
Gentile are so united as if there had been no distinction between them, Col.
3.11. There is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all. The Lord
Christ by his death and sufferings has reconciled those who were at the
greatest enmity.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Verse 1. Now these are the names of the Tribes from the north end to the coast
of the way of Hethlon, as one goes to Hamath, Hazar-enan that border on
Damascus northward to the coast of Hamath (for these are his sides, east and
west) a portion for Dan.

2. And by the border of Dan from the east side to the west, a portion for
Asher.

3. And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west, a
portion for Naphtali.

4. And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side, a
portion for Manasseh.

5. And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side, a
portion for Ephrahim.

6. And by the border of Ephrahim, from the east side unto the west side, a
portion for Reuben.

7. And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side a
portion for Judah.


BEing come, through the assistance of God, to open the last Chapter of
Ezekiels prophecy, we have in it three parts;

1. An assignation or destribution of particular portions to each Tribe, in the
first seven verses, and in 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.29, verses.

2. A description of the offering or holy portion of Land (as it it is called
chapter 45.1.) with the bounds and parts allotted, 1. To the Sanctuary, ver. 8,
9. 2. To the Priests, ver. 10, 11, 12. 3. To the Levites, ver. 13, 14. 4. To
the City and suburbs, v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 5. To the Prince, ver. 21, 22.


Thirdly, A description of the City.

1. From the dimension of it on each side, v. 30. 2. From the gates of it, v.
31, 32, 33, 34. 3. From the compass of it, v. 35. 4. From the name of it, ibid.
Concerning the destributions of the Land to particular Tribes, they differ
much from those were made in Joshuahs days; then the Tribe of Benjamins lot was
between Judah and Joseph, as it is Josh. 18.11. but in this Chapter Benjamins
lot is between Judah and Simeon, verse. 22, 23, 24. Then the Tribe of Simeon had
its lot within Judah, Josh. 19.19. Here it is out of Judah and next to
Benjamin, v. 24. And so of other Tribes, their lot is otherwise in this
visional destribution of Ezekiel then it was formerly, and many things he had
concerning the Temple, Sacrifices, the lot of the Prince, Priests and Levites,
which Solomon never had, and never were had under the second Temple, and
therefore pointed out the change of Mosaical and Levitical ways, and led to a
new state of the Church.

Verse. 1. These are the names of the Tribes from the North end, etc.
Of the Twelve Tribes seven were in the North and five in the South, as they
are set down in this Chapter, and the portion of the Sanctuary, Priests,
Levites, Cities and Prince lay between the Tribes thus divided.

Dan is the first Tribe mentioned in Ezekiels division; it was not so in
Joshua's; then Dan was the last Tribe which had his portion, as is evident,
Josh. 19.40, 49. and because it was too little for them, the men of Dan took
Leshem, or Laish, named it Dan, and so enlarged their borders. This Tribe first
fell from God and embraced Idols; for after they had gotten Laish, they set up
a graven image, Judge. 18.29, 30, 31. and therefore this Tribe is left out of
the catalogue, when the other Tribes are mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 7. and Rev. 7. In
the prophetical blessings of Jacob, Dan and Issachar were in the midst, Genesis
49.14, 16. Here Dan is in the front, which gives us to consider,

1. The truth of what our Lord Christ has given out, Matthew. 19.30. The last
shall be first; Dan was the last, and here he is the first; he has the honor
and pre-eminence above the rest. David was the youngest and last of Jesses
sons, and he was made the first, being anointed to be King by Samuel, 1 Samuel
16.11, 12, 13, 14. Those workers in the vineyard, the Lord ordered that his
Steward should pay the last first, and the first last, Matthew. 20.8, 16. Mark.
10.31. Luke 13.30. There are last which shall be first; the Gentiles were last
in the Jews account, but God made them first: and there are first which shall
be last; the Jews were first in their own eyes, but they were made last and of
no esteem in the eyes of God. Luke 18.14. The publican who was last in the
account of the Pharisee, was first in the account of God.

2. Those that have deserted God and his ways, gone far and long from him, may
find mercy, repent and be received to favor. These Danites met with mercy from
God, repented them of their Idolatry, and returned to him again, else they had
never been honored so far as to be set in the first place. When great sinners
come unto God, who were looked upon as the last and worst of men, God does not
only pardon them, but oft-times honors them and makes them the first; as Paul,
Acts 9.15. He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles,
and Kings, and the children of Israel: He had been a great persecutor,
blasphemous, injurious, but when he embraced the Faith of Christ, he was made
the chief of the Apostles.

3. God of his good pleasure and free grace, calls and recalls whom he will.
These Danites had nothing in them to move God to own them for his people at
first; nothing to move him to recall them, being degenerate and fallen into
idolatrous passages, unless we make wickedness an argument thereunto; and if
so, there is sufficient of that in the Devils to move the Lord to show mercy;
but wickedness provokes to destroy, not to show mercy. The best thing in man
induces not God to show mercy; that is from his will, Romans 9.15. It was Gods
free grace which took Abraham at first out of an Idolatrous Counrry and Fa^ily,
Josh. 24.23. It was free grace that he took Isaac, not Ishmael; Jacob, not
Esau; and so that he took Dan at first, and recalled him at last; and so the
Prodigal.

Dan and the rest of the Tribes had their several portions (being all in
captivity, both Judah and Benjamin at this time) allotted unto them, which may
represent unto us what the condition of the Jews shall be under Christ; however
now they be scattered, yet doubtless there is a time when they shall come to
Sion, and have their several portions in the Church of Christ. John's Vision
Rev. 7. add^ great weight to this Tenet, He saw twelve thousand sealed out of
every Tribe, which he distinguishes from those of other nations who are not
said to be sealed, hereby strongly intimating they were Jews, whose conversion
Paul had spoken of, Romans 11.26. So all Israel shall be saved, that is, all the
twelve Tribes shall come in and stand with the Lamb on mount Sion, Rev. 14.1.

These Tribes had their portions from East to West all of them, which was the
length of this Land of Canaan, and their breadth from North to South; which
informs us of the large extent of the Church of Christ; it reaches to the ends
of the earth; for the Father gave him the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. His dominion was to
be from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth, Psa. 72.8. He
was to be Governor among the Nations, Psalm. 22.28. and not only of some few
or many of them, but of all them that shall inherit all Nations, Psalm. 82.8.
And be King over all the earth, Zech. 4.9. He was from eternity appointed heir
of all things, Heb. 1.2. And he must have possession of all, which John in his
vision saw accomplished, Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ; So that Christ's Church and Kingdom is
large and extends to all quarters.

The Portion here given to the seven Tribes, Dan, Asher, Naphtali, Manasseh,
Ephraim, Reuben, Judah, and to the other five Tribes, Benjamin, Simeon,
Issachar, Zebulun, Gad in the 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29, verses of this
chapter, besides the largeness and unlimitedness of the Church, do here inform
us,

1. That there is sufficiency of me^ns and mercies for all that have part in
the Church and Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17.

2. That what portion soever any one has, is by divine appointment. The Lord
allots every one his portion of what kind soever, Romans 12.3. Luke 19.19. and
22.29.

3. That there ought to be communion between those who are of Christ's Kingdom:
The Tribes lay near together, and their portions, and were to have communion
one with another, Ephesians. 2.19.

4. That as there be several portions here for the Tribes, so there are several
Mansions for them in the Heavens, Joh. 14.2. And not only for believing Jews,
but Gentiles also, Rev. 7.9.

Verse 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
And by the border of Judah, from the East side unto the West side, shall be
the offering which they shall offer of five and twenty thousand reeds in
breadth, and in length as one of the other parts, from the East side unto the
West side, and the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.

The oblation that ye shall offer unto the Lord shall be of five and twenty
thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.

And for them, even for the Priests shall be this holy oblation, toward the
North five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the West ten thousand in
breadth, and toward the South five and twenty thousand in length, and the
sanctuary of the Lord shall be in the midst thereof.

It shall be for the Priests that are sanctified, of the sons of Zadok, which
have kept my charge, which went not astray when the Children of Israel went
astray, as the Levites went astray.

And this oblation of the Land that is offered, shall be unto them a thing most
holy by the border of the Levites.

And over against the border of the Priests, the Levites shall have five and
twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth, and the length shall be
five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.

And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange nor alienate the first fruits
of the Land: for it is holy unto the Lord.


THe offering of five and twenty thousand reeds of land in length and breadth
for the Sanctuary, the Priests, the Levites, the City and the Prince, we had in
the five and fortieth Chapter, and therefore shall say little unto these things.

Verse 8. The Sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.
The Sanctuary is the habitation of God, and its in the midst, that all may
equally have access unto it.

Ver. 9. The oblation to the Lord was five and twenty thousand reeds in length,
and ten thousand in breadth] which was a great compass, and sets out the
largeness of the Church in the times of the Gospel.

The Priests had a large portion, ver. 10. five and twenty thousand reeds of
land in length, both Northward and Southward, and ten thousand in breadth both
Eastward and Westward. This large provision was made for the Priests who were
holy, from Zadock which had kept Gods charge, and been faithful and constant in
Apostatizing times. Verse 11. The Levites also had the same length and breadth
of Land assigned them, verse. 13. Now neither Priests nor Levites might sell,
exchange, or alienate the first fruits of the Land, because it was holy, ver.
12, 14. So that holy things which are the Lords and not men's, are not to be
bought and sold and diverted to other uses: Those who sell holy things, sell
what is the Lords, not their own, and there is no justice in that.

By these portions of the priests and Levites is prefigured the increase and
maintenance of the preachers of the Gospel; for as maintenance was due to the
Priests by the Levitical Law, so now it is due by the light of nature, 1 Cor.
9.9. The mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn must not be muzled; and by
the light of the Gospel, verse. 14. the Lord has ordained that they who preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

Verse 11. The Priests that are sanctified.
The Priests were first to be separated, Numb. 8.14, Deuteronomy. 10.8. Heb. 5.1. and
their separation was from common persons, things and ends. They were to be for
an holy God, holy services, and for holy ends.

2. They were to be sanctified and consecrated unto God, Exodus 30.30. Levit.
21.10.

3. They were to approach and come near unto God, Levit. 31.17. Numb. 4.19.
Ezekiel. 43.19.

4. They were to offer the sacrifice which the people were to bring unto them;
otherwise they were not accepted, Levit. 5.8.10.

Verse, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
And the five thousand that are left in the breadth over against the five and
twenty thousand, shall be a profane place for the City, for dwelling and for
suburbs, and the City shall be in the midst thereof.

And these shall be the measures thereof; the North side four thousand and five
hundred, and the South side four thousand and five hundred, and on the East
side, four thousand and five hundred, and the West side four thousand and five
hundred.

And the Suburbs of the City shall be toward the North two hundred and fifty,
and toward the South two hundred and fifty, and toward the East two hundred
and fifty, and toward the West two hundred and fifty.

And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy portion, shall
be ten thousand Eastward, and ten thousand Westward: and it shall be over
against the oblation of the holy portion, and the increase thereof shall be for
food unto them that serve the City.

And they that serve the City, shall serve it out of all the Tribes of Israel.

All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and twenty
thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation four square, with the possession of
the City.


THe place where the City was to be, is called a profane place, not simply and
absolutely so, but respectively as compared with the possessions of the Priests
and Levites; for in Scripture sense that is counted common, uncircumcised or
profane, which is compared with that is more holy; in Levit. 19.23. Israel
prophanus est ad sacerdotem. This place then though it were profane in respect
of the portion of the Priests and Levites, yet was it holy in part; for it was
part of the holy portion, Chap. 45.1. and a type of the Heavenly Jerusalem; The
City was to be in the midst of it, and was four square having four thousand and
five hundred Cubits, say some, reeds say others, and so was of vast extent. The
Suburbs also on each part of it were alike, of two hundred and fifty measures a
piece.

Its said verse 18. that the increase of the ten thousand measures Eastward,
and Westward, shall be for food to them that serve the City. God is careful
of, and bountiful to those shall serve him; if any shall come to this City, the
Church of God, and serve him and his people, there they are provided for before
hand; God has allotted out ten thousand reeds of land, East and West, which he
will bless so as it shall increase, and that increase shall be for them; in
the Apostles times, when the Church was grown numerous, there was not any among
them which lacked; God provided for them by stirring up the hearts of owners to
sell lands and houses, Act. 4.34, 35. and not only here are we to look at the
temporary provision God makes for the faithful, but that eternal reward also
which they shall have in Heaven, the city which has foundations, Heb. 11.10.
where they shall have an exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4 17.

The 19. verse. dictates three things unto us; First, that the Citizens of this
City are holy men, not common, profane men; they are Israelites not
Gibeonites; Sanctam urbem communes homines non inhabitabunt. Oecol. Rev. 21.27.
There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that shall defile, those that
keep the Comands of God, shall enter into this City, Rev. 22.14. Dogs,
Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers, ^dolaters, Liars, shall be shut out, ver.
15.

Secondly, that they are men chosen, not out of one or two Tribes, but out of
every Tribe; they that serve this City, must be out of all the Tribes; God did
not take some only out of Judah and Ephraim, the great and more honorable
Tribes, but some out of the other and lesser Tribes: God is a free Agent and
may take where, when, and whom he pleases, Rev. 7. some were sealed out of
every Tribe.

Thirdly, those that are of this City, are to be serviceable; they are to
improve their Talents, what ever they be, for the good of the City; they that
serve the City, shall serve it out of all the Tribes of Israel; the Apostles
were servants to this City, and they went up and down into all the Tribes of
Israel to serve this City; Ministers and Christians should now expend
themselves for the Church of God, and labor to bring some into it out of all
parts; God gives gifts and graces to Ministers and others for this end, that
they should be serviceable to the City of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. as every one has
received the gift of God, even so minister the same one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold grace of God.

Verse. 20. The whole of the holy oblation made a apiece, every square
being five and twenty thousand reeds. The City which John saw, lay apiece,
Rev. 21.16. such a figure has beauty and stability in it, and represented the
beautifulness and stableness of the Church, Cant. 6.16. Mat. 16.18.

Verse, 21, 22.
And the residue shall be for the Prince on the one side and on the other of
the holy oblation, and of the possession of the City over against the five and
twenty thousand of the oblation toward the East borders, and Westward over
against the five and twenty thousand toward the West borders, over against the
portion for the Prince, and it shall be the holy oblation, and the Sanctuary of
the house shall be in the midst thereof.

Moreover, from the possession of the Levites, and from the possession of the
City, being in the midst of that which is the Princes, between the border of
Judah, and the border of Benjamin, shall be for the Prince.


THe Prince here spoken of, is the same with him, Chap. 45.7, 8. interpreted to
be neither any civil Prince, nor the high Priest, but the Lord Christ who is
King of Sion. Whatever of the holy oblation was not for the Sanctuary, Priests,
Levites and the City, was the Princes, and what was beyond the holy oblation,
was his; His Territories extend far, and such is the dignity of his person, as
that the father has given him the ends of the Earth to possess, Psalm. 2.8. Not
only Canaan which typed out the Church, was his Dominion, bu even the Nations
and whole earth, Psalm. 82.8. Zach. 14.9.

The Sanctuary, the City, the Priests and the Levites, were in the midst; the
Princes portion was on both sides of them; he was their security and defense;
Christ is the defense of his Church and people; he is on both sides of them,
round about them, he is a wall of fire round about Jerusalem, Zech. 2.5. He is
the Watchman thereof, and keeps it night and day, Isa. 27.3. That is his glory,
and himself is the defense of his glory, Isa. 4.5.

Verse, 28. By the border of Gad, at the Southside Southward, the border shall
be, etc.
When Jacob did prophetically bless the Tribes, Dan and Gad went together, Genesis
49.17, 19. but here they are placed opposite; Dan in the utmost part of the
North, ver. 1. Gad in the utmost part of the South; for Tamar, (which signifies
a Palm Tree, and after was called Palmira) was the furthest. Town Southward in
Judea near the Lake Asphaltites, or the Dead Sea. This portion of Gad reached
unto Meribah Kadesh which was in the Wilderness of Zin, Deuteronomy. 32.51. There was
another Meribah in Rhephidim, Exodus 17.7. where the Israelites did chide with
Moses for want of w^ter, after they came out of the Wilderness of Zin, ver.
1.2. The Lord may dispose of Tribes, and Families, and seat them in North, or
South, or wherever he please, in hot or cold Countries, in Fruitful or baren
Lands.

Verse, 29. This is the Land which ye shall divide by lot unto the Tribes of
Israel for inheritance.
The Hebrew is thus, This is the Land which ye shall make or cause to fall
from, or for the inheritance, to the Tribes of Israel.

That is, by lot you shall make the inheritance fall unto every Tribe; none
were to choose what inheritance they would have, but to take that where the lot
fell. This as Oecolampadius says, is the conclusion of the whole Chap. and
that which follows is the Situation and measures, the gates and Ministers of
the City, their maintenance and use.

These are their portions, says the Lord God, the Hebr. is Adonai Jehovah, the
Lord Lord, the Lord who is Sovereign of all, the Lord who gives being to all
things, and to his word.

Verse, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
And these are the goings out of the City on the North side, four thousand and
five hundred measures.

And the gates of the City shall be after the names of the Tribes of Israel,
three Gates northward; one Gate of Ruben, one Gate of Judah, and one gate of
Levi.

And at the East side four thousand and five hundred, and three gates; one gate
of Joseph, and one gate of Benjamin, and one gate of Dan.

And at the South Side four thousand and five hundred measures and three gates;
one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebulun.

At the West side four thousand and five hundred, with their three gates: one
gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Napthali.

It was round about eighteen thousand measures, and the name of that City from
that day shall be, The Lord is there.


Verse 30. These are the goings out of the City.
Some understand by the goings out, the gates; but Jerome makes them to be the
compass of the City, a quatuor ejus lateribus, from its four fides; for not the
gates, but the sides had four thousand and five hundred measures; at these
goings out was the utmost term and extent of the City.

Verse 31. The gates of the City shall be after the names of the Tribes of
Israel, etc.
In the distribution of the portions of land Levi was left out (he must not be
troubled with the things of this world) but in the assignment of the gates,
there is one of Levi or for Levi; he had right to the City and all the
privileges of it, as much as the other Tribes.

In the 45. chapter, and several verses of this 48. mention is made of the
City, but in the sixteenth verse, and these last six verses, is the fullest
description of the City; and its described, 1. From the measures which were on
each side; for as the goings out of the City northward were four thousand and
five hundred measures, so were the goings out of the South, East and West; and
that we may not question it, the sixteenth verse asserts it in terminis, These
shall be the measures thereof; the North side four thousand and five hundred,
and the South side four thousand and five hundred, and on the East side four
thousand and five hundred, and on the West side four thousand and five hundred;
they were all alike in their measures. What these measures were, is of moment
to enquire. We have only two mentioned in this vision. Reeds and Cubits; by
these the Temple, City, and thingr pertaining unto them were measured, chap.
40.5. The measu^ing reed in the man's hand was six cubits long and a handful
breadth; and if we take measures here for reeds, viz. four thousand and five
hundred reeds, in all they come to eighteen thousand reeds, which make one
hundred and eight thousand cubits, and eighteen thousand hands breadth; and
after this account every side of the City is eight miles, and one hundred
paces; for eighteen thousand reeds make thirty two miles and four hundred
paces, as A Lapide observes. So that this City was very large. Others lessen
the City greatly, and make the measures to be only cubits, and so each side of
the City comes to be a mile and almost a half long, which was no great length
nor breadth, being both equal. Naffenrefferus makes the measures to be cubits,
and insists upon it much; but others are of a different judgment from him. And
seeing the City in the Revelations was measured by the reed, it seems also more
then probable that this also was measured by the same measure. Rev. 21.15, 16.
he measured the City with a reed twelve thousand furlongs. As Ezekiels City
exceeded the former City much, so John's City exceeded Ezekiels far more; for
being square, as the other was, it had three thousand furlongs on each side,
which make three hundred seventy and fivemiles, reckoning eight furlongs to a
mile; So that this City being three hundred seventy and five miles in length,
and as many in breadth, was the best City that ever was.

2. Its discribed from the gates of it. This City had twelve gates, three on
every side; and these gates were according to the names of the Tribes of
Israel; Ruben, Judah, Levi had the North-gates; Joseph, Benjamin, Dan, had the
East gates; Simeon, Issachar, Zebulon, had the South gates; Gad, Asher,
Naptali, had the west gates; The several names of the Tribes were written upon
the gates. Herein Ezekiels and John's City, the new Jerusalem, do fully agree;
for John's had twelve gates, three on each quarter, and the names of the twelve
Tribes written upon them, Rev. 21.12.

3. Its discribed from the compass of it, ver. 35. It was round about eighteen
thousand measures; Take measures for Cubits, and then it was not above six
Miles in compass, but if we take them for reeds as diverse do, then the compass
of this City is thirty two miles and almost an half. But far short of the
compass of the new Jerulalem, that great City, which was fifteen the (...)
miles about, for so many miles do twelve thousand furlongs amount unto; both
the City which John saw measured, and that Ezekiel saw measured, were four
square, comely, firm and durable; the Court is apiece, Ezekiel. 40.47. the
holy oblation was so, Ezekiel. 48.20. and so was the City.

4. Its discribed from the name, verse. 35. The name of the City from that day
shall be Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there.

From the day of its building and inhabitation it shall be called so; Many
Cities have had glorious and significant names, as Nicopolis, Tit. 3.12. which
signifies the Victorious City; Nazareth, Luke 4.16. notes sanctified or
separated; Bethsaida, Mat. 11.21. the house of fruits or meats; Bethlehem, Luke
2.4. the house of bread; Jerusalem, the Vision of peace; but they fall short of
this name, Jehovah Shammah.

Some make the meaning of these words, the name of the City shall be, The Lord
is there, to be this, that God would be in the City; not that the City was, or
shall be ever called so, as it is said of Christ, his name shall be called
Wonderful, Councellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace; he was so, but not called by those names; and so this City, it shall
have God in it there present; yet not be so named; but I see nothing hinders,
but it may both be so called and have God in it, and because God is there,
therefore to be so called.

The name Jehovah is a glorious and fearful name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Junius has the
words thus, nomen gloriosissimum and sum reverendum istud, that name most
gloriously and highly to be reverenced. Bernard calls it Nomen Majestatium, a
Majestical name, and Philo lib. 3. de vita Mosis says, quod si quis nomen Dei
blasphemaverit* hominum deorumque domino abusus fuerit, vel nomen ejus
intempestive protulerit, noxam luat capite; and presently after, Quomodo
meretur veniam, qui (...) abutitur sanctissimo dei nomine, tantum ad explendum
sermonem, non aliter quam prophanis vocibus! Some observe that the Jews after
their return from Babylon, had such high and reverential thoughts of the Name
Jehovah, that they thought it not fit to be pronounced, but used the name
Adonai in the stead thereof, least it should be profaned. This glorious
majestical and most holy name is given to this City.

What is meant by this City, is of concernment to know. Some by it understand
Jerusalem literally, as it was rebuilt by the Jews after their return,
together with the civil state in which the Prince governed by civil Laws, just
Weights and measures; but such a City as is here described, was never built by
the Jews after their captivity. To let that opinion pass, some do make this
City Ezekiel saw to be a moddle and platform of that City, the Jews (who should
be called, converted, and brought to their own land again) should build and
inhabit; but because the Jews return to their own land is denied by some,
questioned by many, and doubted by most, whither ever a City as that here is
held out, viz. of thirty two miles compass, shall be built by them, it is
safest to interpret this City typically, and in this sense Interpreters are not
all of a mind; for some make it to be a representative of Heaven, and the
amplitude or graces thereof; others make it to be a representation of the
Church under the Gospel, in the former times thereof especially, yet short of
that City the Heavenly Jerusalem which John saw, Chap. 21. for though this City
and that agree in some things, yet they differ in many; I shall show you some
difference between them.

1. The gates of Ezekiels City, had no Angels to keep it in; but at the twelve
gates of John's City, there were twelve Angels to keep them, Rev. 21.12.

2. In Ezekiels City there was a Temple, but in John's there is none, Rev. 21.22.

3. The materials of Ezekiels Cities were inferior to those of John's, which
were gold, pearl, and precious stones, Rev. 21.18, to 22.

4. The Waters of this City came from under the Threshold of the Temple, and
from the Southside of the Altar; but John's City had a pure River of Water of
life, clear as crystal, which proceeded from the throne of God, and of the
lamb. Rev. 22.1.

5. Ezekiels City had all trees for meat, and medicine on both sides of the
banks of the River; John's had one by the tree of life, which bears twelve
manner of fruits, Rev. 22.2.

6. The light and glory of Ezekiels City fell short of that which John's had,
Rev. 21.23. for it had no need of the Sun nor of the Moon, to shine in it; for
the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

7. Ezekiels City was not half so great as John's, the one being only eighteen
thousand measures in compass, and the other twelve thousand furlongs in length,
breadth and height, Rev. 21.16.

8. John's City had a Wall of twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
twelve Apostles; Ezekiels City had a Wall, Chap. 40.5. but no names in it of
Prophets or Apostles.

Now, notwithstanding this City John saw, the new Jerusalem exceeded that our
prophet saw very much, yet they both represent the Church of Christ here on
earth, and it will not be denied but that they may in part represent it in
Heaven.

By this City of Ezekiel I conceive is pointed out into us the glorious state
of the Christian Church in the latter days; it has been a long time said to
war under Antichrist and his instruments, the breaches and ruins of it at this
day are great, and the face of such a City hardly visible; but when the times
of Antichrists destruction, and the Jews conversion do come, then shall this
City be built, then shall Sion be in her glory; the Christian Church shall be
then in a greater glory then formerly. If the coming in of the Gentiles at
first began the foundation of this City, what will the fullness of the Gentiles
be when that is come, Romans 11.25. but a glorious addition to this City? and
then when the fullness of the Jews shall be added to the Christian Church, to
this City, what will that be but life from the dead? verse 15. The perfecting of
this City, wherein shall be a Temple suitable, which John minds us of, Rev.
11.1. Where the Temple, Altar and Worshippers are measured; and its observable
where there is mention of measuring, and so building a Temple, respect is had
unto the Jews; and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days put for years
are drawing to an end, and God is about some great things to be done in the
world, and will ere long break forth.

That by this City is represented the Church, some Rabbis themselves do
acknowledge; for though they deny our Christ to be the Messiah, because he
never built them such a Temple and City as Ezekiel describes; yet they
acknowledge this City and Temple to be understood not corporally or literally,
but mystically and spiritually: And the Talmudists affirm, That by Jerusalem we
are to understand the gathering of the Gentiles to Christ, or the whole body of
Christians.

There be several things observable concerning this City or Church of Christ.

1. That it is well and strongly founded; usually Cities are built upon hills
and mountains, which are the strongest parts of the earth, and so was this
City, chap. 40.2. Ezekiel saw the frame of this City upon a very high mountain,
and on such a mountain is the Christian Cfiurch built; on the mountain of Gods
Decree and Power, on the mountain of Righteousness and Truth; its built upon
Christ the rock of ages; such a rock as the gates of hell cannot shake or
shatter. John tells us of this City the new Jerusalem, that it had twelve
foundations, three on every square, which were sure, firm and would never fail:
The Lord Christ, the holy Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the holy Prophets and
Apostles must fall to the ground before the Church shall be ruined, 2 Timothy 2.19.

2. It is comely and beautiful; Cities which are built four square especially
are so, and such was this City, it had four thousand and five hundred measures
on each quarter; there was nothing unfightly on any of the four quarters, they
were all parallel, and had gates alike in them, which presented it very
delightful to the eye; the Church of Christ is comely and beautiful; its built
not of unhewen stones or timber, but such as are well hewn and orderly laid
together. Hence the Church of Corinth is called Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9. and
the Church in general the City of the living God, Heb. 12.22. The Church is
such a building, such a City as is full uf comeliness and beauty; its a
congregation of Saints, Psalm. 149.1. Its the garden of Christ, Cant. 4.12. his
Kingdom, Matthew. 13.41. his Spouse, whom himself says is fair, yea the fairest
among women, Cant. 1.8. pleasant, verse 16. and beautiful 7.1. the Church is
Christ's body, Ephesians. 1.23. the Spirits Temple 1 Cor. 3.16. and therefore has
curious work in it, very glorious and beautiful. What David said of Sion, Psalm.
50.2. that it was the perfection of beauty, is most true of the Church under
Christ and in Christ; its the perfection of beauty, Heb. 10.14. By one offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

3. The greatness and amplitude of this City; it had four thousand and five
hundred measures Eastward, West, North and Southward; it was eighteen thousand
measures in compass, which sets out the greatness and vast extent of the Church
of Christ, Zach. 10.10. God says he will bring the Jews from Egypt and
Assyria, and so multiply them that place shall not be found for them Isa.
49.20. The children shall say in thine ears, that is, in the ears of the
Church, the place is too strait for me; give place that I may dwell. The
Christian Church is spoken of, which should multiply so, that their habitation
must be enlarged, as it is Isa. 54.1, 2, 3. Now the tents and curtains of Sions
habitation are stretched to the ends of the earth, Psalm. 2.8. Mal. 1.11. From
the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.

4. The City has access unto it from all parts; great Cities have many gates;
East gates, West gates, North gates and South gates; so had this City twelve
gates; in every quarter three, which signifies unto us the great access should
be unto the Church of Christ from all parts; not only Jews should come out of
the twelve Tribes to enter and dwell in this City, and be under the Government
of it, but multitudes of Gentiles out of all nations and quarters of the world
should do so, Rev. 7. John saw not only twelve thousand Jews enter in at each
gate, but a great multitude also which no man could number, of all Nations,
kindreds, peoples, Tongues. The Jews were numerable, forty four thousand, but
the Gentiles were above so many millions; the number of them which entered by
the gates was innumerable.

5. The happiness of this City, which is from the Lords inhabiting there, and
giving it its denomination; the name of it shall be Jehovah Shammah, The Lord
is there. Alexandria was not so happy in Alexander, nor Constantinople so happy
in Constantine, nor Jerusalem in Solomon, as this City shall be in Jehovah. We
read in sacred Scripture of a golden City, Isa. 14.4. of a Royal City, 1 Samuel
27.5. of a renowned City, Ezekiel. 26.17. But their glory and happiness was a
shadow to the glory and happiness of this City; they were cities without God,
Jehovah was not there; but here will the Lord himself be.

These words Jehovah Shammah import,

1. The presence of God in the Church, and that is a happiness to have his
presence; when God left the Temple and City of Jerusalem, that was their great
misery, Hos. 9.12. His presence in Heaven makes it Heaven; and his presence in
the Church makes it happy; Thus says the Lord, I am returned unto Sion, and
will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a City of
truth, and the mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the holy mountain: Gods presence
makes it a City of Truth, and an holy mountain; and that City is happy which
has truth and holiness in it, Zech. 8.3.

2. His continuance in it; he will not be ut hospes in diversorio, sed ut
haeres in patrimonio; he will dwell there; he will not leave this city, nor
depart from it, as he did from Jerusalem of old, and as he did from the Jews
after their captivity, Jer. 32.40. I will not turn away from them to do them
good. Ezekiel. 37.26. I will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.
Rev. 7.15. He that sits upon the throne shall dwell with them: It is the
happiness of a Saint to have the Comforter, and his great happiness to have the
same abide with him, and that for ever, Joh. 14.16. So its the happiness of the
Christian to have Christ's presence, and exceeding happiness to have it for ever.

3. His upholding and preserving of it; the Church is Gods building, 1 Cor.
3.9. He said in Isaiahs days, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay
thy foundations with Saphires; I will make thy wind^ws of Agates, and thy gates
of Carbuncles, and all thy border of pleasant stones, Isa. 54.11, 12. and when
the Lord shall do this, he will be Jehovah Shammah, he will uphold and preserve
that building; Matthew. 16.18. Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail. In ecclesia est Deus, qui est suum esse and
omnium rerum esse and praeservare. He is the keeper of Israel, Ps. 121.4. I
will keep this city from being besieged, stormed or plundered.

4. His making himself and his mind known in an especial manner, as he did to
Moses, Exodus 6.3. I appeared to Abraham, unto Isaac and unto Jacob by the name
of God Almighty: but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them; but unto
Moses he was known by that name, and imparted his mind unto him above others:
So shall it be in this city; Isa. 11.9. The earth shall be full of the
knowledge of Jehovah; Isa. 52.6. My people shall know my name; Isa. 60.16. Thou
shall know (that is the Church) that the Lord, I Jehovah am thy Savior: They
in Judah, Israel, Salem and Sion, had other knowledge of God and his Name then
the Nations had; and they of this city shall have peculiar knowledge of God;
what others had in the ear, they shall have in the eye; what others had in the
head, they shall have in the heart: Christ will make great and glorious
discoveries of himself and of his mind unto the citizens of this city; Rev.
11.19. The temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple
the Ark of the Testament. Christ is the Temple of God, and his Temple was
opened in Heaven, that is the Church, frequently called Heaven, in this Book of
the Revelation: The Ark in the Old Testament-Temple, which had the Table of the
Law, and the pot of Manna in it, typed out Christ, the Gospel, and mysteries
thereof; which held out that Christ the spiritual Ark shall not be hid. Jehovah
Shammah, God is present in Christ, and Christ will so open himself to this
city, that himself, Father and mysteries of the Gospel will be more plain and
manifest then ever.

5. His ruling and governing of this City; and its a happy city which has
Jehovah, Christ the King of Righteousness to govern it, Zech. 14.9. Jehovah
shall be King over all the earth; and in that day there shall be one Lord, not
many Lords, but one Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ, Ezekiel. 37.22. One King
shall be King to them all, to all the converted Jews and Gentiles which make
this city of God. Zech. 6.13. it is said of Christ there, that he shall build
the Temple of the Lord, and he shall hear the glory, and shall sit and rule
upon his Throne; Christ shall bear the glory not only for building the Temple
and the city, but also for ruling, because he will rule righteously and
faithfully to the satisfaction of all; Isa. 11.5. Righteousness shall be the
girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. This girdle he
never puts off, but is girt therewith always, showing his readiness to be
faithful and righteous in his government.

6. The pouring out of his Spirit. Jehovah is there to pour that out more
fully; what men had formerly was only the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans
8.23. A few had it poured out upon them, but then will be a more plentiful
effusion, all the Citizens of this City shall be filled with the Spirit, Zech.
12.8. He that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house
of David shall be as God, and the Angel of the Lord before them: then shall the
weakest by the Spirit of Christ abound in gifts and graces, and be as David who
excelled all in his days, and his house shall be as God, that is, full of the
Spirit; or as the Angels, that is, having such grace, qualities, and estimation.

7. The making the City and Citizens honorable and glorious; then shall it be
the renowned, royal and golden City, gilded with the beams of Christ's glorious
presence; from the head comes glory to the body. A Wife shines radiis
mariti; Christ, gloria patris sui; and this City with the glory and beauty of
Christ. His presence made the glory of the latter Temple and City greater then
the glory of the former; and this presence in this Temple and City will make
the glory of it grrater then that of the larter Temple and City, for then he
was there in a state of humiliation, but he shall not be so in this, he will be
in his reigning state, and his citizens will be honorable, Zech. 9.16. They
shall be as the stones of a Crown lifted up; not as common stones, but as the
stones of a Crown; and not as stones of a Crown falling to the earth, but as
stones of a Crown lifted up to be put on the head of a King: O quanta dignitas
horum civium! How great is the honor of these Citizens! They are brought in
Rev. 5.10. speaking of it themselves; Thou have made us unto our God Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign on the earth: And this is not all the honor, for
besides this, they shall have every one three honorable names; for Christ Rev.
3.12. will write upon them the name of his God, and the name of the City of
God, and his own new name.

8. The keeping them in unity and love. The Citizens shall then be of one
mind, Zech. 14.9. In that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one: the
invocation and Worship of his Name shall be one; then shall that be fulfilled,
Zeph. 3.9. Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all
call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. The Hebrew is,
with One shoulder; A metaphor taken ftom Oxen in the Yoke which draw together,
as with one shoulder; so these Citizens shall jointly and unanimously knit
together and worship the Lord Christ. There shall be no Schisms, names of
distinction, as now there are; far if when Christ left the World, the Saints
were all of one heart, Act. 2.32. Much more so shall it be in this City, when
Christ shall be in the midst thereof, and guide them by his Spirit into all
truth.

9. These words Jehovah Shammah, import the great delight the Lord will take in
this City and the Citizens threof, in the Church and members thereof, Isa.
60.4. She shall be called Hephzi-bah, that is, my delight is in her: Then it
will appear the Church is his pleasant portion, Jer. 12.10. And the dearly
beloved of his soul, Verse 7. His glory, Isa. 46.13. The throne of his glory,
Jer. 14.21. Yea, the crown of his glory, Isa. 62.3. He will delight in them to
do them good, to communicate himself unto them, Revel. 7.15, 16, 17. He that
sits on the Throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For
the Lamb which it in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living fountains of water, and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes. Nothing shall disturb or harm them, they shall have no want, but
enjoy all spiritual good, and abound in joy.

To God only be Glory through Jesus Christ.
FINIS.
A Table of the Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
Illustrated in the Book.
The first number directs to the Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to
the Page.

Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page. 9 4 148 14 14 236 32 9 401 Exodus. 20 26 370 32 7
99 Levit. 26 13 27 3 17 377 Numb. 22 6 228 19 9 313 Deuteronomy. 6 6, 7, 8, 9. 355,
356 30 20 112 Joshua. 19 47 236 23 5 151 Judges. 10 16 447 1 Samuel. 14 16 222
2 Samuel. 13 34 99 18 24 99, 100. 1 Kings. 8 11 363 2 Kings. 1 9 401 10 30 118
1 Chronicles. 28 2 217 2 Chronicles. 23 11 532 20 2 560 Job. 21 15 136 11 2 281 19 10 440
39 27 258 36 22 351 17 9 357 Psalm. 12 5 209 23 1, 2, 3 200 44 19 446 39 11 121
74 22 270 76 12 26 14 2, 3 364 78 12, and 43 218 40 2 448 90 11 13 94 23 301 46
4 561 110 3 340 132 13, 14 291 140 11 281 143 10 358 145 15, 16 261 119 14 356
68 366 143 356 144 15 377 126 12 396 127 1 397 Prove. 11 23 261 23 26 165 14 9
335 Eccles. 12 11 211 Cant. 6 4 337 Isa. 9 7 273 13 6 7 10 12 12 27 27 11 6 219
10 67 12 19 18 23 2 2 367 5 10 411 28 26, 29 397 41 18, 19 570 43 3 377 13 397
46 11 395 48 14 259 49 23 47 58 1 109 59 2 357 66 23 535 Jerem. 46 8, 9, 10 7,
8 31 15, 16, 27 392, 393 1 10 81 5 11, 12, 13 137 7 9, 10 372 23 3 236 31 12
405 32 27 374 46 11 34 25 25 33 8, 9 391 50 27 8 33 231 51 34 412 Dan. 5 10, 11
361 Hos. 14 2 381 6 566 Joel. 2 1 7 3 2 216, 238 Amos. 3 2 242 Obad. 1 2 268
Nahum. 1 2 225 Zech. 4 7 17 6 13 608 11 331 7 14 158 11, 12 392 10 6, 7, 8, 9
461, 462 12 10 354 360 14 16 420 8 567 571 Mal. 3 14 136 Matthew. 26 29 381 3
17 322 5 20 132 12 33 162 13 13 170 19 28 478 10 20 365 15 9 380 18 20 540 19
30 588 7 22 387 Mark. 9 45 205 49 376 Luke 4 28, 29 331 17 21 363 22 29 30 381
18 14 588 Joh. 3 6 360 6 63 361 14 16 363 15 5 360 6 68 552 16 13 558 15 2 400
Acts 9 32 5 24 16 372 Romans. 6 14 369 8 6 166 14 352 26 354 1 Corinthians 2 2
372 15 353 6 17 362 2 Corrinthians 5 17 329 3 6 361 3 18 352 353 4 13 360 6 16
363 Ephesians. 6 18 354 2 10 366 12 377 18 315 Philippians 1 21 369 Collossians 1
21 222 12 403 1 Timothy 6 13 14 307 2. Tim. 1 14 355 Hebrews. 9 23 416 12 2 261 12
29 370 Peter 1 1 403 1 John. 2 1 418 2 20 351 3 5 372 4 4 352 5 7 362 Revel. 11
19 608 20 6 307

The Table.
A
ABiathar, why displaced. page 374 Accidentals to us are not so to God 13
Account: God keeps exact account of his peoples sufferings 286 287 Adam had not
the law written in his heart by the Spirit, as believers have, 258
Administrations, what men to be in Gospel ones 374 Advantage, God makes that so
threatens ruin, 244. Affliction. In it men observe how time passes, 33. Gods
people long afflicted, 142. Men under great affliction have vain confidences
151. adding afflictions to the afflicted 285. In great afflictions great
weakness is manifested 445 Afflictions. The Lord is sensible of his peoples
afflictions 447. Though sharp and long, yet they shall have end. 272
Affections, one sinful, sets other on work 264. Evil affections must be
answered for 264 265. Other affections required when we come to God, then when
we converse with men. 393 Agents in Temple-work whom they have need of. 351
Altar of incense what it holds out 320, 321. It is called a Table, and what in
it. 321 322. of burnt offerings 370. why called Harel and Haanel, ibid. a type
of Christ. 371. Anger, what 263 Antiochus, his miserable end. 224 Apostates a
dishonor to God 391 Architecture Gods work, 396, 397 Arms. Men buried with
their arms, and why. 89 Armies, God can easily ruin them 227. brings them to
shame and miserable ends. 238 Aven, what City. 23
B
BArren, who are so, and for destruction 575, 576 Balance, just one 410 Bathe
what 411 Beginnings at first small, 292 Bekkesh and Daresh signifying to seek,
distinguished. 183 Believers have the Law written in their hearts by the
Spirit, otherwise then Adam had, 358. like to trees 565. to fish 568. Believers
Gods lot and portion, 403 Blasphemers blasphemies heard 269. God accounts their
blasphemies against himself, are against his, ibid. and 270. ill to occasion
blaspheming 302 Blessings temporal and spiritual are from God, 227. they are
seasonable 229. end of them it to acknowledge and honor God for them, 230
Blood, being upon ones own hand, what? 101. Why blood was forbidden 146, 147.
whether now it may be eaten, 147. Bloody men have bloody ends 257. God visits
thoroughly for it, 258. blood of Christ frees from guilt 315, 316. Blood put
upon the horns of the Altar what it signifies. 375 Bones, who meant by them
422, 423. God can enliven dry bones 435. Jews like bones, 438 Bow, what smiting
or breaking it means, 233 Branch, three Hebrew words for it, 44. a fourth,
ibid. Breadth of the house increasing upward, what it may note 317 Breaking,
God breaks Kings, Nations 33. Bonds of his 213 Buckler, what. 492
C
CAnaan was Gods land, habitation 260. Whose inheritance it was 272. true rest
there, none in Babylon, 449. safety there, 212, 213. Division of it spiritual,
403 Captivity, God brings into it, and out of it 272 Carcass of Kings what,
354, 355 Change, God can make wonderful ones in a little time 393 Chabash, what
binding it notes, 181 Charad, opened, 11, 269. Charak, what it signifies 31
Chambers, what they note 296, 297, 329. one above another, what that implies
317 Cherubims in the Temple what they note 313, 319 Children, of Abraham known
by their works, 153 increase of them Gods blessing 402 Christ, What a shepherd
he is 210. how differenced from all others 212. called David 213. Whether he
has yet reigned as a Prince, 215. happy they who have him for their shepherd,
216, 217. its he takes away enmity 222. the plant of renown 235, 236. yields
good fruit, 240 Christ called David, 471. what King 472, 477. whether he has
yet been King over the Jews 473, 474, 475, 476. There is a time for Christ to
reign over the Jews, 478. In his kingdom no succession of Princes, 479. He is
chief builder of the Church 288 he is the way, the do or 289. he is the altar,
table, sacrifice, 322. stands by his servants in Temple-work, 349. an Altar
Harel and Haariel, 371, 372. he measures all, 556 Christians liked to trees in
eight respects, 565, 566. true ones are fruitful, 576. always fruitful, ibid.
577. what makes them so ib. Christianity not against Magistracy 412, 413
Church, God has a special care of it, being exposed to many dangers 108.
others fare the better for the Churches sake 228. freed from former evils, 240,
241. when most afflicted, most cared for 285. Church subject to calamities,
202. what shall comfort her 203. God will revenge her wrongs, 213. Cared for in
lowest estate, 287. what its called, ibid. and 288. its well seated and ordered
ib. its an house not a tabernacle 291. the greatness of it, 302, 314. visible
and likned to visible things 326, 327. under various dispensations 327, 328.
Its an exact building 336. the extent and latitude of it, 337. stability,
luster, safety and holiness of it, ibid. and 338. God made known there 348.
Church-work must be according to the pattern God gives, 164. has distinct laws
of its own, 365. what it shall be, ibid. made up of holy ones 368. its holy,
most pure part of the world 404. Its large, ibid. in is provision and
protection, 405, 407, 594. it. Christ's portion ibid. its large under the Gospel
582. Who members of it, ibid. and 583 privileges of it equal to all, 583. all
blessings of it, of free grace, ibid. Gentiles of it 584 Church State preserves
propriety, and men's rights, 405 City. Citizens what and what to do 595.
description of it 599, 500, 601. etc. difference between Ezekiels City and
John's 602, 603. what meant by it ibid. its well founded, great, receives many,
604, etc. Cities have their periods 143 Communion with God expressed by eating
382 Complaint: no cause to complain of Gods dealings. 226 Condition, none so
desparate but God can bring out of 402. see State. Confederates with great ones
must suffer 228 Contradictions seeming in Scripture 236 362 411 Controversies
how, and by whom to be determined. 396 Conversion of sinners a gradual work
559. Covenant: Of making or cutting a Covenant 218, 481 condescension in God to
enter into Covenant with man. 220. what it should work 221. those in covenant
nothing shall hurt 223. God does much for them 380 Covetousness what it does
162. its professors sin 166. evil of it 167. men coveting what is others, lose
their own 273 Court of aid 301. what the Courts represented ib. and 302 Cuhit:
the legal and Sanctuary one differ, and wherein ^91
D
DAy of the Lord how taken 3. sad days succeed merry ones 6. approach of such
days matter of mourning 7. the day of a place 11. of recompense to godly 245.
Lords day the eighth and first 377 Daughters, how taken 25 David, Christ so
called upon what account 471 472 Dead to be buried, after great victories 252.
ignominious to be unburied 260 Death: no defense against it 92 Deliverance is
from the Lord 469 Desert: men think they deserve 387 Design: Gods designs go on
whatever obstacle be in the way 17 496 Difference to be made in things and
persons 395 Divine things: our hearts and minds should be upon them 289 380.
attained by degrees, by labor, by progress 295 those have the charge of them
must be exact 387 546 revealed by degrees 564 Doing of the word is expected by
the Lord 171 366 D^ors of the temple, what they note 322 Doubling of words in
Hebrew note a superlative 366 Dwellings: God knows them, and what sins are
acted in them 468
E
EAst notes spiritual things West temporal 293. eastgate 343. Christ from
thence ibid. Eastern worship not allowed 554 Eating bread before the Lord, what
it imports 382, 383 Edomites 254 255 Enemy 235. God is an enemy to his peoples
enemies 252. harsh dealings insences him 253. they add affliction to the
afflicted 285 286. Enemies are from all quarters 496. make great preparation
497. they watch and seek occasion to ruin the Church 209. have helpers to do
it 214. their coming against the Church not casual 218 Envy whence it arises
47 the nature of it 263 Ephah, what 411 Ethiopia, whence so named 4. Ethiopians
baptized rebaptise themselves yearly, ibid. two Ethiopia's 11 Exactions 410
Examples are to teach 60 Expectation of the wicked disappointed 259
F
FAce: Hiding of Gods what 264 Family: God may dispose of families where he
pleases 497 Favor: Gods not alike dispensed to all 376 F^ast of Tabernacles
420 Fish: their properties 568 569 Flock: such as have need of shepherds 186.
where faithful ones are, what is a prey to all 191. it meets with scattering
storms sometimes 199. God a good shepherd over it 200. in the flock are fat and
lean, goats and Rams 206. God will distinguish between the good and the bad
208. his flock is peculiar, owned, fed, 245 consists of weak ones 246. its
comfort lies in manifestation 246. the holy flock 400 Forms of the house, what
they note 362 Foundation, what 4 Funeral of what dead the priest might be at
397 Fury what 282 220
G
GAtes of the Temple what they hint 294 of East gate 343. gate shut what 380
381. wherefore shut 381 382. when shut and when to be open 530 531. Heaven gate
when open ibid. gate standing open till even, what it imports 533 Gerash, what
driving out it notes 51 Glory: there is glory in the Church 337. We must be
acquainted with that glory, before we see the glory of God 342. glory of God
what 343. receptacle of it 345 346. when glory departs its but for a season 346
sight of glory an humbling thing 347. filled with glory 348 God: he breaks the
urms of the great ones. 33. he wounds them incurably, ibid. dreadful to have
him an enemy 34. he has instruments fit for his work 54. prophets to tell the
worst of Princes, their wickedness 66 God makes use of one King to punish
another 78 79. he is faithful in performing his word* 144. confirms truths by
witness and signs ibid. Gods condescension, vide Covenant. He takes notice of
all that is thought and spoken aganist his 268 269. rejoicing at the calamities
of his people provokes much 286 when reconciled to his, he multiplies blessings
224. he deals best with his at last, ibid. turns evils into blessings 295. what
God does for his own sake 309 when he does great things for them 315. its his
mercy to retake a revolted peoyle 376. happy whom God owns 377. accepts
according to men's abilities 535. God a free agent nothing moves him 449. when
he begins to show mercy, he multiples it 467. he makes clean 469. takes
pleasure in cleansed ones 470. at his pleasure can bring Armies upon his people
595. bears long with the worst of men 420. determines things most free and
contingent 208. discovers plots of enemies ibid. knows infallibly things to
come 217. when God manifests his love and wrath 225. can easily raise forces
against his enemies 229. and easily ruin, Armies, 227. has various ways to do
it, 228. convinces the wicked when in afflictions 266. whom God will honor 391
Godly: No condition so grievous to them but shall end comfortably 375
Godliness: To whom a delight 361 Gog, whom 488 489. whence he came 212.
prophesied of before 216. not Antiochus 224. Dreadful judgment upon him 226.
great 232. where buried, 247 Goodmen must be good before they can do good 366
Gospel: Christ's voice in it, strong, irresistible, efficacious 394. earth
shines with the glory of it ibid. it preserves order, is not levelling 405.
like waters, and wherein 550 551 552. into what parts it went first 555. it
goes where Christ will, 556 557. gradually 558. has depths in it 560. its pure
and sufficient of it self 561. brings men unto God 569. runs like waters 570.
without it what men are, ib. it cures and quickens 571. fruitful 572 Grace will
appear where it is 367. work of it free 403 ^ikened to water and wherein 550
551 552. gradualness in graces 559. all in the Church of free grace (...) it
recals sinners 588 589 Great ones have no cause to glory 84. Greatest go the
wrong way 93. shall bear their shame, though after death ibid. those that join
with them in evil must suffer 228. may lie unburied 260 Guilt: an heavy and
consuming thing 121
H
HAnd stretching out, what it imports 348, 249. lifting up what 284 Gods hand
in men's acting against the Church 237. filling the hand, what it imports 376
Hailstones, fire, brimstone 223 224 Har-el and Hanriel, what 371 372 Hatred,
the nature of it, 253. twofold 263. it sets other affections on work, 264
Hearers: how they carry it often toward them they hear 164. 165. what the
preachers are to them 170 not rest in hearing ibid. Heart most looked at in
worship 165 carnal in spirituals 166. Heart and new what they note 317 318. old
by nature 322. its like a stone, wherein 330 331 332. the evil of it 333. how
cured 336 Heart: Its God prerogative to alter hearts 337. its great mercy to
have stony hearts removed 338. excellency of a tender heart 340 mistakes about
a tender heart 342 343. legal natural tenderness 24^ 244. characters of a
tender heart 345, 346. how to keep it tender 347 348. its a great mercy, its
the gift of God 341 Heathens, what convinces them 310 Hell, poor comfort there
^5 96 High: those highest meet with most storms 328 329 Hin, How much it
contained 420 Holy things to be laid in holy places 332 333. those who have
charge of them must be exact 387. not to be bought and sold 392 Holiness the
law of Gods house 368 Hope, what 439 Horns of the Altar what they signify 371
House of Israel 242 408 Husbandry Gods work, 396 397 Hypocrites will be
discovered 164
I
IDols ruin States 25. defile 298. Idolatry loathsome to God 300. it defiles
more then other sins 316. they are karcasses 355. a wall between God and man
357 Jealousy: to speak in the fire of it what 282. what is in jealousy 225.
it breaks through all 269 Jerusalem highly esteemed by the Lord 352 353. in new
Jerusalem shall be no invention of men, etc. 357. no night there 358: New
Jerusalem exceeds Ezekiels City 604 Jews: there conversion we may expect and
pray for, 462. shall repossess their land 463 480. given to Idolatry 465. shall
be fully gathered 270 271, there is a day of mercy for all the Jews 272. for
lasting mercies 275 offers of mercy to them first 584. shall come to Sion, 589
Ignorance: remedy for the sin of ignorance. 417 418 Impenitency excludes from
Temple mercies 364 Impossibles to man, not so to God 374 Infamous: they that
make so shall be made so 286 287 Inheritance, one to Jew and Gentile 585
Institutions of God like posts and thresholds 356. men must not make any like
them ibid. Interrogations argue not ignorance in God 426 Judgments public
troublesome to neighbor nations 13. they make God known 12. in the forest some
escape ibid 143. former not to be forgotten 13. suitable instruments execute
them, 17. nothing can s cure from them 26, 157. they convince of the equity of
Gods ways 158. threatened, take place 172. they are often lengthned out answerable
to the time of men's sinning 258. what ever they be God is righteous 301. end of
them 230 262. they begin but end not at Gods house 395 396. God executes some
signal judgment 258. impartial 259. judgments upon the wicked are engaging
mercies to the godly 263 Justification, what 315
K
KAdash notes sanctifying and polluting 546 Kings and Kingdoms there
flourishing and perishing in from the Lord 34. tyrannical Kings often have bad
ends 35, Kings are apt to be lifted up with their greatness 38. 39. must be
told of their sins 39. its the Lord makes them great 246. have need of money to
uphold them, ibid. what brings dreadful judgments upon them 53^ why destroyed
55 69. They are lights, and when put our sad events follow 73. 74 Kingdom: No
succession in Christ's Kingdom 479, Subjects of it holy ibid. Knowledge not all
a ^once, 553 564.
L
LAmentations for si^s and ruins of others are from the Lord 65 Land: Land in
league 6. God has ways to empty lands 16. They are his to dispose of 18 261
262 376. he can deprive them of their princes 26. made exemplary with judgments
27. what wastes lands 157. what ever condition its in God is there 262. your
own sins brings desolation 274 301 3^2. their fruitfulness depends upon the
Lord 293. desolate, shall not always lie so 39^. God has a peculiarity in some
lands 214 Last made first. 587 588. Law, what 363. of Gods house why to be made
known 366. chiefly to be observed 368 Liberty of speaking is from God 145 Life
in the hand of God and death also 112. what is the principle of spiritual life
and motion 365. its short 539 Li^e 285. what 291. men's lines must not be in
Temple measurings 292 Lion of God, who 372 Loath, what in it 384. when men
loath themselves for their sins 385 Looks forbidden to priests 393 Lybia,
whence so called 5 Lydia whence so named ib.
M.
MAgistrates good what they are 413 Magnify, when God magnifies himself. 229
Mathematicians: who fit for spiritual ones 261 Man though spared long shall
suffer 101 Marriage: whom the Priests were, and were not to marry 394 Materials
of the Church must be holy 368 Means, what ever used God does all 434 435
Mercies temporal, not merited 308. choice mercies make men renounce former
defilements 468. mercies gradually carried on 450. work more then judgments
384 Messiah: upon what account Jews say he is not come 197, 143, 279 604
Ministers, preachers, its their lot to be ill spoken of, 163. God notes what
said against them 194. men may be much affected with them and yet be hypocrites
169. but as songs to many, hearers 170. other thoughts will be of them in time
172 true ones come in spirit and power 424. of Gods counsel and co-workers 424
425 maintenance due to them, 592. should have accommodation and good; pravision
232. not go out to worldly employments 334. what frame of spirit when we
approach to God 335. they have Christ standing by them when at Temple work ^49.
must first see themselves before they show to others 359 should make known
Christ crucified 372. they must attend and set their hearts upon things 384.
what ones shall be honored 391. what they, ought to be 3^2 393. other frame of
spirit when come to God, ibid. they ought to be maintained 398. should be
careful what they eat 399. must look for hardships of 555. they are fishers
^7^. catch fish of all sorts ^73 Month, one of the months the first of it 37
Mourn we may mourn when judgments are upon enemies of the Church, 83 84
Mountain, how taken 222 Mount Moriah 284. mount Sion what and why 287 288
Christ the mountain of God, 372 Multitude, no warrant for our way 153. they go
the wrong way 272 273. joins against Christ 496 Mouth: opening of it what it
imports 142. freedom of speaking is from God 145. what to magnify with the
mouth 268
N
NAme: profaning Gods name two ways, 299 grievous to occasion the blaspheming
God name 302 what his name signifies 305 what to sanctify it 305. its holy
307. profaning it sticks, and God will vindicate his name 308. For his name
sake he does much 309 Names occasionally given to places 251. God does great
things for his namesake 273 when sanctified 274 Nation: God can reconcile
divided nations 494 Nephesh how taken 148 Nets 67. God has nets to catch
Whales and great fish 69 New Mons what they point out 534 Nilus how made dry
15 No what kind of City 21 Noph a City famous 19
O
OAth: Gods oath 117 Obedience should be more now then of old 540 Oblations to
the Prince, what meant by them 415 Occasions, some glad of occasion against God
and his ways 302 Offering: burnt-offering what it notes 305. other offering and
sacrifice what they import ibid. Meat Offering, sin-offering, trepass offering
333 334 419 Offices and Officers in the Church are only to be set up by the
Lord 107 216 Ordinances of the Temple what 363. why made known 366. they must
be well heeded 284 285. vide Divine things* how we should come unto them 419
Own: men's own sins ruin them 301
P
PAin what it notes 4 Palm Trees described, 303. what for ibid. more of them
213 214 319 Pardon, after it come other mercies 391 Pathros A Country or City
28 Pattern, men must keep to Gods pattern 364 Pavement, what it points out 300
301 Peace, great peace when 245. in times of it men forget God, and sin 274.
those at peace with God must neither be carnal nor cruel 377 People. Thy people
89. when people have power to set up an Officer 106. like sheep in five things
177. Gods people are under their enemies 230. they are safest of all 233. God
has a people he owns, is with 242 243 dealings with them are distinguishing
and convincing 243. God eyes how hearts of men are to his people 252 by their
own sins they bring desolation 274. God deals differently with his own people
and others 293. provident for his ibid. have the best at last 244. happiness of
a people wherein 377. Gods people are sometimes heartless and hopeless 444. are
cared for in the most broken and meanest condition 455. shall have a day of
recompense 245. if they sin shall smart for it 265. they must worship God
publicly 5 8 Perseverance crowns 132. who will persevere 368 Pillars of the
Temple not all alike 328 Place: Mercy and judgment in the same place 238. the
most holy place what it notes 316 3^7 Pledge, what 130 Plenty easily made by
God 381. its from him 382. Plots, secret in time Break out 213. God is angry
with those who plot against the Church 225 Pomp in what 76 Porches for what
297. we are in a porch State 308 Posts, what, and setting them by the Lords
356. Gods posts what, why so named ibid. Priests their office, number,
signification 307. to approach unto the Lord, 331. well provided for 332 come
in holy garments 334. Highpriests what to be, have and do 380. typed Christ,
ibid. their sins 385 386. corrupt deposed 389. their virtues 192. their heads
and hair 393. when not drink wine 394. their marriage ibid. rules for them in
other things 395 396 397 Prince not to meddle with things of God 532. to
maintain his worship, ibid. he must worship God, ibid. not impede his worship
533. must walk as God wills 536 to be bountiful and to whom, 543. not to covet
or oppress, ibid. Nothing can secure wicked princes 26. they ought to protect
their Subjects 47. have their day to leave their greatness 58. their deaths
affect much, ib. wicked ones great troublers 66. Great Princes being enemies to
the Church, how God their enemy 495. the High Priest or Christ 308 406 407 410
his entrance by the gate 381. he and his estate should be for the preservation
of the whole 406. in portion 407. what they should be 409. covetous and cruel
412. should do justice 413. tied to laws of God, ibid. more expected from them
then ordinary, 540 541. Prejudice hard to be removed 139 Privileges profit not
without godliness 94 Promises: made good if the condition be performed, 152.
Gods promises and mercies free 388. shall take effect 397. to be sued out by
prayer 401 Prophets must not spare Princes 66. things are revealed to them by
degrees 83. what they threaten comes to pass 172. men shall have other thoughts
of them ibid. they will be witnesses at last against hearers 173. Prophets
moved by the Spirit 424. true ones come in Spirit and power, ibid. do difficult
things 425. put upon strange employments 434 directed to answer questions 456.
not all recorded they delivered 217. God owns, honors, protects them 218 they
must reveal what is revealed to them 290 Prophesies of God shall take effect
397 Prosperity dangerous 274
Q
QValities evil: make men like brute creatures 65 Qualifications not found but
where wrought by the Spirit 359 Question: God can silence man with a short
Question. 426
R
RAdah, what rule it notes 181 Recompense to the godly for their wrongs 245
Reed; the measuring reed 285. what 291. men must not bring their reeds to
measure by 292 Religion and righteousness should go together, 372. nothing to
be done in it on men's heads 376 Renown, that Christ and the Church has is from
the Lord 239 Repentance when specially it should be 360. to repentants Gods
ways of his house are to be showed 364. the nature of it lies in turning, 124.
it makes a change in judgment, affection and life 385 Reproach: God notes the
reproachings of his 382. Requital in the same or like kind 273 274 280
Resurrection, in it men shall have their own bodies 437 Revealed things should
content us 564 Revolters God has no pleasure in, nor will honor 391. have
found mercy 588. its free grace when recalled ibid. Righteousness 127. legal
128, there is righteousness will not profit 132. what men are apt to rest in
132, 133 Ruah, what it signifies 432
S.
SAbbaths to be sanctified, 396 397. mercy on such days to be had 533
Sacrifices what properly, 255. what they imply 305. several sorts 374 375.
daily sacrifice what it implied 377 types of Christ 416 Salt, what it does, is,
and notes 375. salting the sacrifices what it types out 376 Saints like
Palmtrees 313, 314. like trees in general 565 Sanctum Sanctorum what it
signifies 316 317 Scripture: in it order of things not exactly observed 29.
shall be fulfilled 238 239 Shame: to bear shame 269 when to be ashamed 360. of
what and how ibid. Sheol what it signifies 55 56 Sin A City what now called 21
Shekel 412 Shepherds what, and their duty 176. those over the people are and
ought to be so 183. few such as they ought to be 184. Characters of ill ones,
ibid. and 185. wicked ones as none 187. God eyes and deals impartially with
wicked ones, ib. their sins greatly provokes and brings judgments upon
themselves 192. those under oppressing shepherds shall be freed 193. God will
require his flock at the Shepherds hand 199. God the best shepherd 198 200. See
Christ Sin, Sinners under judgment apt to dispond 121 122 their unbeleif puts
God to his oath 122. if they turn have no cause to dispond 123. they are
authors of their own destruction 125. they lay lands wast 157. it distances and
sets at enmity 221, 222. defiles 216. with holds mercies draws judgments 265.
brings shame and punishment 273. what it causes 308. nothing of man's cleanses
from sin 417 sins of ignorance ibid. Sion, her enemies would rise by her ruin
260 261. when Sion shall have kindness 265. all is noted that's thought or said
against Sion. 268. its against God 269 270 when she goes down Babylon rejoices
286. Gospel and grace from thence 553 Soul sleeps not 436 437 Spirit: new
Spirit what, and what he does 318 319 what attributes at work about it 319.
dignity of it 321. and mistakes about it 325 326, etc. not from man's power or
will, but from grace 329. whether it be in us and how 349 350. what it does in
us 351 352 353 354 it differs from other spirits 359. its freely put into us,
357. a great gift, and wherein 359. before had, men are without life and motion
364 its the principle of spiritual life 365. not leave all to the Spirit and
sit still, ibid. it manifests it self 367. inables to persevere 368. makes way
of God delightful 369. he that has it for both tables duties 371 372. it leads
into the inner Court, opens mysteries, shows glory 347 Stairs of the Temple
what they hint to us 294 295 States: what ruin them 12 25. what upholds them
in greatness 46. what States resemble the dead 445 446. no state but God can
raise out of it 402 447 448 Statutes of God kept afford life 133. walking in
them what it notes 355 356 Statutes and judgments differenced ^57. only to be
walked in 370. Sticks used by God to honorable purposes 455 Storm: how it
comes 220, 221 Strangers might not come into the Sanctuary 389 Sword, makes no
difference 8 Symbolizing not to be with Heathens or Idolaters 371, 397 554
T
TAble with dishes and guests 257. what the Tables in the Temple implied 305
306. first and second Table, man 371 Tanis two of that name 21 Tehaphnehes,
what City, and whence so named 23 Temple: three parts of it, 310 311. the
signification of the Temple, ibid. and 312, 313 314 315. all things measured
that are of it 319 materials of Christ's Temple must be curious and carved work
323. filled with glory 358. Gods mind is made known from thence, ibid. in the
new Temple shall be no posts of men 357. God will not leave it but dwell there
358. no going back in it 363 Things difficult, impossible to men, not so to God
311. mean things used by God to honorable purposes 455. typical cause inquiries
456. great things done not for man but Gods sake 273 Thresholds, what 356
Tidings: after tidings of mercy come tidings of afflictions 494 Time to visit
heathens 7. to take off heavy burdens 27 of public calamities to be noted 65.
times to mourn as well as rejoice 83. there be times to deal with enemies of
the Church, but hid from us 240 241. God observes who are faithful, who false
in Apostatizing times 391. when princes shall no more oppress 408. but own
Christ, and submit to him 408. a time for the Jews coming in 589 Trade, what is
the spiritual man's 369 Transgression what 127 Trees, when great ones fall many
suffer with them 54. by their destruction God quiets Nations 79. for what use
379. Saints likned unto them 556 Tribes, whether the ten Tribes did return and
unite to the rest 459 460 461. Trumpets what made of 100 Types, Tropes, not to
be taken literally 443. God author of true Types 454. typical things excite
inquiries 456 Tyrants, they suffer severely, and where God appoints 70
V
VAlleys, of passengers where 247. of Haman, Gog, 228 Victory: God gives great
and incredible victories to his 244. procures names 252 253. after them ought
to be cleansing ibid. Vision: God the best interpreter of visions 443. why
Ezekiel had the Temple vision 286 Visits, now nothing secures against Gods
visits 11, 26. some are in mercy some in judgment 498. when God begins to
visit his enemies he goes on 239 Uncleanness what 378 379 saved from all 381
Unthankful and Uncharitable, not small on Gods account 208 Voice, Christ's like
what 344
W
VVAlking in Gods Statutes what it implies 355 356. the trade of a spiritual
man 369 Wall of the Temple Gods Protection 290. substantial 318. Christ the
wall 407 Wars lay all waste 8. God the author of them 35 106 God disappoints
Warriers, 237 Watchmen: who are such 107. what to do, ibid. suppose dangers
108. they must depend upon God for more whatever they have 109. they must
forewarn the people, ibid. Act in Gods name, 113. if unfaithful, their account
will be dreadful 112, 113. those that regard them bring certain ruin upon
themselves 113 114. its necessary that they deal faithfully 114. their warning
secures 115. though spared long yet shall suffe^ 201 Waters, what they signify
42. it notes the blood of Christ in three things 313, 314. of sanctuary, what
549, 550. spiritual waters from Christ, 554. choice mercies 555. from Christ as
Mediator 556. comfort in affliction 561 observable things in them 563 Water:
the nature of it 560 551 Ways of God are without exception, 137. Of godly
straight, 538. Of men, such as should cause shame and fear 388 Wealth, often
gotten for others 54 55 Wicked: The Lord knows who are so, 111. They are not
excused if the Watchmen warn them not, 113. Whatever turned from prejudiceth
not 133 Carpers at Gods ways 136. They may have the good pastures 207. They
abuse them and wrong others, ibid. Their expectations fail 261 Reproach Gods
people under judgments 295. by their own badness God does his good 295. they
venture their lives to satisfy their lust 210. combine to hurt the Church,
ibid. they are miry creatures, 575 Will, cannot hinder the Spirits operation
368. no motives of Gods Will 588 589 Windows, what they signify 300 Wine, how
forbidden 394 Word: Gods word shall be performed 391. when powerful 436.
Seeming contradictions in it, 236. Shall be effected, 238 239. called a reed,
and what it serves for 291. has its efficacy from Christ 292 Works: so much of
God in some of his work, as that they convince Heathen 396 World mistakes and
miscalls the godly 111 Worship: false advantages not but defiles ^68. in
matters of it God should have good measure 317. Nothing warrants humane things
in Worship 365. not worship Eastward 371. Priests might not act of their own
head in it 396. Worship of God to be promoted in the first place 404. Prince to
be present at, and to continue to the end 535 to do more then ordinary 540 541
Y
YOaks: what they are 24 227. Upon Gods people 230. God has times to break
them off 231
Z
ZAdock what kind of man 374 High priest how he came to it ibid. The first in
Solomon's Temple 390 He and his Successors constant in ill times ibid. Zoan, an
ancient and royal City 20 21 Zacar, what kind of remembrance it notes 383
Reader, If thou finds not what thou look for in the first number, which
rises to 389. thou will find it in the after numbers which begins at 202. or
thereabouts. Do likewise for the Scriptures and Errataes.

Book Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the sign of the three
Crowns, over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
Folio's
THe Anotations on the whole Bible, or all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, together with, and according to their own Translation of all
the Texts, as both the one and the other were ordered and appointed by the
Synod of Dort; now faithfully translated for the use of Great Britain, at the
earnest desire of many eminent Divines of the Engl sh and Scottish Nation.

A Commentary upon the three first Chapter of Genesis, by John White.

The works of that famous, and learned Divine Mr. William Pemble, gathered into
one volume.

The History of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of Piedmont: containing
a most exact Geographical description of the place, and a faithful account of
the Doctrine, Life and Persecutions of the ancient Inhabitants: Together with a
most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. and a
Narrative of all the transactions following to 1658. justified partly by diverse
ancient Manuscrips, written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther, by
Samuel Morland Esquire.

A Commentary upon the holy Writings of Job, David, and Solomon; that is these
five. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs, being part of
those which by the Ancient were called Hagrographa. Wherein in the diverse
Translations and Expositions, both literal and mystical, of all the most famous
Commentators, both ancient and modern are propounded, examined and censured;
and the Texts from the Original much illustrated, by John Mayor, Doctor in
Divinity.

A practical Commentary, or an Exposition with observations, Reasons and Uses,
upon the first Epistle general of John, by that pious and worthy Divine Mr.
John Cotton, Pastor of Boston in New England.

A learned Commentary, or an Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle of St. ^aul to the Corinthians; being the substance of many Sermons
formerly preached at Gray's Inn, London, by that Reverend and Judicious Divine
Richard Sibs, D. D. sometimes Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridg, and
Preacher to that honorable Society.

(...), or divine characters, in two parts, accutely distinguishing the more
secret, and undiscerned difference between 1. The Hypocrite in his best dress
of seeming virtue, and formal duties; and the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience: As also between the blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace: and the reigning sins
of the unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had; by that
late burning and shining Lamp Mr. Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington
in Summersetshire

Quarto's.
THe humbled Sinner Resolved; what he should do to be saved, or Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the only way of salvation for sensible sinners, discovering
the Quality, Objects, Acts, Seat, Subject, inseparable Concomitants, and
degrees of Justifying Faith. Wherein several Cases are resolved, and Objections
answered, by Obadiah Sedgwick, B. D. and late Minister of the Gospel in Covent
Garden.

The Anatomy of Secret sins, Presumtuous sins, Sins in Dominion, and
uprightness. Wherein diverse weighty Cases are resolved in Relation to all those
Particulars: de ivered in diverse Sermons preached at Mildreds in Bread-street
London, on Psalm 19.1^, 13. by the same Author.

The Fountain opened, and the water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing
of thirsty sinners. Wherein is set out Christ's earnest and gracious invitation
of poor sinners to come unto the Waters, in several Sermons, preached at
Covent Garden on Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. by the same Author,

The plain doctrine of the Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God;
Justified by the God of Truth in his Holy Word, and the cloud of Witnesses in
all Ages. Wherein are handled the causes of the sinners Justification, by
Charles Chauncy President of Harvard College in Cambridge in New-Enland.

Two excellent Treatises of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, one on the fifth of
Matthew, being many Sermons preached at Cripplegate, upon all the Beatitudes.

And Gospel-Revelation in three Treatises, viz. 1. The Nature of God. 2. The
Excellency of Christ. And 3. The excellency of man's immortal Soul: both
published by William Greenhil, William Bridge, Phylip Nigh, John Yates, Matthew
Mead, William Alderly.

Peoples need of a living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, by Mr.
Zachary Crofton.

Holy things for holy men, or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited, etc. In some
Christian reproof and pity expressed toward Mr. Pryns Book, entitled, Lords
Supper briefly vindicated, by S. S. Minister of the Gospel.

A Vindication of the Christians Messiah, that Jesus is the true Messiah
prophesied and foretold by all the holy men of God, who were writers of the Old
Testament, as also proved out of their own Talmud.

The Souls progress to the Celestial Canaan, by John Welles Preacher of the
Gospel.

Comfortable Sermons, on Psalm 24. preached before the Lady Elizabeth her
Grace, by Daniel Dyke, B. D.

Plenary possession makes a lawful subjection to Powers that are in being,
proved to be lawful and necessary, in a Sermon before the Judges in Exeter, by
Rich. Saunders Preacher of the Gospel.

The new World, or the new reformed Church discovered, out of the second
Epistle of Peter, by Nath. Homes D. D.

God save the King, in a Sermon preached the day after his Majesty came into
London by Anthony Walker, Preacher of the Gospel.

A plea for Ministers in Sequestrations, against Mr. Mossom, by S. S.

An Antidote against Anabaptism, wherein the Baptizing Infants, taking Tithes,
etc. are fully vindicated, by Aylmor Haughton

The Conversaion as Heavenly, and as Natural, in two Treatise, by Dr Stoughton.

An Exposition, with practicial Observations, continued upon the thirtieth and
one and thirtieth Chapters of the Book of Job, being the substance of thirty
seven Lectures delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London, by Joseph Caryl,
Pastor of the Congregation there.

Also a continuation by the same Author of the 32, 33, and 34. Chapters of Job,
being the substance of forty nine Lectures, delivered at Magnus near the
Bridge, London.

The Covenant of life opened, or a Treatise of the Covenant of Grace, by Samuel
Rutherfurd, Professor of Divinity in the University of S. Andrews.

Jesus Christ the mystical or Gospel Sun, sometimes seeming eclipsed, yet never
going down from his people: or Eclipses spiritualized, opened in a Sermon at
Paul's, Church, before the right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc. March
28. 1652. the day before the late Solar Eclipse, by Fulk Beller M. A. and
Preacher of the Gospel in the City of London.

A Sermon preached before tbe honorable house of Commons, at their late
monthly Fast, being on Wednesday, June 30. 1647. by Nathaniel Ward, Minister of
Gods Word.

A Declaration of the Faith and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational
Churches in England, agree, upon and consented unto by their Elders and
Messengers, in their meeting at the Savoy, October. 12. 1658.

The humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, concerning a Confession of
Faith, presented by them to both Houses of Parliament.

The humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, concerning a Larger Catechism,
presented by them to both Houses of Parliament.

A Sermon preached by Hugh Peter's, preached before his death, as it was taken
by a faithful hand, and now published for public Information.

Mesolabium Architectonicum that is, a most rare and singular Instrument, for
the easy, speedy, and most certain measuring of Plains and Solids by the foot;
invented long since by Mr. Thomas Bedwel Esquire.

A Changling no company for lovers of Loyalty, or the subjects Lesson in point
of sacred submission to, and humble compliance with God and the King.

The Beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition of 82 Psalm, where is set forth the
Necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty and Morality of Magistrates, by the labors
of Thomas Hall B. D. and Pastor of Kingsnorton; and George Swinnock, M. A. and
Pastor of great Kimbel.

The Christian-mans calling: or a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
Wherein the Nature and necessity of it is discovered. As also the Christian
directed how he may perform it, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions. his
Particular Vocation his Family-Directions: and, his own Recreation by George
Swinnock M. A. Preacher of the Gospel at Great Kimbel in the County of Bucks.
To be read in Families for their instruction and Edification.

Large Octavo's,
THe door of salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration; by George Swinnock M.
A. Preacher of the Gospel at Great Kimbel in Buckinghamshire.

Heaven and Hell Epitouised, the true Christian characcteterised by the same
Author.

A Wedding-Ring fit for the finger: or, the salve of Divinity on the sore of
Humanity. Laid open in a Sermon at a Wedding in Edmonton, by William Secker
Preacher at the Gospel. To which is adjoined, The Nonesuch Professor, in his
Meredian Splendour. or, The singular actions of sanctified Christians; being the
substance of seven Sermons, on Mat. 5.47. By the same Author.

Four profitable Treatises, very useful for Christian practice, viz. The
killing power of the Law, The Spiritual watch, The New Birth: of the Sabbath;
by the reverend Will. Fenner, late minister of Rotchford in Essex.

Enchyridion Judicum, or Jehoshaphats charge to his Judges; together with the
Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's lamentation at Prince Abners Incineration
by James Livesey, Minister of the Gospel at Atherton.

The greatest loss, upon Mat. 16.26. by the same Author.

Meditations Divine and Moral, Henry Tabb M. A.

The Psalms of King David, translated by King James.

Wilful Impenitency the grossest Selfmurther, by that able faithful and
laborious Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. William Fenner.

(...), the Almost Christian discovered, or the False-professor tried and cast,
by Matthew Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation, by the same Author.

Beams of former light, discovering how evil it is to impose doubtful and
disputable forms or practices upon Ministers.

The Pastor and clark, or a debate (real) concerning Infant Baptism, aby John
Ellis.

Habbakkuck's prayer applied to the Churches present occasions, on Hab. 3.2.
and Christ's counsel to the Church of Philadelphia, on Revel. 3.11. by that late
reverend and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ Mr. Samuel Balmford, Pastor of
Albons Wood-street London.

The Rudiments of Grammar: The rules composed in English Verse, for the greater
benefit and delight of young beginners by James Shirley.

The Ladies Dispensatory, containing the Natures, Virtues and qualities of
Herbs and Simples useful in physic, reduced into a methodical order, for their
more ready use in any sickness, or other accidents of the body.

Small Octavo, s.
Catechizing Gods ordinance, in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister at Butolphs Aldgate, London.

The Godly man's Ark in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons;
the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moor.
Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and
collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of her
sickness; by E. Calamy B. D. Paster of the Church at Aldermanbury.

The Gale of opportunity, and beloved Disciple, by Thomas Froysal.

Sion in the house of Mourning, because of sin and suffering, being an
exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations; by D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham in Rutland.

The one thing necessary; by Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephen Walbrook.

A Plea for Arms, delivered in a Sermon at the Spittle, on Tuesday in Easter
Week, April 13. 1658. by the same Author.

Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
Heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added the harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth the
Mysteries of his coming, and of that Redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish; by William Guild Minister of Gods Word at King-Edward in Scotland.

Good company, being a collecton of various, serious, pious meditations; by I.
Melvin, Minister of the Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeons Song; or instruction how to live holily and
die happily; by T. Woodriff B. D. Pastor at Kingsland in Herefordshire.

The Reformation, in which is Reconciliation with God and his people; or a
Catechhism unvailing the Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith,
Ordinances and Government are professed as in the Primitive times, in
opposition to all Errors and Heresies; by W. K. Minister of the Gospel.

Prospering profaneness provoking holy conference, and Gods attention; several
Sermons from Mal. 3.15, 16, 17. by Zachary Crofton.

The Catechism of Hugo Grotius, done into english.

Benedictio Valedictio, or the Rememberance of thy Friend, and thy end, being a
farewell Sermon, preached at the house of the (late Right honorable, Leticia,
Lady Paget, Dowager, deceased, by her Chaplin Anthony Sadler.

Twelves.
IOhnsons Essays, expressed in sundry exquisite fantasies.

The dangerous Rule, or a Sermon preached at Clonmel in Province of Munster in
Ireland upon August 3. 1657. before the reverend Judges for that circuit, by S.
L. Master in Arts, and lately fellow of C. C. C in Oxen.

The Riches of Grace displayed in the offer and tender of Salvation to poor
sinners. Wherein is set out, The gracious behavior of Christ, standing at the
door and knocking for entrance. By Obadiah Shedgwick B.D. and late Minister of
the Gospel in Covent Garden.

The Woman's glory; a Treatise asserting the due honor of that Sex, by
manifesting that women are capable of the highest improvements; by Samuel
Torshel.

The discovery of the most dangerous dead faith; by John-Eaton, M A. and
sometime Student in Trinity College in Oxford.

The new Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; newly translated out
of the Original Greek, and with the former Traslations diligently compared and
revised, By his Majesty's special command, printed at Edinburgh.

Twenty fours.
GRoans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of prayer.

A Handkercher for Parents wet eyes, upon the death of their Children or
Friends.

FINIS.

