GREGORII Posthuma: OR, Certain Learned TRACTS: WRITTEN By JOHN GREGORY, M. A.
and Chaplain of Christ-Church in OXFORD.

TOGETHER With a short Account of the Autor's LIFE; and Elegies on his much
lamented DEATH.

Published by his Dearest Friend J. G. B. D. of Merton College.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden Lion in Little- Britain. 1649.

decorative header with Tudor rose and Scottish thistle
TO My highly-honored Friend, FOR VIRTUE and LEARNING, Ed. Bysh, Esquier.
SIR!
NOt to Dedicate This to Your Name and Patronage, were to commit a double
Trespass; one against the Will and Purpose of the Dead, (if that may be caled
a Trespass in this profane Age) another against my own Obligations to Your
singular Worth; which has so highly engaged both the Author and my Self, as
that for me to think of any other Patron then Your Noble Self, were both
Ingratitude and Impiety: But the greatest Examples this Age can give me,
shall never prevail with me to be guilty of either.

Wherefore, to You, (who durst be charitable at such a time as that, and so
Ingenuous, as to appear a Lover of Learning in this Age) to You (I say) do I
present these Posthums of Your Learned, and now much-Lamented Client; a man so
entirely affected to Learning, as that the very foresight of this Barbaritie
(wherein Learning and Learned men were to be the Objects of Scorn and
Cruelty) broke his heart.

Time was, (even among the Heathen) that Learning was a sufficient Protection
against Tyranny; witness Antonius Triumvir, who, when Varro (his Enemy, and
of a contrary Faction) was Listed for Death, He thus gallantly superscribed
his Name, -- Vivat Varro Vir Doctissimus.

But I forbear: And having now ( Sr!) too long perhaps insisted on the Cause of
my Sorrows and this Dedication, I heartily recommend You to the Grace of Him,
who is able to uphold You in these evil Days; and to enable You, ((...)) to
stand in this slipperie Age.

Your Worship's humbly Devoted, John Gurganie.

VIA VNA COR VNVM blazon or coat of arms
A Short Account of the Autor's Life and Death.
THe Desire of Being is not Ambition, but a generous Appetite and relish of
Immortality, which Nature her self prompt's the Creature to: (...) is an
Apostolical Testimony, that the whole Creation aim's not only at a Being,
but an Eternity of Wel-beeing also. I cannot wonder therefore at the Egyptians
Industry to preserv their Memory and Figures to Posterity. 2 Samuel 18.18.
Nor at Absolom's Pillar, He having no Heir to perpetuate his Name; which, if
good, is rather to be chosen then great Riches: These may perish with the
wicked, but the Memory of the Just shall be blessed.

Who then can distrust, or oppose this Happiness of good men, so long since
assured by Him which is (...), the Eternal God, Blessed for ever? Surely none,
without the guilt of Theomachie or Ingratitude. Upon this Consideration, the
wise Son of Sirach, that Eloquent Encomiast, raised his Monumental Pillar to
the Patriarchs; hence, doubtless, he took his Rise to that lofty Panegyric
of the Primitive Saints; Laudemus Viros gloriosos, Ecclus 44.1.
etc. Let us now prais famous men, etc.

And, in Imitation of Him, I might say much in Commendation of this Author,
whose Worth (as well natural as acquisite) was the Miracle of his Age. But my
Account shall be brief and plain, as most suitable to the sadness of my
Thoughts on this Subject, leaving all Flourish and Fancy to the Gallantrie of
Poetry; from whose sweet strains I shall not long detein you.

Camden's Brit.
Amersham, in the County of Buckingham, enobled hitherto only by the
Honorable Family of the Russels, may now boast as much in the Birth of this
Author; which happened on the 10th of November, 1607: And though his Parents
were but of mean Extraction and Estate, Ovid Metam. lib. 9.
Ingenua de Plebe virum, nec census in illo
Nobilitate sua major, sed vita fidesque
Inculpata fuit, etc. --


Yet of such noted Piety and Honesty, as gained them love and respect from
the Best of that Place. Whence this their eldest Son, about the 15th year of
their pious Education of Him, was chosen by my worthy Friend Dr Crook, to wait
upon Sr William Drake, (and soon after, on Sr Robert Crook) at Christ-Church in
Oxford; where they had the happiness to be under the Tuition of the most
Ingenuous and Learned Dr George Morley, whose Directions and Encouragements to
study were so exact and impressive, as that they soon eased him of farther
trouble with this Author.

The Account of this his young Scholar's Studies being above the Leisure of a
Tutor to receiv; (especially one so greatly and publicly engaged) For besides
mine own Observation of him, (enjoying him no small time in my Chamber in
Christ Church) he confessed unto me, That, for diverse years, he studied 16 of
every 24 hours, and that with so much appetite and delight, Aenea pila, Diog.
Laert. and Lud. Viv. de Cor. Art.
as that he needed not the Cure of Aristotle's drowsiness to awake him, or my
Observation of his Indefatigable Industry, which Magnetically drew my
Affections toward him, my Love being as great to Learning, as my Nature unapt
and impatient of extraordinary Labors. Hence I loved him unto a Filial
Adoption, and after confirmed it by an Academical Exercise for our first
Degrees; wherein, his Worth, like the Rising of the Sun, began to discover it
self, darting forth such fair Hopes and Glimmerings of future Perfection, as
were quickly espied by the then vigilant Dean of Christ Church, Dr Duppa, since
Lord Bishop of Sarum, who immediately received him into favor, and soon after
made him Chaplain of Christ Church, and, after that, his own Domestic, and
Prebendarie of Chichester and Sarum.

For which Favors, he now began (about 26 years old) at once to publish to the
World his Worth, and Gratitude in the Dedication of his Notes on Learned
Ridley's Civil Law, to his and my honored Patron, the Bishop of Sarum. In
which Notes, he made an early Discovery of his Civil, Historical,
Ecclesiastical, Ritual, and Oriental Learning, together with the Saxon, French,
Italian, Spanish, and all Eastern Languages, through which he miraculously
traveled, without any Guide, except Mr Dod the Decalogist; whose Society, and
Directions for the Hebrew Tongue, he enjoied one Vacation near Banburie. For
which Courtesy, he ever gratefully remembered him, as a man of great Piety,
Learning, Gravitie, and Modesty; of which Graces also this Author was as great
a Possessor, as Admirer.

Hence those many Tracts, both in English and Latin, were bashfully laid by,
in his youth, as Abortives; some whereof I have here published, and entitled
Posthuma's, as so many Testimonies and Monuments of his general Learning.

For which he was much honored by the Acquaintance and Favor of men of the
greatest honor and eminence in Learning, Arch-Bish. Laud, B. Mountague, B.
Lindsey, Mr John Seldom, etc.
that this Age has produced; besides the Correspondence (in Points of
Learning) which he held with diverse famous Men abroad, as well Jesuits and
Jews, as others.

And now being like the Sun in his Zenith, ready to shine in his greatest
luster, Behold, the whole Kingdom began to be clouded with Judgments, Ovid.
Met. lib. 1.
(Sic Deus inducta nostras caligine Terras Occuluit --) like that Egyptian
Darkness, which even then began to damp, and has since quite extinguished the
greatest and purest Lights of this Nation, such as were not to be paralleled
by any other for Piety and Learning. Among whom, notwithstanding the Hope of
a clear Day preserved this Learned Author awhile sufficiently spirited for
Study, whereby he composed and published (a little before his Death) those
his Excellent Notes upon some Passages of Scripture, in which kind of holy
Study he intended to spend the rest of his Life.

But, behold! after 20 years trouble with an Hereditarie Gout, improved by
immoderate Study, and now invading his Stomach, Atropos stand's ready to cut
his Thread of Life, being laboriously spun out but 39 years: when, foreseeing
the Glory was now departing from our Israel, his Spirits began to fail in an
extraordinary manner.

For Recoverie and Supportation whereof, (his first Noble Patron, the Bishop
of Sarum, being disabled by Sequestration, etc.) the liberal hand of a second
Mecenas was presently extended, which though it could not save him (as Christ's
did St Peter) from perishing in these waters of Affliction, yet 'twas not in
vain: for, as our Savior said of that Unguent, so may I of his last Patrone's
Charity, Mat. 26.12. Joh. Antioch. Hist. translated out of Greek into Latin
with Annotations.
Was it not to bury him? yes, and to raise him too with the Trump of Fame
being very active and free toward the Publication, not only of this
Posthumous Offspring, but also of some other of greater Exspectation.

And here, Reader! I cannot but drop a Tear for the loss of that his excellent
Piece, entitled by himself, Alkibla.

In which Tract, with very great Judgment and Learning, he vindicated the
Antiquity of Eastward Adoration, (especially in all Churches) as far beyond
an Altar or a Crucifix, (the Romish Bounds) as the Flood preceed's in time
these Superstitious Distinctions of the Christian.

Which gallant Refutation of that Popish Error, I the rather mention, because
some suspected him a Favorer of that Way; but, to my certain knowledge, their
Jealousy was unjust and groundless; he having often declared and protested,
not only to me, but also to many of his familiar Friends, his Abhorrence of
Popery, and his sincere Affection and Constancy to the Protestant Religion,
as it was established in England by Acts of Parliament.

At Kidlington, Mar. 13. 1646. and was buried in Christ-Church in Oxford.
And as he lived, so he died also, a most Obedient and Affectionate Son to his
Distressed Mother the Church of England; for whose Sufferings he forrowed unto
Death; a more painful and exquisite Martyrdom then that by Fire or Sword: By
these the Soul break's prison in a minute to an Eternity of Liberty and
Felicity; that keep's us on the Rack of Death, not only to the Apostles (...),
but even (...), 1 Cor. 15.31.
we die hourly.

This Account would have run into a Volume, should I have given you a
Particular of his Virtues; as, his Courtesy, Humility, etc. not disdaining
the meanest Scholar, nor proud of his victorious Discourses with the best
Learned. And how free and liberal he was of his Treasury, to the full
satisfaction of all Inquisitors, I may confidently appeal to all that knew him.

But I must not so remember my lost Friend, as to forget my self in my Promise
of Brevitie; nay, I will rather choose to be somewhat indebted in this kind to
the Dead; well knowing, the Mourners following, will completely discharge those
Arrears: To whom I now therefore hastily refer you.

decorative header with Tudor rose surmounted by a crown
Upon the DEATH of my dearest Friend, the AUTHOR.
WOuld you the Cause, why this my Son did die?
'Twas, to prevent my Immortality.
As Twins, informed by one soul, part being dead,
The sad surviver live's half-murthered:
So I, in my Retirements, being fixed
On Him, in Me both Life and Death are mixed.
Nor crave's our (...).
Motto less; though God denie's
To match our Wishes with our Destinies.
What then remain's, but that I often look
Upon thee, and enjoie thee in thy Book?
Whose Learned Matchless Lines shall still bring forth
Thy Lovers, as Eternal, as thy Worth.
Who, when we are in Bliss, will sigh, complain,
And curs the Age, suffered thee to be slain.
Slain by an Ichabod; and many more: 1 Samuel 4.24. Masters Oxonienses.
Cartwright Oxonienses. Digges, etc. Oxonienses.


Whom though this hate, the next Age will adore.
Whose Ashes shall revive, if any be
Fit Subjects for Celestial Chymistrie.
Thus Shine ye Glories of your Age, whilst We
Wait to fill up your Martyrologie.
And envy not this our Ambition, though
You wounded were to Death, We have scars too;
And from those darts: but with this difference; You
Let them stick fast, which we with scorn withdrew.
Thus different Glories in one Sphere may be
Equal in Height, though not in Dignity.
Whilst, like that Manna past, or that in store,
The Least was filled, nor is the Greatest more.
J. G. B. D.

An ELEGY On the Learned AUTHOR.
THough yon' close Anchorite's contracted Shroud
Made his innarrowed Carcass seem a Crowd:
Yet the cag'd Votarie did wider dwell,
Then Thou, in thy large Roof, and spreading Cell.
Both lived alike immured: but, Mansion's space,
To Him, was Emptiness; to Thee, was Place.
Which the Retirement's different Ends decide:
Thine was, to Toil and Sweat; but His, to Hide.
Who, though sat down contented with the Store
Thou brought from Nature, coveting no more:
Yet, like a Wealthy Heir, by that Advance,
Thou had lived high on thy Inheritance.
Who ere is born to an Estate to 's hand,
Is full as Rich, as He that buie's his Land.
And such were Thou: but, least free Nature's Gift
Seem mis-bestow'd, unless improved by Thrift;
'Twas thy strong care to melt down Native Parts,
And shape up great Endowments into Arts.
Hence sprung Thy vigorous Pains, unwearied Sweats:
Whilst each past Toil, edg to fresh Toil beget's.
Till thy torn Nervs, stretched in their Search before,
Grow suppler by 't, and so put on for more.
And thy Bent Thought over his deep Object crack's:
Nor Torture bring's, but Patience from thy Racks.
Often did the Sun ow Thee his Morning Streams,
And at thy Earlier Taper light his Beams.
When, now declining in his West, and gone,
Thou bad'st him sleep, for Thou would Journie on.
When Midnight Silence did thy Motions see,
As Night were made for all the World, but Thee.
Nor did thy watchful Temples harbor Rest,
Till thy great Monster-Scruples fell suppressed.
Alcides scorned to deem his Labor sped,
Whilst Hydra wore, or threatening Tail, or Head.
No empty, Surface-Learning could suffice,
No Light, no Floating Notions bound thy Eyes.
But down thy Plummet dive's to the deepest sound,
Still mining through, till it had pressed the Ground.
Art has her Quicksands, which no Hold endure:
He strike's the Bottom that will Anchor sure.
While dull we find the Found, the same Mark hit,
The shackled Circumscription of Our Wit:
Thy unconfined Inquiry bid's at more,
Launches in deeps, never fathomed before:
Plough's the rough Deserts up, scorn's old Abode,
Or Prostitute Directions of a Rode.
Yet thy Nice Pilgrimage does never straie;
But, turn's the crooked Maze, to Beaten-Waie.
So, through wild Seas the adventurous Keel is hurled,
Not to Loos this, but Find the other World.
Thy vigorous Brain releiv's from lazy Rust,
Disguised in Characters, but more in Dust,
Graie Customs, which our dead dismettled Sloth
Gave up, to surfeit the undaring Moth.
Crazed Giants thus distressed Damsels hold;
Not by their strength, but, 'caus their Champion's cold.
Euclide and Ptolomie were so thine Own,
As the fair Building's is the Cornerstone.
Whose beauteous Pile does by the Basis clime:
Yet This preceed's in Worth, though That in Time.
Astrology so obei'd Thy Learned Eye,
As all the Wheels and Clock-work of the Sky,
By Curious Nature were asunder taken,
To guide Thy Art, and then set up again.
And when her Motions jar, her staggering Team
May fix afresh, by Thy King Henrie's Scheme.
The Sacred Hebrew thy Judicious Rage
Pursued, to find it is Mystic Parentage;
With Keen, and Eager, yet with sated Flight:
Not to Ride-over, but Ore-take the Light.
Rude Rabbines, like rude Herbarists go to it:
They mar the Plant, by digging for the Root.
Thy Numerous Language could have circuit run
TO Interpret Countries to the Traveling Sun;
Discours' a his Rising to the Western Seas,
And phras'd his business with the Antipodes.
Yet this bright Stock thy Bounty did afford,
As thy Disbursment still, but not thy Hoard:
Not to amuse the Needy, but supply:
'Twas thy Dominion, not thy Tyranny.
Hence, when I asked thy Torch to light my Way,
And gained some Twilights from Thy Glistering Day;
Thy Liberal Art the Labyrinth did undo,
With the same Cheer, as I had been thy Clew.
Thy Candid Guidance back the Compass brought,
And called Me Tutor still, for being Taught.
Now these Loud Parts, like a Shril-thundering Peal,
Which is the Belfree's Pride, but not it is Weal,
Rent thy frail Tenement, and made us see,
Thy Musick's Excellence, and Cruelty.
An Envious Gout, the Leiger of thy Feet,
To aw thine Industry, lay armed to meet
Thy wakeful Midnight-Watch; and brought Thee back,
For each Raw Learned-Night, a Fortnight's Rack.
And when the single Threats of one Diseas
Bark at thy Vigilant Moons, but not displeas:
When Customarie Anguish now sat by,
Like thy Companion, not thy Malady:
The Enraged Mischief made her Party strong,
Swelled her vexed Unity into a Throng:
Charming Confederates their mixed Powers to reach,
To storm the Fort, for She had made the Breach.
Till the Fresh Host possessed of every Part,
Whilst Gouts secure thy Joints, the Rest thy Heart;
Thy over-number'd Corpse at last did fall,
No one sick Patient, but an Hospital.
M. LL.

decorative header
UPON THE DEATH Of my Loving Friend, Mr JOHN GREGORY.
SUre it must needs be so: -- or else I should
Think Providence but little understood
The State of things; when a dull senseless Tree
Stand's, and outlive's a Jewish Pedigree:
But Man, whose Knowledge might new Worlds create,
And so compose a wiser Book of Fate,
Him, the least breath must scatter into Air,
As if his dust not yet compacted were.
For I don't speak of one, whose Destiny
Was but to make a Sermon, and so die.
Such, as the Law deliver in a Cloud,
Thicker then God at first did, and as loud.
Such, as blaspheme by Preaching, never have don,
Until their Comments make an Alkaron.
Who scare the Turk from being Christian,
And Indians fear they then should put off Man.
He searched Religion's Source, Gospel, and Law,
From Moses in the Flags, to Christ in Straw.
And was so skilled in these Antiquities,
That he could almost tell where Moses lie's;
Who was It Is the opinion of a Learned man, that Melchisedeck was not called
(...), because he had no Father and Mother, but because it was not known, who
his Father and Mother were.
Melchisedeck's Father; Rectify
A Jew even in's own Genealogy.
Who saie's he die'd too soon, that had lived over
All Ages whatsoever were before?
And knew so much of Language, that, alone,
He might have saved all Nations in their own
Idiome and Dialect, though there never fell
A Cloven Tongue, or other Miracle.
Great Citizen of the World! though thou die'dst here,
Yet thus we prove, thou were born Every where.
And, like the Sun too, did thou never sleep,
But when we called it Night, thou still did keep
Thy journey on; till with as large an Eye,
Thou viewd'st the Univers, as much as he.
But thou could not endure (alas!) to run
Over the same Circle still; so having don
Surveying this our Globe, thou went to see
Galileans probably conjectured all the Planets were inhabited Worlds.
What other worlds did do, as well as we.
Thus art thou fled, and left us here to be
Sad Ruins of an Universitie.
What Ignorant Malice could not reach unto,
Nor War it self, thy single Fate did do.
The World began at Noon, but thy bright Raie,
(More glorious Sun!) did set at thy Mid-daie.
Now we do'nt mourn our State, for at thy Fall
It Is fit this Kingdom perish, World and all.
Our heap of Stones at Christ-Church prove's to be
But a more spacious Monument to thee.
And when we purified from this Age, shall name
And dedicate a Temple to thy Fame;
We Will call this Island thine, which is no less
Famous for thee, then it is unhappiness.
When Cities, Temples burnt shall be forgot,
And Sacrilege too; the prais of thee shall not.
Parents shall hither bring their Sons of Years,
To pay their Tribute in a Sea of Tears;
And pointing to thy Tomb, cry, There are found
Oxford and Gregory in one yard of Ground.
Fr. Palmer.

Upon the much deplored Deceas of Mr John Gregory, Chaplain of CHRIST-CHURCH.
HEnce Exclamations on Disastrous Fate,
Let none here call the Stars unfortunate,
Or rail at Lachesis: The Soul that is gone
Scorn's such a whining Celebration;
And dare's that Author whosoever he be
To search into the Stars so far as he.
Since Life was lent him 'till he had a view
Of all the Mysteries that Nature knew,
And had a perfect Knowledge of each Art,
That either Rome or Athens could impart;
'Twas time (now Learning's banished) to suspend
His labor, and to get to his Journei's end.
Should this so sad Intelligence be sent
The Hebrews and Chaldeans would lament:
The Syrians and Arabians (though so far)
Would send to know this an Ambassador;
But vain and fruitless would their Labor be,
When none could give an Answer to it but He.
He, so Admired of all, that had alone
Diversity of Tongues for's Portion;
So fluent, so redundant in them all,
That each which he had got seemed Natural.
The Pious Fates gave him a lingering Death,
Fearing all Arts might perish in one breath:
But fearing too that if he should live long,
All Nations would again become one Tongue,
They added this Confusion to the world,
And thus together too his Ashes hurled.
Asscend, Departed Saint, to be a Guest
To Dialogue with Abram and the rest;
Thou had most Tongues, but know thy Joie's excess
Is far more now then Angels can express.
Epitaphium Joannis Gregorii.
NE premas Cineres hosce, Viator,
Nescis quot sub hoc jacent Lapillo;
Graeculus, Hebraeus, Syrus,
Et qiu Te quovis vincet Idiomate.
At ne molestus sis,
Ausculta, and caussam auribus tuis imbibe:
Templo exclusus
Et avita Relligione
Jam senescente, (ne dicam sublata)
Mutavit Chorum, altiorem ut capesceret.
Vade nunc, si libet, and imitare.
R. W.

The Particular Titles of this Book.
I. A Discourse of the LXX Interpreters; the Place and Manner of their
Interpretation. II. A Discourse declaring what Time the Nicene Creed began to
be sung in the Church. III. A Sermon upon the Resurrection, from 1 Cor. 15.
ver. 20. IV. (...), or a Disproof of him, in the 3d of S. Luke ver. 36. V.
Episcopus Puerorum in Die Innocentium. VI. De Aeris and Epochis, showing the
several Accounts of Time among all Nations from the Creation to the present
Age. VII. The Assyrian Monarchy, being a Description of it is Rise and Fall.
VIII. The Description and Use of the Terrestrial Globe.
decorative header with Tudor rose and Scottish thistle
A DISCOURSE OF THE LXX INTERPRETERS; The Place and manner of their
Interpretation.
JVstin Martyr says, that the Translation was performed, not in the City of
Alexandria, (...). the description whereof, let it be given according to Philo
Judaeus.

(...), (...). p. 448.
(...) etc. that is, The I Will Pharos lies under Alexandria stretching it self
toward the City, washed about not with a deep, but, for the most part, a
shallow Sea, which Considered with the largeness does very much abate from the
streperous nois and turbulencie of the waves, This (Isle) of all other places
thereabout being judged the most convenient for privacie and quietness, and
where the Law might be best attended by every man in his most retired
meditations, here the Seniors remained, and taking the holy Bible into their
hands, they lifted both it and them up into Heaven beseeching Almighty God not
to fail them in their purpose, etc. So Philo.

Aristaeas speaks more distinctly for the Place. (...) etc. that is, Three
days being passed, Demetrius took (the Seniors) along with him, and having
gotten over the Heptastadium and the Bridge, he brought them to the North parts
of the Isle, where he placed the Assembly in a house fitted for them, standing
upon the shore, free from all inquietude, and having all the conveniences of
situation, etc, And it seems to me, that by these words of Aristaeas,
something more may be discovered concerning the Place; for the probability
from hence is good, that the House here spoken of, should be meant of that
famous Tower which Sostratus of Cnidus set up in this Isle Pharos, to direct
the Mariners in the dangerous Seas about Alexandria: And the situation very
well agrees, because the Tower also stood North, and upon the Sea side. And the
Nubian Geographer, where he describes this Tower, tells us, (...) that
there were certain Cells erected in it. But Justin Martyr puts us out of
doubt: for he says, That the Place where the Cells were set up, was (...) p. 17
(...). ubi Phari speculum aedificari contigit, which is all one with that we
believed.

And we have cause to think, that seeing the King intended this matter of the
Translation, with so much Princely care and providence, that he would make
chois of such a Seat, as might most eminently adorn his purpose; and therefore
it was answerably don to choose the Tower, which was every way worthy of this
glorious emploiment: for the Arabic Geographer says (...) That the whole
world cannot show such another Building as this Tower, whether we consider it
for the Materials, or for the manner of the Structure. The Reader may see a
large description of it in this Author, in the third Part of the third Clime.

But seeing the thing was don in Egypt, let the Story of it also be delivered
in their Language, and set down in Hieroglyphics.

And did it not well become the business, that the Scripture should be
translated in this Place? In a Tower: to note out to the Interpreters, the
Sublimitie of those things which they had now in hand; that when they went up
to their work, every step they asscended might elevate their Minds one degree
nearer to the Contemplations of Heaven. And how fitly was it don by the
Seaside; that but a little of Earth might be seen to those, who had now to
deal with such things, as had nothing in them that was Terrene? But most of all
convenient it was, that it should be don in this Tower; For that which hung
out a Candle to the doubtful Mariner in the perilous Seas, did it not well
that it should also hold out A light to the Gentiles? The Coast of Alexandria
was dangerous for any, least of all for the Natives, because they were
acquainted with the Passages; but a stranger durst not venture without some
direction from this Beacon. Such was our way to Heaven; intricate enough to
all Nations, yet more obvious to the Jew, because to him were committed the
Oracles of God: But we the Gentiles having no other direction but the light of
Nature, could not so well tell how to pass the Streits to Heaven, without some
help from the Word; which, though it were always a Light, yet was it never
held out unto us, till this time of the Translation: and therefore was it very
singularly congruous, that from this Place, from whence the Seafaring men took
their notice by a Light, to escape the hazard of those ways they knew not;
that it should pleas God also, by the Lantern of his Word, to give aim to the
People that sat in Darkness. Musaeus in (...) etc.
-- (...),
(...) --
Therefore when ever thou shall chance to go that way, enquire out for Pharos.
Any remainder of this Tower would be worth the seeing, and Justin Martyr,
though there were but a stone left upon a stone, yet he went purposely to take
notice of it.

Why the King should make chois of the Isle for the Interpretation rather then
the City; one reason was, to avoid the disturbance of the multitude, for
Alexandria was (...), A City full of Inhabitants, as it is observed by the
Scholiast upon Dionysius Afer. And in times past even before it was Alexandria,
it had been very much frequented with a confluence of People; for so it is
noted unto us by the Prophet Nachum, where he would know of Nineveh, Whither
thee thought her self Better then Populous No, that is says Chimki (...)
Alexandria in Egypt as it is also interpreted by that Ancient Chaldee
Paraphrase, (...) Art thou better then the great Alexandria, etc. Targum in Hac.
which was performed by the son of Vziel seventeen hundred years past.

Another Reason was for the safety of the Translators, and this is given by
Philo (...) etc. where he urges this Reason from the unhealthfulness of the
Place, which happened to be (...) etc. by the variety and constancy of the
diseases which reigned among the People. For besides the general distemperature
of the air of Egypt, which was calidus and nocivus, hot and hurtful; as it is
affirmed by Joh. Leo African.
one that knew it well, insomuch that a Plague at Grand Cairo could cut off
twenty thousand in one day: besides I say, these more universal Conditions,
Philo intimates from a particular Cause, that there should be a more usual
Mortality here then elsewhere, and that was, The Concours of all manner of
living Creatures to this Place (...) etc. And it is to be conceived, that the
Author means by this not only a multitude of Men, but also that great
variety of strange Beasts and Fowls which were continually bred up about the
Court in Alexandria, mention whereof is made by Ptolomie the King in his
Commentaries, Lib. 12. which was (...). And these Creatures were transported
from all parts of the world, and there bred up not only for their Raritie, and
the Kings Recreation but also to furnish his Table; for so it seems by
Ptolomie's words in that Book -- (...), where he notes concerning those
Phesants that were called (...) that the King of Egypt had of them not only
brought out of Media, but also hatched at home in such a Number that his Table
might be served with them when he pleased: though we may observe by the way,
that these kind of Birds in those days, were (for the most part) kept for the
Eye, rather then for the Belly; insomuch that Ptolomie the King in the book
before cited professes, that he never tasted of a Phesant in all his life;
whereupon Athenaeus observes, That if this noble King had lived in his days,
wherein the Luxury was such, that every man must have a Pheasant at his
Table, (though he had already written 24. Books in this kind, yet) he
says, that he would surely have written one more purposely to note out this
thing. This by the way; because Philo says, that the Places within the City
were (...), full of all manner of Creatures. And this howsoever urged by him
only for a greater Cause of Infection, yet it may be thought by some to have a
further aim; for the Egyptian being aware of this, that the Jew was bound to
make a distinction between clean and unclean beasts, might apprehend it in the
strictness; and therefore carefully remove the Seniors from the very sight of
those things which were an abomination unto them. But in this we have but
prevented the Curious, and therefore if the Conjecture be not sound enough, it
may be the less regarded.

But more then what is urged by Philo for the ill disposition of the place may
elsewhere be observed.

The Prophet Nachum says, that Alexandria is situate upon the waters, not
only because the waters lay all about it, but also (...) for that they were
conveied into it under ground, as Chimhi there has it. And the Arabian more
plainly in the Nubian Geographie (...) that is, the river Nile coming from the
West, runs under the Arches of all their Houses: The manner how this was don
is set down by John Leo in his description of Africa, Cuique fere domui
Civitatis ingens cisterna concamerata, crassisque innitens fornicibus
substructa est, in quas exundans Nilus per Aquaeductum in planitie, magno
artificio constructum extra Alexandriam, deductus sub eius moenibus demittitur,
etc. This artificial conveiance of the River though it be otherwise acceptable
to the Inhabitants yet it could not be without some annoiance to the Air, the
Complexion whereof suffered much alteration by the noisome vapors which rose up
out of the waters, which in tract of time putrified in their Cisterns. It is
the experience of this John in the words following. Cisternae porro temporis
successu turbidae ac coenosae redditae plurimis aestivo tempore languoribus
occasionem praebent, etc. And the same Author affords us yet another
inconvenience to make us more sure of the Insalubritie of this Place: And it
arises by reason of certain little Gardens planted near to the City, the
fruits whereof were of such an ill Condition, that the Inhabitants were thereby
made subject to very noxious Fevers and many other diseases: for so John
reports in the Chapter aforesaid: Juxta aquaeductum per quem Nilus in
civitatem transmittitur, exigui visuntur Horti sed quorum fructus ad
maturitatem perventi accolas noxiis febribus aliisque morbis afficiunt, etc.

These things considered, the Reason was good, why the Isle should be chosen
rather then the City, to be a Place for the Interpreters.

Thus much therefore we are com to know upon good Authority, that our
Translation was made in the great Tower of the Isle Pharos, near to Alexandria
in Egypt; we go on to a more distinct designation of the Place, the
consideration whereof shall also discover unto us after what manner the thing
was don.

FOr the Manner of the Translation; The opinion of some is, that the Seniors
were assembled in one and the same place, where they performed the work by
comparing what was severally don by each of them, and delivering up that for
granted which could be agreed upon by all. This opinion has received it is
ground from the words of Aristaeas. (...). etc. And indeed, the encouragement
from hence for that way seems to be very good, the words themselves being
scarcely able to bear any other construction, then according to that which
has been said.

Nevertheless, it is believed by others that they did the work (...) (as John
Zonaras has it) (...), that is, Each of them being in a several Room, and
when the work was finished, they all met and compared together what every Man
had don; and it was found, that they differed nothing either in sens or manner
of expression, but agreed in all, etc.

This later way of the Story, however it may seem to exact upon our belief,
as making Report of more incredible circumstances; yet it may be taken up upon
the greatest trust of Antiquity, having to alledg for it self the constant and
most undeniable Testimony of the Ancients.

The Jews report it from an immemorial Tradition, which their Talmudists
deliver in the 10 Book of Soeder Moed, in the Chap. Megillah Nikra which is the
3d. and fol. the 8. B* and the 9. A. where the text of the Talmud says on this
manner, Talmud. in Soed. Moed.
(...) that is, There is no difference between the Sepharim and the Tephillim
and Mezuzoth, save only, that the Sepharim may be written in any Language;
but the Tephillim and Mezuzoth only in the Syriack Tongue. But Rabban Simeon
the son of Gamaliel says, that the Sepharim also might not be written in any
other Language, the Greek only excepted. By the Tephillim and Mezuzoth, the
Doctors meant those Schedules which were inscribed with set forms of devotion,
and placed upon the posts of their Houses, or otherwise worn in their foreheads.

By the Sepharim, or Books they intend (...) the Books of the Law, the Prophets
and the Hagiographa, and so the Sepharim are here expounded by the Gloss upon
this place. By occasion of these words in the Mishna, R. Jehudah relates this
Story in the Gemara, (...) that is, We receiv it by Tradition, that King
Ptolmai assembled together the seventie two Seniors, and placed them in
seventie two several Conclaves, not making them acquainted with his purpose,
(after that) going in to each of them, he said unto them, Write me now down
the Law of Moses the Master. The Blessed and glorious God put understanding
into every man's heart; and they all accorded in one and the same sens. So the
Talmudists.

The very same circumstances of the Story are set down in their Massicta
Sopherim, and by Abraham Zacuth in the Book Juchasin, besides the four Editions
of their Hebrew Josephus, or Gorcous son: in all which it is also extant. Among
the Arabians there has as yet com to my Hands one only Chronologer of these
times, said the son of Batric, and he also makes the same report. And because
this Author is not as yet made public, it shall be here set down what he
says; (...) that is, Said Aben B^ta A^bs in Historia Eccl^s.
And in the twentieth year of the Reign of (Ptolomie) the King went up to the
City Jerusalem, and brought with him from thence seventie Men of the Jews unto
Alexandria, and commanded them, saying, Interpret unto me your Book of The Law
and the Prophets, out of the Hebrew into Greek. And he put every one of them
into a several Cell by himself, that he might see now each of them would
interpret apart. And when they had finished their work, the King saw what
every Man had don, and their writings all concorded, nothing was contrary in
any one of them So the Book (of the Interpretation) was sealed up, and put
into the House of their God Serapis, etc.

Thus, said, the Son of Batric, according to the Manuscript Copy of his
Historia, which I saw at Cambridg in the Archives of their Public Library.

Philo Judaeus, though he makes no express mention of the Cells, yet if he
does not intimate some such thing, let the Reader tell us what he means by
this: (...) ((...)) (...) that is, And they sat down privately by themselves,
and having no other company but the parts of Nature, the Earth, the Waters,
the Air, and the Heavens, (the Mystery of whose Creation their first work was
to discover; this being the beginning of Mose's Law) they prophesied, as if
they had been divinely inspired; not one, one thing; and another, another; but
all in the same sens and words, as if they had been prompted by some invisible
Director.

In these words, however it may be said, we are not certain that the Author
intended our matter of the Cells; yet thus much we can be sure of, That he
points out such a way of Interpretation, as carries with it no less of
wonder, then the former.

But Justin the Martyr a Samaritan speaks it plainly, and with a very
remarkable Confidence; as we read in his (...) to the Gentiles: where he
says, That the King appointed (...), to each of the Interpreters a small
several Cel, (...) that every man might perform the Interpretation by himself.
And having said something of their wonderful agreement, he provideth against
the incredulity of all Men, by this resolute enforcement, strongly urged from
his own experience.

(...). etc. that is, This, O ye Gentiles, we report unto you, not in the
guis of a Fable, or a fained Story; but as a received Tradition, delivered
unto us by the Inhabitants of the Place: for we our selves also being at
Alexandria saw the remainder of those Cells; and they are yet to be seen in the
Isle Pharos at this present day.

To this undoubted Testimony of Justin Martyr, may be added that of Irenaeus,
who in the same Centurie makes the like report. Ptolomie, says he, (...)
etc. considering with himself that if they should be suffered to confer one
with another, they might perchance conceal something of the verity of their
Scripture by ways of Interpretation; he separated them each from other, and
commanded them that every man should translate the same part; and this order
was observed in all the Book, etc. And concerning their agreement, he says,
That they all set down the same things, (...). in the same Sens, and in the
same Words; insomuch, that all people that were then present acknowledged, that
the Translation was made by the inspiration of God, etc. And that the wonder of
the work might not be an hindrance to it self, to make it seem the less
probable, for being strange, He excuses it by another of the same kind,
(...), etc. And we have the less cause (says he) to marvail, that God should
thus do, seeing he wrought as great a Miracle for his Scripture, by the hand
of Ezra in the Restitution of the Law.

In the third Centurie, the credit of the Story is upheld by Clemens of
Alexandria; and in the fourth, by Cyril of Jerusalem. Clemens says, (...),
that every one of them having interpreted by himself, according to his proper
Inspiration, the Translations were Compared, and they were all found to agree
both in Sens and Words.

But Cyril more perspicuously, and at large.

(...), etc. that is, And (the King) providing that the Interpreters which were
sent him, might not com together, appointed for each of them a several Cel in
the Isle Pharos, near to Alexandria: and to each of them was delivered the
whole Bible to translate. And being thus separated the one from the other,
every man's part was finished within the space of seventie two days, at which
time they all met together; and having compared their Translations they were
found to concord; not only in the meaning, but also in the very Manner of
expression. For this Translation was not set forth in pleasing words, or the
pomp of humane Sophistry, but all was interpreted by the same Spirit by which
it was first delivered, etc.

In the fourth Centurie, we find the Tradition remembered by Epiphanius, but
not without some alteration of the Circumstances; for he says, that the
Translation was performed (...). in thirty six Cells, by two and two in a Cel.
But Secarius hops to reconcile this to the former: for though (says he)
there were but six and thirty Cells, yet each of these were double: and so
every two of the Translators were separated the one from the other by a
Partition.

This Moderation of the words, though it has not so much evidence as would be
required, yet it has a notable pretens: because Epiphanius himself says, that
the Cells were double: (...). And it may seem also to be the Emperors mind, in
Cap. Sancimus of the 146. Novel. where he says conc^rning these Interpreters,
(...) that being divided by two and two, and set in several places; yet they
all delivered up the same Translation etc. But these words of the Law would not
willingly be Put to this Construction: That of John Zonaras is something nearer
to the Reconciliation: for he writes (...): that the Interpreters of the Law
were divided into Couples, and that they were placed every one in a several
Conclave. For so much may seemingly be gained by the word (...); because (...),
is as much as (...) which notes out one separated from Company, or (...),
which is to be said of him that is alone, and talks to himself; for so the
Gloss of this word (...) is given, both by Hesychius, and Phavorinus.

But if this way of the Story will not be reconciled to to the former, then
it must be said that Epiphanius was but one, and that his Testimony is not of
greater Authority then theirs that went before; and the less, for coming after
them: and that the Tradition (as it uses to be) was otherwise told afar off,
then nearer home; and that Epiphanius spoke as he heard say: whereas Justin
Martyr was himself at Pharos, and saw the Tower and that which was left of the
Cells, and was thoroughly informed by the Inhabitants of the Place.

Thus we see with what confidence this passage of the Story has been
reported and received, during the space of five hundred years, since the time
of the Translation. And it seems to have been don upon the best security;
because not only the Jews and their Talmodists, but also the Reverent Fathers
of the Church, stand bound to make it good; And these, besides their Estimation
otherwise, ought in this especially to be looked after, for that they are all
ancient, and because they all agree: pure Antiquity being the safest Judge of
things don in times past, and consent of Authority the surest argument of such
Antiquity. When we say that they all agree (if it must needs be) we except
Epiphanius; but why should we so do, seeing that his thirty six Cells, if they
were doubled, (as he says that they were (...)) are as many in number as the
seventie two of the rest are? If they were not, it lesseneth but the number of
the Cells; takes little away from the Miracle of the Interpretation: or if it
did, yet the single testimony of Epiphanius will not be seen through such a
cloud of Witnesses.

But besides our Authority from the Ancients, we may gain some probability
toward the credit of the Cells, if it be enquired into the Causses which ought
to move the King to resolv upon such a way for the Translation.

Two Reasons especially may be urged for this: the one whereof especially
concern's the purpose of the Translation, and both of them the King's
Satisfaction.

For the Purpose of God in the Translation, it was one of those things which
might be required for the coming in of the Gentiles, that the Scripture should
he provided before hand, in such a Language as would be most generally known
at the Primitive times; therefore it was necessary that all religious care
should be had of the Translation, and that it should be safely laid up and
reserved for the time appointed: And that the Kings of Egypt might see to this,
it was needful that they should be prepossest with a strong Conceit of the
Divinity of this Law: and this could not be more conveniently don, then by
such a miraculous Circumstance of the Interpretation: For otherwise, why should
Ptolomie think more divinely of the Law of Moses, then of his own? seeing that
all ways of Religion would seem strange, but that we are taught betimes to
fear: and till we receiv a Spirit of Judgment to discern the Right way,
every way is thought to be wrong; but that which we are brought up in. And
why should Ptolomie have a better Opinion of Moses, then of his Hermes
Trismegist? who as he is accounted by some to have gone before this Moses in
time, so by others he is thought not to have com far behind him in worth and
excellency. But what could Moses teach to them, who had all his learning from
thence? for he was brought up a Scholar in Egypt. And what would be thought
of these Scriptures, when the King should hear it read in Osee, that God
commanded a Prophet to commit Adultery? and in Exodus, that he taught his own
People how to Cozen the Egyptians?

That of Solomon: as the Wise man dies so dies the Fool, how would it stand
with their Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls? according to which, the
Soul of a Wise man ought to pass into such an one; and the soul of a Fool, into
an Ass.

For the Resurrection of the Body, small comfort was to be had from the dry
bones in the vallie of Jehosaphat. The Egyptian had better hopes then these,
for he had his dead Bodies still to show; and such as had gotten by their
Mortality, for they were every day less subject to Corruption then before.

And whereas it is said, That there was no God like the God of the Hebrews:
Could the King believ that, when he should find in these Scriptures that even
this God also had a Right Hand, and a Son? or if he had been so much better
then those of the Heathen, was it likely that Aaron his own high Priest would
have preferred their Apis, or the Calf of Egypt before him?

when these things should com to be considered by the unsanctified discretion
of the Heathen, how could they choose but appear far beside, and below their own
Majesty? for such untoward Notions as these must seem to be, could never
argue to him that perfection and transcendencie of Style and Matter, which the
Law of Moses had pretended: therefore that the King might be brought on to a
reverend estimation of those things, it was much to the purpose that he should
be thus prepared by a wonder: for it greatly concerned the safety of the
Translation, that it should be first esteemed by the King: for otherwise,
Principles so avers from the Gentiles manner of Devotion, had never been
suffered to lie at all, or not long in the Library at Alexandria; because, even
the opinion of a new way in Religion, can never prosper without a Precedent,
and such an one as is beyond all exception; and though it be never so wisely
suggested, yet it seldom gains reputation from lesser examples, then that of
a King: And it seems, by that we find in Justin Martyr, that the Miracle
wrought the very same effect in Ptolomie, as we would have it, for he says,
(...), etc. that the King perceiving that these seventie Men had all agreed,
not only in the matter, but also in the Manner of their Interpretation,
insomuch that no man differed from another not in a word; but every man
expressed the same conceit, and by the same phrase: he stood amazed, and
nothing doubting, but that the Interpretation was wrought by Divine Power; he
acknowledged that the Interpreters were worthy of all honor, as being Men to
whom God did bear a peculiar respect: and having first given them condign
reward, he took order for their departure into their own Country, etc.

And the same effect which the wonder wrought upon the Prince, it wrought also
upon the People; for so it appears by that which is already observed out of
Ireneus, (...), etc.

Thus we see that the purpose of God in the Translation would not only
endure, but did al^o vary conveniently require, that something in the Business
should be miraculous; for the King's better instruction, and that the
Scriptures might have so much honor and admiration, as might gain them something
in the Opinion of the Heathen, and preserv them from the Injuries of Time.

And this was to be the first Reason.

The second Reason, for which the King ought to take such a way for the
Translation, is, For that he made question of their Fidelity.

And that this may be accepted for a sufficient Cause, it shall be set down,
That the King's mistru^^ was raised upon such surmises as were no way
frivolous, but contained in them matter of moment.

For it could not be exspected from any Nation in those days, that they
should be trusty in rev^alin^ the Secrets of their Religion; but from the
Jews it would b^e thought impossible: for this Nation stood ^o nicely affected
to their Sepher Hattocah, or Book of the Law, that even in the slightest
Circumstances, it was observed with an incredible Curiosity of Devotion.

Mahomet Abulcasim the Son of Abdalla, regard^d the esteem of his Alcoran so
far, as to provide by a Law that upon the outside thereof, this Caution should
be always written (...) Let no Man touch this Book but he that is Pure. And
the Law is yet in force among the Turks for some special Alcorans of note, one
of which sort inscribed in the same manner, may be seen in the Archives of our
public Library.

But the Jews not contented with so much Care, used a more intolerable kind of
Circumspection; for Rabbi Nehemiah says in the Massichta Sopherim Chapter 3.
Halak. (...) That no man may lay (their book of the Law) upon his Knee, nor
lean upon it with his Elbows, when he reads it. And Halac the 10. it is
commanded (...) that no man shall spit in presence of this Book, nor offer to
turn his back upon it.

And in the same Tract, Halac 13. it is said, (...) that is, That no Man shall
lay this Book under, or upon his bed; or at his beds feet; neither shall any
Man sit upon his Bed, having this Book lying upon him; for Rabbi Eliezer did
thus, and a Serpent came and bit him. All this Care was taken for the outside,
but much more for that which was within.

To let pass other Circumstances, which would make this manifest, we have need
only of that one which most of all concerns our matter in hand. And it is,
That for the most part among the Jews, it was accounted an odious profanation
of this Law, if it were any ways communicated to the Heathen.

To this purpose note that of the Junior Becchai, (...) etc. Because (says he)
there are (...) in the wisdom of our Law, (...) pure words, and worthy to be
kept secret. Therefore says he, (...) Thou art bound to conceal them, and
never to impart them, according to the sens of that which is written, They
shall be to thee, to thee alone; and not to the stranger with thee. So the son
of Afer at the beginning of his Commentary upon the Law, fol. 3. A. Col. 1.
Therefore that which Maimon says contrary to this in Halaca Tephill of his
Misne Torah. cap. 10. must be otherwise excused; for Elias the Levite in his
second Preface to the Hammasoreth, expressly affirms from the Tradition of the
Ancients, that nothing might be communicated to the Gentiles, save only the
seven Precepts of the (...) Sons of Noah: but as for (...) the History of the
Creation, the Law, and such like; whosoever shall impart these (...) to the
Heathen (...) He shall go down to the grave in sorrow, and his life and soul
shall be consumed, etc. The Rabbin goes on, and has much ado to excuse
himself there to the Jews, by whom he was given over for a Reprobate, only
for teaching his great Patron Cardinal Giles the Hebrew tongue; because their
fear was lest by this means the Cardinal might com to the understanding of
their Law.

But more then this, (that it was unlawful for the Jew to make any other
Nation acquainted with their Law) it may be added, that there was a reason in
special, why it should be dissembled to this Ptolomie, Because the
Communication of it had succeeded so ill in the days of his Father. For
Ptolomie (...) having learned, that the Jew would do no manner of Work upon a
Sabbath day, made that an opportunity to take their City; which was as
easily as ingloriously don: because no man upon that day would resist him, For
to them it was a breach of the Sabbath, even to save their lives. And this is
objected unto them by Agatharchides of Cnidus, who wrote the History of
Alexander's Successors, where he sets down this Story, (...). that is,
There is a certain Nation called the Jews, and they inhabit the great and well
fenced City Jerusalem. This City they negligently yielded into the hands of
Ptolomie, and would not take up arms for their own protection; choosing rather
to become vassals to a stranger, then to defend themselves upon the Sabbath day.
These Reasons if they stood alone, had enough in them to make the King mistrust
his Interpreters: and yet, if Antiquity have not misinformed us, there will
be one Reason more, which it self alone ought to have prevailed, though all
the rest had been wanting: For we find that the Translation was twice
performed, and that the Seniors disagreed the first time. In this passage of
Story, I suppose, we shall tell the Reader some news; Our Author is one Armius,
of whom we know nothing more then his name, his words shall be here set down,
as we find them cited by an Arabic Commentator upon the Pentateuch, in his
Preface to that Work.

(...) Arab^, Ms^s. in 5. lib. Moysis literis Syriacis conscriptis. In
Bibliotheca Bodleian.


Thus says Armius the Chronologer. In the nineteenth year of the Reign of
Ptolomie the son of Ptolomie, the King commanded that they should gather
together the Seniors of the children of Israel, and that they should bring with
them the (...) Book of the Law in their hands, and that each of them in several
should translate it accordingly, as it should be revealed to his
understanding. And the Seniors came and presented themselves together with their
most divine Book of the Law. And the King's command was, that every man should
translate the whole Book. And it came to pass that the Seniors disagreed in
their Interpretation: and the King commanded to put them in Prison, and in
Chains, etc. Thus we see that the King was led by good Reason to a suspicion
of his Interpreters, and that therefore in all probability he would take such
a course for his Translation, as we have already made report of, According to
the Testimony of the Ancients.

But nothing ever lighted so heavy upon this matter of the Cells as the
Authority of S. Heirom, which was the more likely to oppress it, by reason of
his great learning and general repute; because a Testimony, for the most part,
is not measured by its own validity, but the Autor's worth; and we do not
usually observe what force it may have in it self, but from whence it came.

S. Hierom, when he comes to consider of the Translation of the Seventie,
seems to deride the passage of the Cells, and forsaking the constant Tradition
of his forefathers, in a very neglectful manner, peremptorily sets down
upon his own trust, that the History of the Cells is vulgo sine Autore jactata,
but a Common Report bruited abroad under no man's Authority. And elsewhere he
says, That he cannot devise who it should be that first contrived these
seventie Conclaves in the fictions of his brain. Nescio quis primus Auctor 70.
Cellulas Alexandriae mendacio suo exstruxerit, quibus divisi eadem
scriptitarint, etc. His Reasons follow, Cum Aristaeas ejusdem Ptolemaei (...),
and, multo post tempore Josephus nihil tale retulerint, sed in unica Basilica
congregatos contulisse scribant non prophet ass, etc. Hiero. Praefat. in
Pentat. Ep. 104. p. 341. Tom. 3.
Because Aristaeas, and long after him Josephus can tell of no such thing, but
the contrary: and because also, that if it had been so, it could not be
accounted for a Translation, but a Prophecy. So S. Hierom.

But before we receiv his Testimony, it shall be examined and compared; and
leaving his Reasons to the last place, we will first of all beseemingly
moderate the strong Opinion of his Name.

True it is, than S. Hierom in Learning and Knowledge could not be inferior to
any of his time; and therefore being a great Scholar, he might the easilier
fall into that common infirmity of those that know much, go about to raise his
own Reputation by the ruin of another Man's. If the Father were thus inclined,
he could not be without so much of a Critic, as would teach him to Censure;
which things while we do, our Ambition seeking for its own safety, always
aims at those that are farthest off, and least able to help themselves.
Therefore the Ancients, and those that are dead, are more easily reprehended,
then the latest and the living. It is not for me to say that the Reverend
Father was guilty in this: and yet if he were not, why is it objected unto
him by his Adversary Ruffinus in the second Book of his Invectives. Page 181.
Tom. 9.
Quid ergo mirum est (says he) si me minimum, and nullius numeri hominem
laceret, si Ambrosium secet, si Hilarium, si Lactantium, si Didymum
reprehendat, Page 183. ibid.
etc. and afterward he says, that he spared neque antiquos, neque novellos
scriptores, sed omnes omnino, nunc imperitiae, nunc inoptiae notat; neither the
Autient nor the Modern Writers but charged them all, and every one of them
with unskilfulness and folly; ut erat in quod intenderat, vehemens: So eager
he would be for his own opinion, as learned Vives has noted concerning him,
in his observation upon the 42. Chap. of Austin 18. Book De Civitate Dei. But
if this be to be suspected, as coming from his enemy; yet how shall he be
there excused, where he would not spare Saint Paul himself at a Criticism? for
reading that place in the Epistle to the Collossians. Quae sunt rationem quidem
habentia, etc. he writes to Quaest. 10. p. 433. Tom. 3.
Algasia, Chap. 2. v. 23.
that the Conjunction ( quidem) is there redundant; and that S. Paul had often
don as much as that came to, propter imperitiam Artis Grammaticae, etc. He
says, that the great Doctor of the Gentiles did not understand his Grammar; as
if the Spirit in Scripture would not look to the Syntax; or if not, as if he
that had disputed among the Philosophers at Athens, had been so ignorant in his
Accidence, as not to know how to place a Conjunction.

He that could say of S. Paul, that he was an ill grounded Scholar, 'twas no
marvail that he Censured Lactantius, S. Ambrose, S. Hilarie and Didymus; and
yet if these also could not escape his reprehension, I should not willingly
trust him with Aristaeas; nor our History of the Septuagint.

But let the Father be pardoned for being a Critic; and take S. Hierom in
the best sens: let him be a Man of a most mature and most moderate judgment,
and one that could think as well of other Men as of himself; yet why are we
bound to believ S. Hierom rather then Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens of
Alexandria, Cyril of Jerusalem, and the rest? why one Man rather then so many?
why a late Author, rather then those that went before him?

But let it be supposed, that this learned Father could discern above all
this, yet his Testimony could not be taken for this matter, because we find
it guilty of partiality.

For we are to be advised that S. Hierom, having gotten a competent knowledge
in the Hebrew tongue, by great industry and conversation with the Jews,
especially his constant Tutor Barabbas, undertook a new Translation of the
Bible, according to the Original.

This though in it self a very laudable and pious Enterprise, and pretended
also to be most necessarily don, because of diverse and dangerous Corruptions
wherewith the Greek Translation was found to be encumbered, yet because it was
preferred in an age which was strongly addicted to the Septuagint, it would not
be taken at the Fathers hands: Therefore all Men cried out upon S. Hierom,
satisfying themselves with this, That the Greek Translation was delivered by the
peculiar entercours and inspiration of God, and therefore ought not to be so
desperately handled by a Man; that the wisdom of the Church had thus long
received it with an irresistible devotion; and why therefore should it now be
called in Question, or what hope could there be of a better; and therefore
what need of another Translation? This we are sure of, because it may be
discovered by the Father's own Complaint against the Men of his Time. See the
Prologue to his Hebrew Tradition upon Genesis. Heiro. proae. ad Trad. Heb. in
Genesis p. 451. tom. 3
Neque vero 70 Interpretum, ut invidi latrant, errores arguimus, nec nostrum
laborem illorum reprehensionem putamus. See also his Apology aagainst
Ruffinus, Chap. 7.8. And it very well appears by the words of Austin in his
Epistle to this Hierom, where he declares himself to be very much against
his new Translation. See the 43. Chap, of his 18. Book De Civitat. Dei. Quamvis
non defuerit temporibus nostris Presbyter Hieronymus, etc. In his 8. Epistle
he goes about to control the Father by this Dilemma. Those things (says
he) which were Translated by the Septuagint, Aut obscura sunt aut manifesta;
August. Epi. 8. fol. 82. Tom. 2.
si obscura sunt, te quoque in eis falli potuisse non immerito creditur; si
autem manifesta, superfluum est te voluisse explanare quod illos latere non
potuit: either they were easy or hard to be understood; if easy, to what
purpose then should you explain that which they could not be ignorant of; if
they were hard to be understood what hopes can there be that you should not
be deceived as well as they? Heiro. Praef. in Paralipo. 1. Epist. 107 ad
Chromatium Episc. page 343. Tom. 1.
But the Father here disputes ex falso supposito, framing his Argument as if
the Translation of the Septuagint had escaped till that time without the
contraction of any error or Corruption, which if it had been, S. Hierom
confesses himself to be in all the fault in his Epistle to Chromatius, which
is the Preface in Lib. Paralipom. Si Septuaginta Interpretum pura, and ut ab
iis in Graecum versa est editio permaneret, superflue me Chromati, Episcoporum
Sanctissime atque doctissime, impelleres ut Hebraea volumina Latino sermon
transferrem, quod enim semel aures hominum occupaverat and nascentis Ecclesiae
roboraverat fidem, justum erat etiam nostro silentio comprobari, etc.

Nevertheless, by this it is perceivable how unwilling S. Austin was, that
there should be a new Translation and though afterward upon better advice,
he was contented to see it, Ideo autem desidero interpretationem tuam de
Septuaginta, etc. Epist. 19. fol. 18. A. ibid. yet he would never yield to
this, that it should be read in Churches, and he gives the reason, Propterea
me nolle tuam ex Hebraeo interpretationem in Ecclesiis legi, ne contra
Septuaginta Autoritatem tanquam novum aliquid proferentes magno Scandalo
perturbemus plebes Christi, quarum aures and Corda illam interpretationem
audire consueverunt, quae etiam ab Apostolis approbata est: lest it being
taken as some new thing introduced against the Authority of the Septuagint, much
scandal should be given to the people of God, whose hearts and ears have been
all this while accustomed to that Translation as a thing approved by the very
Apostles themselves. And S. Austin speaks this out of some experience; for he
had already told S. Hierom, Quidam frater noster Episcopus cum lectitare
instituisset in Ecclesia cui praee. etc. Aug. Heironym. Epist. 10. fo, 10. a.
1. Col,
in his 10. Epistle, of a certain Bishop who had given way that this new Latin
Translation should be read in his Church, but with very ill success; for when
the people understood that S. Hierom in the Prophecy of Jonah, had put it down
Hederam instead of that which anciently, according to the Greek, had been
Cucurbitam, there was a great tumult raised among the Parishioners, insomuch
that the Bishop was forced to ask Council of the Jews, who notwithstanding that
they had answered, that the Original word might bear either of those
Constructions, yet the people would not be contented till the Bishop had
blotted out Hedera, and set down Cucurbita, according to that which was before.

And certainly, the New Translation took so ill abroad that some one or other,
to put by the Opinion of the Thing feigned an Epistle in the name of S. Hierom,
Scribit frater Eusebius se apud Afros Episcopos etc. Apolog. adver. Ruffin.
lib. 2. p. 248. Tom. 2.
where he makes the Father to confess how ill he had don in Translating the
Original Scripture into Latin; seeing that in the Hebrew text there was no
truth at all; he also makes him to say, that this was a thing don in his
younger days, and by the instigation of the Jews; and this Epistle was found
among the African Bishops by Eusebius, by whose means it was conveied to S.
Hierom.

These things are acknowledged by S. Hierom himself in his Apology against
Ruffinus, where also he says, Ergo ille qui Epistolam, sub nomine meo,
poenitentiae fixerat, quod male Hebraea volumina transtulissem, objicere
dicitur me in Septuaginta condemnationem Scripturas sanctas interpretatum, ut
sive falsa sunt, sive vera quae transtuli, in crimine maneam, dum aut in novo
opere fatear me errasse, aut recens Editio veteris condemnatio sit. This was
the general voice against the new Translation, and S. Hierom liked it the wors,
Ruffin. in Heirom. page 181. Col. 1. Tom. 9.
because it was taken up against him by his great adversary Ruffinus in his
second Invective, Septuaginta duorum virorum per cellulas interpretantium, unam
and Consonam vocem dubitandum non est Spritus Sancti inspiratione prolatam, and
majoris id debere esse autoritatis, quam id quod ab uno hoc, sibi Barrabba
asspirante, translatum est; It Is no doubt (says he) but that one concording
voice of the seventie Seniors in their Cells, was uttered by divine inspiration,
and therefore I hope is to be preferred before the Translation of one man, who
had no other instruction but from his Tutor Barrabbas.

The new Translation succeeding so ill, S. Hierom had this to do, to give
satisfaction to the men of his time, and by all means to be quit with his
Antagonist.

Considering therefore that the complaint of all men was unadvisedly grounded
upon too great an estimation of the Septuagint, which every Man urged to
himself from the miraculous manner of the Interpretation, the Father conceived
that this prevailing opinion might receiv some abatement by a comely and well
tempered disparagement of that wonder; therefore he gives out in one place,
that this great sound of the Cells was but a rumor of the Ordinary people: and
not contented to say so, elsewhere he is bold to call it a fable; hoping by
this, that if he could but take off the people from their opinion of the Cells,
he might gain upon them for his own Translation.

The purpose of S. Heirom in this, though we grant it to be good, yet we
cannot think but the Project was bad: and therefore the Father herein is
altogether forsaken by his great friend S. Austin; who on the other side
laboreth so much the more to set up the old Reputation of the Septuagint, which
he has not spared to do in the most prevailing ways, though he lived at the
same time with S. Hierom, and was well acquainted with his Tenets, and loved
any opinion the better for being his. Austin therefore in his 8 Epistle to S.
Hierom speaking of the Septuagint, thus he professes, De quorum vel consilii,
vel spiritus majori concordia, quam si unus homo esset, non audeo in aliquam
partem certam far sententiam, nisi quod eis praeeminentem Autoritatem in hoc
munere sine Controversia tribuendam existimo, etc.

In his Commentary upon the 87 Psalm, he says, their Authority is such, ut
non immerito propter mirabilem consensum, divino Spiritu interpretati esse
credantur, etc. And whereas S. Hierom had put off this passage of the Cells with
a Nescio quo Autore, as if the Autors of it had been ashamed to show themselves,
Austin is not afraid to say, that those which reported this were multi, and
non indigni fide; many, and worthy to be believed: And if it be so (says
he) that the Translation was made by several Men, in several Cells, and yet no
man discorded either in sens or words; Quis huic autoritati (where he directly
aims at S. Hierom) confer aliquid, nedum praeferre audeat? who is he that
shall dare, I will not say to prefer any thing above, but to confer any
thing unto the Authority of this Translation.

And because S. Hierom hoped it might follow as an absurdity, that if the work
had been performed in the same manner by several Men, and in several Places; it
was to be thought not a Translation, but a Prophecy; S. Austin believes it
to be a very good Consequence, and affirms that it was therefore said to
be don Prophetically, because they concorded so wonderfully. Qui Autoritate
prophetica ex ipsa mirabili Consensione perhibentur. Quaest. super Josue Lib. 6.

And forasmuch as S. Hierom had taken notice of diverse differences between the
Hebrew Text, and the Greek Translation, Manifestum est autem Interpretatione^
illam quae dicitur Septuaginta, in nonnullis se aliter habere, quam inveniunt
in Hebraeo, qui eam linguam noverunt, and qui Interpretati sunt singuli eosdem
libros; hujus item distantiae caussa si quaeratur, cur tanta Autoritas
Interpretationis Lxx multis in locis distet ab ea veritate qua in Hebraeis
Condicibus invenitur nihil occurrere probabilius existimo quam illos Lxx, eo
spiritu interpretatos, quo and illa quae interpretabantur dicta fuerunt, quod
ex ipsa eorum mirabili consensione firmatum est, etc. Ergo and ipsi nonnulae in
eloquio narrando, and ab eadem voluntate Dei, cujus illa dicta erat, et cui
verba servire debebant, non recedendo; nihil aliud demonstrare voluerunt, quam
hoc ipsum, qoud nunc in Evangelistarum 4. concordi quadam diversitate miramur.
August. de Consens. Evangelist. Lib. 2. C. 66. fol. 105. Tom. 4.
S. Austin says, that there is no reason why we should think otherwise of
these, then we do of that harmonious discord which is found to be among the
four Evangelists; for as there the same-Spirit guided each Man's Pen to mean,
and yet not write the same; so here the same inspiration, which had formerly
instructed the Original Writers, did now also direct the Translators to set
down the very same things, but in a different way.

Therefore in whatsoever the Authority of S. Hierom could prevail against our
Story, it may be overborn by that which has been said, most of all by the
ponderous Testimony of S. Augustine.

We com now to Consider of his Reasons; the later whereof bearing no notable
force in it self, may be passed by, but the former stands thus.

That there could be no such miraculous Circumstance in the Translation, as
this passage of the Cells, because then Aristaeas, who undertook a particular
Narration of this whole Matter, would not have omitted this, if he had known
it; and he could not choose but know it, if it had been don, for he lived at
the same time, and the Reason prevails yet further, because Josephus, relating
this History out of Aristaeas, makes no mention of any such Matter.

This Reason I was always afraid off: for besides that it is the stronger for
being given by S. Hierom, it has also such a proper validity in it self,
that if we should not fairly decline it, it would injure the probability of
all.

But the inconvenience that may arise by this Reason we sufficiently avoid, if
these three things can be brought to pass. 1. That the History of the
Septuagint which now goes abroad under the name of Aristaeas, is not the
entire work of that Aristaeas, who lived in the days of Ptolemie. 2. That the
true Aristaeas had this passage of the Cells. 3. That Josephus left it out, and
the Reasons why.

For the first, which concerns Aristaeas, That he is to be taken for a
spurious Author, we are already prevented by the learned Vives a Castro,
Scaliger, Vossius, and others, who have all set down their judgments against
this Author. and those that have spoken most moderately, have said (that which
is the very truth indeed) That the Compiler of this work was much later then
the days of the Translation, and that the Story as now it is, was gathered
together out of Josephus, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and some others, which are not
now at all, or not yet extant.

But because the Credit of any Author, especially those that are Ancient ought
not to be disparaged upon a slight or frivolous ground, the Causses shall be
set down which have necessarily moved hereunto.

The principal Reason rendered by Vives and the rest, is, For that some things
are cited by the fathers out of Aristaeas, which are not to be found in the
Story as now it stand's: Instance is made in Epiphanius concerning the Cells,
and in the Letters which passed between Ptolemie and Eleazar the Priest, which
are not delivered by the Fathers, as they lie in the Story; but have a
manifest variety, and such as cannot easily be reconciled. This Reason is
good, and makes much against the Compiler, who would be called by the Name of
Aristaeas. But something shall be added out of our own Observation.

The Author of the Present History says, that Demetrius going along with the
Seniors to the Isle Pharos, went over (...), the Heptastadium and the Bridge,
etc. But this passage is manifestly taken out of Josephus, who though he
undertake to set down the Story according to Aristaeas, yet he does not
follow him (...), through the whole file of his Narration; but oft-times, and
especially where he would b^e brief, he takes his own ways of expression;
Therefore when he comes to tell how the Seniors were conduct^d by Demetrius
from the City to the Isle, he delivers it under the Circumstances of his
own time, as if they had passed over the Heptastadium and the Bridge, because
that indeed was the way in his days, and as he thought in the days of
Aristaeas.

But if our information be rightly given, we shall find this to be a
notorious Anachronism: for at the days of the Translation Pharos was an Isle,
and therefore they could not pass over thither by Land.

Homer tells that in old time this Isle Pharos lay a whole day and a nights
sail from Alexandria. (...)
Eustath, (...) p. 1500 Edic. Romans 1550.
(...) etc.
And the Archbishop of Thessalonica says upon this place, that this was so
(...), etc. in the days of the Ancient Heroes, but since that time it has
been turned into earth by the River Nile. Such a property indeed the River
has, because it continually draws much mud; as is observed by Aristotle,
Eratosthenes, and many others, but that it should do it in this proportion, it
is altogether incredible.

For by the Judgment of the best and most skilful Mariners, A ship under sail
having wind and tide, may ride as far in the space of one hour as shall answer
8000 paces upon the land, which multiplied into 24. make up 192000. Therefore
the distance between the City and the Isle must have been 192 Miles: and so
much earth must have been gathered together by the Attractions of Nile since
the time of the Trojan wars. But concerning this, Aristides said well in his
description of Egypt, (...). Homer, says he, indeed writes, that Pharos is
as far from Alexandria as one can go by sea in a day and a right. But says
Aristides, (...), I know not how I should believ him.

But while Pharos was an Isle, the true distance between it and the City, as
it has been usually and experimentally accounted, was about seven Furlongs;
(...), or nearer upon a Mile: This space was in after times wrought into an
Istmus by the bold industry and expenses of Cleopatra, which from the measure
of the distance was called Heptastadium.

This is most confidently reported by Ammianus Marcellinas in Julian. lib. 22.
p. 285. Haec eadem Regina, Heptastadium, sicut vix credenda celeritate, ita
magnitudine mira construxit, ob Caussam notam and necessariam. Insula Pharos,
etc. a civitatis litore mill passibus disparata, Rhodiorum erat obnoxia
vectigali, quod cum inde quidam nimium quantum petituri venissent; foemina
callida semper in frauds, sollennium specie feriarum, iisdem publicanis secum
ad suburbana perductis, opus juss erat irrequietis laboribus consummari, and
septem diebus totidem Stadia, molibus jactis in Mare, solo propin quanti terrae
sunt vindicate. Quo cum vehiculo ingressa, errare ait Rhodios, Insularum, non
Continentis portorium flagitantes, etc. that is, The same Cleopatra raised the
Heptastadium, not more wonderful for its magnitude, then for the expedition of
the business; and she did it for a reason very necessary and well enough
known. The Isle Pharos, which was about a Mile distant from the City, paid
Tribute to the Rhodians; which being by them too intolerably exacted, the
Politic Princess, always exquisitely able to deceiv, upon a time withdraw's
the Publicans into the Suburbs, as if there had been some great Holidaie to be
kept. In the mean time she had set men a work to cast mighty heaps into the
Sea; which being followed with indefatigable pains, seven furlongs of Sea were
made into Earth within the space of seven days; and the City continued with
the Isle. This don, the Queen rode over in her Chariot, and told the Publicans,
that they were much deceived to com and require Impost for the Isle, for that
was now become a Continent, etc. Whereas the Historian says, the Isle was
tributarie to the Rhodians. The Reader must not be ignorant, that these
people, by reason of their great experience in Navigation, were for a long time
Lords over all the Seas, and in all Marine matters prescribed rules to other
Nations: insomuch that the Imperial Law in all Titles which concern the Sea,
still goes according to the Law of the Rhodes: unless it be where it is
otherwise required by the unalterable customs of particular places. So says
Docimius in the Law, (...), Jus Graeco Romans in Le. Naut. p. 278
(...), etc.

And therefore it is, that when Eudaemon of Nicomedia made complaint to
Antoninus, that in a wrack upon the coast of Italy, he had been robbed by the
Publicans that inhabited the Cyclades, Digest. De Leg. Rhod. de act. (...)
the Emperor returned this answer, (...). that is, I indeed am Lord of the
Land, but as for the Sea, it must be judged by the Law of the Rhodes: Title 2.
of the Digest. cap. 9. This by the way, but by that of Ammianus Marcellinus
we are certainly informed concerning the time, when Pharos first began to be
a Peninsula.

Therefore if Aristaeas make mention of the Heptastadium, he ought to live
either in, or after the days of Cleopatra; but the true Aristaeas was dead
long before.

But Benjamin bar-Jona is against us: for he reckons the making of this
Isthmus among the acts of Alexander the great (...) that is, And there
(Alexander) raised up a Bank at the Haven of Alexandria, the space of one whole
mile within the Sea. (...) p. 121.
But this cannot be: for then it shall never be pardoned his Historians,
Plutarch, Q. Curtius, and especially Arrian, who was testis oculatus, if
striving, in some things, to make him greater then he could be, they should
neglect in other things to make him so great at he was. All that ever yet
undertook the mention of this Mighty Prince, have not spared to say as much
as could be believed, and do we think they would leav out that which ought to
be? 'Twas enough for the renown of Alexander which other Autors have said,
Part j a climat. 4.
concerning his Non ultra in the East: and yet the Arabic Geographer
asscribeth also unto him the Pillars of Hercules in the West: and says
moreover, that by the help of his Mathematicians, he dug up an Isthmus, and
joined two seas together: See this Author in his first Part of his 4. Clime.

That which is already recorded of this Mighty Conqueror, by Historians more
commonly known, is as great a burden as fame can bear, and yet I have seen two
Greek unpublish'd Autors in the Baroccian Archives, Archivae Bara. B. blioth.
Bod.
that have gone beyond all that is yet extant, as if they would set down not how
much Alexander could do, but how much 'twas possible for the Reader to believ;
for so they have scrued up his Acts to a most prodigious and incredible hight,
that nothing more can be exspected from the Historia Lombardica, or the most
impudent Legend: and yet I find nothing at all said of this Agger.

Justin has said much for Alexander out of Trogus Pompey, and much is set down
by Diodorus; to say nothing of Zeno Demetrius, printed at Venice in vulgar
Greek; and a French Author not extant, both which have written the life of
Alexander, and that they might lie by Authority, they have don it in verse: and
yet none of all these ever durst to say, that this was any of his Acts, to
join Pharos to Alexandria: nay Plutarch in the life of this Alexander says,
that Pharos was an Isle in those days, and very well intimates, that the
Isthmus was congested in after times. Therefore if this would not be
remembered, neither by those who knew all that Alexander did, nor yet by others
who durst to write more then they knew: Bar-Jonah is not to be regarded in
this matter.

But Joseph Scaliger troubles us further, for he says, that this Isthmus was
raised per Superiores Ptolemaeos, by the former Ptolemies: and his Authority
for this is out of Julius Caesar, in the third book of his Commentaries De Bello
Civili, toward the later end of that Book, there Caesar says thus.

Haec insula objecta Alexandriae portum efficit: sed a superioribus regionibus
in longitudinem passuum 900. in mare jactis molibus, angusto itinere and ponte
cum oppido conjungitur.

At the first reading of these words, I marvailed how Scaliger could pick out
the thing which is pretended, seeing that here is no intimation to that
purpose; but upon a further inquiry, I found in the Critical Notes upon this
Place, that Brodaeus would have it read, A superioribus Regibus, and out of
this varia lectio, Scaliger got his Superiores Ptolemaeos.

Suppose we then that the true way of reading should be according to
Brodaeus, yet how will Caesar be trusted for this, in whose judgment we all
know that the Pailing up of an Isthmus would be too great a work for a woman;
in comparison whereof Cesar's Ditches and Trenches could bear no reputation?
Therefore it concerned the Dictator to darken the glory of Cleopatra, for fear
that should eclips his own: therefore the exploit is obscurely suggested in
terms of generality and ambiguitie, that it was don A superioribus Regibus,
which whether it be to be understood of Ptolemie Lagus, and Philadelph, or of
those which succeeded, who can tell us; and if it be not, it makes nothing
against us. But why are we bound to read Regibus, seeing that in the most
ancient and the correctest Copies, we find it constantly written, A
superioribus Regionibus? and so it is to be referred to in longitudinem
passuum 900. a sup. Region. etc. or otherwise it may follow the force of the
Conjunction ( sed) which leads to another way of Interpretation; and either
of these ways, seems fully to satisfy the Autor's meaning, and affords a
Construction proper to the Place. So we see, that these words of Caesar are not
of force enough to overthrow the Testimony of Ammianus Marcellinus: therefore
it holds still that Pharos remained an Isle till the days of Cleopatra; and
we are sure that Aristaeas was dead long before: therefore for him to make
mention of the Heptastadium is an inexcusable Anachronism: and there needs
nothing more to prove the first thing which was required, That the Author of the
present History of the Seventie, cannot be that Aristaeas who was to live in
the days of Ptolemie. Now we are to prove that the true Aristaeas had this
passage of the Cells. And this will be easy to do, because Gedaliah in his
Shalshelet Hakabbala (professing to set down this History of the Seventie
Interpreters, briefly out of Aristaeas) toward the later end of his Abstract
uses these words, R Gedalea in Shalshelet fol. 23. and 24.
(...) ((...)) (...) that is, And every day the King asked them the
Interpretation of some hard sayings, and dark sentences (which may be seen at
large in this Of Aristaeas he means.
Book) And they still gave him such an Answer as was to the purpose, and
well-pleasing in his sight; insomuch that the King marvailed greatly, etc.
After this (says he) they were conducted to a certain Island (...) about a
mile distant from Alexandria, (...) and to each of them was appointed a several
Conclave., etc.

We cannot imagine the Author to be so notoriously impudent as to have cited
this out of Aristaeas, if it had not been there.

Therefore now if we give the reason, why Josephus should leav it out, we
have brought that to pass, which was required to be don.

Josephus having had good experience of the Heathen, not only by his
conversation with their Books, but also with themselves, made observation of
that, whereof he himself afterward found cause to complain: that as they made
little account of the Nation of the Jews, and their Religion; so they slighted
their Antiquities, and misbelieved any thing that could be said or written
for their Renown. Josephus being well aware of this, and desirous by all means
that his work might find Acceptance with the Gentiles, took diligent heed to
make the disposition of his History of such a temper, as that nothing should
be proposed so incredible, as not to bear some congruitie with such things,
which had been known to be before, and were like to be hereafter.

Therefore when he comes to the miraculous passages of Holy Writ, he uses
a fair way of Dissimulation, still moderating the wonder of a work, that he
may bring it down to the Heathens Faith, and make it fit for ordinary belief.

The Reader shall willingly believ this, after experience made in an Instance
or two.

When Josephus comes to tell of Isreal's departure out of Egypt, and how they
passed through the midst of the Sea upon dry land; he relates the Story
bona fide, but withal superaddeth thereunto a most unwarrantable Extenuation.
His fear was, lest the Gentiles would think much to believ, that the unrulie
waves of the Sea should not only stay, but also give back at the shaking of a
Rod, and the voice of a Man. And this would be the rather doubted of by the
Heathen, because notice had been already given unto them by Artapan, that
howsoever the Heliopolites in Egypt reported concerning this matter, not much
otherwise then Moses himself had don; yet the Tradition of the Memphites was,
(...), that is, That Moses being well acquainted with the conditions of the
Place, observed the Reflux of the waters, and so brought over his Troops by
dry Land.

Therefore Josephus, that he might make this easy to be believed, makes it
equal to that which no body doubted of; persuading the Reader, that this was
all one with that passage of Alexander the Great and his Company, through the
Phamphilian Sea.

(...).
(...), etc.

Whether (says he) the thing were don by the Council of God, or that the Sea
should do it of its own accord, no man ought so to wonder, as if it were a
thing unheard of, that the Sea it self should make way for the men of those
old and innocent times, when as but the other day, as it were, the Pamphylian
Ocean gave way to great Alexander King of Macedon, and his followers: and when
they had no other road to pass by, the waves themselves marked them out a path,
rather then any thing should hinder the design which God had purposed them
unto; and that was to put a period to the Kingdom of Persia.

But let us see how these two Matters differ in their Moments, and how unlike
the passing of Alexander is to that of Israel.

Strabo can tell us the truth.

(...), Stabo lib. 14. p. 666. and 667.
(...): that is, About Phaselis there is a straight of the Sea, where Alexander
passed over with his company, for the hill Climax lying upon the Pamphylian
Seas, leaves a narrow Passage upon the Shore, which at a low ebb is so dry,
that it may be passed over on foot; but at the flowing of the waters, it uses
to be covered all over with the waves. Now because the way of the Mountain is
round about and precipitate, travelers, for the most part, take this way by
the shore, if the Sea be calm; and it was Alexander's hap to com that way in
the winter Season, who committing most of his acts to fortune, set forward
before the waters were gone off, so that he and his followers were fain to wade
all day long in the Sea up to the middle, etc.

The Reader may here see whither Josephus have not destroyed the Miracle by
lessening it, and made it ceas to be a wonder, while he strive's to make it
fit to be believed.

The same Author, when he should tell us how the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and
the Moon in the vallie of Ajalon he talks of a great Thunder and Lightning,
and of strange Hail, which is some thing more too, then what the Scripture
says: but to the purpose nothing is said, save only, that the day was longer
then it used to be, (...) etc. (...). page 123.

For the days to lengthen was an ordinary thing, to those who lived between
the Tropic of Cancer, and the Arctick Circle; and for the same day to be
longer then ever it had been, would not be so incredible to the Heathen,
because they had already heard, of one night as big as three; for such a thing
as this had happened, when Jupiter begat Hercules of Alcmena, and this was told
them long before the time of Josephus, by their divine Orpheus in his
Argonauticks. -- (...)
(...).
When Hercules was born (says he) Three days the Sun leaving his wonted
Light,
Lay hid, and made of three, but one long Night.


Again, Josephus when he is to set down how the King Nabuchodonosor was
changed into a Beast, he scarcely obteineth of himself at first, to call it
any thing but a Dream; and afterward, when he speaks of it as of a thing
don, he says no more but this, That the King lived seven years (...),
privately; as if to dine and sup alone, had been to eat grass like Oxen, Dan.
4.25.
and to be from the society of Men, had been all one with being turned into
the condition of a Beast; not that we believ that the King of Babel was
transformed into a Brute, though the literal sens of the Text seem to lead us
on to such a Metamorphosis; but that, to bear them mind of a Beast under the
shape of a Man, was more then to keep ones Chamber; and to depart from ones own
self argued somewhat else then (...), To be private. And yet Josephus saie's no
more, nay, he crave's pardon for this, as if it had been too much to say that
such a thing could be don in a Dream. (...), (...). 1. (...). lib. 10. cap.
11. page 311. and 312.
etc. No man (says he) I hope, will blame me for this; for I have set these
things down as I found them in ancient writings: showing hereby that his care
was, not so much that things might appear don in themselves, as that they were
truly related by him.

If it be said that the Retrocession of the Sun and shadow in the Dial of
Ahaz, was as great a wonder as any; and yet that it was fully and faithfully
reported by Josephus, the Reader shall have this satisfaction, That however the
moment of this Miracle consisted in the Retrocession of the Sun it self, yet
the most visible part thereof, and that which would be most of all observed
was the Retrogradation of the shadow, which obtained so far above that which
was the cause of it, that in the Book of the Kings, the whole Miracle is
reported with no other fame then this, of the shadows going back, without any
mention of the Sun at all. Now the Historians hope was, that if the more
obvious part of the Miracle concerning the shadow could be persuaded, then
that must necessarily follow, And Josephus might know that there was no cause
why the Heathen should misbeliev the Retrocession of the shadow, because their
Mathematicians could tell them that such a thing as this might be don by
Nature. For.

Let a Plane be set equidistant to the Horizon of a Right Sphere in any part
of the Earth, between the Equator and the Tropicks; the point of whose
Verticitie let it be less elevated then the Parallel of the Sun's Declination,
and let the Plane be Sciaterically prepared,, and it shall be necessary for
the shadow of the Sun to go back, according to the Rules of that Art. etc.

diagram demonstrating the retrogression of the sun on the sundial of Ahaz

Let A B C D be the Horizon, A E C the Meridian, B the East point, and D the
West. Let B E D be the Equator cutting the Meridian in E. Let F G H be for
the North Parallel of the Sun, cutting the Meridian in G. Let the Semith of the
Place supposed to be between the Equator, and the said Parallel be the Point
I, by which draw a vertical Circle K L I M, touching the Parallel F G H in L,
and another, N O P I Q cutting the same Parallel F G H in the point O, between
L the point of Contingencie, and F the point, where the Sun shall begin to rise
when he enters into the Parallel F G H, and again in the Point P, between L
the said Point of Contingencie, and the Point G in the Meridian, and draw yet
another Vertical F R I S by F the point of the Sun's rising, and therefore
cutting the Parallel F G H in R between the Points P and G.

Now because the Sun being in any great Circle of the Sphere, the Shadow of
any Style erected upon a Plane, at right Angles, is necessarily projected upon
the Common Section of the Plane of the Circle and the Style.

Therefore the Sun being in the Vertical Circle F R I S, and in the point of
his rising F, the shadow of a Style perpendicularly erected upon the Horizon of
such a Place, whose Semith Point shall be in I, cannot recede from the Plane
of that Vertical F R I S; but shall cut the Western Semicircle of the Horizon
in S at the same place, where the Parallel T S opposite to the Parallel of the
Sun, cutteth the Horizon; so that the distance of the Shadow in the Horizon
from the Meridian Southward shall be the Arch A S. Again the Sun being
elevated above the Horizon and placed in O, comes to the Vertical N O P I Q,
and then the Shadow of the said Style shall cut the Horizon in Q, and the
distance from the Meridian will be the Arch A Q, greater then A S, But when
the Sun shall com to L, the Point of Contingencie, and so be in the Vertical K
L I M, then the shadow of the Style shall cut the Horizon in M, and the
distance of the Shadow from the Meridian will be the Arch A M, greater then A
Q, and the greatest which the Shadow can have that day.

Therefore from the time of the Sun's being in F, the point of his rising till
he came to L the point of Contingencie, the Shadow of the Style went still
forward from S by Q to M.

Afterward the Sun moving from L to P shall be again in the Vertical N O P I
Q, and the Shadow of the Style shall again cut the Horizon in Q; and the
distance of the Shadow from the Meridian shall again be the Arch A Q, as
before when the Sun was in the point O. Therefore the Shadow is gone back in the
Horizon, from the Point M to Q nearer to the Meridian. Again, the Sun moving
from P to R, shall be again in the Vertical F R I S; and the Shadow of the
Style shall cut the Horizon in S, and the distance thereof from the Meridian
shall be the Arch A S, as before when the Sun was in F, the point of his
rising. Therefore the Shadow is gone back also from M by Q to S. Therefore in
any part of the Torrid Zone, where the Elevation of the Pole is less then the
Declination of the Sun, the Shadow of a Style perpendicularly erected upon a
Plane, may have a natural visible Retrocession, which was required to be don.

But Peter Novius, however he acknowledges that the Retrogradation of the
Shadow is according to nature in the Case proposed, yet in the Matter of
Hezekiah, he understands it to be miraculous; and he makes the Miracle to
consist in this, That it was not don as the Proposition requires, within, but
without the Tropicks, between that of Cancer and the Arctick Circle, for in
such a position of Sphere, the Dial of Ahaz was placed.

But learned Clavius (whose way of demonstration we follow) makes it plainly
to appear, that the same thing may be don as well in the one Place as the
other: And it must needs be so, for in our own Elevation, here at Oxford,
(which lies in the same Position of Sphere, though not under the same Latitude
with theirs at Jerusalem) a Plane may be fitted for such a Polar Altitude as
shall be less then twenty three degrees and an half, and then it will have
the same site in respect of the Sun, as if it were placed between the Tropicks,
and so the Retrocession of the Shadow must be as natural as before.

Therefore it must be said against Peter Novius that the Miracle was not in
the going back of the Shadow only, but the Sun: for so it is set down by
Isaiah the Prophet.

And whereas it was set down in the beginning that the most visible part of the
Miracle was the Retrocession of the Shadow: that shall here be proved, because
to the strength of our Observation it is required that this should be.

The most received opinion concerning the Degree in the Dial of Ahaz is, That
they should be meant of Hours: so indeed the Targum renders (...) and at the
first view it seems most reasonable, According to this, the Sun went
backwards ten hours, therefore he had gone forwards 150 Degrees of the
Equinoctial line, (for he is to go every hour fifteen) therefore also he had
yet to go thirty degrees, which is the complement of 180. the Semicircle of
the day.

The time then of the Miracle was within two hours of night, and the
Retrocession of the Sun it self was as visible as that of the Shadow: for he
had gone back above three parts of the Hemisphear.

But this could not be. For the Prophet asked the King whether he would have
the Sun go ten degrees forward, or ten degrees backward: but if degrees be
taken for hours would he ask him whether he would have the Sun go 10. hours
forward, when there was but two to go? For the Sun was then Occidental, 60
degrees past the Meridian, and within two hours was to leav that Horizon: So
that if the King had required, that the Shadow should have gone 10. degrees
forward, the Prophet must have gone back from his word; for that which was
promised was more then could be don.

Therefore it seems that the degrees in the Dial of Ahaz are to be
understood of those in Heaven, where they are most properly and primarily so
called. Therefore the Sun together with the whole frame of the superior world,
went so far backward in the diurnal Motion, as made up the space of ten degrees
in the Equinoctial Line, which answered to two third parts of an hour in the
Dial of Ahaz:

Therefore the Retrocession of the Shadow was much more visible, then that of
the Sun: For we all know that the space which the Sun goes in half an hours
time and a little more, is better noted in the Dial, then in the Heavens: For,
by reason of the great distance of the Sun's Excentrick from the surface of the
Earth, the Angle of vision is so Acute, that it cannot transfer a perceivable
species of so rapt a motion. And as it cannot be perceived in the going, so
neither would it easily be observed when it was gone; for an Arch of 10.
degrees in so vast an Orb as that of the Sun, would never be distinguished by
those that stand here below, unless it were Geometrically observed by a
Quadrant or Astrolabe: the knowledge and practice whereof, I think was not so
common in the Kingdom of Israel. Therefore though the main condition of this
Miracle was, that the Sun it self should go back, yet that which was most
apparent, was the Retrocession of the shadow: And because Josephus knew that
this would be accepted among the Gentiles, as a matter not without Nature's
compass, he ventured, upon this encouragement, to set down the whole wonder.
For it was not his desire purposely to smother any thing that was Miraculous,
but only so to quality the Paradoxall part of things, that they might pass
among the Heathen without scorn and derision: Therefore in all places where
there could be any pretens, he uses no dissimulation. So in the History of
Balaam, he durst to say, that a dumb Ass forbad the madness of the Prophet:
'Twas strange indeed that an Ass should-speak; but why not an Ass as well as an
Ox? which had often happened in the Roman State; and once above all the rest
Livie reports, that to the great terror of the Consul Domitius, an Ox uttered
these words, Livius lib. 35.
Roma cave tibi.

And thus Josephus would have been content to do the rest, if there could have
been the like reason; but being desirous to train up the Heathen by
Probabilities to a good conceit of his Nation, and those things which were
written of them; he must not lay too great a task upon their belief, and
therefore still when his History lead's him to the Narration of a strange
thing, he always temper's the discourse with a convenient mixture of
Possibilities; and howsoever it sometimes endanger's the main Matter, yet we
shall seldom find him reporting a wonder sincerely; but having warily taken
off that which could seem incredible, he proposes the Action under such easy
circumstances, as shall make it concord with humane reason, and common
apprehension.

By this time, the Reader may know the Reason why Josephus, when he is to
relate the History of the Seventie, out of Aristaeas, willingly omitteth this
passage of the Cells, because it was like to sound very incredibly in the
Heathen's ears, that a Book should be so prodigiously translated; that
threescore and twelv Jews should be shut up in so many several Cells, and
after so many days, each Man should bring out the same Interpretation. The
same, not only in the sens and Notion; but the same also for order and Manner
of Expression; and which was more, the very same, word for word. Therefore he
that reads Josephus shall plainly perceiv, that when he comes to this
Circumstance, (...). p. 354.
he leaves it quite out, and instead thereof says no more but this, That
the Seniors made (...), a most accurate Translation: and that they did it,
(...), in seventie and two days, etc.

Nevertheless the compiler of that Aristaeas which is now exstant, when he had
brought the Story thus far on, considering with himself, that this matter of
the Cells was a remarkable Circumstance of the Translation, and strongly urged
by Justin Martyr; he resolved with himself, that he would by no means leav it
altogether untouched; and yet because he could find no such thing in Josephus,
(whom he especially followed) he durst not set it down plainly and expressly,
but in stead of that which should have been, he leaves the Reader thus in
doubt. (...) (...).
(...). And these words howsoever they may bear a very natural sens against
the Miracle of the Cells, yet it would not much wrong their propriety, if they
should be rendered in this Manner. Illi vero singula eodem modo
Interpretabantur, apud se conferendo (codices Hebraeos cum suis versionibus)
etc. And if this meaning of the words might go free without contradiction,
Aristaeas also may be cited for the Cells, as A. Castro has labored to bring
it about. But this we seek not after, only that there may seem to be some
Ambiguitie, and the more, because Azarias the Idumaean who translated this
Aristaeas which is now exstant, into Hebrew, when he comes to this passage,
understands it in favor of the Cells, and has given up his Interpretation
accordingly: for instead of those words of Aristaeas, (...), etc. he has left
us as follows.

(...) Et ecce hi accinxerunt se pro virili, and modum hunc observarunt; utique
unusquisque ex eis seorsim transtulit singulas ejusdem (sc. legis) parts,
deinceps contulerunt inter se omnes translationes, etc.

By all this we com to know the Place where, and the Manner how, the Holy
Scriptures were translated by the Seventie Seniors: That the performance hereof
was a matter of Wonder and Admiration, for they were all Separated at the doing
of it, and yet all concorded when it was don: That we are directed to believ
this by the most warrantable Testimonies of the Ancients: That it is agreed
upon by the Latins, Greeks, Hebrews, and Arabians: That besides this
Authority, there is good Reason for it: That there is no Authority or Reason
against it, but that of Saint Hierom's, and that this is brought to a Nullitie.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE, Declaring what Time the NICENE CREED Began to be Sung in the
CHURCH.

By JOHN GREGORY, Master of Arts of Christ-Church in Oxon.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE DEVS PROVIDEBIT. I. Y

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

VIA VNA COR VNVM blazon or coat of arms
A DISCOURSE Declaring what time the Nicene Creed began to be Sung in the
Church.
Quest. What time the Nicene Creed began to to be Sung in the Church?
BEfore any thing can be directly said to this, we must first look a little
aside upon the beginings and improvements of Church-Musick. In the recollection
whereof, not to go so far back as David's chief Musicians, or the Father of
them that play upon the Harp and Organ; It is certain that the Jews had a set
solemn way of Musical Service, but how to be compared unto, or drawn up to
any correspondencie with our ways, I know there is one has undertaken, but
doubt, (and more then so too) whether any man is able to perform.

As the matter stand's within the compass of Ecclesiastical time, properly so
called, The Apostolical it self was not without such a proportion of that
Ceremony as the infancy and Cradle of the Church could afford, Carmen Christo
quasi Deo canere solitos, etc. That they were wont to sing an Hymn to Christ at
their Congregations, it seems by the Junior Pliny to Trajan. But their
Music about that Time was non clamans, sed amans; It had more of the Devotion
then the Voice: sent up with heart enough; but for the harmony, much after the
rate of their other accommodations, from the simplicity whereof as unequal
time took off, so it added to the grace and glory of it. The Church Music had
these degrees to rise by; the first and rude performance was don plano cantu,
by Plain song; as the Psalms are most ordinarily read in Cathedrals, or at the
best, but as they use to be sung in Parochial Churches, where though sometimes
the nois may seem to pretend to a dash and sprinkling of Art, it is most
commonly (and it is well if it be no wors) but all in the same Time and Tune:
from Plain Song they got up to Discant; and first of all to contrapunctum
simplex, a simple kind of Counterpoint, and then Music was in Parts, They
sung not all the same tune, but by way of consonancie, yet so as the Music
answered note for note: as if there stood a Minim or Sembrief in the upper
part, there stood another against it in the lower and inner parts: so that this
Music needed no bars.

To this the rare, but intemperate Invention of the Masters has added the
Contrapunctum figuratum, consisting of Feuges, or mainteining of Points,
alteration of the Keys, etc.

But this last accession came especially in with the Organ: of the Antiquity
whereof something also is to be said.

And here we must not think that the Organs in the old Testament were any
such things, as that which we call so now. Marin. Merfen. De Instrum Harmon.
lib. 10. Prop. 44.
We read it in Job chap. 30. verse 31. and my Organ into the voice of them that
weep. The Syriack renders it, my Psalterie, clean another Instrument of a
Triangular form, as you may see by the description of Mersenius. The Hebrew
word in Job is Hugab, which the Chaldee still turns Abuba: Now Abub
signifies properly an Ear of corn, with the stalk or straw; By Translation it
signifies a Pipe made of such a Reed or Stalk, fistula ex novarum frugum
calamo confecta. The word is Arabic too, and there it is pronounced Anbuba,
from whence the Latin Ambubaja, betraying it self by the sound to be none of
the Roman race. And the Hebrew Organ may be otherwise of Brass or Iron,
Ambubajarum Collegia Hor.
as Maimon to that place in Erchin of the Talmud, C. 2 3. And therefore Jubal
taught no body to play upon any such Organs as ours. David's Organ was but a
kind of Pipe, what kind soever it was.

Our Organs are of a later and another manner of Invention.

Navarr in his Book, De Oration. and Hor. Canon says, and says it again,
that the use of Organs was not received in Thomas Aquinas his time. Balaeus.
This Doctor was born in the Year 1221. But our Author, De Scriptorib. etc. as
Mantuan also, attribute the bringing in of Organs to the Pope Vitalian. Then it
must be about the Year 660. But to make short, The Organ is not of the
Western, De Gest. Francor. lib. 4. c. 113.
but the Eastern institution. Aymon says, that the first Organ they had in
France was made more Graecorum, by one, cui nomen erat Georgius, Imperante
Ludovico Pio, ejusque sumptibus. Jews the Godly began his Reign in the Year
813. Mich. Glycas and Constable. Manasses yield the Invention to Theophylus his
time, a Greek Emperor of the Year 830. but Marianus Scotus, Martin-Polonus,
Platina, the Annals of France, Aventine, and the Pontifical it self, all agree,
that the first Organ that ever was seen in the West, was sent over into France
to King Pipin, from the Greek Emperor Constantinus Copronymus, about the Year
766. Res adhuc Germanis and Gallis incognita (says Aventine) instrumentum
Musicae maximum, Organum appellant, Annals Bosorum. lib. 3. f. 300.
cicutis ex albo plumbo compactum est, simul and follibus inflatur, and manuum
pedumque digitis pulsatur, etc. And so we have the Antiquity of Organs in the
West. But in the East, they cannot be less ancient then the Nicene Council it
self, as appears by the Emperor Julian's Epigram upon the Instrument.

(...)
(...) etc.
Martin. Morentinus in Praefat. ad Misopogon. ubi de vita and Script. Juliani.
Quam cerno alterius naturae est fistula, nempe
Altera produxit fortasse haec aenea tellus;
Horrendum stridet, nec nostris illa movetur
Flatibus, and missus taurino e carcere ventus
Subtus agit leves calamos, perque ima vagatur;
Mox aliquis velox digitis insignis and art
Adstat, concordes calamis pulsatque tabellas,
Ast illae subito exsiliunt, and Carmina miscent.
And now it may be thought that the Antiquity of the Organ is brought far
enough back. It Is true for the Instrument; Zonar. Tom. 3. Annal. in Michaele
Imperator. p. 127.
but for the Church use I am in doubt. Zonaras tells us of an Organ set up by
one of the Greek Emperors, (...), all of pure gold; But what? (...). not to put
the Church in Tune, but to cast a glory upon the Court and draw foreign
admiration upon the Emperor.

I had occasion to show an Armenian Priest the Chapel here, and perceiving him
to cast his eye upon the Organ, I asked, whether there were any such sight to
be seen in their Churches? He answered, No such matter: neither did he know
till it was told him, what to call them; and yet this man had lived 14 years
under two Patriarchs, Constantinople and Alexandria.

But more then this. In the Greek Liturgies I meet with Music enough, and more
indeed, then I can tell what to say to, but not so much as the mention of an
Organ in all their Books. The old Greek-Latine gloss sets down (...),
Organarius: but that will make nothing to the matter, an Organist there must
be, where the Instrument it self was: but whether that were in the Church, or
only in the Emperors Courts, is the doubt. And for the present time, it is as
good as taken for granted, that there is not an Organ to be seen in any
Church of the Eastern world.

Bruschius de Monaster. German. fol. 107.
In the West indeed the Greek example is very magnificently out-don: Bruschius
reports of an Organ set up in a Minster of Germany, by the Abbat of the
Covent there, cujus maxima and medioxima fistula habuerit in longitudine pedes
28, in circumferentia spithamas 4; the Diapason whereof was 28 foot in Length,
and the Compass about proportionable, we have never an Organ here abouts of
that Pitch.

But how anciently such things have been don, Ecclesia nestra non assumit
instrumenta musica, sicut Citharas and Psalteria in divinas lauds ne videatur
Judaizare 2a. 2ae. Q. 91 Art. 2
even in this part of the World, is hard to judge. The words of Thomas Aquinas
implie no less, then that there was no Ecclesiastical use of Organs in his
time; however it was not long after, before they got into the Church: for
Durand makes mention of them, as of things received before his time. Rational.
lib. 4, c. 34. lib. 5. c. 2. his time was about 1280. etc.

. Note one thing more, That the most ancient and original form of Christian
Liturgy, is the order of Baptism* It must be so in reason* and from thence
the main parts of all Common Prayers are translated; the Creeds especially, for
those, and the Pater noster were the first Rudiments of the Catechumeni, and
gave beginning to all Divine Service.

And if a case should lie against the Athanasian, I hold the ground to be good
from hence, that it was not properly put into the Liturgy, because it was not
yet received into any order of Baptism.

The Creed in use, before the Fathers met at Nice, must needs be that which is
called Apostolical; for they had no other: But since the Council, the Nicene
form was generally received into all Orders of Baptism in the other Church, as
the Greek, Syriack, Ethiopick, Armenian and Coptick Orders: But the Rubric in
all is as in the Syriack, Haiden amar, not then the Priest shall sing; but, Tum
dicit Sacerdos, Credo in unum Deum, etc. In the Latin Church indeed, sometimes
the Symbolum Constantinopolitanum was repeted, but most commonly the Nicene.
And all the Roman Tradition fasteneth the Institution thereof upon the times
of Pope Mark, which was about the Year 366. and immediately succeeding upon the
Council it self. And for the manner of Recitation, Berno says, Ille enim ob
Arrianorum haeresin Symbolum Nic number in Missa decantari ordinavit, etc Another
says, That he ordained it should be don Alta voce; And the same Father
says, That by a Canon of the third Council of Toledo, it was ordered
concerning the Creed, that it should be passim clara voce decantatum, secundum
formam Ecclesiarum Orientalium.

Now out of all this to frame an Answer to the Question. By all the Orders of
Baptism, the Catechumenus was first to make his Abrenunciation, to renounce the
Devil and all his works. And this he did with his face turned toward the
West. That don, he was to turn himself toward the East, and make profession
of his Faith in the words of the Nicene form (since the Council) But which is
principally to be noted (as to this business) all this was to be don Alta
voce. The Church as it received the Form from the order of Baptism, so it
retained the posture of conversion (toward the East) and manner of
pronunciation.

So much therefore is certain, that the Nicene Creed, (or what form soever) was
always recited in a different Tone, A louder voice at the least: but, because
the Canon makes mention of Decantari, and that this was to be don secundum
formam Ecclesiarum Orientalium: Two things will be granted upon this: One is,
That there was a kind of Modulation in the Pronouncing of the Creed; another
is, That this was not Roman in the Original, but from Eastern Example. The
Sum of both is, That either the words dici and decantari must be confounded:
or that, dureing the good simplicity of time, the pronunciation was made by
Dici, only with the difference of Alta voce, but afterward graced with a
measure of Harmony; yet such an one, as cannot be compared higher, then to
the matter of Plain-song; for I am deceived, if the Eastern Music ever
improved further. Antiphones I know they had, and upon what Seraphical
occasion, if Sozomen de^^ver it rightly; but this came to no more then our
alternation, at the most ordinary singing of the Psalms, by way of Responds,
but all in the same time and tune, and without any Discant at all.

Therefore to say all at once. The Singing of the Nicene Creed, as now it is,
with all the Ornaments and figurations of Harmony, is but a Yesterdaies
business, and contemporarie to the Organ, but however the same Creed has been
most certainly Sung according to the improvements of time, and at the least in
plano Cantu, in a plain Song-fashion, ever since the date of the Council it
self, and for the Reason given out of the Order of Baptism.

FINIS.
A SERMON UPON THE RESURRECTION, From the 1 Corinthians. XV.XX.

By JOHN GREGORY, Master of Arts of Christ-Church in Oxon.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE DEVS PROVIDEBIT. I. Y

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

VIA VNA COR VNVM blazon or coat of arms
A SERMON UPON THE RESURRECTION.
1 Corinthians. 15.20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first
fruits of them that sleep.


THe perfection of God is, that he can have no Hope; the perfection of Man is,
that he can attein unto the end of his Hope. If in this life only we had
Hope, we were of all men most miserable. The very Heathen themselves though in
other things run cross, yet all concentered in this Faith. Divine Plato
believed, and taught, that there should be a (...), or Regeneration of things,
in the revolution of time. The Egyptian Sages determined the space to be a
Period of 30000 Years: therefore in their Hieroglyphics, or holy Writings,
the Character of the Soul was a Pyramid. The Correspondencie is, that, As a
Pyramid, (if it be turned about upon it is Axis, the Axis continuing still the
same, is Geometrically transformed into a new solid Cone: So Mortality having
gone it is Round, as it were, in this Circle of Time, upon the immovable Center
of the Soul, shall become a new Body, and unite again. It is the Reason, why
the Sepulchers of their Kings were set up in a Pyramidal form, as they are seen
to be at this day.

Those that understand not the Mysterious, and Mathematical part, (which I
could speak no plainer) may receiv the sens and meaning; that, even these
unlikelie men ploughed in Hope.

But we need not instance Men; the very unreasonable part of the Creation,
even the Creature it self, now subject to vanity, travelleth under the pain of
this Hope; and by a certain (...), or Lifting up of the Head, as S. Paul
expresses it, earnestly exspecteth, as by an eager and understanding
Confidence, to be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

And yet I fear me, we preach but to CORINTHIANS still; and that, if the
company were divided, as at the Council where S. Paul pleaded his cause, I
doubt me the most part would be Saduces, and might be called in question,
for not having Hope of the Resurrection of the dead. We pretend indeed, as if
we had no continuing City; but, that we look for one to com. But when I see
that our inward Thoughts are, that our houses shall continue, and our dwelling
places to all generations: When I see that this their way is, I am ready to
think, the wise man dies as the fool; and to compare Man being in honor, unto
the Beasts that perish. When I see the incomprehensible Patience of God, still
drawing us, as he did Ephraim, with the cords of a Man, with the bonds (in the
Hebrew it is, Densis funiculis amoris, with the Thick bonds) of Love: And the
infinite Security of the People on the other side, drawing Iniquity with
Cords of Vanity, Isa. 5.18.
and sin as it were with a Cart-rope: I dare not go about to consider, what
shall be the end of these Men.

We are all ready to wish with Balaam, that we may die the Death of the
Righteous, and that our last end may be like His: but, when I see men live, as
if they never thought to die; and die, as if they never thought to live again:
when I see that instead of shining Lights, they go out like Snuffs, in the
midst of a crooked and pervers Generation; ready to say to their departing
Souls, as that great Unbeliever, Animula blandula, vagula, etc. I seem to be
so far from giving an account of the Hope that is in me; that, in
contradiction of King Agrippa's words to S. Paul, I am almost persuaded not to
be a Christian.

The greatest Argument in our own opinion, that we are not (...), such as have
no Hope; (...), Atheists, or without God in the world, is, that we com up to
his house, to be here taught of his ways, etc. But this word of his has too
truly proved a Mirror, wherein we daily com to behold our selves; but with no
greater Impression, then we do our Natural faces; we go away, and strait
forget what manner of men we were.

But thou believe, thou say, that this body of thine shall rise again.
Thou do well: the Devils also believ and tremble. But will thou know, O vain
Man, that this Faith without works is dead? The Tree is known by it is fruit.
And can I think, that thou, which all this while do but cumber the ground,
and bring forth nothing but wild grapes, do believ, that as this Tree
falls, so it shall lie?

But let all this be a Transportation and Exstasis: the best shall be
supposed; that there is no man here, but knows in whom, and what he has
believed; and therefore cannot be thought to boggle at the great Article of
the Resurrection. But thus much, I am sure, must be granted me; that we all
put the day of our death far from us. For it is not possible, that they who
remember their later end, should thus sin. The mistrust however of Infidelity
in the former, and the certain experience of our supineness in the later, moved
me to reflect upon you these two Common, (but therefore the less noted,)
Considerations.

1. The 1st is the end of our Life, Death. 2. The second is the end of our
Hope, Resurrection.
And first of the first Fruits expressed here. Secondly, of the whole Lump;
implied in the Inference, But now: But now is Christ risen, etc. And first of
the end of our Life: but which I mean to consider of, not under the
discourageing term of Death; but as it is here comfortably secured, under the
Type and Adumbration of Sleep.

Sleep, and Death are of so near a Kin, that Galen says of them, Lib. de.
cause. pulls.
that they are Brother and Sister: answerable to that in Homer's Poetry, where
they are both said to have one Mother, and to be begotten of the Night. Somnus
Mortis imago, is the old saying; that Sleep is the Lecture of Death. And it is a
Masterpiece; of which that of the Comoedian may be affirmed, Qui utramvis
recte novit, ambas noverit: He that has been asleep, may know Death at first
sight. Plato in his Phaedon, is not contented to say, they are alike; but, in
a manner, the same; and, that Sleep is a very kind of Death.

When the Scripture speak's of Men's departure from hence, the usual Phrase is,
not to say such an one died; but, such an one slept with his Fathers. And the
same Spirit speaks to the Dead, but as we would do to those that are not yet
stirring. Awake, awake, Sing ye that dwell in the dust.

We are all here but Strangers and Pilgrims; and our being here we use to
call but This, that is no, Life; but the Passage, and Journie to another. While
it is called to day, we travel on through the ways of this World: but the
Night comes, and no man can work at the approach of this Evening. We die;
that is, we rest from our Labors.

When we go to take our Natural rest, we enter into our Chambers, and shut
the doors. Such a Room as this is the Sepulcher. A Churchyard, in the
expression of the Ancients, was but (...), a Dormitorie, or Sleeping place. And
in the 36 of Isaiah and the 20 verse, the Grave is no otherwise termed; where
the people appointed to Die, are bid to go but into their Chambers and shut the
doors about them. And we need not fear to trust our selves: for, he that
lives, and was dead, and is alive for evermore, has the Keys of Hell and
Death.

Having entered our Chambers, and shut the door, the next thing we do, is, to
commend our selves to God. So the Martyr Stephen, when he was to fall into that
other sleep, first said his Prayers; Lord Jesu receiv my Spirit.

This don, we put off our Clothes; So Naked we came into this World, and
Naked we shall go out, etc. The Raiment of a Man, (says a Learned Rabbin) is
his Body: And, had our Father Adam stood, we had needed no other. Thou have
Clothed me, says holy Job, with Skin, and with Flesh: when therefore we
die, we are said, in S. Peter's language, to put off this Tabernacle; as, in
S. Paul, when we rise again, to be. Clothed upon with our house from Heaven.
Over night we put off this weed of Mortality: but the Morning comes, and we
shall be covered again with our skin; and put on Incorruption, our Better
Cloths, as to go and see God in this Flesh. The same flesh we put off the
night before; but with this difference, that this Fowl Garment, which could not
be kept Unspotted of the world, shall in the mean time be washed clean in the
Blood of the Lamb.

Our Clothes put off, we lay our selves down, and take our rest: And, to Die,
In the Prophet Isaiah's Phrase, Isa. 43.17. and 57.1.
is but to lie down in our Beds. And when thy days shall be fulfilled, says
Nathan to David, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers: so indeed we read it,
as we may; but the Original is, And thou shall lie down with thy Fathers. 2 Samuel 7.12. So Asa, the King's Coffin is called a Bed. 2 Chronicles 16.14. and our
forefathers, in their Saxon tongue, style a Burying place; legersto, or place
to lie down in: as in the Laws of King Canute. Numb. 3.

In the Case of Natural Rest, it is not the whole man, only the Earthly part
falls asleep; the Soul is then most awake. The Body's Night is the Soul's
Day: our Better part, says Cardan, is never it is own man till now, when
exalted unto a State of Separation, (as it were) in the body, it spends the
time in Contemplations, free, and congeniall to its own Extraction. So in the
sleep of Death, it is not the totus Homo: the Body indeed is dead, because of
sin; the Soul is then most Alive. Here, as a Servant, it is still required to
the Exigencies of the Body; having no time of it is own to spend, but what it
can get by stealth, when the Master is gone to bed. But there, like it is
Redeemer, free among the Dead, and delivered from the Encumbrances of the
Body, it begineth to be a Soul to it self, minding that which is above, and
looking with a more piercing eye upon the Invisible things of God.

It is noted by the Naturalists, and we find it true in observation, that no
nois awaketh Natural Sleep more suddenly, then an Humane voice: Nay, though it
be that (...), that dead and dangerous sleep; as the Aphorism notes it in
Hippocrates. But especially the Experiment holds, if the voice calls upon
him in his own name. But, that we shall all be awaked out of this other
Sleep, by the sound of our Proper Names, is more then I can pretend to: though
S. Peter's call was, Tabitha surge; and our Savior's to his Friend, Lazare
veni for as, Lazarus com forth. To say nothing to Epiphanius his Tradition,
that, when our Lord went down into Hell, and there found our Father Adam fast;
he took him by the hand, and called him by his own Name, in the words of S.
Paul, Surge Adam qui dormis (so indeed some Ancient Copies read it,) Arise Adam,
thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, Christ takes thee by the hand.
But this I am sure of, that we shall all be awaked by a voice, the voice of
an Archangel; and the word shall be, as some think, Surgite mortui, etc Nor
shall it be the voice of a God, and not of a Man; it shall be an Humane
voice: for, by the Archangel, we are to mean the Son of Man. For the hour
comes, in which all they that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and
shall com forth, Job. 5.28. Which why it should be strange of us, I know not;
since it is true of the Swallows, by a certain and confessed Experience, that
when the Winter comes, they lie down in the hollow of a Tree, and there
falling asleep, quietly resolv into their first Principles: But at the Spring's
approach, they are n t so (though thoroughly) dead, but that they hear the still
nois of Returning Nature, and awaking out of their Mass, rise up every one to
their life again. Ego novi hominem, etc. I know a man (says the Learned Prince
of Concordia) who, in his soundest Sleep, could walk, talk, write, and dispatch
any business of the most required Vigilance. They seem to have had some such
conceit of Death, who hold it no absurdity, to write Letters to their dead
Friends; as the Emperor Theodosius to S. Chrysostom, more then thirty Years
after his deceas; as if Death were a kind of live Sleep; Such an one as that,
which Jupiter sent of an Errand, to awake Atamemnon. And may we not as
properly say, that to be Dead, is to be Alive; as to say, to Die, is to be
Born? And yet the Ancients (as if Corruption had been their Father, and the
Worms their Mother) were wont to call the days of their Death, Natalia, not
Dying, but Birth-daies. Mos inolevit in sancta Ecclesia, it has been the
custom in the holy Church, (says Haymo,) when a Saint of God departed this
life, to call it not the day of his Death, but the day of his Nativitie. That
which we call Death's, they call Life's door: Seneca himself said as much;
Dies iste, quem Tutanquam Supremum reformidas, Aeterni Natalis est. As if all
this were so indeed, the Jews to this day, stick not to call their Golgotha's,
Batte Caiim, the Houses, or places of the Living. At the least they have an
Effectual life in them: for the Mummies are known to be most sovereign and
Magistral in Medicine; and the Principal Ingredient of the weapon-Salv, is the
Moss of a dead Man's-skul: as the Recipe, delivered by Paracelsus to Maximilian
the Emperor.

Once more, and I leav the Parallel. Sleep, we know, is most natural to
Animal-Creatures; and for Men so Necessary, that Aristotle says, that the end
of it in us, is, Been Ratiocinari. And yet he himself is cited by
Olympiodorus, to have known a Man, who never slept in all his Life. And the
strangeness has been quitted by an Experience of later days. The Comparison
hold th in the Sleep of Death: it is Omnibus communis, common to all men, as we
use to say. And yet some Jews believ, that the last age of Men shall be so
long lived, as to prevent the Resurrection; But S. Paul himself has promised,
(...), that we shall not all die; some shall be changed. And therefore it is no
vain Article, which we so daily profess; that our Savior shall com to judge
both the Quick and the Dead: We are to say then of all those that are
departed this life, as the Jews of their Father Jacob; Non est Mortuus: or, as
our Savior of Lazarus, and the Maid; Why trouble you your selves? they are not
Dead, but Sleep. And when a Friend leaves this world, we are to bid him but
Good Night; in sure and certain Hope to meet again, in the great Morning of the
World.

But now, How long, how long, Lord, Holy and True? will some say: or, as those
in S. Peter, Where is the promise of his Coming? For, since the Fathers fell
asleep, all things continue to be as they were from the beginning to the
Creation. But these Men have not the knowledge; and this is to be spoken to
their shame. The Lord is not slack, as concerning his Promise: for, Behold, he
comes quickly; and his Reward is with him. When we awake out of our natural
sleep, be the Night never so long, to us it seems but a Moment. And the
Night is no longer, in the Prophet David's account, Psalm. 30.5. For, his Anger
endures but a Moment: that is, weeping may endure for a Night, but joie comes
in the Morning. It Is no otherwise in Death: for, when first we awake out of
this sleep, we shall think that we did but then lie down; and were it a
thousand Years, it would seem no more to us, then it does to God himself; but
as one day.

It is Observable, that the Holy Ghost, which accounts Natural Death, as a
Sleep, yet calls the Life of a Sinner by the name of Death. To be truly
Dead, is, to be Dead in Trespasses and Sins: And therefore S. Paul, not making
mention of the Great Resurrection, bid's his Corinthians awake to
Righteousness, and sin not. For a Righteous man has more Hope in his Death,
then a Sinner in his Life: and no man can be Dead to Nature, that is Alive to
God.

But, if to Die be but to fall Asleep; we should put off this Garment of
Flesh with as good a will, as we do our Clothes. And that we may sleep well
in the night, we should forbear sleeping in the Day, not Idleing in the
Market, as those in the Parable; nor sitting down in the seat of the scornful:
but working out our salvation: for the Sleep of a Laboring man is sweet.

And that we may rest in these Beds, in an undisturbed peace, we are to
provide, that no Innate Furies, no Stings of Death, like gross and restless
Vapors, do arise from a guilty Conscience. Such a man will be scared with
Dreams, and terrified with Visions, and be full of tossings to and fro, until
the dawning of the the day. Job.

And because to the Conciliation of Rest and Sleep, it is required that there
be a Moderate Repletion, (for Paulus Aegineta makes this to be of the
Definition:) we are by no means to go to bed, till first of all we have sat
down to the Great Supper; till we have eaten of that Bread, and drank of that
Cup, which show the Lords Death (but our Life) till he com; and are therefore,
not unfitly, termed by the Fathers of the Nicene Council, (...) the Sacraments,
and Emblems of the Resurrection. This don, we may lay our selves down in
Peace, and take our Rest: for the Lord will make us to dwell in safety. And,
as the Disciples to our Savior concerning Lazarus, if thus we sleep, we
shall do well. Of the first Consideration thus much: Pass we now from Death to
Life; from the end of our Days, to the end of our Hope, Resurrection.

I Said, that was twofold: Frst of the first Fruits: then of the whole Lump.
And first of the Resurrection of our Savior; but, which I am not here to make
Proof of; for it is taken for granted in the Text. But if any should be so
foolish, and slow of heart, as not to believ all that is written in the
Prophets; the Heathen Tacitus will tell you one Article, in the 15 of his
Annals; That he suffered under Pontius Pilate: And the Jew Josephus adds the
other, in the 18. of his Antiquities; That he rose again the third day from
the Dead.

That which most properly I am to make known to you is, upon what Consideration
our Savior can be called The First: then, by what Analogy The first Fruits.
The Patriarch Enoch was Translated; and the Prophet Elias went up to Heaven in
a fiery Chariot: And the Assumption of Moses has been disputed for by some;
though it should seem, by the Contention betwix the Archangel and the Devil
about his body, that there was no such matter. Howsoever, these all rather
died not, then rose again. As for the Rising of Samuel, to which the Cunning
Woman of Endor pretended, it was nothing less then a Resurrection; 'twas an
Apparition. And Saul should have said to the Woman, as He to Her: Why have
thou deceived me? for this is not Samuel. Elisha indeed raised up the
Shunamite's Son: and our Savior raised up his friend Lazarus, after he had
been Dead four days: And yet still This was the first Resurrection. The rest
did not go before, as the Scripture seems to say, but followed This. For, as
he was a Lamb, slain; so was he a Lamb Risen too, from the beginning of the
World. The rest were Raised, He only Rose from the Dead. Elisha's dead Bones
raised up Another Man's; Our Savior's dead Bones raised up themselves. They
raised Others, by His power; He, Himself by his own.

To say therefore, there was any Resurrection before This, is to say, that
Abraham was before Christ. The rest were all but second Brothers in the
Resurrection: He only was Primogenitus Mortuorum, the first begotten of the
Dead.

We have seen in what sens our Savior is to be accounted the First: I am now
to tell you, in what Proportion he stands to the First Fruits.

But then I am to lead you back to the Old Law, of the Omer, or Sheaf. Levit.
23.9. Where the Children of Ifrael are commanded, that at the reaping of their
Harvest no Bread, or Parched Corn, or Green Ears be eaten in their dwellings,
till a Sheaf of the Frst Fruits be offered, and Waved before the Lord,
together with a Lamb for a Burnt Offering. The Traditions here (and not
unnecessarily) supply; that, those who lived far from the Holy City, might
eat of the New Corn, when Mid-daie was past: for that is was presumed, the
Sanhedrim would see the Sheaf offered up ere that time. Thus the Letter, and
Cerimonie: which, how well it is answered in the Truth, and Substance, I shall
briefly show you.

The Typical Sheaf, (as the Doctors deliver in the Talmud,) was to be cut down
in the Night: So was the True. Codmenac.
He was cut down indeed in the Day time; but the Darkness was the greater:
for the very Light of This Day was Darkness; and therefore how great was
that? A darkness, that indeed might be felt. A darkness over the face of the
whole Earth: Such an one, as in the Beginning was over the face of the Deep,
before the Creator had said, Let there be Light. And though the Scripture
makes mention but of Darkness till the Ninth hour; yet most certain it is,
that That Day had another Darkness, about the Twelfth hour, of Nature's own
Provision. For, by the Astronomical Tables, the Moon was at that time almost
totally Eclipsed: So truly were these First Fruits cut down in the Night,

The Typical Sheaf thus reaped down, was carried into the Court yard of the
Sanctuary, threshed, parched, ground; then lifted up, and waved before the
Lord: So was the True. The manner of the Jews Threshing was by the Treading of
Oxen, and Wheels indented with iron teeth. And did not many Bulls compass Him
about? And was not He bruised for our Transgressions? His Hands, and his Feet
were pierced; and all his Bones were out of joint: they had been broken too,
but for the Prophecy. He was Parched: for, was not his strength dried up, as
a Pot-sheard? Did not his Tongue cleav to the roof of his Mouth? And was he
not brought down to the dust of Death? You may hear him say all this himself,
Psalm 22. He was lifted up too: for, as Moses I fted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, so was the Son, etc. And he was waved too, (as some compare it) by
an Earthquake, at the Resurrection. But instead of Waving, the Text translateth
it; The Sheaf was Separated. So were these first Fruits: and the Desertion was
so great, that he cried out, His God, His God had forsaken him. Lastly, there
was an Extraordinary Lamb to be offered up, as due to the Sheaf. And if one
should ask us, as once the Son did the Father; Behold the fire, and the wood;
but where is the Lamb for a burnt Offering? He would be answered, that God
would provide himself a Lamb. Ecce Agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God. But that
which most of all concern's is, the Condition of the First Fruits: That was,
till These were offered up no Man of the Land of Israel might eat of his New
Corn; 'twas yet Profane, and Cursed, as the Ground that bare it. But, the Sheaf
once offered up, the whole Crop is entitled to the Consecration. For, if the
First Fruits be holy, says S. Paul, then so is also the whole lump. This
also is the case of the Resurrection: for, if Christ, the first Fruits, be
risen; then They also that are His, the whole Lump, at his Coming. The Harvest
is the end of the World; and the end of our Life is in the seed time:
Churchyards are the Plots; which, therefore, the high Dutch most properly
term, God's, Aeres, or Glebe Land, wherein the Dead are sown a Natural body;
but the Crop shall not be such, as wherewith the Mower fills not his hand,
or he that binds up the Sheafs his bosom. It shall be with the Fat of the
Kidneys of Wheat, as Moses in the Song. Deuteronomy. 32.14. It Is sown in Dishonor; it
rises again in Glory. And the Reapers are the Angels, who shall gather and
bind us up again (...) Betsror hachaiim, into the Bundle of Life, as in the 1 Samuel 25.29. which words therefore the Jews use to repete in their Diriges, and
inscribe upon their Tombs.

The First Fruits being risen; take any one of us any grain of Corn in the
whole Lump, and cast it into the ground, if it die not, it abides alone: but
if it die, it brings forth much Fruit. For the Life of the Lump, like Corn in
the Earth, is laid in the First Fruits in God: The instance of the Corn is so
pregnant, that the Greek Churches, in their Commemorations of the Dead; use to
boil Wheat in water, and set it before them, as a convincing Symbol of the
Resurrection. And my Author is bold to say, (...), that This is the Greater
wonder of the two; that the Resurrection of the Corn is more Prodigious then
that of the Body. Strange indeed it is, that a grain of Corn should not
quicken, except it die: But much more strange, that out of one grain, and one
as good as Dead, should spring forth such a Numerous Increas. As for our
Bodies, which are sown in Corruption; the Earth, when she shall give up her
Dead, will render, but as the Talent hid in the Napkin, the same again; or one
for another. But the Husbandman receives his own with Interest: shall I say
that this Grain has gained him Ten Grains? Nay, in some parts under the Line,
they reap the profit of a Thousand for One.

In Relation to the First Fruits, we are called by Saint Paul (...),
Complantati, such as are planted together with him in Likeness of his
Resurrection. Correspondently the Prophet Isaiah says, Our bones shall
flourish like an Herb. Now the Herbs and Plants, we know, however cut down,
yet reinforcing from the Root, spring up, and rise again. We use Vulgarly, but
Improperly, to call the uppermost of the Branches, the Top of a Tree: but we
are corrected by Aristotle, in the Books De Anima; where we are taught to call
the Root, the Head; and the Top, the Feet. In the Revers of this Comparison,
the first Fruits are the Root, and the Head; we, the Branches, or Members. And
in the 36. of Isaiah, the Head acknowledges the whole departed Race of
Mankind to be his Trunk, or Dead Body. We read it: Thy Dead Men shall
arise; With my dead Body shall they arise. But the rest is put in by the
Translators: The Original is, Thy dead Men shall arise: they shall arise, my
dead Body. Seeing therefore that the Ax is not laid to the Root of the Tree,
what though the Branches be lopt off by Death, there is still Hope in the
Tree, says Holy Job. For though the Stock thereof die in the ground; yet
through the sent of water, 'twill bud and bring forth boughs like a Plant;
which withers over night: but being watered with the dew of Heaven,
springs up afresh in the Morning. And therefore in the same Prophecy of
Isaiah, the Dew of dead men is likened to the Dew of Herbs: Ros tuus, Ros
Olerum. To this say the Jews, in the Book Zohar, That, at the last Day, a
kind of Plastical Dew shall fall down upon the Dead, and engender with Luz,
the little Bone spoken of before: and so out of this, all the rest of our
Bones, and the whole Man shall spring forth. But we are not to give heed unto
Jewish Fables: and therefore it shall not be here enquired, who shall be the
Father of this Rain; or, Who should beget these drops of Dew. Sure we are,
that though touched by Death we shrink up, like that sensitive Plant: yet we
shall soon quicken by his Influence, whose Head (in the Canticles) is filled
with Dew; and his Loks as with the drops of the night. In Exprobration
therefore unto Death, and Mortality, we know whose use it was to bury their
dead in their Gardens; sowing their Bodies with as much faith, as their Fruits,
and equally exspecting the spring of Both. It Is for no other reason, that we
ourselvs stick our Hearses with Flowers, and go forth to the grave with
Rosemarie. Our Precedents were the Jews, whose ancient Custom it was by the
way as they went with their Corpses, to pluck every one up the Grass; as who
should say, they were not sorry, as men without Hope; for, their brother was
but so crop't off, and should spring up again in his due season.

But the Prophet Isaiah's Comparison of the Flourishing of our Bones like an
Herb, is yet further made good, by (as I think) one of the greatest Secrets,
that are yet known in Nature. A Learned Chemist, who spent much time in the
Contemplation of Tinctures, and Impressions of Vegetals, to prove the Great
Principle of Salt, made this experiment. He took several Herbs, and Plants,
and calcined them to Ashes: he put up the Ashes into several Glasses, sealed
Hermetically, and written upon with the several names of the Calcined Herbs.
When he would show the Experiment, he applied a soft flame to the Glasses;
whereforthwith he might perceiv the self same Herbs rising up by little and
little out of the Ashes, every one in his proper form: and, the flame
subtracted, they would return to their own Chaos again.

The Spectators, as the Chemist, beheld this with the greatest Admiration; and
giving thanks to God, concluded from thence the Resurrection of the Dead Body.

We may take an Omen of our Rising again, from the Time of our Savior's
Resurrection. The first fruits rose in the Spring: and that is the time (so the
Senator Manilius) wherein the Phoenix rises out of her ashes. And it is the time
wherein the Egyptians celebrate their Annual Resurrection: for upon the 26. of
March, they solemnly go to a place by Nile, where they see, and touch the
Bodies Rising out of their Graves. It will seem strange, I confess, but it has
been seriously testified, and believed. Howsoever we shall take this, but as a
staff of Egypt, a broken Reed, or, but such an one, as Gehazi laid upon the
Dead Child. But the master comes shortly, and shall command the Breath to com
from the four Winds, and breath upon our Slain; and then these Bones shall live.

But I would not have this Doctrine two partially applied: our Savior indeed
is said to be the first Fruits of them that sleep in Him. Those that sleep in
Him, are such, which here awake and stand up from the Death of sin. For, as
there is a second Death; so, Here is a first Resurrection. In the great morning
of the World the Dew shall fall down upon the dead in Christ; as that other Dew
upon the Fleece of Gideon; and the rest of Mankind shall be dry. But another
dew shall fall upon the ungodlie; a Blasting Mildew: and then the rest of the
ground shall be wet, and the Fleece only shall be dry. The 'wicked lie in
the graves like Sheep, (says the Psalmist) that are appointed to the
Slaughter; and the Righteous shall have dominion over them in the Morning. In
the field of the World, where our Savior is the first Fruits, the Good are the
Wheat; and the Bad are the Tares: which as they both are cut down alike, so
shall they both alike be gathered up: But the Tares for the Fire; and the good
Corn for the great Husbandman's Barn. They seem indeed to be of the Lump; but
no more title to the First Fruits, then that, as these were cut down, so those
were sowed in the Night.

If these things be so, what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy
Conversation? But if the Resurrection were to be argued from the Sanctity of
Life; there was never less Hope of it, then now. Nay, we take the only course
to prove that our Savior is not yet Risen. It Is but the Conversion of S.
Paul's Proposition: If Christ be not risen; then you are yet in your sins: But
you are yet in your sins: and ye know what fallows.

In all holy conversation, etc. Why, there was never more Holiness pretended
to; never less practiced then now. And ye must not count me your Enemy,
because I tell you this Truth What streining here is at the Gnat of a Cerimonie;
by them which can swallow whole Camels of other Profitable Abominations? How
odious is the very name of a Cope, or a Surplice to those, which yet can love
the garment spotted with the Flesh? All possible means has been taken, to
purge the material Temple of any suspicious Rust, contracted by the
inconsiderations of Time: but the Temples of our Bodies, and they should be
those of the Holy Ghost, they are Painted still, Painted Sepulchers. They
appear well outwardly; and we have been persuaded to wash our selves in Jordan,
from the Romish Leprosy: we do well; only in this, the Lord be merciful
unto me. We will have Rimmons still; And what was Rimmon, think ye? 'Twas
the Strumpet Lady of Lust, and Wantonness.

If it be well to deface a Picture in a Church; will it not be much better,
to restore the Image of God in our selves? I do not say that these things ought
they not to have don: I leav that to a higher Discretion: but, I may, and must
say that if the other things be left undon, ye have but washed the outside
of the Platter. What avails, if the Statutes of Omri are not kept; when other
Judgments shall be turned into Wormwood, and the fruits of Righteousness into
Hemlock? Talk of Christians! Get to be Heathens first. I can believ that these
men hope to rise again: for they say, and they do as they would be don by.

The Body and Blood of Christ; are the Sacraments of Resurrection: but, can I
think them to be so, to Them, who so duly com to Receiv them unworthily. It
is the cause, (says S. Paul) many are weakand sickly among you, and many
sleep.

If ye be indeed risen with Christ, Seek those things which are above. But do
they do so, that sit brooding upon this Earthly pelf, to hatch a Cockatrice
Egg? Or, such an one as the silly Estrich leaves on the Sand? Do we seek
those things which are above, but as we do these which are below? We can
light a Candle, and sweep the House; and balance that eternal weight of Glory,
with a falls Measure.

Will you hear the end of all? Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is
the whole duty of man. Pretend to what you will: Pure Religion, and undefiled
before God, and the Father, you know what it is: It is, to visit the
Fatherless, and Widows in their Affliction; and to keep himself unspotted of
the World.

FINIS.
KAINAN DEYTEPOS.

OR A DISPROOF OF HIM, in the 3. of S. Luke. v. 36.

By JOHN GREGORY, Master of Arts of Christ-Church in Oxon.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE DEVS PROVIDEBIT. I. Y

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

KAINAN DEYTEPOS.
OR A DISPROOF OF HIM, in the 3. of S. Luke. v. 36.
WHen to assure, even the Scripture it self was accounted but Distraction; And
whilst the holy Cares of those Primitive Souls slept securely upon the more
instructing parts of the Book of God, The Enemy came and sowed Tares in the
Genealogies, proportioning his Temptations to the more obnoxious Parts, and
more exposed to the chance of Transscription, or Industry of violence.

To reconcile the Greek Book of the Generations to the Hebrew Accounts, the
Deliberations have been many, Learned, and insufficient.

Moses says, That Arphaxad begat Sala, and Sala begat Heber, etc. S. Luke
says, That Arphaxad begat Cainan, and Cainan begat Sala, and Sala begat Heber,
etc. which (seeing that the same Spirit equally guided both the Pens, Beda.
Praef. in Act. Apost.
) I can never wonder at enough (says one) and proper ingenii tarditatem
vehementissimo stupore perculsus, nescio perscrutari.

But leaving S. Luke awhile to the success of this inquiry. Certain it is,
that the Supernumerarie Cainan is most originally to be charged upon the
Seventie, but quod nemo scire (says Scaliger) neque unde hauserunt, neque cur
potuerint hactenus caussam reddere potuit. He says that no man can tell from
whence they had it, or could ever yet give a Reason why they should put it in.

Concerning this Translation, the Traditions are, That under the Reign of
Ptolomie Philadelph, and by the agencie of Demetrius, seventie and two of the
Elders of Israel were invited over to Alexandria with the Originals of their
Law: That they were appointed a Recess in the Isle Pharos, where, in the space
of seventie two days they rendered it into Greek: That the Translation first
diligently revised and approved of by the Jews there frequently residing at
that Time, was carefully and solemnly put up and reserved in the King's
Library. So Aristeas, and from him Josephus. Philo seems to intimate as if
the Translation had been severally and unanimously performed, that is by two
and two in a Cel, as Epiphanius, and the Emperor in the Novels.

But by the fuller Authority both of the Jewish and Christian Interest, It was
Translated all alike, and by every one in a Separate Conclave. Anti ^uitat.
Judaic. l. 12. c. 2.
So Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus,
the Talmudists in Megillah Nikra. fol. 9. A. in Massichta Sopherim c. 1. Halac.
8. Abraham Zacuth in Juchasin. -- R. Gedalias in Shalshelet Haccabala. fol.
23.24. etc. And Justin Martyr would have the Gentiles to know (...), etc. That
this is no Fable or fictitious Relation, for that He himself had been there
and visited the ruins of the Cells, and received this Tradition from the
Inhabitants of the Place.

It is added moreover by the said Aben Batric, that Simeon the Just was one of
the Interpreters, and that upon his unbelief of a Passage in the Translation
which prophesied of Christ, it was given unto him not to see death till he had
seen the Glory of God. Whom when he had taken up in his Arms, he then began
that his Nunc Dimittis; Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, etc.

For the Translation he expressly affirms that the whole was performed by
each of them in his several Cel, no man dissenting from another: and that the
several Copies were all sealed up and put into the Temple of Serapis.

And yet contrary to all this one Armius ((...)) quoted in the Preface to an
Arabic Version of the Greek Pentateuch says (...). Catena Arab. in Pentateuc.
Ms. in Arch. Bodleianis.
That the Elders disagreed, and that therefore the King commanded they should
he put in prison, and under chains.

An eager and famous Contestation passed betwixt Saint Hierom and S. Austin
about this matter; the former attributing so little to the Story, that with
him The Cells and Separation are but a Fable: the later so much, That he
accounts their varieties from the Original, to be no less harmonious then
those of the Gospels.

But forasmuch as the Testimonies, notwithstanding their number and
concurrence, may be all thrust up into the single authority of Aristeas, and
that so substantially disabled by Scaliger, the most indifferent men take part
with Saint Hierom.

The truth of all may seem to be as follows.

The Talmudists in Sopherim deliver a Tradition of five Elders who translated
the five Books of Moses for Ptolomie the King. Sopher. c. 1. Halac. 7.
etc. (...) and that this was a sad day to the House of Israel, and like the
days of the Calf, etc. And the time of this Translation is to this day kept a
fast, and noted in their Calendar with a Miracle of three days darkness,
which, as they say, was then upon the Earth.

The Tradition seems to point us to that version of the Law performed before
the times of Alexander the Great, Clem Alex. 1. Strom.
as Aristobulus testifies in his first book to Ptolomie Philametor: But the
Tradition erroneously casts it upon the days of Ptolomie when not the Law
only, but the Prophets also were translated, and by the seventie Elders, as
before.

Those among the Jews who read the Law in this Translation were called
Hellenists, otherwise the (...), and the (...) Korin lemephrah. Such as read
the Law backwards as the Talmud, in Sota fol. 32.6.

In the Jerusalem Talmud it is said, that R. Levi coming to Caesarea, and
hearing them read the Shemang, or Audi Israel (a Section of the Law) Deuteronomy. 6.
(...) Hellenistin, or in Greek, would have hindered them, which R. Jose
perceiving, angerly said; He that cannot read it in Hebrew, shall he not read
it at all? Nay let him read it in any tongue whatsoever, that he
understands and he has don his duty. Sota. c. 7.

This preposterous way of Reading (as it was taken) bred a diversity of
conversation, and was the cause of many (...), or murmurings betwixt the other
Jews and Hellenists; for so we are to read, not Grecians. Act. 6.1.

For the Translation, I believ it to be that which for the greatest part of
the main body is yet exstant, and that it was performed at such a Time and
Place, and possibly by such a Number of Elders; for the Cells, the Separation,
and miraculous concent of the Interpreters, with other pompous circumstances
remembered by Aristeas, I assure my self they were all afterward devised by the
Hellenists to advance the reputation of their Scripture, against that of the
other murmuring Jews: which, derived down to the Fathers of the Church in such
a disguis of Miracle and Antiquity, and which is more then that, expressly
quoted by the Evangelists and Apostles, rather then the Original, was easily
received with that precipitation of Reverence, as gave not time to consider
what licentious courses had been practiced upon it.

In this Translation as now received, besides many other various Readings, two
irreconciliable differences from the Original have passed, the one purely
Chronological by a numerous excess in the Anni (...); The other is not so
only, but also the Interposition of another Cainan into the Series of the
Genealogies. This later commits the new Testament with the Old; The former
leaves the Old upon plain terms of contradiction to its self, and is so vast,
as in fixing the Era of the Flood to leav the Hebrew Computation many hundred
years behind; and so absurd; as to let it follow that Noah died before the
Flood, and Methusalem lived after it.

To reconcile either of these two to the Original, upon my duest consideration
of all that has been devised, I find to be of an impossible performance.

To defend the Translation against the Original, as the Romanists immoderately
undertake, puts us upon an unreasonable and ensnaring consequence: which
howsoever men corrupted by engagement may more indiscernably swallow up, yet
super-induced upon a sincere and unmixed faith, removes the ancient Landmark,
and betraieth us to Atheism and instabilitie of mind, dividing a Kingdom
against it self, and tossing the Ark of the Church to and fro, like a wave of
the Sea.

No man (I know) has more to the purpose solicited this cause then the very
learned Morinus, and yet I can perceiv that after all other stones removed, he
is forced with Baronius to report himself to the Tradition of the Church,
which, how Catholic soever, brings no more to pass then this: That the Greek
Computation has been universally received from the very beginings of
Ecclesiastical Time. There was reason for it, for it pleased God (who even in
these things despises not the ways of Men) that the Scripture might be the
sooner known, and to the more, to suffer it to pass rather by the streams, then
from the fountains, to which the access was harder, and the differences but
such as imported no substantial inconvenience in the ways of salvation.

But if universal Tradition be of that moment in this matter, then what shall
become of the Vulgar Edition, which must be maintained by that Party, and yet
cannot be but upon the same terms; where notwithstanding we find these sums
cast up, not by the Greek, but the Hebrew reckoning?

As for their Cardinal Aliac, who undertook to make good this Computation of
the Seventie by the great Conjunctions from the Figure of the World, judgment
is already passed upon him by the Earl of Mirandula. J. Picus Mirand. Ad.
Astrol. lib. 5. c. 9.


The ways of Reconciliation and defens being thus shut against us, The
Translation it self must be called in question and written upon as
Supernumerarie and corrupt.

For the Anni (...), it is evident from the method and demeanor of the
undertaking, it is not of that kind as could fall out in Time, or by
Transscription, but of deliberation and purpose, the Numbers for the most part
increasing by a Centenarie accession.

By the Original, Seth was 105 years old when he begat Enos: By the Septuagint
he was 205. Enos was 90 years old when he begat Cainan; The Greek is 190,
etc. contriving so as to cast all up into a set and intended form of Imposture.

It Is otherwise manifest by the different Traditions of this Period, not only
as it is summed up by the Ancient writers, Demetrius, Eupolemon, Timotheus,
Nicephorus, etc. but in the Copies themselves, and their Translations, as in some
Arabic versions of the Greek Pentateuch I observe, in the Russe Bible, and the
Samaritan Pentateuch; which also I undertake to be no Original, but to have
been drawn out of the Greek Fountains, as, in respect of that, I may call them.

For the Later, S. Luke I know is dangerously pretended; but in so low a
Spirited and Shifting way, as that the Evangelist must needs be a looser by
the hand.

We must speak it out, that however it has appeared in the Later Copies of
that Gospel, Ced. Antiquiss Euang. and Ad. Apost. gns. gr. lat. Arch. Bibl.
Pub. Cantab.
and so derived down to the Syriack and Arabic Translations, etc. yet the Old
Originals received it not; as also Beza has noted, more importantly his
vetustissimus Codex, whereunto I my self also can bear him Witness, that it is
not to be found, either in the Greek or Latin.

But neither was it exstant in the Ancient Copies of the Septuagint. That in
the Kings Library at S. James's I confess to have wherewithal to bear out some
repute of Antiquity, especially if it should be, as the Patriarch who sent it
over pretended, written by the hand of Tecla, a Disciple of S. Paul's. Menolog.
Sept. 24.
But the Menologie (none of the worst remembrancers) makes no mention of any
such Act of the Saint; and if it had, we know of what moment to make that
kind of trust.

But suppose the Cainan (...) to have been exstant in the Copies of S. Paul's
time, this will not be good enough security against the Testimony of Berosus
the Chaldean, a man of Ptolomie Philadelph's own time; who, Eusebius. Praef.
Evang. lib. 9. page 24.
in his Babylonish History, accounting the Series of the Patriarchs after the
Flood, sets down Abraham (...) in the tenth Generation, and therefore Cainan
could not be reckoned upon: which moreover is confirmed by Eupolemon's like
tradition of the same Series.

This only doubt can be raised, whether Berosus, though he published his
History after the times of the Translation, yet might not compose it before,
under the times of Alexander, which also were his. But if he did, then I say
that he took the Series from that other antienter Greek Translation of the
Pentateuch, mentioned by Aristolulus, and so the Testimony is the greater.

But the Cainan (...) was not exstant in the Septuagint of S. Paul's Time. If
it had, Theoph. Antioch. 3. Lib. ad Autolyc. Irenae. Lib. Epiphan. Ep. 55.
Theophilus Antiochenus immediately following would not expressly have left it
out in his Epilogism. No more would Irenaeus, Epiphanius or Eusebius in theirs.
And those that know how the case stood betwixt S. Hierom and this Translation,
know he could not possibly have passed it over, had it been to be found in
the Copies of his Time.

But neither is it exstant in the Vulgar Edition, the Samaritan Pentateuch, or
the Russe Bible, translated out of the Septuagint, for there it is (...).
Arphaxad begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber.

True it is, Ms. in Arch. Bodelian. 5.
that I meet with this Cainan in two Arabic Versions of the Greek Pentateuch,
but evidently translated since the corruption was set on foot.

But it is of more moment then all this, that it never was, nor could be in
the Original, out of which the Elders translated, and that by an invincible
Note of the Masora marked upon the place.

Nor did ever any Translation out of the Hebrew acknowledge it. Not the Targums
whatsoever, not the Vulgar Latin, not the Spanish or the Vulgar Greek, both
translated by the Jews themselves, and printed at Constantinople in Hebrew
letters; Not the Persian Paraphrase by Tawos. The Arrabick by Saadiah Gaon, or
that other by the Jews in Mauritania, set forth by Erpenius.

But neither is the forgerie constant to it self; for though we meet still
with it in the Book of Genesis, yet in the better Copies of the Chronicles it
is not found, the Projector so much forgot himself.

Manifestly therefore both Cainan and the Numbers came in the wrong way, the
design whereof, what it was, and managed by whom, I go about to show.

In the first Verse of the first Chapter of Genesis, the Hebrew, standing in
their Arithmetic for a thousand, is six times found. From hence the Ancient
Cabalists concluded, Gemara Tal. in Helec Sanhedrin. fol. 97. a R. A. Zar. in
Imr. Bine. C. 43.
That the World should last six thousand Years, because also God was six days
about the Creation, and a thousand Years with him are but as one day;
therefore after six days, that is six thousand Years duration of the World
there shall be a seventh day, or Millenarie Sabbath of Rest: concerning which
Justin Martyr to Tryphon the Jew, (...). that is, And there is a certain man
among us whose name is John, one of the Apostles of Christ, who, in his
Apocalypse, has foretold of a thousand Years to be enjoied in Jerusalem, In
the Revelation made to him.
by those which shall believ in our Christ. The same also was asserted by
Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, Apolinarius, and Irenaeus, as S. Hierom in his
Catalogue, and has been of late days by very Learned men awaked out of a
long sleep, and even now is by some, to no good ends, more then enough resented.
Though this was wont to be one of the reasons, why, the Revelation was
accounted but (...), as Cregorie Nyssen, and not called by S. John's, but the
Heretic Cerinthus his name. Other Asspersions raised upon this Book by
Eusebius, Dorotheus, Dionysius, etc. are summed up by Erasmus, and more
forcibly urged then fully answered by Beza.

I may add, that the Canon of Scripture we go by, groundeth much upon that
Enumeration subjoined to the last Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which yet
is not found in the very ancient Manuscripts. Gretser mentions one, and I
meet with another here at home. Synodic. Gr. Ms. in Arch. Baroc. B. Bod.
Nor is it exstant in Joseph's Arabic Code, where only the Canon of the
Council is set down, with a note upon the Idiotical Psalms. And yet in the same
Code, in the Apostolical Canons, contrary to the trust of all the Greek
Copies, Cod. Council. Arab. Ms. in Arch. Roan. B. Bod.
it is (...) The Revelation of S. John called the Apocalypse, but immediately
follow the Constitutions of Clement, and recommended to the Church upon as
equal terms. In a Manuscript Arabic Translation of the New Testament in Queens
College, only this Book of the Revelation is wanting.

In the Arabic lives of the four Evangelists observed upon by Kirstenius, the
note is. Observandum quoque est, hunc Autorem ne verbo quidem uno mentionem
facere (...) D. Joannis, P. Kirsten. in Vit. 4. Evan. Arab. fol. 50.
quam quidam hunc Evangelistam in Patmo scripsisse asserunt qua autoritate ipsi
videant. Atque adeo semper iste Liber inter Apocrypha reputatus est.

But the Author does make mention of the Apocalypse in these words, (...) but
this period (says Kirstenius) doctioribus hujus linguae considerandum
relinquimus. I dare not own the doctioribus, but the Reading should be (...)
and the meaning is, And the report go's, that S. John delivered up the
Apocalypse to his Disciple Phughir. So express is the mention, and no stronger
the Tradition.

But in derogation to a Book wherein too much may so soon be said, at least
enough, be the writing never so Canonical, the Argument is most intractable,
and to the usual reach of Men so intricate and lost in Mystery, that unless
the Times reveal faster then yet they have don, no man will be found worthy
to open and to read the Book, neither to look thereon.

Chap. 5.4.
Not to repete over Cajetan's Exponat cui Deus concesserit; Calvin, the Man
whose prais is in the Interpretation of the word of God, Sententiam rogatus de
Libro Apocalypseos (so Bodin report's him) ingenue respondit je penitus
ignorare quid velit tam obscurus Scriptor; Joh. Bodin. Meth. Hist. C. 7.
qui qualisque fuerit nondum constat inter Eruditos.

But this later part of the (...) concerns me not so pertinently as the
former, that is the six thousand Years duration of the World, unto which more
then what was said before must be added out of Lactantius, Sicut ipsum hominem
Deus die sexto ultimum fecit, etc. ita nunc die sexto magno verus homo verbo
Dei fingitur; that as God made man last in the sixth day, Lactant. L. 7. C. 14.
so in the great sixth day or Millenarie of the World, the true man was made
by the Word of God.

He says also that mention was made of this Tradition by the Sibylline
Oracles, the great Hermes, and the old Histaspes King of the Medes.

Joh. Antioc. Ms. in Arc. Bar^. Bib. Bod. Chronograph. l. 10.
More expressly Clemens, Timotheus, and Theophilus as they are quoted by Joannes
Antiochenus Melala. (...), that is, That upon the sixth day (as the Scripture
has foresaid) God made man, and man fell by sin; so upon the sixth day of the
Chiliad (or sixth Millenarie of the World) our Lord Jesus Christ came into this
World, and saved man by his Cross and Resurrection.

To the same purpose Aelfric an Abbot of our own, in his Treatise of the Old
and New Testament to Sigwerd of East Hoolon. that adam getacnude theontham
sixtan d^^ge geseaen aes thurh god usne h^elend crist the come to thissere
orulde [on thaere sixtan ylde] and us geedniode to his gelicnesse. That Adam
who was shapened by God upon the sixth day, betokens our Savior Christ, who
came into this World (in the sixth Age thereof) and renewed us after his own
likeness.

For this duration of the World, I think it well enough retorted upon
Lactantius by one of the Jews (...) etc. (...) that God has not made haste to
do according to this saying; for as Lactantius compute's, the Time is already
past and gone; and yet the World continue's to be as in the days of old, etc.
R. Azarias in Imre Binah c. 43. fol. 142. though some of us Christians have so
little to do, and think our selves so well acquainted with the unsearchable
ways of God, Cunmannus Fliusbachius.
as to bid our Readers take it upon their word. Mundi hujus aetatem supra sex
millia annorum, tanquam certam and immotam metam quam Deus mundo, sapienti and
inscrutabili consilio determinavit; non excursuram esse etc. And what will
become of the Millenarie Sabbath of Rest, if the six thousand Years whereon that
depend's be of no weightier consideration?

But to weaken or defend the Tradition, I have no engagement upon me. It
yields me this Observation, That in the Opinion of those which held it, Our
Savior was to com in the Flesh in the sixth Millenarie of the World.

But by the Hebrew Account, the Messiah was to com long before, as the Angel
Gabriel prophesied in the seventie Weeks determined upon that People.

It amounted therefore to this. That either the Tradition must com down to the
Text, or the Text made to com up to that.

In the Arabic Catena, and there only, I find the Imputation laid upon the
Original (...) etc. (...) that is, That the Jews cut off from the Ages of the
World 3600 Years, co conceal the Epiphanie of Christ, that their Books might
not convince them of the contrary, etc. Caten. Arab. C. 19.

I begin to think how readily Morinus, and others of the Romish Party will
resent this Testimony. Learned Men, I confess, but of a strange brow, to
pretend to the world, Chronologiam juxta Lxx Interpretum numeros subductam,
Antiquis Hebraeorum codicibus videri conformem, That the Chronology computed
according to the Numbers in the Septuagint, probably differs not from the
Ancient Hebrew Coppies.

But for the Sincerity of the Hebrew Text, the Foundation of God and man
stands sure. And for that of Julius Africanus) the only thing which has
been urged to purpose in this Cause) it shall be unexspectedly answered. Julius
Africanus says, That the Jews (...) etc. themselves delivered this Computation
of years taught by the Sprit of God in Moses, and out of the Hebrew Histories,
etc. Not meaning, as Morinus would have him, that the Greek account was drawn
from the Ancient Originals of Moses, but as Joannes Antiochenus; (...), etc.
For like as God made Man in the sixth day, as Moses expounds, Psalm. 90.
Orat. Mos. etc.
(who also has it in his writings) That one day of the Lord is as a thousand
years etc.) So in the sixth Millenarie day, our Lord Jesus appeared.

And this was all Moses had to do with it.

That the things was don by the Jews, I deny not; but, by those, I mean the
Hellenists. And I take upon me, that the Corruption proceeded not by
subduction from the Hebrew, but the accession to the Greek Scripture, and that
it was don hard by the times of the Translation, and to no other end then to
what I pretended: which was to make the Accounts fall even with their Tradition
of the Messiah coming in the sixth Millenarie of the world, as it falls out
by the Epilogisms of Demetrius, cited by Alexander Cornelius; Eupolemon, cited
by Clemens Alexandrinus; Eusebius. P. Evang. p. 248.
Timotheus and others, cited by Joannes Antiochenus; differing some from the
rest, (...), etc. But all agree in this, that our Savior came in the sixth
Chiliad.

(The distinctest Enumeration of this Account is that of Theophil. Antioch.
before the Insertion of the Cainan (...). etc. That is, Adam was 330 Years old
when he begat Seth Seth 205 Enos Enos 190 Cainan Cainan 170 Malaleel Malaleel
165 Jared Jared 162 Enoch Enoch 165 Methusala Methusala 187 Lamech Lamec 188
Noah Noah 500 Sem Sem 100 Arphaxad Arphaxad 135 Sala Sala 130 Eber Eber 134
Phalec Phalec 130 Ragau. By this Account there passed from the Beginning of the
World to the 600 Year of Noah's life 2362 Years; from thence to the 130 Year of
Phalec 529, which added to the former Sum, makes up from the beginning of the
World to the same time 2891 Years. (...), etc. as the same Period of
Theophilus. From the Flood to the time at which Abraham our forefather begat
Isaac, 1036 Years; from Isaac the son of Abraham to the Sojourning of the
People with Moses in the Wilderness 660 Years: from the death of Moses to the
death of David the Patriarch 498 Years; from thence to the Captvitie in Babylon
518 Years; from the beginning of Cyrus to the end of Aurelius verus 744. Years:
that is from the Flood to the death of Aureli^s 3456 Years; to which if we add
the 2362 Years from the Crea^ion to the Flood, the Total is 5818 Years,
Substracting from thence 192 Years, from the 42 of Augustus to the death of
Aurelius, our Savior comes into the World in the 626 Year of the sixth
Millenarie.

But the Tradition as otherwise delivered will have it so, That our Savior
must com precisely at the sixth hour of the sixth day, or very middle of the
sixth Millenarie. So the Arabic Catena (...) that is, Cat. Arab. Ms. in Arch.
Bib. Bod.
The Lord Christ was to be manifested after the end of 5500 Years for the
Redemption of Adam, as be promised, saying unto him. The sixth day at noon I
will com unto thee, and redeem thee. Caten. Arab, ubi Supra.

And therefore Eustathius Antiochenus observes, That Christ was Crucified the
sixth Hour of the sixth Day, (...), to intimate the middle of the sixth
Millenarie.

The form of the Period (as it stands to this Alteration) is drawn up by the
Patriarch Nicephorus, in his Chronicon: (...) etc. And the (...) are (...).
5500.

So Joannes Antiochenus, Eusebius, the Ethiopian Calendar, etc.

But also the Tradition especially required, that the 6000 Years should be
equally divided by the times of Phalec, (...), etc. says Eustathius
Antiochenus. Phalec in the Hebrew signifies Division; and the time of the
World's duration, was divided by his days into (...). And Joannes Antiochenus,
(...), Joan. Antio. Ms. Lib. 2.
(...). From Adam to Phalec 3000 Years according to the Prophecy. So Cedren.
p. 12. Suidas in Phalec, and Hesychius in the Questions of Anastasius.

To reconcile the Numbers to this, it was proceeded after this manner.

By the Period of Theophilus, The interval from Adam to Phalec was 2891 Years:
To this 110 Years were to be added. First therefore, and to make it look the
more unlike a cheat, they cut off 20 Years from Methusala's sum; and whereas
Theophilus had reckoned him at 187, they set him down 167; as in some Copies it
still stands. Then it was from Adam to Phalec 2871 Years. This don, they
insert a new Cainan, assigning Him 130 Years, which, added to the former sum,
precisely makes up 3001 Years from Adam to the 130 Year of Phalec. And
therefore Cainan was not taken into the Seventie, out of S. Luke as the learned
Grotius prejudged, but contrarily: which how likely it might be don by such in
whose opinion this Translation stood upon the same terms as S. Luke's Original,
is not hard to be believed.

And yet the Arabic Catena can tell you the very day of this Cainans death
(...) that is, And Cainan died upon Fridaie the thirteenth of Elul, and his
Sons embalmed him, and buried him, and lamented over him 40 days. Caten. Arab.
C. 32.

And they make him the Patriarch of a Nation, but agree not. Eustathius
Antiochenus. (...), of the Sogdians. Eusebius, (...), of the Gasphenians. Fasti
Siculi, (...), of the Sarmatians.

Cedren says, (...), etc. That he read the Giants Books to the men of his
Time, which he found by chance as he was walking in the Fields.

In Eustathius Antiochenus, He is the Inventor of Augurie and Astronomy.
(...),

Glycas, and Georgius Syncellus talk as if he had continued the Tables of
Seth. And so I find it in a Manuscript Chronicle. Anonym. Ch^on. Ms. in A^ch
Baroc. Bib. Bod.
(...). That after the Flood, Cainan the Son of Arphaxad wrote Astronomy,
having found the doctrine of the Stars written by Seth and his Sons in Tables
of Stone.

But none of all this is due to Cainan the son of Arphaxad, but to Cainan the
son of Enos, as I shall make to appear by as sound a Tradition as these,
written back to Aristotle out of India from Alexander the Great.

See the Arab. Geog. p. 23.24. de aloe^s, a like Tradition of Aristo. and Alu.

S^pher. Juchasi^. f. 3. b.


When I came (says the King) into the Land of Pharsaiacon, etc. The Natives
said unto me, (...) etc. (...) Lo here in this Isle the Sepulcre of an ancient
King, whose name was Cainan the son of Enos, who reigned over the whole World
before the Flood. He was a wise man, and endued with all kinds of knowledge,
and had power given him against the Spirits, Devils, and destroying Angels.
This Man by his wisdom foresaw that the blessed God would bring a Flood upon
the Earth, the prophecy whereof he wrote in Tables of Stone, which here we
have; and the writing is Hebrew, etc.

This is the right owner of those parts and Inventions: That other Cainan was a
man of the Chiliasts making, one with whom things stood all otherwise then with
Melchisedec.

This man had neither beginning of days, or end of life, but in the Genealogies.

FINIS.
Episcopus Puerorum, IN DIE INNOCENTIUM.

OR, A Discovery of an Ancient Custom in the Church of Sarum, making an
Anniversarie Bishop among the Choristers.

tomb effigy of the Boy Bishop of Sarum in vertical position

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

VIA VNA COR VNVM blazon or coat of arms
Episcopus Puerorum, IN DIE INNOCENTIUM. OR, A Discovery of an Ancient Custom
in the Church of Sarum, making an Anniversarie Bishop among the Choristers.
IN the Cathedral of Sarum there lies a Monument in stone, of a little Boie
habited all in Episcopal Robes, a Miter upon his head, a Crosier in his hand,
and the rest accordingly.

The Monument lay long Buried it self under the Seats near the Pulpit, at the
removal whereof, it was of late years discovered, and translated from thence to
the North part of the Nave, where it now lies betwixt the Pillars, covered
over with a Box of Wood, not without a general imputation of Raritie and
Reverence, it seeming almost impossible to every one, that either a Bishop
could be so small in Person, or a Child so great in Clothes.

Having consulted with the most likely men I knew (whereabouts I then was) to
what Moment of Antiquity this could refer, the Answer still was, that They
could not tell, and from one too from whom it seldom used to be so, the late
Learned Bishop Mountague, who also earnestly appointed me to make further
inquiry after the thing, not doubting but that there would be something in the
matter at least of curious, if not substantial observation.

Returning therefore from thence, By Salisburie I obtained a perusal of the Old
Statutes of that Church, intending afterward to have looked over the Leiger
Books. But findeing in the Statutes a Title, De Episcopo Choristarum,
concerning the Chorister Bishop. I began to think my business was well nigh don
already. And indeed a Circumstance of the Chapter directed me to their
Processional, and so I came to perceiv that the meaning of the Monument was
thus.

MATH. II. XVI. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the Wisemen was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the Children that were in
Bethlehem and in all the Coasts from two years old and under, according to the
time, etc.


The Monument is altogether concerned in the memory of this Massacre. First
therefore a little shall be said of That, and then something of the day it
self.

Here not to give Herod so many ill words neither as some do, and yet as an
aggravation of the foulness of this murder, and by the insolence of the
Martyrdom, to excuse the Holiedaie, it will be at least to some purpose to
observe a little of the Ancient Reverence and Holiness of Children.

The Title of the Day remembers them by a full and proper expression of
Innocence. 'Twas impossible to Christen the Feast more incomparably. The word
Innocence is of a vast reputation, and yet dare's not signify any thing here
below but the State of the first Man, and that of Children, and therefore thus
far suffer them to com to you, and forbid them not

He must needs have little of a Man, nothing at all of God in Him, that could
break into a Circle of such harmless and undefended Simplicity.

The Jews themselves thought nothing fit to be a murderer of this kind, but a
Devil; and a Shee-one too: that the fearfulness of the Sex might dispose to
more unrulie and more barbarous resolutions of Inhumanitie.

This Shee-Divel they call by the Name of Lilith. It is taken from the Night,
for so the word signifies first. And it will be something to you when you
remember your self of that ordinary superstition of the old wives, who dare
not entrust a Child in a Cradle by it self alone without a candle. You must
not think those people know what they do, and yet you may perceiv their silly
ways to derive from an Original much better, and more considerable then can
be guessed at from their prone and uninstructed way of performance.

That which we read, Aben Ezra (...) Castra Seba.
Job 1.15. And the Sabeans fell upon them, etc. The Hebrew is, And Seba came.
('it is a hard Book that.) The Syriack Translation is, Et irruerunt Latrones. And
the Arabs or thieves came in upon them. But the Chaldee renders (...) That
Lilith the Queen of Smargad came, etc. And Elias in his Methurgeman says, that
(...) This was a City of the Sabeans called in their Language by the name of
Smargad. And that this Lilith was (...) a kind of shee-Divel which killed
Children. The Glossa Talmud in Nidda fol. 24. b.
Gloss to Nidda says so too, and describes her to have wings and an humane
Face: You may hear more of this Fairie Queen, if you can meet with that Edition
of Ben Sira, which was Printed by the Jews at Constantinople, with the Books of
Tobit, the Book of Zorobabel, etc.

By this discourse how slight soever it may seem to be, I shall be able to
attein my serious end. For, for this reason, as especially as any other, the
Hebrew women as Exodus 1.19.
livelie as they were wont to be, yet now in dread of this Hobgobling,
solemnly observe this custom (enchantment you may call it) at this very day.

When the great belli'd woman's time is com, the Father of the Family, or for
want of him, some holy man or other (for this is required too) is desired to
com to the Room where the woman is to lie in; and then, and there he is to
draw a Circle upon the several walls of that Place, and upon the doors, both
within and without, and moreover also about the Bed, etc. And he is to
inscribe these words, (...) Adam Chavah Chuts Lilith. that is, Adam. Eve. Cut
Lilith. And so the Child is thought to be sufficiently defended.

The Heathen Stories of their Strix, as our own later ones of the Lamiae (they
are the same) I let pass. Only I stay to wonder, that it should be their
black business to kill Children, seeing that the principal preparations whereby
they Exercise, are made either of the Skin or Flesh of a Child. Of the skin
they make their Virgin Parchment, a thing of great importance, as to them, and
in which all their Spells and Charms are to be written. Of the Flesh decocted
to a Jellie, they make their Unguents, with which they do things of so rare and
unreasonable consequence. This practice of theirs as maliciously bad as it is,
yet more and more confesses to my purpose, the secret strength of Innocence,
and sanctity of Children.

Therefore by the greatest right of Nature, these Infants ought to have been
proof against the most barbarous and unhappie hand.

But you will marvail the less (and the more too) when this is added to it,
That Herod's own Son was one of the Company.

The Scripture indeed makes not this mention, but yet you have it from a very
good hand: Cum audivisset Augustus inter pueros quos in Syria Herodes Rex
Judaeorum intra bimatum jussit interfici, filium quoque ejus occisum, ait,
Melius est Herodis porcum esse quam filium. When Augustus Caesar (says
Macrobius) had heard that Herod the King of the Jews his own son was one of
those Children, which from two years old and under were commanded by him to be
slain in Syria, he said, 'Twere better to be Herod's Hog then his son. Sextus
Senens. Bibliothec. Sanctae Lib. 70.
Macrobius Saturnal. lib. 2. cap. 4.

Sixtus Senensis quoteth this Answer of Augustus out of Dion Cassius his Roman
History, in the life of this Emperor, but I do not find it there.

The same Author quoteth this passage out of Philo Judaeus his Chronographie.
Herodes Ascalonita anno trigesimo principatus sui tyrannici Sanedrim ex domo
David delevit, and Annalaeum quendam, atque alios Sanedrim ex proselytis
suffecit qui nimium videbantur in Lege eruditi, tum and Salomen sororem suam,
and virum ejus de tribu Juda, itemque proprium filium, quem ex uxore ejusdem
susceperat, interfecit, quod diceretur jam in lege promissus Christus natus.
Only the last words are to the purpose, itemque proprium filium, etc. That
Herod killed his own son too, because it was reported that Christ, who was
promised in the Law, was now born.

If this were the reason, it seems a little to reflect upon the matter of the
Innocents.

But indeed if the Story had been fully and expressly set down, it must have
gone for nothing. For this is but that Philo, which with others of the like
pretended Authority, ( Berosus, Metasthenes etc.) Amius the Monk has so lately
obtruded to this world. But the impudent forgeries of this fellow, the learned
Joseph Scaliger, Sethus Calvisius, etc. have very quickly and sufficiently
chastised.

And yet this ignorant Man is as reverently quoted by Rabbi Azarias in his Meor
Enaiim, Meor Enaiim fol. 89. etc.
as if he had written the Wisdom of Solomon.

But the strangest thing indeed is, that Josephus himself should take no notice
of this matter, not only not of the saying of Augustus, but nothing neither of
the killing of the children, a Passage very unexspectedly omitted by so great
a Courtier and so good an Historian, especially one that spared not to set
forth the rest of Herod's indignities to the full.

It is enough to draw some doubt upon the Tradition of Macrobius. Joseph
Scaliger believes it all; but yet his wonder is, that Augustus should make
such a return upon Herod, seeing that he himself did the Murder, not only
upon this, but upon all the three sons. I do not perceiv that the Learned Man
has cause enough. Herod did but cast the envious part upon the Emperor (and
officiously too) but left the main and principal guilt upon his own head, and
therefore nevertheless, to all this the Emperor might very fitly retort, as
he did, That it were better to be Herod's Hog then his Son.

But what son of Herod's could this be? It must be Antipater; or it must be
none. But Antipater was more a man then to be reckoned among the children of
two years old and under. And moreover then that, Antipater was not at
Bethlehem, nor thereabouts at that time.

I know not upon what terms to make this hold, unless it may be thus.

Herod had obtained of Augustus the killing of two sons already, and now
solicited for the third. It was presently upon the killing of the Infants that
Herod's Messengers came to Rome with the Accusations of his son Antipater, and
so both the Passages came to the Emperors ear at the same time, and this later,
for the nearness was misreckoned into the bargain.

There is another Circumstance or two, which make the Murder so much the more
concerning.

One is,

(You must not take it for a thing don: but therefore the (...) of the
expression is the greater.)

Now the Dead did bury the Dead. This blood cried so loud, that Rachel heard
it in the Grave, and rose to execute the Funerals.

Jer. 31.15. Mat. 2.18.
In Rama was there a voice heard, Lamentation and weeping, and great mourning,
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not.

But why Rachel? And why should this voice be heard in Rama?

Note here the Situation of Rachel's Tomb, out of the Arabic Nubian Geographer.

At vero Bethlehem, Locus videlicet ille in quo natus est Christus, Geograph.
Arab. Nubiens. Clim. 3. Part. 5. p. 115.
distat ab Hierosolymis sex millibus passum, and e media via ista habetur
Sepulcrum Rachel, matris Joseph and Benjamin filiorum Jacob, Quibus salus. Huic
Sepulcro duodecim sunt Lapides impositi, impendetque testudo lapidea
concamerata, etc. So the Maronites in their Translation.

Bethlehem, to wit the Place where Christ was born, is distant from Jerusalem
six miles; and in the middle-waie there stands the Sepulcre of Rachel the
Mother of Joseph and Benjamin, the sons of Jacob; upon whom be health. The
Sepulcre is erected of twelv stones, and an Arch of Stone above, etc.

So the Geographer.

This was in the Tribe of Juda, but confining upon that of Benjamin, where Rama
was. (...), Rachel, in the Oriental Languages, signifies a Sheep or Lamb, And
so an Innocent was very fitly called up to mourn over these Infants, who died
in the Cause of the Lamb of God.

And the voice of this Lamentation was heard in Rama, because Rama was in the
Tribe of Benjamin.

Benjamin was that Son of whom Rachel died in childbed, and though his Father
gave him this Name, yet his Mother would have had him called Ben-oni, or the
Son of Sorrow.

The next is,

That though otherwise there is a large Enditement of Inhumanities against this
Tyrant, yet his miserable and uncommon death is rather imputed to the shedding
of this (though much of the rest was his own) Blood.

That this world, and he parted by an unusual course of Mortality, and by the
judgment of God too, (at least in common reputation) Josephus is clear.

Severe execution being don upon the two Sophisters and their Scholars for
pulling down the Golden Eagle, which (to acknowledge the Roman Empire) Herod
had set up upon the greatest gate of the Temple, (...). that is, Henceforth he
was taken with a diseas, which seizing upon the whole state and habit of his
body, tormented him exceeding severally. A Fever he had, but not of any
acute kind: an unsufferable Prurigo over all his body, with continual
tortures of the Colon. By the Tumors about his feet you would judge him to be
Hydropical, To this a strange inflammation of the lower Belly, and such a
putrefaction of the Genitals as bred Worms; moreover then this, a shortness and
difficulty of Breathing, with a Convulsion of all the Parts. This moved those
of that time who pretended to know the mind of God, to give out that these
diseases were inflicted upon Herod for his murder of the Sophisters, etc.

Josephus has a fuller Tradition of this Event, C. 8. of the 17. Book of his
Antiquities. And if you consider the common Translations of both, you will
find it fit that this other should be set down here too. The matter will not
only be to turn the Greek, but (if it may be) to render it so, that
especially the words may signify a distinct and Artificial description of
Herod's diseas, as Josephus meant, and indeed expressed it like himself.

I do not threaten here to do very much neither: This I am sure of; The
Translators understood the matter but meanly, (and yet one of them was a
Physician too). I will do what I can, toward that I pretend to, and leav what
is like enough to be wanting to those, whom it may more properly concern.

Josephus his other words are these.

(...) (...) (...).
(...).

But the diseas of Herod grew yet more bitterly violent, God exacting this
judgment of his enormities upon him. He had a Gentle Fever, that is, not
expressing it self so much to the outward touch and feeling, as more grievously
burning him within: a strange appetite, and desire still to take something in;
but nothing would stay with him, An Ulcer of the Entrails with hard
conflictations, especially of the Cholick Gut. A Phlegmatic Humor appeared
about his feet, and Shining too; More then this, the diseas had got about the
lower Belly, and more then that, there was a putrefaction of his Genitals, and
it bred worms. An Orthopnoea, or shortness of breath, and that also very
unpleasant. A troublesome flux of Rheum, which caussed a perpetual Asthma: And
the Patient not having strength to resist these things, there followed a
convulsion of all the parts. It was said therefore by the Divines of that time,
and those which it then stood upon, to give holy judgment of these things,
that the hand of God was upon the King, to punish him for his so often repeted
horrible offenses.

Here I must tell you though, that I do not see any such extraordinary moment
or manner of Fatalitie in this dissolution.

The diseas indeed was especially complicate of a dropsy and dysenterie. The
Orthopnoea, Dyspnoea, Spasmes, etc. nay and the Fever it self too for ought I
know, were but accidents of one or both. Hippoc. de victus ration. Lib. 3.
sect. 4.


The Dysenterie ((...)) was (and the wors therefore) especially in the (...).
The Dropsy was of that kind which from the fashion of the Inflammation, is
called Ascites. (...), or (...) signifies (as Galen says) to Hippocrates,
(...), the lower region of the Belly comprehended between the Navel and the
Genitals. There the Inflammation was, and it was (...), as the Tradition says,
Therefore the Dropsy was of that kind which I said, and of a malignant State.

There is nothing make's the matter look so like a Judgment, as the (...), But
this Putrefaction of the Genitals might very possibly be an Accident of the
Dropsy, this kind especially. If it were not; it might be otherwise Natural
enough, and you may hear of it in Hippocrates, and in the very same words used
by Josephus here. (...). Aphoris. Lib. 3. 7. Aph. 21.

And yet you shall see how this Tradition has improved it self under the
Christian's hands, (...), Chronicon. Alexand p. 488.
(...). that is, And Herod being struck with a grievous dropsy, the whole
state of his Body corrupted, and the Worms crawled out. Thus he departed this
life, receiving a just vengeance of that murder, which he committed upon the
Children in Bethlehem for our Savior's sake.

Cedren has it out of another Author, that this Herod was famously known by the
Name of (...) The Child-slaier. Herod might be so called for the killing of
his own sons.

But I wonder where the Author had this.

Indeed Eusebius himself has said more then com's to his share, as to this
matter. Even he also accuses Herod of this horrible diseas, and charge it
upon the murder of the Children, but (which was the Sleepiness of the
Forgerie) he quoteth Josephus for it too.

Our own Elfrick the Abbot as unadvisedly, who having told the Story, closes
it up with this rash doom upon Herod and se yfela cining, and the wicked King
died Miserably. Photius has delivered it more expressly bad, and to no sens of
Traditional belief. I know there is a kind of well meaning in these devout
Lies; but no more acceptable to him whom it seems to concern, then the
cutting off of a Dog's neck. The Christian interest is more absolute and
sufficient of it self then to need a superogation of this kind.

The simplicity of Joannes Antiochenus is more useful here then the Judgment
of Eusebius. He tells the History of the Children out of the Scripture it
self, and then makes this end of Herod's matters, out of Clemens the
Chronographer. (...) that is, And immediately Herod being taken with an
incurable diseas, was eaten up of worms and so died. Joan. Antiochen. Melala
Chronog. Lib. 10. Ms. in Arch. Baroccian. Biblioth. Bodleianae.

But this Herod the Great, was not eaten up of Worms neither; There Is a
difference betwixt (...), Act. 12. 2 Macab. 9.
or (...), and (...). This indeed was the diseas of which the other Herod died.
Antiochus died so too: and both by the plain and visible judgment of God, the
which, where it is not very notably and convincingly revealed, it were good to
make as little use of our own Augurie as we can.

In the other Herod's case, S. Luke says that an Angel struck him. This Angel
in Josephus, is but an Owl, (...): and a German Soothsayer had told the King as
much before. Antiquit. Lib. 18. C. 8. But of this in a more proper place.

But if Herod the Great had been (...), or eaten up of Worms, and by the
judgment of God too: is it to be thought that this judgment looked a-squint
upon all the rest of this Kings enormities, and cast a full eye only upon the
Massacre of the Children?

This is but to deliver up Herod to Satan here, that his soul might be saved
in the day of the Lord. Would you have such a man thus taken from the evil to
com? Rather then so, if you would have a damnation upon Herod that sleeps
not, let him have his portion in this life. Let him die the death of the
Righteous, and let his last end be like his.

Though he may seem to you to be never so much plucked off from God's right
hand, yet you do not see that this man was written Childless: though he had
drank so deep of the Blood of Innocents, Still there was one left, and one of
his own Race too, to fit upon the Throne of Jurie. you are not to reckon of
these things according to your own angry way of vengeance. The right
profligati homines, and those that are notoriously engaged, especially in
interested impieties, are most usually condemned to prosper here, that they may
be the more secretly and justly reserved to the blackness, and darkness of
their own other World.

But if you will now, Herod shall be left in the very same case that you
would have him.

Let it be so, that he was judged here, that he might not be condemned
hereafter; or, let both be true, ('it is so sometimes) Then I believ with you
that the doom did as principally, and immediately reflect upon this Murder of
the Innocents, as upon any of all the rest.

There is an aggravation in the Number too; at least if the account be
honestly given up to our hands.

Menolog. December. 29. Antholog. f. 132. a.
The Greek Tradition in the Rubric to the Day, is, (...). That it was no less
then fourteen thousand.

The Aethiopick Church reckons of as many in their Missal Memorials.

I know not what to say to this, but if it beee so, then Thou Bethleem
Ephratah ar't not so little among the Thousands of Juda, Mich. 5.2.

It will not be much beside the matter, if here I remember you of this Story.

The Town of Hamel in the Duchy of Brunswick was exceedingly pestered with
Rats. There happened to com to Town a Roguie Fiddler, who undertook presently to
quit the Place of all the Vermin, upon condition to receiv such a sum of money
for his pains. The Burgers agreed. The Fiddler betook him to his Pipe, at the
sound whereof the Rats came all forth, and followed the fellow quite through
the Town to the River Weser, where they were all drowned. The Piper (the Pid'e
Piper they called him) came to demand his money: but the sum was now thought
to be too much, especially the thing being don so easily too, and so
unexspectedly: yet they allotted him a good sufficient reward; but the fellow
would have his bargain, all or none; or else he would com by it as he could:
They bid him take his Course. The fellow set his Pipe to his mouth and to work
again as before. And all the Children followed him out of the Town, to the vale
of Koppenburgh, where the Mountain seemed to open and receiv in these little
ones into a preposterous womb, and so closed up again, but certain it is, that
it was never yet heard of where, or how that Earth delivered her self of these
children again. The Number of the little ones was 130. And the thing was don in
Sermon-time, upon the 26 of June, in the Year 1284. as Sethus Calvisius out of
the Annals of the Place.

The special Reason why this Story is here set down, is that which fallows.
In the memory of this disaster, The Men of Hamel date all their public
Matters especially, from this Exodus, or going forth of the Children, setting
it down next to the Year of our Lord.

Ammianus Marcellinus tells of two that suffered unjustly under the Tyranny
of Valentinian, Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 27. p. 369 and 370. Edition.
Lendenbrogian.
Quorum memoriam apud Mediolanum colentes, nunc usque Christiani locum ubi
sepulti sunt, Ad Innocents appellant. whose memories the Christians at Millan
do yet celebrate, And the Place where they lie buried is called, The Innocents.
These two last digressions were not intended to be mistaken, but by this
uninterrested disguis, the more to justify the Celebrations of these our own
Innocents indeed. The several practices of whose Memories, I would have here
taken as they are received, and they shall be more justly then affectionately
delivered.

Brocardus in his description of the Holy Land, points you to the very
place where these Infants were slain. Item (says he) ostenditur locus
occisionis Innocentium puerorum.

Adrichomius and others tell you of a Chapel there about Bethlehem dedicated
to their memory, and under that a Vault, in the which these little Bodies lie
buried.

The description of this Vault you have in the Viaggio da Venetia. Al Santo
Sepolcro. Verso l'oriente glie un altra grotta, ouero caverna, giu hassa, and
stretto, ordinata in modo d'una Croce. e qui furono sepolti gli santi
Innocenti, etc. Ancora ne sepeliron una part di ditti Innocenti fra Bethlehem
and Bethama, otto miglia, lequali sepolture se vedeno ancora hoggi di. that is,
Eastward, there is another Grott, or Cavern lying low underneath, and the
passage very narrow, it is contrived into the fashion of a Cross, and here
(some of) the Holy Innocents lie buried. Another part of them lie buried in the
way betwixt Bethlehem and Bethanie, for a matter of eight Miles distance: And
their Sepulcres are to be seen to this very day.

This is all the Local memory of these Infants I met with. And it is more too
then the good Arabic Nubian Geographer had heard off.

The Day.
. For their Anniversarie Remembrances concerned in time, I do not find their
Day among the Ancient Holy Ones.

There is a Greek Apostolical ('it is called so) Institution of the Church
Holiedaies. It Is true; They are but few there, Indeed they could not be many,
as then. This bloody seed of the Church was not yet so much cast upon the
ground.

The Greek Enumeration acknowledges, and appoints S. Stephen's Day to be
kept Holy, but of the Innocents no mention there at all.

The Arabic Translation of this Constitution has more Holiedaies then the
Original, and the Hypapante for one.

And you are to rest (say they (...) upon the Festival (called) Aibubanti, and
that is the entrance of the Lord Christ into the Temple. Constitut. Arab. Ms.
fol. 67. a.

Codex Concilior. Arab. Joseph. Egypt. Ms in Archiv. Roan Bibl. Bod.
This Holiedaie is called in the Roman Church Purificatio B. Mariae. We call
it so too: and from the Saxons, Candlemas-Daie; Here the Arabic Greek word
Aibubanti ((...)) seems to betraie the trust of the Translator, and therefore
though it fall not so directly within my business: yet it is not to be let go.

It passes unaccepted against, that this Holiedaie was first made at
Constantinople, Meursii glos. in (...).
and no sooner then the times of Justinian the Emperor, if it should be so.
The Arabic Constitution does not so providently begin with Ego Petrus and
Paulus, etc. as the Greek; and then afterward insert a Holiedaie of
Justinian's making which was no less then 500 Years after.

But to make this up as well as I may.

It is certain that the Arabic Translator followed some other Greek Copy then
that which is now most usually received.

It is certain also that this very Holiedaie was very anciently and
immemorially observed in the Aethiopick, the Coptick, and the Syriack Churches,
etc. and by the name of (...) or, Ingressus Domini, the entrance of the Lord
into the Temple. So that for the Thing and Celebration it is absolutely old
enough, if not Apostolically so; yet however (and which is the matter) much
deeplier engaged in Antiquity then the times of Justinian: But for the Greek
word here in the Arabic disguis, it is not so ready to give a just account
(And yet if I should say, that the Greek word were as ancient as the thing,
though not in use and solemnity at Constantinople, till those very times of
Justinian. I know not what any man could happily say to the contrary.

And so I have discharged the Translator as I could. But as to my own matters,
It is to be confessed here, that though the Arabic Constitution makes more
Holiedaies then the Greek, yet it makes no reckoning of Innocents day at all:
neither indeed do I find this Festival in any of the Eastern Almanacks.

For however there be Lessons appointed for this day, Novum Testamentum
Syriacum Ms. in Arch. Biblioth. Bod.
set down at the end of some Syriack Translations (as well Manuscript as
Printed) of the New Testament, yet the Holiedaie is not to be found in the
Antiochian Calendar.

And though the Aethiopick Church in the Celebration of their Corban or
Communion, uses to make a very solemn and devout Memorial of these Innocents,
yet there is no Day assigned to them in the Calendar of that Church Neither
was it to be looked for. For the Coptick Almanac it self (which is known to
prescribe to this other) has it not neither.

Athanasius Kircher. Grammat. Copt. Sect. 6. C. 3. page 332
Indeed, None of all these Calendars acknowledge more then seven or eight
Holie-daies throughout the whole Year; that is, the Annunciation, the
Nativitie, the Epiphanie, etc. Praeter haec Festa celebranda, alia non invenio.
More then these I find not, says One, (and of the Roman interest too) It is
his note to the Coptick Calendar: And the reason imports alike for all the
rest. Alkas Cyriac. Tab. Astron. Arabs. Ms. in Archiv. Laudin. Biblioth.
Bodleian.
It Is true. I can tell you of an Arabic Calendar of Alkas at the end of his
Astronomical Tables, where I find this Day put down under the name and title
of (...) Occisio puerorum, or, The Murder of the Infants. But I can perceiv
too that this Calendar is not very ancient, as well by the Memory of Saint
Chrysostom there in these words (...) that is, The death of John of the Golden
mouth. (as the Eastern Men use to call this Father, and he is often so quoted
in the Arabic Catena): as also by an evident plainness of the Roman
engagements there, not only from the very great number of Holiedaies, but of
such too as expressly belong to the Relation, and the (late too) institution of
that Church.

Here I do not mean to sit as Judge upon the Holiedaies, as concerning their
Number or Manner of Celebration. I mean only to speak to you a few words of
peremptory and indifferent Truth.

1. That in the most Primitive and Apostolical times, the Calendars yielded up
but a very short, and only principal account of Saints and Martyrs; yet (which
is to be noted by some body) The Nativitie of Christ is always one, and one
of the chiefest; and moreover then that, the Saturdaie and Sundaie (would you
have me call them both Sabbath days, or which is wors, that which was the
eighth, the seventh day) were held in equal reverence of Keeping, and
Observation.

2. That the Reason why so few Saints-daies were observed in and about the
first Times, how substantial soever as for that present, and exigencie, yet
draws on no necessary Example upon us, were it not that the Eastern Churches
in a full Body, had left the matter to this Day, at the very same rate as
they found it then, without making any considerable addition to that small
number, any where, and in the most set and leading Places (as the Coptick,
Antiochian Churches, etc. none at all.

3. That it is most likely, that in the Times immediately succeeding to those
which are granted for Primitive, the remembrance of Saints and Martyrs was
practiced but in gross, at the Solemn confessionarie Commemorations of all
together, in the memorial part of their Communion, and this only by a naked
rehearsal of their good Names (as at the first) without any appointment of
particular days to this or that Saint. The flying tracks of these
Commemorations, you may discover in our own latest reformed Liturgies, or if
you would see it nearer to the Top of Time, then let your recours be to the
Aethiopick Missal: you may see that in the Bibliotheca Patrum, or if you be
curious and would see it somewhat more Original, you may Read (that is this part
of it) in the Prodromus Coptus. C. 2. De Coptit. Moribus p. 37. and 38.

4. Lastly. That the first assignment of these Remembrances in gross, to set,
and single days, and increased too to so notorious a Bulk, was very probably
the design of the Greek, but much more especially of the Latin Church, and for
the most part not so anciently neither as to be reflected upon, with any
commanding or convincing Reverence, nay nor don (when it was) to that just and
clear purpose, as would be wished for in this Case.

It Is true, So Meurfius his Glossare in (...)
The blood of these Innocents was dear and precious in the sight of God, and
like that of all his Saints. The Day of one's death is better then that of
one's Birth, as by an excellent abuse of expression, the Church has very well
rendered the Place, But do you think that a Report of this kind will make these
bones fat? ( Pro. 15.30.) your selves it may.

It Is true too, that a good Name is better then precious Ointment ( Eccl. 7.1.)
but do not you know, that these dead Flies, (with Reverence to your Saints be
it spoken) do make this Ointment (which in the right sens indeed would be
very precious) to have a stinking Savor?

Let me tell you the Truth (though I do it with an un-forward will) This is
one of the Little Follies that will stick upon you, who otherwise might be
accounted to have been Men in Reputation for Wisdom, and Honor. Ecclesiastes
10.1.

And now I think almost as much as could be, has been said against the day
of these innocents. And yet for all that it is certain that the Holiedaie is of
very old standing in both the Churches. And thus, and thus it was celebrated.

As nearer home, I shall begin with the Use of the Abbie of Oseney here at
Oxford, (it was so, but the Maps will cheat you now (indeed they are cheated
themselves) it is ubi Troja fuit.)

By the use of this Church they were wont to bring out upon this day, the Foot
of a child, prepared after their fashion, and put upon with red and black
Colors, as to signify the dismal part of that day. They put this up in a
Chest in the Vestrie, ready to be produced at the time, and to be solemnly
carried about the Church, to be adored by the People.

My authority for this you have here set down, out of an old Ritual of that
Place, and observed to me by my very good, and learned friend Gerard
Langbain, Doctor of Divinity, and Provost of Queen's College.

The Rubric in the Ritual is, Item notandum quod in die Innocentium, post
Primam, preparetur Pes innocentis, viz. cum rubro auriculari, nigroque panno
super auricularem posito, qui jacet in quadam cista in Revestuario, and postea
in Karola deferatur, ut adoretur a populo.

The Rumick wooden Calendar uses to distinguish these Holidaies, not as we,
and other folk do, but by a pretty kind of Hieroglyphical Memory.

As instead of S. Gregorie's day, they set you down in a Picture, a
Schoolmaster holding a Rod and Ferula in his hands. It is because at that time
(as being about the beginning of the Spring) they use to send their children
first to School, Adeo superstitiosi sunt quidam, etc. and some are so
superstitiously given, as upon this night to have their children asked the
question in their sleep, whether they have any mind to book, or no; and if
they say, yes, they count it for a very good presage, Sin tacuerint aut
negent, stivae eos adjudicant, but if the children answer nothing, or nothing
to that purpose, they put them over to the Plough.

So for S. George's day they picture a Horse; for S. John Baptist's, A Lamb; ad
agnum Dei, de quo vaticinatus est respicientes.

For Simon and Jude's day a Ship, because they were Fis;hers; and so (to com to
the matter) for Innocents day, the drawn sword of Herod. Olaus Wormius, Fast.
Danicor. Lib. 2. Cap. 19.

It has been a custom, and yet is elsewhere, to whip up the children upon
Innocent's day morning, that the memory of this Murder might stick the
closer, and in a moderate proportion to act over the cruelty again in kind.

Lewis the eleventh was so sad and serious a remembrancer of this Martyrdom,
that he would not be interrupted by any affairs of State how important
soever, in the Strictest Sanctification of their Day. Philip de Commines.

But the most commensurate Recollection of this days business (did not the
Superstitious part spoil the Decorum) is that, which we are now about. A
celebration of the day, and the divinest parts of that, by a Service and
Solemnity of children.

The Episcopus Choristarum was a Chorister Bishop chosen by his fellow Children
upon S. Nicholas day. Upon this day rather then any other, because it is
singularly noted of this Bishop (as S. Paul said of his Timothy) That he had
known the Scriptures of a Child) and led a life sanctissime ab ipsis
incunabilis inchoatam. The Reason is yet more properly and expressly set down in
the English Festival.

It is said that his Fader hight Epiphanius, and his Mother Ioanna, etc. And
when he was born, etc. they made him Christen, and caled him Nycolas, that is
a man's name, but he keeps the name of the child, for he chose to keep
virtues, meknes, and simplenes, and without malice, also we read while he lay
in his cradel, he fasted wednesday and friday: these days he would souke but
ones of the day and there with held him plesed, thus he lived all his life in
virtues with this childs name. And therefore chilldren don him worship before
all other Saints. etc. Lib. Festivals in die S. Nicholas fol. 55.

From this day till Innocents day at night (it lasted longer at the First)
The Episcopus Puerorum was to bear the name, and hold up the State of a Bishop,
answerably habited with a Crosier, or Pastoral-staff in his hand, and a Miter
upon his head, and such an one too some had, as was multis Episcoporum mitris
sumtuosior, (says one) very much richer then those of Bishops indeed.

The rest of his fellows from the same time being, were to take upon them the
Style and countefaict of Prebends, yielding to their Bishop (or else as if it
were) no less then Canonical obedience.

And look what service the very Bishop himself with his Dean and Prebends (had
they been to officiate) was to have performed, the Mass excepted, the very
same was don by the Chorister Bishop, and his Canons upon the Eve and the
Holiedaie.

By the Use of Sarum (for it is almost the only place, where I can hear any
thing of this, that of York in their Processional seems to take no notice of
it) upon the Eve to Innocents Day, The Chorister Bishop was to go in solemn
Procession with his fellows ad altar Sanctae Trinitatis, and omnium Sanctorum
(as the Processional, or ad altar Innocentium sive Sanctae Trinitatis, as the
Pie) in capis, and cereis ardentibus in manibus, in their Copes, and burning
Tapers in their Hands, The Bishop beginning, and the other Boys following.
Centum quadraginta quatuor. etc. Then the Verse, Hi emti sunt ex omnibus, etc.
And this is sung by three of the Boys.

Then all the Boys sing the Prosa Sedentem in supernae majestatis arce, etc.
The Chorister Bishop in the mean time fumeth the Altar, first, and then the
Image of the Holy Trinity. Then the Bishop says modesta voce, the Verse
Laetamini, and the Respond is, Et Gloriamini, etc. Then the Prayer which we
yet retein.

Deus, cujus hodierna die praeconium Innocents Martyrs non loquendo, sed
moriendo, confessi sunt, omnia in nobis vitiorum mala mortifica, ut fidem tuam
quam Lingua nostra loquitur, etiam moribus vita fateatur; Qui cum Patre and
Spiritu Sancto, etc.

But the Rubric to the Pie says, Sacerdos dicat, Both the Prayer, and the
Laetamini, that is some Rubricks do, otherwise I take the Benediction to be of
more Priestlie consequence, then the Oremus, etc. which yet was solemnly
performed, by the Chorister Bishop, as will follow.

In their return from the Altar Praecentor puerorum incipiat, etc. The Chanter
Chorister is to begin De Sancta Maria, etc. The Respond is Felix namque,
etc.and sic processio, etc.

The Procession was made into the Quire, by the West door, and in such order
(as it should seem by Molanus) ut Decanus cum Canonicis, insimum locum;
Sacellani, medium; Scholares vero cum suo Episcopo ultimum and dignissimum
locum occupent, etc. That the Dean and Canons went foremost; the Chaplains next;
The Bishop with his little Prebends in the last and highest place; the Bishop
takes his seat, and the rest of the children dispose of themselves upon each
side of the Quire, upon the uppermost Asscent, the Canons resident bearing the
Incens, and the Book; and the Petit Canons, the Tapers, according to the
Rubric. Ad istam Processionem pro dispositione puerorum scribuntur Canonici ad
ministrandum iisdem; Majores ad thuribulandum, and ad Librum deferendum;
Minores ad Candelabra portanda, etc.

And from this hour to the full end of the next days Procession, Nullus
Clericorum solet gradum superiorem asscendere cujuscunque conditionis fuerit.

Then Episcopus in sede sua dicat versum. Speciosus forma, etc. Diffusa est
gratia in labiis tuis, etc. Then the Prayer. Deus qui salutis aetenae, etc. Pax
vobis, etc. Then after, the Benedicamus Domino, Episcopus puerorum in sede sua
benedicat populum, in hunc modum, that is, The Bishop of the Children sitting
in his Seat, is to give the Benediction, or bless the people in this manner.

Princeps Ecclesiae pastor ovilis cunctam plebem tuam benedicere digneris, etc.
Then turning toward the People he sings or says (for all this was in
plano cantu, that age was so far from skilling discant, or the Fuges, that they
were not com up to Counterpoint) Cum mansuetudine and charitate humiliate vos
ad benedictionem; the Chorus answering, Deo gratias. Then the Cross-bearer
delivers up the Crosier to the Bishop again, and tunc Episcopus puerorum
primo signando se in front sic dicat. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini, the
Chorus answering, Qui fecit Coelum et Terram.

Then after some other like Ceremonies performed, the Episcopus Puerorum or
Chorister Bishop begineth the Completorium or Complyn, and that don, he
turns toward the Quire, and says, Adjutorium, etc. then last of all he
says, Benedicat vos omnipotent Deus, etc. sicut ad primas vesperas. Similiter
Episcopus puerorum benedicat populum supradicto modo, et sic compleatur
Servitium hujus diei. Rubric. Processional.

And all this was don with that Solemnity of Celebration, and appetite of
seeing that the Statute of Sarum was forced to provide, sub poena majoris
Excommunicationis ne quis pueros illos in praefata Processione, vel alias in
suo ministerio, premat aut impediat quoquo modo, quo minus pacifice valiant
facere et exsequi quod illis imminet faciendum, etc. that no man whatsoever,
under the pain of Anathema should interrupt or press upon these Children, at
the Procession spoken of before, or in any other part of their Service in any
ways, but to suffer them quietly to perform and exsecute what it concerned
them to do.

And the part was acted yet more earnestly, for Molanus says, that this Bishop
in some places, did reditus, census, et Capones, annuo accipere, receiv Rents,
Capons, etc. during his Year, etc. And it seems by the Statute of Sarum, that
he held a kind of Visitation, and had a full correspondencie of all other
State and Prerogative, for the Statute says. Electus autem puer Chorista in
Episcopum modo solito puerili officium in Ecclesia (prout fieri cousuevit)
licenter exsequatur, Convivium aliquod de caetero, vel visitationem, exterius,
vel interius, nullatenus; sed in domo communi cum Seciis conversetur, etc.
Ecclesiam, et Scholas cum caeteris Choristis statim post Festum Innocentium
frequentando. etc.

More then all this, Molanus tells of a Chorister Bishop in the Church of
Cambraie, who disposes of a Prebend which fell void in his month (or Year,
for I know not which it was) to his Master, quasi jure ad se devoluto, Quam
collationem beneficii vere magnifici Reverendissimus Praesul, cum puer grato
animo Magistrum suum been de Ecclesia meritum nominasset, gratam, et ratam
habuit.

In Case the Chorister Bishop died within the Month, his Exsequies were
solemnized with an answerable glorious Pomp and Sadness. He was buried (as all
other Bishops) in all his Ornaments, as by the Monument in Stone spoken of
before it plainly appears, the express or Image whereof I have here set down
in the dead Posture, as repeteing over a passage of that kind, which deserves
to be remembered, though it were not fit to have been don.

tomb effigy of the Boy Bishop of Sarum in horizontal position

For this Antic at the Feet of the Child, it is also a little to be spoken
to.

This Manner in Sepulture is very ancient and usual, both in the Christian,
and the Common Interest; and yet, me thinks, it is a hard matter to six a
through pac't Reason upon it.

Geographia Nubiensis Part. 3. Cli. 47.
The Arabic Nubian Geographer has this piece of Story. He very fully
describes the Sepulcres of the Septem Dormientium (the thing I think is not
so, but will serve the turn, as if it were true) and then says.

At the Feet of these Dead Sleepers, and to each of them a Dog lay to the
Tomb, his head reflex't upon his Tail.

It will be a safe and easy way howsoever (and I think it is true too) that
all these appointments of Gentry came down from the Egyptians. It seems we
have not observed yet how much of the great business of Heraldrie we have
taken from them; whereas we that wonder at this odd kind of writing, express
and turn it into English our selves. Pausanias in the Boeotica, where he
speaks of the Sepulcres of those Thebans, which so stoutly fell in the
Macedonick war; says, that their Tombs had no Inscriptions, (...), but the
statue of a Lion stood by as to signify their courage (and fortitude.).
Ptolomeus the Phaestion renders the Original of these things up to Hercules.
But that huge Name signifies so much, and so little, that I know not how to
make the Synchronism.

The matter, if it be taken from the Original, is plainly Hieroglyphical. That
People were the First, that read neither backwards nor forwards, but a way of
their own. Caussinus and others may be seen to the 37 Hieroglyphick of Horus
Apollo.

For the Thing here, The Head indeed and forepart was much defaced, but it was
not untoward to guess the Dragon by his tail, where yet I did not only make
use of my own Sagacitie (such as it is) but of that also of my Ingenious
friends, M. Edmund Chilmead, and M. Richard Goodridge, who discovered no
otherwise upon the Place.

The little Monster (I think I may call it so) seems to acknowledge it self to
some Noble Family, but I believ it is higher yet; and as to express a Bishop in
every point, refers up to That of the Psalmist, Conculcabis Leonem and
Draconem, etc. For the Smalness of this Matter had reason to entitle it to the
divinest looks they had at that time; and a child of this kind might be
thought fit enough to tread upon the Old Serpent.

In the Greek Traditions concerning the day I find not any thing like to
this Manner of Celebration. Durand. lib. 7. cap. 44. Numb. 15.
And in the Latin but very little. Durand indeed makes mention (and only
so) of the Benedictio Puerorum in die Innocentium. Beleth says as much.
Nocturnos and universum Officium crastinum celebrant Diaconi, quod Stephanus
fuerat Diaconus, and ad Lectiones concedunt Benedictiones (quod tamen facere
non debent, says Durand) ista tamen ut ejus diei Missam celebret
Hebdomodarius. Sic eodem modo, omne officium perficiunt Sacerdotes ipso die
beati Joannis, quod hic Sacerdos fuerit, et Pueri in ipso Festo Innocentum,
quia Innocents pro Christo occisi sunt. Beleth Divin. Offic. Explicat. Cap.
70. The Saxons had, and kept the day, as it seems by their Evangelistarie,
where the Rubric to the Gospel is This godspel seal on cyldamasse dag. This is
the Godspel for Childmass or Childermass day. But of any Chorister Bishop, as
to bear a part in the Observation I did not attein unto: and since I can almost
perceiv that it was not much to be exspected, and I am not to dissemble that a
very ingenuous friend of mine M. Thomas Barlow of Queens College suggested to
me as much. The Custom does very much appear to have taken its rise from the
Romish; but how anciently, I must confess, I know not. It began to loos it self
more especially from the times of the Council of Basil; in the 21 Session,
whereof it receives this sharp rebuke.

Turpem abusum in quibusdam frequentatum Ecclesiis, quo certis anni
Celebritatibus nonnulli cum Mitra, baculo, et vestibus Pontificalibus more
Episcoporum benedicunt, (quod Festum Fatuorum vel Innocentium, vel puerorum, in
quibusdam regionibus nuncupatur) etc. Haec sancta Synodus Statuit, et jubet
etc. ne haec, aut similia ludibria exerceri amplius permittant. Session. 21.

I know not whether it will be best to say, that the Reverend Fathers might
have been less mistaken, but that the Festum Fatuorum was a distinct Holiedaie
from the Innocents day is a clear case by Durand. ubi supra.

Otherwise I think it is not much to be thought, that God took any very
great pleasure in this Sacrifice of Fools.

It seems indeed to suit well with Flesh, and Cerimonie, that the Memories of
the young Innocents should be kept in store by a Holiedaie of Children, but
'twas but strange fire. The word of the Lord was precious in those days, when
the Child Samuel ministered before Him in a Linen Ephod.

All this notwithstanding you may note too, That these are not the least of
those little Ones which have been made capable of this improper excellency.

Baronius tells of an Archbishop of Rhemes consecrated at five years old. But
see Sethus Calvisius to the Year after Christ 925. yet a little further, and
that you may the less be moved at this small thing represented here unto you
in such grand apparel: I shall set down in the last place (as connatural to the
business) a Story of an Episcopus Piscis, or a Fish in Bishop's habit, you
must not question whether this be jure Divino, or no: This Sea-ghost appeared
in this form and fashion.

depiction of a "Bishop-fish"

You may find as much in Gesner and others, but Rondeletius is my Author, and
these are his words.

He had related before of a Monk-Fish, and then he says.

depiction of a "Monk-Fish"

Monstrum aliud multo superiore mirabilius subjungo, quod accepi a Gisberto
Medico Germano, cujus ante aliquoties memini, quod ipse ab Amsterodamo cum
literis acceperat; quibus ille affirmabat, Anno 1531, in Polonia visum id
Monstrum marinum, Episcopi habitu, and ad Poloniae Regem delatum, cui signis
quibusdam indicare videbatur vehementer se cupere ad mare reverti, quo
deductus, statim in id se conjecit. Sciens omitto plura quae de hoc Monstro
mihi narrata sunt, quia fabulosa esse arbitror, Ea est enim hominum vanitas, ut
rei per se satis mirabili, praeter verum plura etiam affingant; Ego qualem
monstri iconem accepi, talem omnino exhibeo, vera ea sit annon, nec affirmo,
nec refello. So Rondeletius. Not to bestow much upon the Translation, In short
it is: That in the Year 1531 a Fish was taken in Polonia, Such an one as
represented the whole appearance and appointments of a Bishop. This Sea Monster
was brought to the King, and after a while seemed very much to express to him,
that his mind was to return to his own Element again, which the King
perceiving commanded that it should be so, and the Bishop was carried back to
the Sea, and cast himself into it immediately.

There is a stranger thing belonging to this Story then the thing it self,
that Cromer who lived then, Cujus corporis magnitudo facies ac cultus, talis
erat omnino qualem videmus Episcopi cujusdam Romani.
and wrote the History of Polonia at that very time, should know nothing of
the matter.

Bellonius says, that this Fish was for all the world like to a Roman Bishop,
sua mitra, suique reliquis ornamentis, etc. What Popery in the Sea too? Away
with these Bables: it is a marvail that such fopperies should be pretended, to
the beating down of substantial Truths, (because you and I must live forsooth,)
and yet the things themselves should signify just nothing at all.

FINIS.
DE Aeris and Epochis. SHOWING The Several Accounts of Time among all Nations,
from the Creation to the present Age.

By JOHN GREGORY, Master of Arts of Christ-Church in Oxon.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE DEVS PROVIDEBIT. I. Y

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

VIA VNA COR VNVM blazon or coat of arms
DE AERIS and EPOCHIS. Showing The Several Accounts of Time among all Nations,
from the Creation to the present Age.
TO determine the Confusion of Things, Chronology takes part with History,
which interweaving the Account of Time with the passages of Story, renders
the Series more distinct, and fitter for comprehension.

Not to be curious about the description of Time, Confession. 11. cap. 14.
whereof S. Austin confessed, Si nemo ex me quaerat, scio; si quaerenti
explicare velim, nescio. It Is the measure of all our Motions, and is divided By
the two greater Lights of Heaven, into Days, and Months, and Years, Genesis 1.
The two lesser parts of Time will offer themselves in the consideration of the
greater.

A Year, though it might have been as truly said of any other Star or Planet,
yet is it now made proper to the Sun and Moon, whose Revolution in the Zodiac
is the general definition of this part of Time, so that every Month, in the
stricter sens, should be taken for a Lunar Year: but that use has prevailed
against the right acception, making the Moon's Year to be that space of Time
wherein she measures the Zodiac twelv times, or makes twelv Conjunctions
with the Sun. This course she dispatcheth in the space of 354 days, 8 hours,
and some odd minutes, eleven days, or well nigh before the Sun.

The Sun's Year is the Revolution of his Motion in the Ecliptic, which if it
be accounted in the Zodiac, it uses to be called Annus Temporalis, because
it so distinguishes the quatuor Tempora, Summer, Winter, etc. It is otherwise
termed (and indeed most properly) Annus Tropicus or vertens, because the
Astronomers of old reckoned this Year from the Tropicks first, as it may seem,
though after also from the Equinoctial's depending upon the Sun's entrance into
these Points, Cabasil. in 3. Ptolem. C. 2.
which they used to observe with a great brazen Circle planted (...), in the
square Porch at Alexandria, mentioned by Hipparchus, whom Ptolomie cites in
the third of his Almagest. and 2. Chap. which is concerning the quantity of
the Year.

If the Revolution be accounted from any fixed Star to the same again, the
Year is then called Annus Sidereus, first appointed by Thebit the Arabian, and
very much advanced by the late learned Copernicus against the unsounder opinion
of Ptolomie, in whose judgment it seemed as deceivable as to account from the
wandering Saturn, or Jupiter.

A Year therefore in our most useful sens, is that space of Time, in which the
Sun passes through the twelv Signs reckoning his Motion from under any one of
the fixed Stars (but from Aries to choose) unto the same again.

The precise Quantity of this Year in Days is determined of by all to be
365, but the surplus of Hours and Minutes has very much and vainly exercised
the most curious.

To say nothing of Democritus, Harpalus, Meton, Aristarchus, Archimedes and
others, who assigned each of them his several Quantity. Julius Cesar's
Mathematician sets down 365 days and six hours: Hipparchus and Ptolomie
found this to exceed as much as made up the three hundredth part of one day.
Albategnius doubled this proportion. The Correctors of the Roman Calendar like
none of these, and whereas all the rest adjudged the Surplus to be less then
the fourth part of a Day, Copernicus finds it to be more, and sets down
365 days, 6 hours, and 40 seconds. Censorinus therefore said well that the
Year consisted of 365 days, and one part of the sixth, but how much, says
he, no body know's. But the Julian proportion, as most ready for
calculation, has obtein'd in Chronology. Emend. Tempor. l. 1.
Erit igitur (so Scaliger said of his) instituti nostri fundamentum Annus
Julianus.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Characters of Time.
A Character in Chronology, is a certain Note whereby an infallible judgment
is made of the time proposed.

They are either Natural or Civil. Natural, as Eclipses, the Cycles of the Sun
and Moon, etc. Civil, as the Sabbatical Years, the Indictions etc. Their
importance in History is more then their appearance. Sine his, without these
(says Scaliger) omnis conatus irritus, it is to no purpose to go to work.
Character temporis (as the same Author) constituit fines audaciae Computatorum,
ut qui in hoc negotio Characterem negligat non magis fit audiendus, quam qui
negat principia. Can. Isagog. We begin with the natural Characters, and first

CHAP. II. Of the Eclipses.
EClips is more properly said of the Moon then of the Sun. The Eclips of the
Moon is caussed by the Interposition of the Earth. The Eclips of the Sun by the
Interposition of the Moon, therefore the Sun cannot be Eclipsed but when he
is in Conjunction with the Moon; nor the Moon, but when she is in opposition
to the Sun: yet neither do the Eclipses com to pass, as often as these Lights
oppose or conjoin; for then they should be Monethlie: Only that Conjunction
or Opposition makes an Eclips which is Diametral; that is, when the center of
the Earth and the centers of both the Luminaries shall be in the same line,
which happens to be there only, where the Moon's Eccentrick cutteth the Sun's
in that Line, which is therefore called the Ecliptic. This intersection is (as
needs it must) but in two places, called by Ptolomie the Nodi, one asscending,
the other descending. The Arabians term them the Dragon's Head and Tail, from
the fashion of the Intersections as they imagine it. But neither do these
Intersections keep one certain place, but moving make a Circle of 18 Years, so
that the Eclips of the Moon which shall fall out the tenth of December next, in
the 20 degrees. of Gemini, shall 18 Years hence com to pass in the same Sign again.

Therefore Eclipses being Periodical, the beginning of the World supposed, the
Astronomer by Calculation can attein to any, and all that ever have been by
the same Rules, by which he foretells those that shall be so, that if any
where in Story this Character shall occurr, nothing can more assure the Time.

Let Instance be made in the Beginning of the Grecian Empire, the appointment
whereof depends upon the Battle at Arbela, or (as Plutarch corrects) at
Gaugamele. Eleven days (says the same Author) before this fight an Eclips of
the Moon was seen. 'Twas the second hour of the Night, says Pliny, the Moon
then rising in Sicilie. Astronomical calculation demonstrateth that this Eclips
(all things considered) could not fall out but in the second Year of the 112
Olympiad, which was the 3619 of the World, the Sun being then in the 24 degrees.
of Virgo. And therefore that God in Cicero mistook the course of the Stars, who
presaged, Cic. de. Divinat. lib. 1.
that if the Moon should be Eclipsed in Leo, a little before the Sun's rise,
the Victory should fall on Alexander's side. So indeed it did, but neither was
the Moon then in Leo, nor the Sun in the East. De Emend. Temp. lib. 5.
Chronolog. Bunting. fol. 126.
For such is the assurance of this Character, that though the Astronomer learn
of the Historian, that there was an Eclips; yet where, and oft-times when it
was, the Historian might learn of him.

Eusebius and Dio set down that there was an Eclips of the Sun a little before
the death of Augustus; but by a Calculation Astronomical, the Eclips was not of
the Sun but of the Moon, nor was it a little before, but a little after his
death.

S. Hierom reports, that in his time (about the Year of Christ 393) so
terrible a darkness overshadowed the earth ( obscurato sole) that every man
thought the World was at an end. Nos scindimus Ecclesiam (says he to
Pammachius) qui ante paucos menses, circadies Pentecostes, cum obscurato Sole
omnis Mundus jam jamque venturum Judicem formidaret.

But the Astronomers find that there could be no Eclips of the Sun then, nor
near about that time; but in such cases they answer, that the Interposition was
made by some unusual exhalations, of that opacitie, which might intercept the
Sun's light, in as great a measure as if the Moon had com between; Such an one
was that Eclips (as some Historians miscal it) which was seen so often in one
Year before Cesar's death, and that of the Year 798, the Sun being so dark for
18 days together, ut naves in mari aberrarent, Scal, in Prolegom. page 51.
which was a greater Eclips then the Moon could make.

Yet neither is it here to be dissembled that the Astronomers themselves do not
always agree about this infallible Character, for Moller finds out, by his
Frisian Tables, many Eclipses which cannot be attein'd unto by the Prutenick
Tables, or those of the King Alphonsus, etc. To excuse this, we are to lay an
imputation upon their Tables, as being not all exacted from the same
Hypotheses, or not performed with like elaborate erection: Or otherwise we are
to say (supposing the Tables to be exact) that some error was committed in the
calculation of the Eclips. And in this case we are to guide our selves by the
greatest Masters in the Art. For what if Moller say that the Year of Caesar
Augustus his diseas cannot be demonstrated by the Eclips of the Moon in the
beginning of Tiberius, because the Moon was Eclipsed both the Year before and
after. Sethus Calvisius may satisfy, that neither of those could be total, as
this was, and whereas the one of those was seen at 7, the other at 8 of the
Clock at night, this was seen at 5 in the Morning.

And therefore all this notwithstanding, the Character is to be accounted
excellent and of singular importance, which Aristotle himself, not ignorant of,
appointed Calisthenes at the siege of Babylon, to reserv with all possible care
the (...), or Astronomical calculations of the Chaldeans, as Simplicius
relates. And the care was taken, yet none of these observations (though known
to be very many) could escape the injury of time, save only three Eclipses,
which came to Ptolomie's hands, unto which, himself added three more of his own
observation, serving very much to the advancement of Historical Truth, though
this be but a small number, in comparison of those many which the Historians
here and there have committed to Memory; for indeed we are not for this
matter, much less beholden to ignorance then to knowledge. We know when it was
that a Roman General durst not give Battle for fear of an Eclips: and that of
the Moon in the beginning of Tiberius, as one mentioned, Tacitus Annal 1.
as Tacitus can tell us, affrightned the mutinous Soldiers into order and
accord: And it is not long since the Conqueror of the Indies persuaded the
Natives, that he had complained of them to their Moon, and that such a day
the God should frown upon them, which was nothing else but an Eclips, which he
had found out in his Almanac.

However this ignorant Admiration was an occasion to the Men of those days,
not to leav so strange an Accident, as an Eclips out of their Story,
especially if it happened to be great, or concurring with any notable design:
little aiming at that which the reach of those days has brought to pass upon
them, which by turning over the leaves of that celestial volume, recovereth
their Eclipses again; and by application of this Character, makes as sure of
the time proposed, as if it had been written in Heaven.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Cycle of the Sun.
THe division of the Year into 52 Weeks, because it sets off one day
supernumerarie, makes an alteration in all the rest; so that the days of the
Week (which use to be assigned by the letters of the Alphabet) fall not alike
in several Years; but Sundaie this Year, must fall out upon the next Year's
Mondaie, and so forwards till seven Years; and (because the Bissextile
superaddeth another day every fourth Year) till four times seven, that is
twenty eight Years be gone about. This Revolution is called the Cycle of the
Sun taking name from Sundaie, the Letter whereof (called therefore Dominical)
it appoints for every year. It is found by adding nine (for so far the
Circle was then gone about) to the Year of our Lord, and dividing the whole by
28. So to the year following 1639, if 9 be added, the numerus factus will be
1648, which divided by 28 leaves 24 for the Cycle of the Sun.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Cycle of the Moon.
THe Cycle of the Moon is the Revolution of 19 years, in which space (though
not precisely) the Lunations do recurr.

For because of the Sun and Moon's unequal motions, the changes falling out
inconstantly, the time of Conjunction could not be still the same. This
variety the Ancients perceiving to be Periodical, endeavored to comprehend
what Circle it made in going about. Cleostratus the Tenedian persuading
himself, that the Variety finished within the space of 8 years proposed his
Octaetris, affording thereby no small direction; But the error of this was
discovered in part by Harpalus first, and after that by Eudoxus, but more fully
by the learned Meton, who, finding that the Revolutino was not completed in
less time then the space of 19 years, set forth his Enneadecaetris, within the
Circle whereof the Lunations (though not exactly) do indeed recur; so that if
the Quadrature of the Moon shall fall out as this day of this year; the like
shall return again, the same day of the 19. year succeeding. This Cycle is
therefore called Cyclus decennovennalis, and from the Author Annus Metonicus,
from whose Athenians the Egyptians may seem to have received it, as the Romans
from them, in letters of gold; from whence, (if not from the more precious use
of it) it obtein'd to be called, Origan.
as yet still it is, the Numerus Aureus, or Golden Number. It was made
Christian by the Fathers of the Nicene Council, as being altogether necessary
to the finding out of the Neomenia Paschalis, upon which the Feast or Easter,
and all the Movable rest depended. It self is found by adding an unite to the
year of our Lord, and dividing the whole by 19, the remainder shall be the
Cycle of the Moon, or if nothing remain, the Cycle is out, that is nineteen.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Ferial Character.
THe Character of any Time proposed, is that which remains after all the
Septenaries be cast away from the whole sum converted into days.

In rationibus Solis and Lunae (says Scaliger) de dierum aggregato semper
abjicimus omnes septenarios; and residuum, cum horis and scrupulis est
Character temporis propositi.

So the Character of a Month consisting of 29 days, 12 hours, and 793
minutes, is 1.12.793. that is Feria primahor. 12. min. 793. for so much
remains more then the Septenaries. The Ecclesiastical year of old, began at
Easter, the first Week whereof was all Holiedaie, the days being
distinguished by prima, secunda, tertia, etc. added unto Feria. From thence the
days of any other Week began to be called Feria prima, secunda, etc. It Is a
Character of good assurance if the Historian set down Qua Feria, what day of
the Week the Act was don. And if he set down what Holy or Festival day it
was, it is a double Character. An Example shall be the deceas of great Otho,
which, as some Historians cast, happened in the Year of Christ 972, as others,
in the Year 973, but they say too, that he died the seventh of May, upon the
fourth day of the Week, and a little before Whitsontide; but the seventh of
May could not fall upon the Feria quarta, but in a year whose Dominical letter
was E. which was the Letter of 973, as it is certain from the Cycle of the Sun,
which that year was 2.

Besides, the Cycle of the Moon was 5, therefore the Terminus Paschalis that
year was March the 22, therefore the 11 of May was Whitsundaie, which cannot
be said of the years before or after. Therefore it is certain that Otho died
that year, or else he died not that day.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the great Conjunctions.
COnjunctio superiorum is not the same thing now as of old. The ancient
Astrologers called no Conjunction great but that of trium Superiorum, when
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars met altogether. But the later finding the effects of
the two conjoined more strong and prevailing then of the three; have given the
name of a great Conjunction only to that of Saturn and Jupiter.

These two superior Planets finishing their Circles in unequal time, they make
three Conjunctions in the whole Revolution. The twelv Signs in Astrology are
divided into four Trigons, or Triplicities, each denominated from the
connatural Element; and so they are three Fiery, three Aerie, three Waterie,
and three Earthie. Nineteen years, and some odd days and hours gone about,
Saturn and Jupiter meet together in Signs of the same Triplicitie: 198 years
gone about they meet in signs of several Triplicitie, but not altogether in
complying: 794 years and 214 days gone about they meet in Signs of contrary
Triplicitie. The first of these is called Conjunctio Minor; the second Media.
This latter Magna, the great Conjunction, when Saturn joineth force with
Jupiter in the fiery Trigon or Triplicitie, which though it happen in 794
years, and 214 days, yet it uses to be accounted by the Numerus rotundus of
800.

By these Conjunctions, Cardinal Aliac undertook to reform the whole State of
Chronology, and make infallible demonstration of the years of the World.

To bring this about, he first of all supposed out of Albumazar the figure of
Heaven when the World began: That the Horoscope was in the seventh of Cancer,
and that the Sun was in the 19 of Aries, the rest of the Planets accor^ingly
assigned.

This taken for granted, he brought himself to that first and great
Conjunction, which falling out in the wateris Triplicitie, insinuated such an
influence into the Inferior bodies, as brought upon the World that universal
Deluge, as Aoniar, and Albumazar delivered out of their Ancients. By this
Conjunction he assigned 2242 years for the Interval betwixt the Flood, and the
beginning of things, but which was neither true in it self, nor following his
own Principles. And therefore we may imagine what Conclusion he was likely to
make, whose foundation was not better appointed: though otherwise a great
Conjunction may be set down among the Characters of Chronology; but rather to
assure, then to find out the moments of time; and more concerning that which
is to com, then those which are gone and past.

Concerning the Civil Characters, and first of the Sabbatical Years.
AS the Jews every seventh Day, so their Land every seventh year kept a
Sabbath, which was therefore called Annus Sabbaticus, and the whole seven,
Hebdomas Annalis, a Week of Years. These seven years seven times told made 49
years, and the 50 was their Jubilee, so called from Jobel, which, as some Rabbis
interpret, is as much in Arabic, as Aries in Latin; Talmud. in Rosh. Hassana.
for so Aquiba one of their Doctors reports, that when he traveled in
Arabia he heard the people call a Ram Jobel. Add hereunto that when the Jubilee
came, a great sound of Trumpets was to be made through all Israel in sign of
the Remissions, and these Trumpets, they say, were made of Rams horns. But
this, though favored also by the Chaldie Paraphrase, yet sounds not so
credibly to the Learned, Targum in Josu. 6. v. 4.
especially the known Arabic not acknowledging that word. And if not, then it
may be said, that Jobel signifies any Musical (however horrid) sound, so
called as Masius helps it out, from Jubal the Father of them which play upon
the Harp and Organ.

The Jubiles though by Institution beginning at the 2500 year from the Creation,
yet are Proleptically reckoned from the beginning of the world; which also was
considered by the Author, for the first year of Moses his first Jubilee, was the
last of the 51 Jubilee from the Worlds Creation, accounting from the Autumn
where the Jubiles begin.

If it be said that such or such a thing was don in a Sabbatical year, it is a
very good Character in the Jewish Chronology.

It Is an ordinary opinion that Nebuchadnezar was the same with that
Nabopolassar in the Canon of Ptolomie; But it is certain out of the Prophet
Jeremie, that the 18. year of Nebuchadnezer was a Sabbatical year, and it may
be demonstrated out of the Almagist, that the 18 of Nabopolassar was not,
therefore they were not the same by this Character.

But in accounting the Sabbatical years, this rule is to be observed, that the
same year which ends one Jubilee, begineth the next, or otherwise the
Scripture it self would be charged with error. And therefore Bucholcer and
others who were not aware of this, are not to be trusted for their Sabbatical
Chronology. Hescych. Lexic. in (...).
Eusebius himself was not much better advised: and yet Hesychius could tell
that (...) was (...) the space of 49 years.

Those who think the Sabbatical years noted in the Jewish Calendars not to be
truly so called, may as well say so of their Sabbatical days. Those who think
the Sabbatical years were disused in the Captivity, must consider better of
the Prophets words, who, when they seem to say such a thing, are not to be
understood of the simple celebration, but the Moral Solemnities, as Jer. 34.
and elsewhere. Those who think the Sabbatical years, though instituted, yet
never to have been observed among the Jews, may repent of that mistake as well
as Scaliger himself. In Frag. p. 34.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Indictions.
INdiction ab indicendo. 'Twas the Revolution of 15 years, devised, as our Bid
thinks, to avoid confusion in Chronology, likely to arise from the Common
use, which was to say, such a thing was don in such a year of such a Reign,
without considering what time of the year the King that then was began to rule,
or what time the Predecessor ended. But why this period should be called an
Indiction, the causses given says Calvisius, multae sunt quas si legas, cum
diversissimae sint, incertior abis quam accessisti. Several reasons are set
down in Sir Henry Spelman's Glossarie, out of Cedren, Scaliger, Paul Petavius
and others. The first and greatest pains about this were taken by the learned
Onuphrius, yet unprofitably. Scaliger considered of a new reason, but which
Baronius refuteth ad Annum Christi 312. Scaliger again replieth in his next
edition, and seems to acquit himself of the Cardinal's exception, Scalig. in
Prolegom. p. 210.
but cannot be heard neither by Petavius nor Calvisius, though as much adored
by this later, as slighted by the former. And indeed says Petavius, this is
one of those things which could never yet be found out, through very much
inquiry has been made after it.

Indiction is most properly said de Tributo Indicto, Cod. lib. 10. Tit. 16.
as appears by the Title in the Code. And because these Tributes indicebantur
in Quinquennium, therefore that which was wont to be called Lustrum, was
otherwise acknowledged by the Name of Indiction, answering to the Greek (...);
as in Circle, so in use; the Indiction being nothing else but a Roman
Olympiad. Succeeding times put tertia Lustra together, and called three by the
Name of an Indiction; so reckoning their years, and beginning at the Emperor
Theodosius, says Cedren, but deceiving himself, for the 273 Olympiad in the
Fasti Siculi has this Synchronism. (...), that is, Here begin the Indictions
of Constantine. He says of Constantine, for that before this time there had
obtained in the Antiochian use, a Julian Indiction. Indictio Juliana
Antiochensium, beginning in Julius Caesar, 48 years, Ante C. N. noted therefore
in the same Fasti with an (...), or the first Indiction, but as I think of 5,
not 15 years. Those of Constantine began (as was said) in the 273 Olympiad, in
the third Consulship of Constantine, and second of Licinius. Therefore they
began 312 years post Chapter Not. as only Petavius is not certain of. Therefore
the Indictions began at the very dismission of the Nicene Council; succeeding,
says Onuphrius, in place of the Olympiads, which, as unchristian, the Emperor
had forbidden.

The same Author cites a Canon of the Council, That the Bishops Rescripts etc.
should bear the date of the Indictions, etc. but to be taken upon his own
trust, for the Canon, says Petavius, is not there to be sound.

But certain it is, that the Indictions began at this time, consisting of 15
years: and if not with some relation to those three years, during which the
Council assembled, allowing for each of those a Lustrum or Quinquennal, then
likely for the reason given by Venerable Bede, or at leastwise for some other
which we know not off.

And because at the very same time the Emperor celebrated his Vicennalia with
great largesses and distribution of dole unto the people, as the use was;
therefore the Greek of New Rome rendered the Latin Indicto by (...),
distributio, and Palladius in the life of S. Chrysostom, says, that the Asian
Bishops came to Constantinople, decima tertia Distributione, And with the same
respect, the Rescript of Honorius relaxeth the debita contracta, usque ad
initium Fusionis quintae, meaning the Indiction. Cod. Theod. De indulgent. lib
6.

The Emperor Justinian made a Law, That no Writing should pass without the date
of the Indictions etc. sic enim (says he) per omnia tempus servabitur, etc.
L. Sancimus Novel. 42. And the providence was material, for the Indictions have
proved to be an excellent Character in Chronology, for the assurance of
things don since the times of Constantine.

For the time of the year, the Indictions were fixed in September originally,
as may be seen by the Rescript of Anastasius in L. ult. de An. and Tribut. And
in the 24 of that Month as the Subscriptions testify: but not alike retained
in both the Empires, for by the use of Constantinople, they begin at the
^alends of September, since the time of Justinian says Scaliger, and that in
conformity to their new year, which began at the same time: but the Western
Cesars date from the 24 as of old: The first uses to be called Indictio
Constantinopolitana, the second Caesarea, add to those the Roman Indiction,
beginning (as their year also) from the Calends of Januarie.

When we find in Story that such a thing is said to have been don in such an
Indiction, as Indictione prima, secunda, tertia, etc. the number is still to
be understood of the same, not several Circles. For instance. Pelagius the
Pope being accused of the Faction, against his Predecessor Vigilius, went up
into the Pew, and putting the Gospel-book upon his head purged himself by Oath.
This was don says the Appendix to Marcellinus, Indictione secunda. He means
not the second Indiction, but the second year of the seventeenth.

To give an instance of this Character.

Rome (says Prosper, Cassiodorus, etc.) was taken by Alaric the Goth. Varane
and Tertullo Coss, or at least, as Marcellinus, Varane solo Cos. for his
Colleague Tertullus was not chosen till the Calends of Julie. Marcellinus
adds, that it was taken Indictione octava. Orosius, and Cedren undertake that
this was don in the year post. Chapter Not. 411. but this answers to Indictio
nona, therefore the City was taken the year before, by this Character.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Periods.
THe Indictions, as the Circles of the Sun and Moon are very assuring
Characters even by themselves, sed eorum fallax est usus nisi quaedam ex illis
Periodus instituatur, but of much greater certainty, says Scaliger, if
brought into a Circle or period; which was also considered by Dionysius the
Abbat, who therefore (taking some example from Victorius Aquitanus) multiplied
the Cycle of the Moon into the Cycle of the Sun, that is 19 into 28, which made
up 532 years, and so it was called the Cyclus Magnus, and from the Author,
Dionysianus. Unto this the great Scaliger superadded the third Character of
Indictions, the Revolution* whereof he multiplied into the other two, that is
532 by 15, and the whole Circle was 7980: and this is that magna Periodus
Juliana Scaligeri; Juliana, from the Julian form, by which it measures, and
Scaligeri, from the last Hand.

The admirable condition of this Period is to distinguish every year within
the whole Circle, by a several certain Character: for, as in that of Dionysius,
Let the Cycle of the Sun be 2, and the Moon 3, or whatsoever, in what year
soever; the same never had, nor never again could fall out within the space of
time: so in this of Scaliger, let the Cycle of the Moon be 5, that of the Sun
23. Let the Indiction be 6, as it falls out this present year 1638. I say
the same Characters shall not again concur till the revolution of 7980 years
be gone about.

This Period the Author fixed in the Tohu, or eternal Chaos of the World, 764
Julian years before the most reputed time of Creation, so that the Circle is
not yet out, but shall be the 3267 of the Incarnation.

This he did, that he might comprehend all, and more then ever was don, all
Aera's, Epoche's and Terms in Chronology, and in special, that of Orbis
Conditi, which, through variety of opinion, was so inconstantly disposed of,
that Chronologers knew not where to six themselves: then also that he might
give some account for the Heroical times of those Egyptian Dynasts pretending
Antiquity many years further back into the Chaos, then the Mosaical (...) or
Beginning.

All this and more he has brought to pass by this incomparable Period, which
bringing the three Characters to a concurrence yearly, distinct and several,
must needs deliver up a most infallible account of time.

To advance the opinion of their concurrence, let them first be singly
considered.

Josephus says at the end of his Antiquities, that he finished that work in
the thirteenth year of Domitian, and 56 of his own age, etc.

Scaliger demonstrateth by the Circle of the Moon, that either he says not
true of the thirteenth of the Emperor, or else himself was one year elder. De
Emend. Temp. l. 5. p. 476.
Again,

The Chronologers are not a little ashamed that they should not be able to
satisfy, as concerning so late and famous a Calamity, as the siege of
Constantinople, by Mahumed the second: especially recommended to posterity,
not only by the deep impressions of so vast a Misery, but also by some secret
concours of Fatalitie, as being both built and lost by a Constantine, and the
son of Helen.

Thus far they agree, that the City was taken either Anno 1452, or else 1453,
post Chapter Not. they agree also for the most part, that it was taken the 29 of
May, feria 3.

The Patriarchical, as also the Political History set forth by Crusius,
equally affirm that the City was taken in the year, 1453, Chalcondyles and
Hieromonachus his (...) report, that it was the year before, but all agreeing
that the day was Tuesdaie, the 29. of May.

I say that the year 1452 had 5 for the Circle of the Sun, therefore the 29 of
May could not that year fall upon Tuesdaie, but the day before, therefore
either the City was taken the year 1453, or else it was not taken the 29 of
May; but they all agree that it was taken that day, therefore it was taken
that year, by the Circle of the Sun. Therefore also the state of the City
stood 425 years longer then Valens the Astrologer foretold, who being demanded
concerning the fate of Constantinople, erected the Figure of Heaven for the
Nativitie thereof. The Horoscope was Cancer. Having considered the Stars he
gave this Judgment, that the City should live to the age of 696 years, but
those are past and gone, says Zonaras, except he would be meant of the
flourishing state, for otherwise he was deceived.

The Character of Indictions of what importance it is, that therefore absolute
Chronicle of Marcellinus can testify. Quod cum singulis Collegiis consulum
(says Scaliger) suas Indictiones reddat, nihil habemus hodie perfectius in eo
genere. de Emend. Temp. page 513.

By an old Roman Inscription. Such an one died Consulatu Stiliconis secundo
and 7 Kal. Novembres Die Beneris o Ra Ouarta. Marcellinus notes this
Consulship with Indictione tertia, therefore it was in the year of Christ 405.
but the Cycle of the Sun for this year was 22, therefore the 7 Calends of
November could not fall out upon Fridaie, but the day before. Besides the
second Consulship of Stilico succeeded immediately the sixth of Honorius, but
the year before had 5 for the Circle of the Moon: for Claudian says, that
Honorius entered the City the Calends of Januarie, Luna adhuc rudi, therefore
the New Moon was in the end of December, which could not be, except the Cycle
had been five. Therefore the year before the sixth Consulship of Honorius was
the year of Christ 403, therefore the sixth Consulship of Honorius was the year
404; and therefore the second of Stilico was 405. In this demonstration the
three Characters all concur, but not periodically, yet to the making up of a
strange Truth; for by this it will follow, that he which inscribed the Tomb
did not know the Consul's name, though he lived at the same time. Scaliger
therefore. Quam barbari sunt and impuri (says he) qui doctrinam Cyclorum
irrident. De Emend. Tempor. p. 514, 515.

Thus much assurance we can make to our selves from the several abilities of
each Character, but which if they meet together in this Period, set such a mark
upon the time proposed, as makes it to be known from any other whatsoever,
within the duration of the world, or the whole Circle at least.
Artificiosissima Periodus! as Helvicus admireth, with many others: so that the
Author needed not to break forth into his Nos qui eam excogitavimus periodum
hanc satis laudare non possumus. Canon Isagog. Lib. 3. Yet

Salian (otherwise a great Annalist) loses a Chapter or two in the
disparagement of this Period, as he exspected it should redound, but it
falls out unto his own. The absurdness of his exceptions betraie him thus
far, that he could have no juster cause why to expose this period, then that
himself had been so unfortunate as to build his Annals upon a less during
foundation. But of what accomplishment this Period is, I think we may best of
all be judged by Petavius, the most open mouth against that great restorer of
Chronology. This Petavius says, that there is not one thing in that whole
Book, De Emendatione temporum, not liable to just reproof, this only period
excepted, then which he confesses to know nothing more important for the
advancement of Chronology: and therefore earnestly commends it unto general
practice, assuring all men that by this means, the most insuperable confusions
of time may be reduced to order, with most incredible eas and effect.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Aera's.
IN the account of Time, there must be (...), the Vnde and the Quo.
Accordingly Chronology whatsoever, fixes it self upon some certain term, to
which the reckoning shall refer. The most natural Term would be the World's
creation, from which the Jews and we Christians account our Times, though we
rather from the Redemption: Si origo Mundi in Hominum notitiam venisset inde
exordium sumeremus. Censorin. De Die Natal. Cap. 20. Some of those who could not
attein the Worlds beginning, reckoned from their own. So the Romans ab Orb
Condita. Otherwise this Account uses to respect either some great Name, or some
Notable event. So the Greeks account from their Olympicks, and the Assyrians
from Nabonasser.

These or the like Terms of Computation, Censorinus expresses by the word
Tituli. They are most usually known by the Names of Era and Epoche. They are
called Epoche's, (...) a sistendo, quod illis sistantur and terminentur
mensurae temporum, says Scaliger, De Emendatione Temp. Lib. 5. page 358.

Era (say the Alphonsine Tables) Hispanis dicitur tempus limitatum ab aevo
aliquo sumens exordium.

It was first of all said of the Era Hispanica respecting the time of Caesar
Augustus. The Spaniards to complie with the successes of their Triumvir (for
the Division assigned Spain to Augustus) received at that time the Julian form,
accounting the same from the Emperor under this Style (as Sepulveda conceiteth)
Annus erat Augusti, or A. er. A. which in time for want of Interpunction was
put together, and became the word Era. Sepulved.

To this, Scaliger. Ridicula says he, Ridicula, and tamen illi viro erudito
adeo placuit Commentum suum, ut ejus rei gratia duntaxat scriptionem illius
Libelli de emendatione Anni suscepisse videatur, etc.

James Christman fetches the word out of his Arabic, from Arah, computare;
which, because of the Spanish usage, might receiv some probability from their
conversation with the Moors; But the Arabic Geographer in the second part of
the fourth Clime deriveth this Etymon ab aere flavo, and the Saracen calls
this term Aeram Aeris, that is, says Christman, Aeris solvendi Fisco Romano,
meaning a certain Tribute imposed by Augustus, first upon the Spaniards, and
afterward upon the whole Empire.

Some (but most unreasonably) derive the word from Hera, one of the names of
Juno, so Garcios Loisa out of Hincmare, as he thinks; others from the same
word, as it betokens dominion, so they force it; they should rather have
considered that Hera in the Spanish tongue signifies time, though from a
Gothic Original, from whence our Saxons had their gere, or year, as we now
call it. And this may seem to bear some relation to the word, especially for
that Era is oftentimes used for Annus in Isidore's Chronicle and elsewhere. Sir
Henry Spelman's Glossarie may be seen in this word. Scaliger, Petavius,
Calvisius and others confirm, that Era in old Latin signified as much as
Numerus, and it is manifest enough out of Nonius Faustus Regiensis, and Cicero
himself; and this they hold to be the most likely derivation of the word, if
it be, yet he that first observed it was Resendius a Spaniard, in an Epistle
to a friend of his, who required his Opinion concerning the Era Hispanica.

But because this Etymon does no way intimate why that use of the word should
be peculiarly taken up among the Spaniards (except it were true which Scaliger
considered that it was in use elsewhere, but against which Petavius has given a
probable reason) the Notation in the Glossarie would rather be taken, and so
it may be a word of the Gothic derivation, translated thence to the Spanish
use, and properly said of their Epoche, but now the common name of all others.

Those Aera's or Epoche's are severally to be fixed, and first of all that of
Orbis Conditi.

CHAP. V. Era Orbis Conditi.
MUch question has been made among the Chronologers, in what time of the Year
the World should begin, and more, as some think, then needed. Not so, for beside
that for either reason also this ought not to be indifferent to learned men,
yet in Chronology it imports necessarily that the (...) (as it is therefore
called) be assured to some certain time, wherein the Account shall determine;
seeing therefore it was necessary that some one term or other must be taken,
why not the true to choos?

If the Question were asked indefinitely, whether the World began in the
Spring, the Summer, the Winter or the Autumn, the answer must be, That it
began in all. For so soon as the Sun set forth in his Motion, the seasons
immediately grew necessary to several positions of the Sphere, so divided
among the parts of the Earth, that all had every one of these, and each one or
other at the same time.

The Question therefore is to respect some particular Horizon; and because it is
not doubted, but that the Sun first to this upper Hemisphear, and in special
from the Horizon of our first Parents; The Quere is to be moved concerning
the Holie-Land; at what time of the year the World there began.

It Is agreed upon by all, that it began in some Cardinal point; that is, that
the Motions began from the Eastern Angle of the Holie-Land, the Solstitial or
Aequinoctial points one or other of them asscending in the Horoscope. Nay,
Mercator excepted, scarce any man doubts but this point was Aequinoctial,
either in the Spring, or Autumn. Whether in this or that, was anciently a great
Question between the Doctors Eliezer and Joshua, as the Seder Olam relates.

Scaliger Joseph, and (because he did) Sethus Calvisius, Torniellus and others,
fix this beginning in the Autumn, which also was the Opinion of our Bacon long
ago.

But the Father Julius was not of his son's mind. Mundum (says he) primo
vere natum Sapientes autumant, and credere par est. So the more part Maintein,
and for the best reasons. And if it were not otherwise evident, Nature it self
is very convincing, whose Revolutions begin and end in the vernal Aequinox. Nor
can any other good reason be given why the Astronomers should deduce all
their Calculations from the Head of Aries.

The Era of the Flood falls within the 1656 year of the Worlds Creation, as
the Hebrew Scripture is plain, why it is otherwise in the Greek account shall
be said hereafter.

CHAP. VI. Nabonassar's Era.
WAs of all profane ones of the greatest note and use. Altraganus Albategnius
and the King Alphonso's Tables call him Nebuchadonosor, or Nebuchadnezar,
deceived as it seems by the Almagest. So Ptolomie's Book entitled (...), or
Magnae Constructionis, is called by the Arabic Translators Althazor and Serig,
who, at the instance of Almamon their King, turned this book into that
language, and that they might speak Ptolomie's title in one word, they set down
Almageston, that is the (...), or the Great Work. The Translators of this
Almagest use to render Ptolomie's Nabonassar by Bechadnetzer, giving too much
heed to the likeness of Names. Alfraganus and Albategnius followed the Arabic
Translation of Ptolomie, and the Alphonsine Tables, the Latin Translation of
that.

Mercator, Funccius, the Prutenick Tables; Origanus and many others confound
this Name with Shalmanesser's, the Assyrian King. But James Christman makes
demonstration that the times agree not, besides other circumstances added by
Scaliger inducing the same truth, with the evidence whereof Origanus holding
himself convinced was not ashamed to make his retractation.

Yet Christman and Scaliger themselves found it an easier matter to tell who
Nabonassar was not, then who he was. It seemed to Christman, that he might
be the same with Beladan the father of Merodach, or at least that he was a
King of Babylon, whose own name was unknown, Nabonassar being the Royal Name
of that Kingdom, as he thinks, and common to them all. Scaliger puts this
together, and assuring himself that Nabonassar was the same with Beladan,
makes no doubt but that was the name of the King, this of the man. So the 5
book of his Emendations, but the third of his Isagogical Canons, confesses
this also to be a mistake.

This Error was first discovered by the Appearance of Ptolomie's Canon, which
sets down a List of the Babylonish, Persian and Roman Kings, from
Nabonassar's time, to the time of Ptolomie. Mention was made of this Canon by
Panodorus, Anian, and George the Syncellus, amongst whom Scaliger (but lately
and not entirely) met with it. Sethus Calvisius received a Transcript of a more
perfect Copy, from D. Overal, Dean of S. Paul's; the Original whereof is
exstant in Biblioth. Bodlian. and set out with Ptolomie's Hypothesis by D.
Bambrigge.

The Canon begineth, Kanon asileion
(...) id. Nabonassari 14. (...) b Nadii 2 (...) e Chinceri and Pori 5 (...) e
Jugaie 5 (...) ib Mardocempadi 12 etc.

Nabonassar therefore was King, not as some thought of Egypt, but Babylon; who
for delivering his People from the subjection of the Medes, was made the Era
of their Kingdom; from whom the Chaldeans (and the Egyptians therefore)
accounted their Celestial Calculations. For his Synchronism, The Canon sets
him down the fifth before Mardocempad or Merodach-cen-pad, the same with
Meredach Baladan, who sent Messengers to K. Ezechia to enquire concerning the
Retrocession of the Sun. But for a more certain demonstration of the time,
three Lunar Eclipses noted by Hipparchus, are set down by Ptolomie in the
fourth of his Almagest. The first was seen at Alexandria the 16 day of Mesori,
in the 547 year of Nabonassar. This Eclips by the Julian Calculation and Tables
of Calvisius, fell out upon Fridaie the 22 of September, at 7 of the Clock in
the afternoon, and 20 minutes; the Sun then being in the 26 of Virgo. It was
the Year 4513 of the Julian Period, that is the 3749 from the Worlds Creation,
out of which if we deduct the 547 years of Nabonassar, the remainder will be
3203, the year of the Worlds Creation, wherein this Era was fixed; The day as
the King Alphonsus, and before him the Translators of the Almagest have
delivered, was Dies Thoth, or Mercurii; answering to the 26 of the Julian
February, beginning (so Ptolomie) at high noon, the Sun then entering into
Pisces, and the Moon, being in the 11 degree and 22 minutes of Taurus. And the
same conclusion will follow from the two other Eclipses, reduced in like manner
to our Calculation.

And to put all out of doubt, Censorinus says that the 986 Year of Nobonassar
was the 238 of Christ, but that was the 4951 of the Julian Period. Therefore
Nabonassar's Era began in the 3967 year of the same Period, which was the 3203
Year from the World's* Creation. So that the Era is undoubtedly assured.

This Era still accounts by Epyptian years, which are therefore called Anni
Nabonassarei, and because it began upon Wednesdaie, the first day of their
first Month, which (as the day it self) they hold holy to Thoth or Mercury)
uses to be called Nabonassar's Thoth.

CHAP. VII. The Era of the Olympiads.
THe Olympic Games were instituted for the exercise of the Grecian Youth, by
Hercules (as the Tradition go's) to the honor of Jupiter Olympius, near unto
whose Temple they were performed in the Olympian field. The Exercise was called
Pentathlon, or Quinquertium, from the fivefold kind. The Victor was crowned
with an Olive, and triumphantly carried in a Chariot into his own City, and,
which is to the purpose, his name was publicly recorded.

The time was (as only Pindar has revealed) at the full Moon which followed
the Summer Solstice. They were celebrated every fifth year; and the Interval
was called an Olympiad, consisting of 4 Julian years, and the odd Bissextile
day, which was the cause, as some think, why this form of year was first
introduced.

The first Celebration by Hercules vanishing in the Intermissions, grew to be
less famous then the restitution by Iphitus, whereof so much more notice has
been taken then of the other, that this which was many years after, is yet
accounted for the first Olympiad. The time or Era whereof is assured by the
Character of that extraordinary Eclips, which the Sun suffered with our
Savior, noted by Phlegon to have happened in the 202 Olympiad, which
multiplied by four makes 808 years, between the first Olympiad, and the
Passion of Christ.

Besides that, Thucydides reports that in the first year of the
Peloponnesiack War, on a summer's day in the afternoon, there happened an Eclips
of the Sun, so great an one, as that the Stars appeared. This Eclips, by
Astronomical Calculation, is found to be the second day of Julie, in the year
before Christ 463, at which time (as Crusius calculateth) the Sun was Eclipsed
in the 6 of Leo, half an hour after 5 in the afternoon, the digits of the
Eclips were 9, and four third parts, therefore almost one fourth part of the
Sun was visible, respecting the Horizon of Athens, but in Thrace the Eclips was
well nigh total; so that the Stars were seen.

This therefore was that Eclips which Thucydides says was seen in the first
year of the Peloponnesiack war.

In the fourth Year of the same War, the same Author says that Donius Rhodius
wan the Prize in the Olympicks, and this was the fourth year of the 87
Olympiad, and that was the 460 year before Christ. If therefore the 87
Olympiads be multiplied by 4, they become 348 Julian years, which if they be
added to 460, the total will be as before, 808 years, or the 202 Olympiad
before the Passion of Christ.

Again Thucydides reports, that in the 19 year of the Peloponnesiack War, the
Moon was Eclipsed, and this was as Diodorus Siculus relates in the fourth year
of the 91 Olympiad. That Eclips of the Moon, as Crusius calculateth, fell out
upon the 27 day of August, in the 445 year before the Passion of Christ. If
therefore 90 Olympiads be multiplied by 4, they make up 360 Julian years, to
which also must be added the three first years of the 91 Olympiad, and then
they are 363, which added to 445, make up 808 years before the Passion of our
Savior, which falls with the 3173 year of the World, and is the Era of the
Olympiads.

CHAP. VIII. Era Vrbis Conditae.
THe Italians, by an old custom, used to account their years from the time of
their first Plantation; yet in this the lesser towns were more happy then the
Mother City: Rome her self not having attein'd to know her own beginning, til
Cato's time; who considering the absurdity, searched the Censor's Tables, and
bringing down the account to the first Consuls, got within a little of Vrbs
Condita. It rested only to make good the Interval from the Regifugium to the
Palilia; so the Era of the first foundation is called from the Rites done to
Pales Pastorum Dea, the Shepherds Holiedaie as we may call it, celebrated the
same day the City was built. Propertius Lib. 4.

Vrbi festus erat, dixere Palilia, Patres
Hic primus coepit moenibus esse dies.
The Interval, as Cato found it, amounted to 243 years, Terence Varro (who at
the same time studied the point) reckoned one year more; and from thence, says
Scaliger, in factiones duas res discessit, there became two sides, one for the
Catonian Palilia, the other for the Varronian; though Petavius (that
Scaligero-mastix) affirms that the former was not Cato's opinion; and Sethus
Calvisius demonstrateth that they were both but one.

This Epilogism was found out by Tarutius (or as he is more rightly called (
Taruntius Firmanus, a great Astrologer of those days, who at the solicitation
of Varro cast the Nativitie of Rome; which to recover, he first of all tried
for the Founders Horoscope. To attain to this, he entered into a consideration
of the main actions of his life; and be, cause he had understood by Tradition
that there happened an Eclips when Romulus was conceived in the womb, he went
the Hermetical way, as that is called, to find out the Nativitie by the
conception.

After consultation with the Stars, and a due comparison of this with what was
otherwise known, (...), he confidently pronounced this Judgment.

That Romulus was conceived in the first year of the second Plutar. in Roma.


Olympiad, the 23 day of the (Egyptian) month Choeac, at the third hour of
the day, the Sun being then totally Eclipsed. That he was born the one and
twentieth of the Month Thoth, about the Sun rising. That the Foundation of
Rome was laid the ninth day of Pharmuth between two and three a clock in the
morning, the Moon being then in Jugo. So the Astrologer.

Otherwise the Tradition was (which also Taruns considered) that the Foundation
of Rome was laid in the third year of the sixth Olympiad, the Sun and Moon then
being in an Ecliptical conjunction, which defection was noted by Antimachus
the Teian Poet.

For the first Eclips, as his Tables (which are said to be those of
Hipparchus) directed him, it fell out in the first year of the second Olympiad,
upon the 23 day of the Month Choeac, which answers to the 24 of June at
three a clock in the morning. Yet according to Tyche, Ptolomie's, and the King
Alphonsus their Tables, the latitude was then so great that there could be no
Eclips at that time. So Sethus Calvisius and others. Nicolas Muller pretended,
that this Eclips could not be found out by the Prutenick Tables, but by the
Frisian, which he was then about (his own and more elaborate) he promises to
account for it. Calvisius answers, that the Prutenick Tables according to
Copernicus his Hypotheses were most exactly performed, and that he doubted
Muller could not stand to his word. Yet since that Muller has calculated this
Eclips, and found it to be by his Frisian Tables, according as the Astrologer
set down.

Henry Bunting finds it in the second year of the second Olympiad, one year
later then the Astrologer. And this may seem to be nothing out of the way.
For Dionysius Halicarnassius reports, that Romulus as he came not into the
world, so he went not out without an Eclips. Now Romulus reigned 37 years, at
which very time the Sun was Eclipsed, upon Saturdaie the 26 of May about 7 of
the clock in the afternoon* the Sun then setting at Rome; and the greatest
absurdity Calvisius could find in this was, that it sets off but 18 years
for the age of Romulus at the building of Rome; which as he think's could not
make him mature enough for the importance of this undertaking; but considering
all other circumstances agree so well, the Acception is unjust enough.

For the other Eclips pretended to be at the Foundation of the City. Nicolas
Muller finds that also in his Frisian tables, yet confesses it could not be
seen at Rome; but in Asia 'twas visible he says, and so might be known to
Antimachus.

And this makes something for the Astrologer, who (as Cicero cites him) found
the Moon at the Foundation in Jugo, that is, as Solin may seem to interpret it,
in Libra; the rather, because the Poet Manilius says, that Rome was built in
Libra. So Petavius: but Solinus (though he knew not what he said) yet says
too, That the Sun was then in Taurus, which is demonstrated by Bunting, and
moreover, that it was in the twentieth degree; and therefore the more learned
Scaliger and his Calvisius interpret the Astrologers in Jugo, to be the same
which is now said in Nodo, which is as much as to say, that the Sun and Moon
were then in Conjunction, as Muller says well, and that the Sun was intra
terminos Eclipticos, within the Ecliptic terms at Rome, but not so far as to
make the defection visible in that Horizon.

Howsoever the Astrologer according to his Calculation set down that Rome was
built in the third year of the sixth Olympiad, which Terence Varro took for his
resolution; and so reckoned from the Regifugium to the Palilia 244 years;
Marcus Cicero, Titus Pomponius Atticus and the Emperor Augustus approving the
Epilogisms, and besides them Plutarch, Pliny, Paterculus and others, and 'twas
the received opinion; and is infallibly demonstrated in Mercator's Chronology,
by eight several celestial Characters or Eclipses, which calculated to
Nabonassar's Era fall even with the Astrologer. To say nothing of Crusius, who
has don something to the same purpose, or Peter Appian, who evinceth the same
(I say not how truly) out of the Figure of the Heavens, which Turnus found
(but as Julius Solinus describes it) at the laying of the Foundation, Verrius
Flaccus in the Fasti Capitolini sets down Rome built in the fourth year of
the sixth Olympiad, one year later; and the Canons of Eratosthenes in the first
year of the seventh Olympiad one year more, or rather but one in all; for the
Registers of the Capitol agree with Cato, and he differs nothing from Varro,
if Calvisius may be Judge.

Therefore altogether neglecting Temporarius his morosisitie (who was so far
out of conceit with Turnus, that he would not believe that there was ever such
a man as Romulus) we say that Rome was founded in the third year of the sixth
Olympiad which was in the year of the Worlds Creation 3198, and before the
Incarnation 750.

CHAP. XI. Era Septimanarum Septuaginta, the seventie Weeks.
THis Era was fixed by the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 9. Seventie Weeks (says he to
the Prophet) are determined upon the People, etc. verse 24. Know therefore and
understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment, to restore and build
Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven Weeks, and threescore
and two Weeks, etc. And after threescore and two Weeks shall Messiah be cut
off, but not for himself; and the people of the Prince that shall com shall
destroy the City and the Sanctuary, etc. And he shall confirm the Covenant
with many for one Week, and in the midst of the Week he shall cause the
Sacrifice and the Oblation to ceas, and for the overspreading of abominations
he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, etc. So the Angel.

The Weeks are to be understood not of days, but Years; and those not of the
Moon, but the Sun; and so 70 by 7 is 490 years, from the time of the going
forth of the Commandment etc. unto the Abomination of desolation. But where to
begin or end this Epilogism, is the vexata Quaestio, as Scaliger cal's it, a
question that has endured the greatest controversy, involved with
circumstances of such notable intricacie, that a Scholar of very great parts
('it is reported by one that knew the man) fell mad with studying how to make
this good.

Some reckon the Epilogism from Cyrus, others from Darius Hystaspis, and some
from the seventh, others from the 20 of Artaxerxes Longimanus, accordingly
ending the Weeks, some at the profanation of the Temple by Antiochus, others at
the destruction of the Temple by Pompey, or that of Herod, or else at the
Passion.

The truest of the false, is that which begineth at the seventh year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, and ends in our Saviors Passion: for this makes a
good account of the years. It was the opinion of the learned Bunting, Funccius,
etc. but that which I perceiv to be rested upon, is the judgment of Scaliger
followed by Calvisius, and this begineth the Epilogism at the second year of
Darius Nothus, and determines it in the final destruction of Jerusalem by
Titus. For the Angel says expressly, that after seven Weeks and sixty two
weeks, the Messiah being cut off, the holy City shall be destroyed etc. and
that in the middle of the seventieth week the Sacrifice and Oblation shall
ceas, and for an overspreading of abomination, etc. which is plainly called by
our Savior, the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet
etc. and therefore no question, but the feventie Weeks are to end with the
Holy City. Their beginning was to be from the time of the going forth of the
Commandment, etc. And this, though such an one was given first by Cyrus, and
thirdly by Artaxerxes, yet most purposely from Darius Nothus in the second year
of his reign. The 13 year of Darius Nothus is the 20 of the Peloponesiack war
by Thucydides that was the 92 Olympiad, and this was the 3538 from the Worlds
Creation, or 4302 of the Julian Period, therefore the 2 year of Darius Nothus
was the 4290 of the Julian Period, and that was the 3562 from the worlds
Creation. The Cycle of the Sun was 6 and the Moon 15. And the Interval is
expressly 490 years. For the Holy City was destroyed in the seventieth year
of the Incarnation, which was the 4019 from the Worlds Creation, and the 4783
of the Julian Period; the Cycle of the Sun was 23, and the Moon 14.

CHAP. X. Era Alexandrea,
WHat time Seleucus began to succeed in his part of the Empire of Asia, The
Greeks disusing their Olympian account, set up a new Era, which though it
reckoned from the reign of Seleucus, yet it bare the name of the conqueror
from whom it was called Era Alexandrea Graecorum, or Syr^ Macedonum. Seleucus
began to reign twelv years after the death of Alexander, as appears by
Alba^egnius and the Almagest; which consents also to Diodorus Siculus, who
affirms that the first year of Seleucus was the first of the 117 Olympiad.

Therefore this Era was fixed in the 4402 of the Julian Period, which was the
3638 from the world's Creation; the Cycle of the Sun was 6, and the Moon 13.
The Era was fixed says Scaliger (though Petavius will not yield it) by
Calipus of Cyzicum, who finding that Meton's ciclus decennovenalis exceeded the
Moon's Revolution one quadrant of a day, put four of these together, and
detracting from thence one whole day for the quadruple excess of hours, gave
an exacter account of the Lunations then before.

This Cycle the Author to the honor of Alexander began the 28 of June, in the
Summer Solstice at the new Moon, which followed the fight at Gangamele. And
this was in the year of the world 3619 as the Eclips assures which happened
eleven days before, but because this fell out to be in the second year of that
Olympiad, Calippus altered his mind, and stayed nineteen years to make his
Period concur; but Alexander deceasing within seven years, the Era could not
begin till twelv years after, which was the first of the reign of Seleucus, and
3638 of the World.

CHAP. XI. Era Dhilcarnian
IS the same with the Alexandrea Graecorum, and has nothing proper but the
Name, which it self also is nothing but Alexander in other words as by the
Arabic Geographer and otherwise it is made known. Dhilcarnain, that is,
habentis duo cornua, as Albumazer's Translator expresses it. So Alexander was
called with relation to the Ram in Daniel's Vision as some divine, but then they
are fain to read it Ailcarnain, not considering that it is not the word in
Arabic as in Hebrew, for a Ram, the Arabians if they had meant thus, would
have said not Aiie, but Hamelcarnain; but let that pass, for the word written
in it is own language manifestly imports no more then one that has two horns.

So Alexander, says Christman, might be called either for that his Empire was
bipartite into Asia and Syria, (which is not altogether so true) or otherwise,
for that he joined the East and West together with Conquests, holding as it
were the two Horns of the World in his Victorious hands.

And this he says, because as Hercules in the West, so Alexander set up two
Pillars for a non ultra to the Eastern World. The Arabians themselves say more;
For though the more commonly known Historians of this Conqueror Q. Curtius and
Arrian out of his Ptolomie and Aristobulus take no notice of Alexander's
falling in the Western World, ( Cedren excepted, wheresoever he had it) yet
the Arabic Geographer doubts not to affirm, that he was the man by whose
appointment and Design that Isthmos Gaditane^s was cut out, and the Atlantic
Ocean let into the Mediterranean, so making that Straight or Fretum (therefore
not to be termed Herculeum) now called the Sreights of Gibralter, or as it
should be Gebal Tarec, that is Tarec's Hill, so called says the Arabic
Geographer from Tarec the Son of Abdalla, who having transported his Barbarians
over the Straight, secured his Army with the Natural fortification of that
Place. Geographus Arabs. 1. par. cl. 4.

But why Alexander should be called Dhilcarnain or habens duo cornua,
Scaliger's reason is beyond exception, and which Petavius himself could not
choos but commend. Alexander to raise himself a reputation of Divinity,
suborned the Priest to entitle him the son of Corniger Ammon, thenceforth the
Cyrenians, who had formerly used to express this Jupiter horned in their Coins,
transferred this honor to the Conqueror, and so the reputed son, as the Father
was known by the name of Corniger which when it came to the Arabians was to be
said as here it is Dilcarnian.

CHAP. XII. The Jews Era.
ALexander the Great with his Grecian Army marching toward Jerusalem with all
intention of hostility, the High Priests and Levites came forth to meet him,
all in their Holy Garments. The King beholding this reverent Assembly, made
an approach himself alone, and drawing near to the High Priest fell down and
worshipped. The Captains wondering to see the son of Jupiter Ammon, who had
given command that all men should worship him, himself to fall down to a Jew,
Parmenion drew near and made bold to ask him the question. To whom Alexander;
It Is not the Priest says he, but his God whom I adore, and who in his very
habit appeared unto me long ago at Dius in Macedonia, and encouraged me in my
undertakings for the Empire of Asia. This don, the King ascended the Temple,
where Sacrifice first don to God, the prophecy of Daniel was brought forth,
the high Priest turning to that place which foretells of a mighty Prince of
Graecia that was to conquer the Persians, which, the circumstances well
agreeing, the King readily applied unto himself, and so departed very well
pleased, and full of hope, leaving the People to their Ancient peace.
Antiquitat. Lib. 11.
So their Historian Josephus; and the Book Taanith Cap. 9.

But it is added moreover by Abraham the Levite in his Cabala, that the High
Priest by way of acknowledgment made faith to the King, that all the children
which should be born that year to the holy Tribe should be called by his
Name; and moreover that from the same Time they would henceforth compute their
Minian Staros, or Era of Contracts, etc. fol. 3.

CHAP. XIII. Era Dionysiana Philadelphi.
A Celestial year is such an one as keeps touch with the Sun, the Months
whereof begin at his entrance into the Signs precisely, and especially serving
for the Prognostication of the Seasons. Such a kind of year Dionysius an
Astrologer in Egypt set up after the example of Metan and others; (as by Theon
it is noted upon Aratus.) The Era whereof he fixed in the first year of the
famous Ptolomie, surnamed Philadelph. It Is often cited in the Almagest, which
also gives Testimony that this Era began in the 463 of Nabonassar's Thosh,
Ptolm. lib. 10. C. 4. and 5 Almagesti.
which was the fourth year of the 123 Olympiad, answering to the 4429 of the
Julian Period, which was the 3665 of the world's Creation. The Cycle of the Sun
was 5, and the Moon 2.

But neither was this this year of Dionysius merely celestial, 'twas also
civil, as Scaliger discovers* yet of no greater use in History to reconcile
one place in that golden book (as the same Author terms it) of Jesus the son
of Sirach. That wise man says that in the 38 year when Evergetes was King, he
came into Egypt, etc. but how could that be, says Scaliger seeing this
Ptolomie reigned but 26 years. To say as some do that he meant the years of
his own life, Emendat. Temp. lib. 5.
or the life of Evergetes, is rather to excuse the Author, then interpret him.
And therefore it is to be said that he refers to the Dionysian Account, in
the 38 whereof he might com into Egypt in the time of Evergetes. And therefore
Petavius upon his Epiphanius first, and again in his Doctrina Temporum, had
little reason to fall so foully upon the much more learned Author of this and
many other admired Revelations.

CHAP. XIV. Era Hispanica.
JVlius Caesar in the fourth of his Dictatorship, appointed his Mathematicians
to the Correction of the Roman Year; Dion lib. 11.
which is the beginning of the Julian Account. The The 283 whereof Censorinus
says, was the 1014 of Iphilus, and that the 986 of Nabonassar. Therefore the
Julian Account began the 703 of Nabonassar which was the 4669 of the Julian
Period, and 3905 from the Worlds Creation. The Cycle of the Sun was 21, and the
Moon 14. Seven Years after, and 38 before the Nativitie of Christ, the
Spaniards being brought under the subjection of the Empire, received also this
form of year; their Era from that time forth bearing Date from hence: which
though it was the fifth of Augustus, yet the Style went in the Dictators Name;
and so the King Alphonso would be understood in his Tables, when he calls
this Term Era Caesaris, meaning the Dictator.

CHAP. XV. Era Actiacae Victoriae. etc.
CAEsar Augustus having triumphed over Antonie and Cleopatra in the battle of
Actium, (...) says Dion, became himself to be Monarch of the World, (...),
etc. insomuch that he gave command that the Empire should begin to compute
their Acts from this daie's Achievment; which was the second of September by
Dion. It was the year of the World 3919, and 4683 of the Julian Period; as
otherwise, and also by an Eclips noted in the Fasti Seculi, it is manifest; yet
by the decree of the Senate, this Era was fixed in the destruction of
Alexandria, which was taken August the 29, of the year following, 'twas the 16
Julian year, and the 294 from the Death of Alexander.

Till this time the Egyptian account measured by Nabonassar's year, consisting
of 365 days, without any intercalation of the odd hours; in the place hereof
the Julian form succeeded; And because the Egyptians called every day in the
year by the Name of some God, which were therefore called (...), and every year
of their Lustrum's or Quadriennals in like manner, which were therefore called
(...), Anni Deorum, these years were henceforth called in honor of Augustus,
Anni Augustorum Deorum, or Anni Augustorum, as it is recorded by Censorinus, who
only mentions them by this Name.

This Era Actiaca continued in use till the time of Dioclesian, who having
gained himself an Opinion of Wisdom and Fortune among his People, thought
himself worthy from whom the Computation should now begin, which was don. It
was therefore called by those of the Empire Era Dioclesianea; but by the
Christians Era Martyrum Sanctorum, from the great Passion of Saints in the 19
of this Emperor's Reign, wherein more then one hundred forty and four thousand
Christians suffered persecution in Egypt. Thus Ignatius the Patriarch of
Antioch answered Scaliger by his Letters; Vir, says Scaliger, quo doctiorem
Oriens nostro seculo non tulit. But the Era Martyrum and that of Dioclesian
begin at the same time; as Christman upon his Alfraganus proves out of Abull
Hassumi an Arabic Historiographer. And to assure the beginning of Dioclesians
Era, Theon upon the Almagest notes an Eclips of the Moon at Alexandria,
Theon. Hypom. 6. in Ptolem. Almag. p. 248.
(...), and in the 81 year of Dioclesian, and 1112 of Nabonassar. Ashyr the 29,
and 6 of Phamenoth, and this Eclips, exacted to the Julian form, happened
November 25, a little after midnight, in the year of the World 4313, and 364
from the Incarnation; the Sun was in the 5 of Sagittarie. Therefore
Dioclesian's Era was fixed in the 1032 of Nabonassar, which was the 284 from
the Incarnation. Therefore as it is called Era Martyrum, it refers not to
the persecution in the 19 of Dioclesian, but to that of his first year, wherein
Diodorus the Bishop celebrating the Holy Communion with many other Christians
in a Cave, was immured into the earth, and so buried all alive. Eusebius in
Dioclesian.

This Era is used by S. Ambrose, Epiphanius, Evagrius, Hermannus, Contractus,
Bid and others. It stood in common Christian use, until the times of Dionysius
the Abbot, who in stead hereof brought in the Era of Christ's Incarnation, so
that (as Peter Aliac, our Bid, and others) the Christians did not use to
reckon by the years of Christ, until the 532 of the Incarnation, yet Scaliger
may be seen, De Emend, lib. 5. p. 495. and p. 496. and p. the 18 of his
Prolegomena.

Nor is it to be thought, says Christman, that this Era Martyrum was utterly
abolished, except we mean it of Rome; for says he it is yet in use among the
Egyptians, Arabians, Persians, Ethiopians, and generally the Eastern men.

Scaliger says it once and again (how truly I doubt) that it never was but as
it still is used in the Egyptian and Ethiopian Churches: No doubt,, but that it
was most proper to Egypt where it first began, for which cause it is called by
the Arabians Teric Elgupti the Era Aegyptica. From the Egyptians the most part
of the world received it, though the Abassines or Ethiopians in a directer
line, as whose Patriarch and Religion is subject to that of Alexandria. The
Ethiopians call it the Anni Gratiae.

CHAP. XVI. Era Christi Nati.
Dionysius the Abbot who as we said was Author to the world of accounting by
this new Era, infinitely more concerning then that of Dioclesian, fixed the
same in the 4713 of the Julian Period which answers to the 3950 year from the
World's Creation, so that the Anni Christi were not in use of Computation till
the 532 year after the Nativitie, as it was fixed by Dionysius. This Dionysian
(...) the more accurate in Chronology find to be at fault, but not themselves
agreeing upon the difference. To say nothing of the Bishop of Middleburgh, who
affirms that this Era was behinde-hand with the true Nativitie 22 years, and
that S Paul himself had revealed this to him, though afterward he changed this
opinion, S. Paul it seems not being in the right, and believed that this Era
was so far from being 22 years behind, that it was two years beforehand with
the truth. Capellus laboreth to prove that it is a Metachronism of six years,
Kepler of five, Decker of four, others of three, Scaliger of two, who
demonstrateth, as he himself thinks, that the first year Dionysian of Christ
ought to be reckoned the third Learned Bunting one of the first who took this
exception, demonstrateth that the difference is but of one year. He proves it
thus. Taking for granted out of S. Luke, that the thirtieth year of Christ is
Synchronical to the fifteenth of Tiberius. He notes an Eclips of the Moon set
down by Tac^tus in the first year of Tiberius, the two Sexti, Pompeio and
Apuleio Coss. This Eclips happened upon Thursdaie the 27 of September, in the
4727 of the Julian Period, which was the 3963 from the Worlds Creation. And
seeing, as most certain it is, that this Eclips fell out in the first year of
Tiberius, and that the fifteenth of Tiberius answers to the 30 of our
Savior's age, it follows, that the first of Tiberius was the fifteenth of
our Savior; and the first of our Savior was the 4712 year of the Julian
Period, one year sooner then the Dionysian (...), or, as it may be, the very
same; for it is doubted what S. Luke means by (...); our own Translation
renders, that Jesus began to be about thirty years old, etc. which
considering, and that the first of Tiberius was but the beginning of a year, the
difference may seem to com within compass of some reconciliation.

For the time of the year. The Alexandrian, and therefore the Ethiopian and
Armenian Churches deliver that our Savior was born the 6 of Januarie, the same
day he was baptized, accordingly they celebrate both the Festivals in one
day of the Epiphanie, which for that it has been of some standing in those
parts, prevailed so far with Causabon, as to forsake the more received opinion,
but not considering how slenderly this Tradition pretends. Some question of of
old there was in the Church of Alexandria (so their Clement reports) as
concerning the day of this Nativitie. To resolv this doubt they observed this
course: The day of his Baptism supposed, which as we, they held to be the
Epiphanie, they supposed also out of the forequoted place of S. Luke, that our
Savior was born and Christ'ned the same day, for that he was 30 years old
when he was baptized. Their conclusion therefore was, that our Savior was
born the sixth of Januarie, which how consequent it is I need not say. The
forenamed Bishop of Middleburgh sets down our Savior born in April.
Beroaldus thinks, he was born about the beginning of October. So Scaliger;
Calvisius about the end of September. As for the day says Scaliger, Vnius Dei
est, non Hominis definire: and Hospinian persuadeth, that the Christians did
not celebrate the 25 of December, as thinking Christ was then born, but to make
amends for the Saturnalia.

How much better had it been for these men to content themselves with the
Tradition of the Church, then by this elaborate unfruitful search to entangle
the Truth.

The Religion of this 25 day, though Scaliger say it, non est nupera neque
novitia, it is Apostolical by the Constitutions of Clement. etc.

Antiquitat. Lib. 11.
Nor does Chrysostom's Oration say much less. The Catholicus Armeniorum in
Theorinus Dialogue make's this good by Ancient Monuments brought from Jerusalem
to Rome by Titus Vespasian; or if this Authority could be rendered suspicious,
we cannot elude the Persian Ephemeris, nor the Astronomical Tables of Alcas,
in both which our Savior is set down born the 25 of December. And truly the
strange and rare position of Heaven at this Nativitie, does not a little
reinforce my belief, though otherwise not much given to admire matters of this
nature; for Cardan finde's it in the Figure of our Savior, there happened this
day a Conjunction of the two great Orbs, which is of that kindle, which Nature
can show the World but once, except the World endure more then forty thousand
years.

CHAP. XVII. Era Passionis Dominicae.
NO less question has been made about the Year of our Savior's Passion, then
that of his Nativitie. Thus much is certain, That he suffered upon Fridaie the
fourth of Nisan.

Not to take notice of the Acts of Pilate cited by the Heretics in Epiphanius.
Clemens of Alexandria delivers, That our Savior suffered in the 16 of
Tiberius, and 25 of Phamenosh, which answers to the 21 of March; but our
Savior suffered upon Fridaie, therefore the Dominical that year was E: but the
16 of Tiberius had 11 for the Cycle of the Sun, therefore the Dominical Letter
was not E, but A: therefore either the Passion was not upon that day, or else
it was not that year.

Epiphanius affirms that our Savior suffered the 20 of March, but he
suffered (as before) upon the feria sexta, therefore the Dominical must be D,
for otherwise Fridaie could not fall upon March the 20. This happened Anno 19 of
Tiberius; but the Cycle of the Moon for the year was 15, therefore the Passover
that year was not celebrated March the twentieth, but the fourth of April, and
feria not sexta but septima.

Many other forms of this opinion are set down by the Ancient, but which will
not endure the touch of these Characters.

Phlegon Trallianus notes an Eclips of the Sun the fourth year of the 202
Olympiad, the most horrible that ever was. No man ever doubted but this was
that which the Scripture notes at our Savior's Passion, observed also by the
Astronomers in Egypt, reported to have said those words, Aut Deus Naturae
patitur, etc. The Reverend Father Dionysius may be seen in his Epistle to
Polycarpus and to Apollophanes, but who when he says, that this was don by
the Interposition of the Moon, does not a little betraie his Tradition; for the
Sun and Moon were then Diametrically opposed, and the Moon her self totally
Eclipsed in Libra to the Antipodes of Jerusalem; therefore the Eclips was
supernatural.

The fourth year of the 22 Olympiad answers to the 19 of Tiberius, and the 33
of the Nativitie, which was the 4745 of the Julian Period, and 3982 of the
World, in the 78 Julian year, and 780 of Nabonassar; and because it was feria
sexta, therefore it was the third day of April, there happening the very same
day a natural Eclips of the Moon in the 11 of Libra, which began at Jerusalem
at 5 of the clock and 49 minutes in the afternoon. Therefore this day was
exceeding terrible, for the Sun was totally once, and the Moon once totally,
and twice Eclipsed.

CHAP. XVIII. Hegira Muchammedis.
MAhomet having introduced a new Superstition, which the men of Mecha impatient
(as all other of alteration) resented not, was forced to fly that place. This
flight of his, or persecution, as he had rather it should be thought, in
allusion to that of Dioclesian, and compliance with the Christians Era
Martyrum, was called Hegira Muchammedis, that is (...), or the flight of the
persecuted Prophet. It fell out upon Fridaie the 16 of Julie, and 622 of the
Incarnation, beginning (as their years are Lunar) from the new Moon of that
time, but which they account not as others from the Conjunction it self, but
from the Horning, which is the cause why they set up in their Steeples a
Crescent, as we a Cross in ours. From this Era Fugae Muchammedanae they
reckon their years.

CHAP. XIX. Era Jesdigerdica.
THis Era was fixed, says Albumazar, Anno Hegirae 11, Rabie prioris, 22. fer.
3. which answers to the 16 of June, Anno Christi 632, so called from
Jesdagerd the last Persian King, in whom that Empire says Haithon the
Armenian, was lost the same year of our Lord unto Othman the Saracen; to be
reckoned not from the inauguration as Alphraganus and Isaac the Monk and some
others, but from the death of Jesdagerd.

The Persians begin their year at the Vernal Aequinox accurately observing the
Sun's entrance into the first point of Aries, which day they call Neuruz, that
is, Novus dies; from ruz, which in their tongue signifies a day, and Neu,
novus, new; entertaining this time with great solemnity, which they hold so
sacred, that no Matrimony there is accounted legitimate if not contracted in
the Spring.

Now, because the Egyptian year, to which that Era did apply, still
anticipated the Sun's motion, and gave an unjust account of the Equinox, the
Sultan of Corasan or Mesopotamia, appointed eight of the most learned
Astrologers of that age (amongst whom Aben sina or Avicen was one) to make an
exact determination of the Tropical year, which was don as they could. This new
form was fixed in the Aequinox observed by them, the Sun entering the first
point of Aries, Thursdaie the 18 of Phrurdin at two of the Clock in the
afternoon, in the 448 year of Jesdagard, and 471 of the Hegira, which was 1079
of the Incarnation according to Dionysius. The Cycle of the Sun was 24, the
Moon 16.

This Era from the Style of the Emperor was called Gelalaea, that is, Era
Augusta or Imperatoria, as that word signifies in the Persian Dialect.

CHAP. XX. What is Proleptical, and what Historical Time.
HIstorical Time is that which is deduced from the Era Orbis Conditi.
Proleptical is that which is fixed in the Chaos: The Jews call it tempus Tohu,
as the Chaos is called by their Moses, Genesis 1. So the new Moon which they
suppose to be upon the second of the fix days, that is, if the Luminaries had
then been, they call Novilunium Tohu, for that as yet there was neither Sun nor
Moon.

The first example of Proleptical Time was given by the Greek Church, who in
their Computations follow the Holy Scripture of the Septuagint. Therefore
their Era Orbis Conditi is sixed in 5500 year Ante Christum Natum. Their more
Artificial men, perceiving that this vast Epilogism was good for somewhat else,
besides the measuring of Times, applied it to the Characters, and they found
that divided by 19 and 28, it gave the Circle of the Sun and Moon, but divided
by 15 it gave not the true Indiction; therefore they added 8 to the sum, and
so it became a Technical or Artificial Period, comprehending the three
Characters, and because it supposed 8 years of the Tohu, it was Proleptical; but
which the Times following not considering reckoned Historically, as if the Era
Orbis had then been fixed; but are thus to be corrected.

This Account is used by the Maronites, Grecians, and generally by the Eastern
Church, it is called Era Graecorum, or more properly Periodus
Constantinopolitana, from the Seat of the Empire, where it may seem to have
been devised.

By this Example Scaliger made up his Julian Period, which it self also, as
this, consists of Time, partly Historical, and partly proleptical.

CHAP. XXI. Considering the Causses of that infinite Variety which is found to
be amongst Chronologers.
FRederick Husman in his Epistle to the Elector Palatine reckons up 40
several Opinions concerning the Connection of those two famous Aera's; this of
Christi Nati, and that other of Orbis Conditi. And I doubt not but this
diversity might be redoubled if any body would undertake that such
frivolous pains.

The extremest variety is that of the Greek and Hebrew Scripture, making a
difference of two thousand years; an occasion justly taken by some equally to
disparage the authority either of the one or the other. For it cannot be but
that this Epilogism must be detracted from the Hebrew, or superadded to the
Greek, there being no mean way of reconciliation. But certainly, the Hebrew
(though I hold it not so every ways incorrupt, as if not one jot or title of
the same suffered the common fate of time) yet I believ it to be the Original,
and by the incredible diligence of the Masora, subservient to the greater
providence of God, to retain more of it is own purity, then any other
Scripture whatsoever; and therefore that it rests in the Greek Translation,
to account for this difference: yet neither do I think that choice Assembly so
neglected by God in a matter so importantly cared for by him, as to recede so
foully from their Original.

I rather cast this corruption upon the dregs of Time, assuring my self that
this imposture was put upon us by the Hellenists, those among them who affected
that ancient Heresy of the Chiliasts; the conceit whereof I affirm to be the
occasion of this corruption.

Other differences in that Connection have these lesser Causses.

That profane History makes no certain account of Time before the Olympiads.

That in the Roman affairs (a most important piece of History) the
Consulships are not registered in the Fasti with that distinction and care as
was necessary, experience whereof has been made by the industrious
examinations of Onuphrius and Cuspinian.

That the Historians themselves generally did not consider so much the
designation of Time, otherwise then with a reference to their own Aera's, which
were but uncertainly fixed.

That many of them wrote not the History of their own Times.

That some of them took liberty to relate those things inclusively, which
others related exclusively.

That several Nations reckoned not by the same form of years. That all Nations
not Christian, affected an Opinion of greater Antiquity then their own
beginings, endeavoring therefore to leav the Story of their rising as possibly
uncertain to posterity, as in them lay. So the Egyptians tell us of Heroes
past, who by their reckoning reigned long before the world was made; which they
say with as much credit, as the Indians tell us, that they have outlived four
Suns already, and that this which we have is the fifth from their beginning:
To say nothing of Janbazar Tsareth and Roani, men that lived before Adam's
time, as the book Heubattish make's report, and that one Sombasher was Adam's
Tutor.

But the greatest cause of all is for that Professed Chronologers of our own
times, such as Funccius, Beroaldus, Bucholcer, nay Satian, Baronius,
Torniellus, and Gordon themselves were altogether unacquainted with any
Artificial way of this work, not knowing how to make application of Natural
and Civil Characters to the assuring of Times. One of the first who began to
know what was to be don in this matter, was the most learned, and perceiving
Mercator, who Instituted a Chronology by way of Demonstration Astronomical.
To this beginning, something by Crentzeim was added; but very much more by
Bunting the Author of a most elaborate Chronology, demonstrating by the
Characters of Eclipses, the Sun and Moons Circles, and with Calculation of
every Eclips since the world began.

But this Art has received greatest perfection from that excellent work of
Scaliger de Emendat. Temporum, upon whose grounds Calvisius has erected a most
incomparable Chronology for demonstration of time by Eclipfes, and Cycles of
the Sun and Moon severally applied to every year, yet wanting so much to
accomplishment as may seem to be added by the incredible pains of Helvicus;
who excels Calvisius (though otherwise excelled by him) in Synchronismes
infinitely added, and the application of the Julian Period, which why Sethus
Calvisius should not measure is very much to be marvelled. These two
therefore put together make up Chronology every ways absolute, and brought
to such a perfection as needs not to be added unto; for though I doubt not,
but that even those also are sometimes failing, as for some other necessary and
unavoidable defects; so also for that they are not thoroughly advised, whose
Tables Astronomical they best and most securely may follow. Yet I assure my
self the differences caussed by this is but very small and insensible, that it
cannot be much amended though never so much care should be taken, and that by
tampering it may be made much wors, as by the learned, infinite and equally
unprofitable pain of Petavius, is too well known. Therefore good it were, that
Chronology brought to this degree of complement, might exspect no extremer
hand, but being stamped with the impression of some public authority, might go
current in general Opinion, without farther clipping or defacing upon
whatsoever specious and pretending reformations.

CHAP. XXII. Of Canon Chronological.
THe designation of Time secundum intervalla, the Chronologers call Canon:
which if it set the Aera's down singly is termed Canon, (...): if it make a
Connection of them, (...).

An Example of the first is, Anni From the Era of the Julian Period Unto that
of Orbis Conditi 764. Unto the Universal Deluge 2419 Unto the Birth of Abraham
2711 Unto the Destruction of Troy 3530

An Example of the second is,

The Creation fell out in the 764 of the Julian Period. The Flood came upon the
earth Anno 1656 of the Creation, and 2420 of the Julian Period. Our Savior
Christ was born Anno Mundi 3949, Anno Period. Jul. 4713, Olympiad 194, and 748
of Nabonassar.

This Connection of things is called Synchronism, whether it be of the
intervals themselves, or together with the Story.

An error committed herein is called Anachronism: and either says too much,
and that is a Prochronism; or too little, and that is a Metachronism.

FINIS.
THE ASSYRIAN MONARCHY, BEING A short Description of it is Rise and Fall.

By JOHN GREGORY, Master of Arts of Christ-Church in Oxon.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE DEVS PROVIDEBIT. I. Y

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

VIA VNA COR VNVM blazon or coat of arms
THE ASSYRIAN MONARCHY, BEING A short Description of it is Rise and Fall.
A Monarchy, as the Philosopher discourses in his Politics, is the
government of one man over many. According to the degrees of this
Principality, the word Monarchy, is equivocal; in the prime meaning intending
The Lawful Absolute Rule of some Prince, either Elected or Succeeding,
exercising Dominion corresponding with the Law of Nature, and the Right of
Nations. Thus His Sacred Majesty is a Monarch or sole Governor within these
his Realms.

In a wider and unjuster sens, A Monarchy is taken for The Peremptory
Authority of some Mighty Potentate, whose Right and Title for the most part is
his Sword; or, if he he Succeed, it is in the Ambition and Tyranny of his
Progenitors, by which he usurpeth power where he pleases, striking into the
hearts of Men rather the fear then the love of him, whereby he enforces his
unwilling Vassals to an unnatural Obedience. Thus the great Turk may be called
a Monarch; for in this sens, though it seem to secure it self under the
protection of an acceptable name; yet a Monarchy thus taken, (...).
differs little from that which Aristotle calls the ((...),) vice of a
Monarchy, to wit, a Tyranny.

Historians take more notice of this later, because the more notorious: of this
kind were those 4 great Monarchies unto whose Kings, as to famous Epoches, the
straggling and unbounded affairs of the World are orderly reduced.

In this number the Kingdom of Ashur bears a place, and the first; the
Description whereof we have here undertaken. In the consideration of this, we
shall observe in it a treble Vicissitude, which the Babylonians and Assyrians
underwent, in the continuance of this Government. The first from Nimrod to
Ninus, in which time the seat of the Kingdom was at Babel: The second from
Ninus to Asarhaddon, and in this interim the Assyrians prevailed at Ninivie;
The third and last, from Merodac to Belshazar; in which again Babel got the
better, which it held till all was lost to the Medes and Persians.

And for the greater illustration, to all this we will promise the Description
of the Land of Ashur; as knowing this full well that the circumstance of Place
as well as Time adds much to the understanding of the Story.


THe Land of Ashur was so called, from him that first planted a Colonie from
Babel in those parts, whose name was Ashur the Son of Sem. It is the opinion of
that learned Rabbin Don Isaac Abarbinel, in his Commentaries upon the first
Book of Moses, called Bereshith in Parasha Noach, fol. (...) (...) that is,
Assure the son of Sem dwelt in Assyria, and from his name it was so called. To
this opinion among the Ancient Greeks, only Eratosthenes attained, as he is
introduced by the Scholiast of Dionysius the Alexandrian, a Geographical Poet,
his words are (...). Among the Modern Suidas has embraced this conceit there,
where he pleases to retract his own, in the word (...). So also amongst many
others, Gemma Frisius for the Latin Writers, in his 22 Chapter of the Division
of the Earth: from the Jew Josephus, who also favors this Assertion. The
Etymologist therefore, who ever he were, has deceived himself in assigning
the Etymon of this word Assyria, (...) etc. vide Etymologicum magnum in voce
(...) Hesychium in voce (...).
while he forgeth this distinction between it and Syria; that Syria should be
that part of Asia which was overwhelmed in the Deluge, and was therefore so
called (...) (which also are the words of Hesychius) but Assyria, says he,
was that part which having escaped the Flood was so called from a the Particle
Privative, (...) But this is a Fable befitting the Greeks, whose Nation has
been seriously taxed by its own Autors, for their luxury of invention in
fabulous discourses.

In the next place we are to free the Description ensuing from the
equivocation and ambiguitie of the word Assyria, which is sometimes taken for it
self, at other times for the whole Region of Syria; in that sens comprehending
in it more then it self, to wit Palestine, Syrophoenicia, Syria, Damascena,
Arabia, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Chaldoea, sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to Strabo and Pliny, and many others. But our Master Ptolomie to
deliver the delineations of the world from the Ataxie and confusions of the
Ancients, dealt more accurately in his observations. Ptolemaeus Asiae tab. 5.
cap. 1.
He therefore in his first Chapter of the fifth Table of Asia, describes our
Country in this manner, (...). (...).
(...), etc. In which description Ptolomie has vindicated this Country to her
proper limits; aptly sequestring Assyria from the rest, comprehending the
Country within the confines of the great America upon the North, Mesopotamia
upon the West, Susian upon the South, and Media toward the Sun rising. The
chief of Ptolomie's followers in this are Dominicus Marius Niger, in his
Geographical Commentary upon Asia; whose words I forbear to insert, because
they are but the mere Metaphrase of the description already given. Besides him
Page 159. Tigurinae editionis.
Vadian has don the like in the Chapter which treats of the Situation of
Assyria. So also Gemma Frisius in his 22 Chapter of the Division of the Earth,
and Marcianus Heracleotes, who in the description of Susian the Province,
Marcianus Heracleotes in cap. (...).
thus writes; (...). He says that the North limit of Susian is Assyria: and
Ptolomie had said before, That the South limit of Assyria was Susian. The
agreement of these Autors I oppose to the distraction of others, in reading
whereof diligent heed would be taken of the ambiguitie of the word Assyria,
lest the Reader not being sufficiently cautelous, might happily be then least
acquainted with the Country, when he has traveled most about it.

Longitudo and Latitudo Assyriae.
The Latitude of Assyria is Northern, cutting off from the Equinoctial toward
the Pole Arctick an Arch of a greater Circle, containing about 5 degrees and
from the 34 degree to the 39 and 20 scruples. The Longitude accounted in the
middle Line, from the great In the assigning Geographical Longitude, we find
an observable difference. The Moderns accounting from the Isles called Azores,
guided by the variation of their compass: the Arabians account from the Pillars
of Hercules, or the Streights of Gebaltarck, corruptly called Gibralter;
Titus-Abelfeldea, Some also from Arius under the Line, and others otherwise: but
Ptolomie from the fortunate Isles, and him here we follow.
Meridian of the World, is from the 78 degree to the 84. In assigning this
Position, we we have rather inclined to Ptolomie, then the modern conjectures
of later Writers; for though instruments be more exact, and men's experience
more universal, yet what shall all that do, cum jam Seges ubi Troia fuit and
Ninus in ipsa Nino requiratur: when it is brought to such ruin, that if the
founder himself should rise again, Ninus would scarce find Ninive, through he
sought it in it self. According therefore to the Longitude and Latitude
assigned, The site of this Country is in the North part above the Torrid Zone,
between the Tropic of Cancer, and the Arctick Circle, under and about the
fourth Clime: the longest day being some 14 hours, and one second part. This
Situation is approved by Rabbi Abraham in his description of the Climes, his
words are these, (...) that is, The fourth Clime begineth at the end of the
third, to the Latitude of 36 degrees of the equal line in the North portion,
and his day is fourteen hours and one second, and passes through Assure. So
far the Rabbin. We conclude therefore, That the position of this Region is an
Oblique Sphere, whose Phenomenon are these: They enjoie, as we do, both a
Vernal and Autumnal Equinox, the Sun being in Aries and Libra. Their site is
in the South part of the North temperate Zone, therefore their air is pleasant.
Vitello Alhazen.
The Sun never culminate's in their Senith point, that being placed beyond the
Tropic of Cancer, which is the extremest circle of the Sun's Motion in his
Northern declination. And because the Optics teach, that every Opacous body
projecteth his Shadow to a part directly opposite to the body luminous,
therefore the Sun being either in the Northern or Southern Signs, their
shadows are never directed to the South, but contrariwise: therefore they are
Heteroscii. Lastly, they have the Pole Artick always elevated, and the
Antarctick always hid.

For the Astrological site of this place, it is comprehended within the first
Quadrant, in the part Oriental and Meridional, and is therefore subject to the
second Triangle under the Dominion Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn, the Planetarie
Lords being Saturn and Venus Oriental: in regard of whose rule in that earthly
Triplicitie, the inhabitants must needs be of a disposition wanton and
lascivious, in apparel gorgeous, in Religion Idolaters: And because the Assyrian
in special is subjected to Virgo, and her influence is Mercurial, therefore our
inhabitants must be great Astronomers. Thus Ptolomie, Cardan, etc. But whether
it be so or no, let their Ghosts dispute before Minos and Rhadamanthus. Thus
much is certain, That the manners of the Ancient inhabitants most aptly
corresponded with this Prognostication, and if any urge the contrary at this
day, these Autors may easily find an answer; that besides the translation of
the Perigaeum and Apogaeum of the Planets, the precession of the Equinox, and
the Suns lesser Excentricitie, it is apparent that the Signs in the eight Sphere
have forsaken their places in the first Moover; Aries now being in the
dodecatemorie of Taurus; and Pisces in the place of Aries. And so much may
suffice for the general application of Theoretical Geographie, to the Practical
description of this Country. Before we enter the particular parts, our
discourse shall tread awhile upon the Borders; Where first on the North part we
meet with the Armenian Mountains, which might have been slightly passed over,
but that they show the place where once Noah's Ark rested. That it rested in
Ararat, or Armenia, Moses bears witness; that it rested in that part of
Armenia, wherein we have placed it, may be a conjecture not without
probability, because Ptolomie places the Country Gordiena directly upon the
North adjoining in Situation to these Mountains. Now that Country was so
called from the Gordiaean Mountains, upon which the Ark rested, as is approved
by a double Paraphrase of two Ancient Chaldeans, Jonathan the son of Vziel, and
Onkelos; the one translating that Text of Moses, to wit, (...) the Mountain of
Ararat by (...) Cardu, the other by (...) Cardon, (...) Elias in Methurgeman.
both entending the Gordiaean Mountains (whereof Strabo and Curtius discourse)
Elias also in his Methurgeman allowing their interpretation.

Of these Mountains Stephanus makes mention in his Book De urbibus. So also
Elmarinus the Arabian translated by Erpenius, and another of that Nation whose
name is unknown, cited by Schickard in his Taric of the Kings of Persia. The
later thus writes, (...) (...) that is, This is (Mount) Godius, upon which
that Ship rested, that Ship of Noach, on whom be peace. But whereas this Author
calls the Mountain Godius, Schickard admonishes that it is an error of the
Transcriber, who in stead of (...) Gordi writ (...) Gadi. It is apparent then
that the Ark abode upon the Gordian Mountains; but where or upon which, that is
yet doubtful.

Rabbi Benjamin Tudelensis who traveled through all parts, to visit his
Countrie-men the ten Tribes dispersed, (...) Rab. Benjamin in Itinerario.
citante Schicha^do.
gives notice in his Itinerarie, that the place where the Ark rested is four
miles distant from Gezir Ben Omar, and that is an Isle Situate in the midst of
Tigris, at the foot of the Mountains of Ararat. The Armenians also design the
place, urging Tradition for a certain Mountain heretofore called Gordie, but
now Gibel Noe, as Andrew Thevet intimates in these words:

Au rest quelques Chrestiens Levantins, enter autres, La Cosmographie
Universelle Livre. 8. Chap. 15.
les Armeniens and Caspiens mainetiennent que ceste Arche s'arresta en la
Montaigne que l'on nommoit jadis Gordie, a present dit par aucuns du pais,
Gibel Noe.

We have also those among the Moderns, who have placed this Mount under a
peremptory Longitude and Latitude as a thing ordinarily known: yet for ought I
perceiv, Posterity in this has obtained of Antiquity nothing more then the
very name, and that is (...), by the Testimony of Nicolas of Damascus, not
Lobar, as Epiphanius: Josephus (...). a c. 4.
though Junius would correct the other by this. It was called (...), from (...)
birath, which in the Armenian tongue signifies properly any stately Edifice,
such as this vast Vessel might seem to be: In after times it is like they
called their Ships by the same name, and thence the Greeks traduced the same
signification: for so Suidas, Hesychius, and the Etymologist conceiv of this
word (...), that it often is taken for (...); and therefore Lycophron in his
Cassandra calls the Argonavis (...).

In this conjecture that it may pass the better, know that great Scaliger has
born his part, as the Reader may find in his notes upon the Greek fragments,
Scaliger in Notis ad Fragmenta. page 40.
added as an appendix to his admired industry in the Emendation of the Times.
Thus much shall suffice for our abode in the North of this Country, where the
Reader may pardon our long tarrying for Noah's sake.

Upon the East, as was said, this Region is bounded by the Medes, in special by
the mountain Zagros, whereof a most Ancient Geographer makes this mention,
(...), etc. (...).
Upon the South we shall find first Susian, the Province so called from the
Metropolitan City Susis; which the Etymologist says, might be derived from
Susia, signifying in the Syrian tongue a Horse, for that this place afforded
good Horses. (...), Etymolo. (...). Athenaeus.
Indeed (...) in the Syriack signifies so: but his other conceit is more
probable, that it was so called from the Lilies which grew thereabout; as
Aristobulus and Chares most aptly determine in Athenaeus, this only is their
error, that they say (...) signifies a Lilie in the Greek tongue, whereas they
ought to have said in the Hebrew; for the Jews indeed call a Lilie (...)
Shusan: and therefore was this place so called (...), for the pleasure of the
place, because of so many Lilies wherewith it was most naturally and pleasantly
beset.

Here the Kings of Persia kept their Courts in Winter, because the Region
hereabouts was then most temperate, though in Summer it was so extremely hot,
that when the Sun was in the Meridian, the Lizards and Serpents could not pass
by the way, but were stricken dead with the extraordinary fervor which the
Sun beams projected, Strabo lib. 15. Geog.
being multiplied more strongly by the reflection of certain Mountains not far
from thence, Strabo. lib. 15. Geog.
as Strabo the Author most probably persuadeth. Who also adds, that for this
cans the Inhabitants were forced to make earthen floors upon the tops of their
Houses, the depth of two cubits, for no other reason, but to free themselves
from the intolerable heat. Strabo ibid.

By this City ran the River Vlai, as Daniel calls it. Pliny. Herodotus.
Maximus Tyrius.
Ptolomie and Pliny write Eulaeus; no great error: it was also called
Choaspes, because that runs into it. This River was venerable in the opinion
of the Kings of Persia, who always drank of this water wherever they were.
(...) Benjamin in Itinerario fol. 20.
Rabbi Benjamin has observed, that, in his time, among the ruins of Elam
stood Susan the Castle, in time past the Palace of Ahasueros, having yet many
fair and goodly buildings from the days of old. He notes also, that he
found there 7000 Jews in 14 Synagogues, there being before one of them erected
the Sepulcre of Daniel the Prophet. Thus Rabbi Benjamin; in whose days it
seems by what he says afterward, that the River was built upon both sides,
and the city divided into two parts, that dissevering them both; whence it
came to pass in aftertimes, that the one part by reason of commerce thriving
more then the other, it was superstitiously imputed to Daniels Tomb, which the
richer part then kept; this fond conceit once set abroach caussed great
emulations, and in fine to compose the debate, Singar (...) Shach with the
Persians and Arabians and the neighboring inhabitants, signifies a King: from
whence is derived that form of Speech which we use at the Chess-game, when the
King is taken: to wit of (...) Shach Mat, commonly Check-Mate which in this
language signifi^th, The King is dead. Shichard in Taris Regum Persar.
Shach commanded that the Tomb should be displaced and set upon the Bridge, in
the midst of the River Vlai, that so both parties might enjoie their vanity
with an equal participation. Not far from Susis we have placed the plain of
Dura where Nebuchadnezar erected the golden statue, that stately Trophie of his
Idolatrous worship. Thus Junius has noted upon that place in Daniel. Dan. 3.1.


Next unto Susian, also upon the South is placed the land of Nimrod, Babylon.
or Babylonia, and therein not far from Tigris the City Erce, which Ptolomie
in a pardonable error, calls Aracca. From hence passing over the River, we
draw near to that pregnant Relic of the new world's ambition, Babel by name;
so called from the event of that, because there their Language was confounded.
(...)
For so the Hebrews intimate by the word Babel, a word which in our mother
tongue we yet retain from our Saxon Ancestors, as they from Askenaz; for when
we hear a man speak confusedly, we say he bable's. The foundation of this
City was laid in Nimrod's pride, and therefore must needs have a fall; and the
fall thereof was great: upon these ruins King Ninus built again, but with more
humble intentions, and more happy proceedings. Semiramis continued the work,
and enclosed all within a wall of that height and thickness, that we shall
hereafter in her life make bold to ask the question, whither 'twas hers or no;
in the mean time, doubting lest it will prove too great a work for a woman.

This City has been deservedly set forth by the industry of many, (...),
((...)) (...). Herodotus says, the wall was 52 of the Kings cubits in
thickness, Q. Curtius 32 foot in thickness. Quintus Curtius lib. 5.
and those most famous Writers; as Strabo, Diodorus, Herodotus, Solinus,
Pliny, and Fustathius upon Dionysius Afer, etc. For the form of the City, it
was four square, as Herodotus says; the walls so thick that two Coaches might
meet upon the breadth: for the Circuit, the Autors above mentioned agree not.
The most exact Tradition for this is that of Clitarchus, that the wall was 365
furlongs about, which divided by 8, set off for the Quotient 45, the number of
English miles in the whole compass, allowing eight furlongs for one mile.
Clitarchus adds, that the wall was finished in one year, each day one
furlong, till the 365 was completely ended, which is the just complement of the
Julian Solar year in days, not respecting that fraction of Hours and minutes,
in which the Astronomers agree no better then our Clocks and Dials, (...).
as the Proverb is. The height of the wall was 200 Cubits, the Towers 10 foot
higher then the Wall, To approve what has been said concerning this spacious
City, hear what the great philosopher discourses in the third of his
Politics, that Babylon was so wide and ample, that three days after it was
taken, one part of the City knew nothing of it. The buildings in this place
were not continued to the Walls, nor to themselves, and if there had been no
more society among the inhabitants, then there was among their houses they had
scarce ere com together; for their dwellings were all assunder; but the reason
was politic to avoid the fury of fire, and undergo a seige in war, for the
wast which lay between the houses, in time of a siege was sown and the
increas sufficient to maintein themselves within themselves: by reason whereof it
was impossible to win this city: for against a famine they had thus provided,
and other way there could be none, for the wall of the city was an
impregnable fence against the strongest Rampires; and hence it was that Darius
could not attein to the conquest of Babylon, without a famous stratagem, as
Justine relates out of Trogus Pompey. Justin. lib. 1
This City opened it self at an hundred gates, and those all of brass. In the
midst of the City upon the one side of Euphrates stood the Kings palace, a
stately and sumptuous structure, on the other side of the river likewise in
the midst stood the Temple of Jove Bell, and in the midst of that were erected
7 lofty towers upon the eighth, that being a furlong high, and as much in
breadth, from the top of this Tower the Chaldeans made their Astronomical
observations as the noble Tycho in his Vraniburgum. See in Tycho's Astronomical
Epist. the description (...) th^s Vraniburgu.
In ^his Temple was placed the golden Image of Jupiter, which was to be seen
in the days of Diodorus the Sicilian, in height forty foot.

We have reserved for the last place, that bold attempt of Art in the Horti
pensiles, that pleasant Paradise which the Syrian King planted upon the
battlements of a Tower, the top whereof was the base of the whole work, the
foundation of the garden was laid in stone, above that were placed Hurdles
compacted together with slimie sulphur, these were covered over with brick, and
that overlaied with Sheets of lead, upon which was cast abundance of earth
manured with that dexterity, that plants grew there as properly as in their
native soil. Strange indeed it was to see a wood upon the top of an house, and
that trees rooted in stone should grow 50 foot in height; and yet the credit
hereof has an interest in the best Autors, both among the Greeks and Latins.
And this was once the flourishing estate of Babylon, that fiery furnace in
which it pleased God to dissolv the hardest hearts of the most refractarie
Jews. But now Bell is bowed down and Nebo stoopeth, no Arabian pitcheth his tent
there, nor Shepherd his fold: But Jiim cries in the Palaces, Isa. 13.19.
and the Houses are full of Ohim; The Ostriches dwell there, and the Satyrs
dance there.

Ibid. Mesopotamia.
Thus leaving Babylon the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, we com unto
Mesopotamia, which bordereth upon this Country South and by west. This is
called in Scripture Aram naharaim, that is Aram between the two Rivers, to wit,
Tigris and Euphrates, here Abraham sojourned at Carras, famous for the sight of
Crassus: this also was the Country of Laban the Syrian. L. Florus.


Further West Tigris boundeth Ashur: Moses calls it Hiddekel, which Rabbi
Chimchi derive's from (...) and (...), either says he, because the waters are
of a sharp taste, or else because they are of a swift course. The Chardeans call
it diglath (...) the Arabians (...) Aldiglath, all for the same reason: for the
word Diglath or Diglito, as Pliny has preserved it, is corrupted out of
Hiddekel; or if Diglath be a primitive, the reason is notwithstanding the
same, for that also signifies a thing narrow and swift. Aristoteles ad
Scholiast. Dionys. Af. Alexand.
Let Josephus be the interpreter. (...). for this cause also it was called
Tigris, though Aristotle himself has said otherwise, who, as he is introduced
by the Scholiast of Dionysius Afer, testifies that in times past this river
had been called Sulax, which, says he, signifies (...) prone or precipitate
(such indeed it is) and in after times Tigris, from that Tiger which carried
mad Bacchus, I know not whether. But the word it self discovers its own
Etymon, Tigris from (...) gir, signifying in the Persian tongue an arrow: to
which if we add the Hemantick letter (...) Tau, we have the word entire (...)
Tiger or Tigris, because the stream of this river ran so swift, that it was most
like the projection of an Arrow out of a Bow. and this is the opinion of
Quintus Curtius, and others. And well might notice be taken of the swiftness
of this River, the stream of whose current usually ran as fast in one day,
Shickard Taric Regum Pers. p. 206.
as the most nimble footman can do in seven, if Shichard has not mistaken in
his Taric of the Kings of Persia; where he cites Pliny and Solinus, but none
could give him occasion so to say, save only Dionysius Afer in these words,
where speaking of Tigris, he thus sets down -- (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Which words perhaps Shickard might understand in that sens, in which we have
cited him; but the Poets intent is far otherwise, as he may understand that
reads his Scholiast who best understood him; for Eustathius upon those words
thus discourses,

(...) (id est Tigris and Euphrates) (...) ((...)) (...). Eustath. in Dion.
Afr. etc.


Wherefore, according to the judgment of the Scholiast, the meaning of his
Poet is, that the distance of the two rivers Tigris and Euphrates, is as much
as the best fitted traveller could go in seven days; that is as much as if he
had said, Mesopotamia in breadth would prove to a good footman seven days
journie. So though Tigris be (...), of all Rivers the swiftest, yet in this
opinion he has made more haste then good speed. We have sufficiently lingered
upon the borders of Assyria, we will now travel in the Country, beginning
first with Adiabene because because as Pliny and Solinus testify, Adiabene est
Assyriorum initium. The beginning of Ashur is that part which is called
Adiabene, for here it is probable that the founder made the first plantation of
his Assyrians, because the King Nimrod first conquered this place, and settled
the Government in a Metropolis erected by himself.

It was called Adiabene, not as the Greeks have vainly conjectured from (...)
and (...), because this was a place of hard passage, as Strabo, Eustathius, and
the rest; for this conceit is refuted by Marcellinus, a traveller in these
parts, who witnesses that he passed over a certain River called Adiavas, from
which the place was called first Adiavene, Ammianus Marcellinus in vita
Juliani. page 302 edit. Lugdun
which word when it came among the Greeks, they changed, u into b necessity
often urguing them to this, for want of that letter in their Alphabet, so where
the Original reads David, (...), the Septuagint they read (...), the
Evangelists reteining the same.

Ninive vrbs.
In Adiabene that which first and best deserv's our diligence is the thrice
noble seat of Ninus. The Scripture Stile's it both in Moses and the Prophets,
urbs magna Deo, and therefore seeing God himself has taken notice of it, we
will take the more.

It was called Ninive from Ninus, quasi Nini, (...) Naveh, that is the
habitation of Ninus, because Ninus set the last hand to the complement of this
City, and there kept his Court.

But he that laid the first foundation was the son of Cham, not Sem; though
our English Metaphrase has so translated. To decide the matter hear Moses
himself: (...) In which words, our Translation takes Assure for a person, which
beyond all doubt should be taken for a place, and then it run's thus: From
that land (to wit Babylon) he (that is Nimrod) went out into Ashur and builded
Ninive. And this is the meaning of Moses in the mind of that most learned Jew
Ramban, or R. Moses ben Nachman, as shall appear by his gloss upon the place,
as he is cited by Abarbinel in his Commentaries upon Bereshith.

Ramban says, (...) (...) Ramban in Abarbinelis Commen. ad Bereshith. These
words intend thus much. Out of that land went Nimrod to rule over the Country
of Ashur and there he built Ninivie, and the rest of that Province's great
Cities, whereof ( Moses) makes mention, and this Text (...) is all one as if
it had been (...) etc. Thus Ramban, who also cites a Concordance necessarily
requiring the like exposition in the like case, as says he (...), must be
rendered as if it had been (...) Ramban in this is not singular, nor has wanted
his deserved approbation among our own most learned Writers. For thus reads
M. John Drusius, so Tremelius, judicious Calvin, and diligent Paraeus: none
without good reason, for what should Assure the son of Sem do among the children
of Cham? And again, he that built Babel, was as likely to build Ninive. The
founder therefore of this City was Nimrod, for the situation thereof, it was
set upon the River Tigris. A late Writer of our own in his Microcosm has made
bold to displace it, affirming that it was built upon Euphrates, which if it do
not otherwise appear, I will ingeniously repent the mention of him, whom
notwithstanding I should also have spared in this place, had he himself spared
great Scaliger in a lesser matter: were it not that I count it frivolous to
cite a modern Author in a matter of Antiquity; to this one I could oppose the
Authority of many, amongst whom Ninive upon Tigris is as ordinary, as London
upon Thames. But to fetch that situation upon this River, from the same
fountain which they did, I appeal to the Ancients.

Amongst the Latins Pliny is plain, that Ninus the City stood upon the River
Tigris. Among the Greeks thus Herodotus, speaking of a certain Trench, (...):
where out of all doubt, though the Text be something cryptical, yet (...) is
not to be referred to Euphrates, or the Trench, but to Tigris, as the same
Author expounds himself in Euterp, where he plainly says, that Tigris run's
by Ninive. Arrian in his book of the affairs of old India speaking of Tigris
thus writes, (...), etc. that is, Tigris running out of Armenia anciently a
great and famous City, Arrian. rerum Indie.
etc. where a trusty and faithful Writer has plainly set down our desire. To
these we add the last and greatest, our master Ptolomie, according to whom we
have placed this City upon this River toward the Sun rising.

Besides this consent of the Greeks, sum up the whole truth in the Authority
of an Hebrew Geographer, and he, testis oculatus, to wit, the forenamed
Benjamin Tudelensis in his Itinerarie, where making mention of that City which
the Arabians call, (...) Benjamin. Itinerar. fol.
and others from them (...) Almozal, says that City is built upon Hiddekel
(that is Tigris) on the one side, over against Ninive, a bridge only between it
and Ninive; if therefore Mosal be built upon Tigris, there being but a Bridge
between it and Ninive, it is apparent in the judgment of an eie-witness, that
we have placed it where it should be. Only Diodorus dissenteth whether by an
error in the Text, or by misinformation, one or other it is likely: for we
must not forsake all these, to lean to one. The reason of his error might be,
because in sine these two Rivers meet and become one and the same.

Ninus therefore was set upon Tigris, not as Diodorus upon Euphrates, nor upon
the River Lycus, as M Nicolas Fuller in his Miscellanea, who for that opinion
cites all those almost, whom we have introduced for the contrary, adding
also Ammianus Marcellinus, an Author as he says beyond all exception, which
we deny not; only this we have found, that both he and the rest are by
Fuller in this matter misinterpreted, as he that diligently reads shall be
ready to testify. For the situation thus much. For the circuit and compass
thereof, the Prophet Jonah describes it to be a great City, (...) Jonae. 3.
even in the eyes of God, of three days journie, Diodorus says, that the
sides thereof were inaequilater, the longest sides containing 150 furlongs in
length, the shortest 90. According to which dimension of the parts, the whole
circuit must be 480 furlongs, which divided by eight, set off for the Quotient
60, the number of English miles, measuring the compass of this city. The words
of Diodorus are these, (...), etc. where the Author having discoursed upon the
immens and ample circuit of Ninus, adds, That the Founder failed not of his
purpose: for after him (says he) never any erected the like City, whether
we respect the greatness of the Compass, or the stateliness of the Walls: for
the Walls were in height one hundred foot, and so thick that three Charriots
might ride upon the breadth together. He adds also, that the walls were
beset with a thousand and five hundred Towers; each of them erected to the
height of two hundred foot. So far Diodorus: whom after ages may for ever
gratify for this precious monument of Antiquity, (which he alone seems to
have preserved) for the illustration of that which the Holy Ghost in Scripture
more then once inculcate's concerning this vast and mighty Ninive.

That City of Babel and this of Ninive by a fatal vicissitude held up the
Assyrian Monarchy, till the time of Daziavesh the Mede, and Cyrus the Persian.
It suffered many overthrows, before it received it is last: two famous, the one
by the irruption of the River Tigris, which at an inundation broke out upon the
w^ll, and threw down twenty furlongs thereof, which destruction,
(notwithstanding the stream of Interpreters run's oth^rwise) yet let the
Learned inquire whether it were not plainly foretold by the Prophet Nachum in
those words (...) that is, And with an Inundation passing by, he shall make a
full end. Nachum c. 1 versu.
(...). Septuag. Chronology seems to deny this interpretation; but each man
must consider, that the time of this Prophet, or his Prophecy is not
determinate by any authority of Antiquity, and therefore in the Moderns can
be but conjectural. That the River made this ruin, (...).
Diodorus is a pregnant witness. The second destruction was undertaken and
ended by Nebuchadonosor the King of Babel, as the Jews in their Chronology
testify: So Rabbi Saadias upon the Prophet Daniel. And indeed this City was
too great to be destroyed at once, being as we have said 60 miles in
compass. The Reader at the first sight may judge it incredible, He should say
twelve thousand. See Joha Leo Affricanus.
were not Alcaire in Egypt at this day extant to correct his unbelief; a
place, as Buntingius has noted, no less in circuit; and so populous, that
there once died of the Plague in one day twenty thousand.

The Prophet Jonah writes, that in the city of Ninive, by the testimony of
God himself, were more then one hundred and twenty thousand persons, which
could not discern between their right hand and their left. If there were so
many children, then at the proportion, the inhabitants were almost innumerable.

The Tomb of Ninus was almost as admirable as the City; but of that in his
Life.

It may now be said of Ninive, which once was of a great City in Strabo,
Magna Civitas magna Solitudo: The greater Ninive was, the greater are her
ruins: for now, The rejoicing City that dwelt carelessly, that said in her
heart I am, and there is none besides me, how is she become a desolation? a
place for beasts to lie down in; every one that passes by her shall hiss and
wag his head. Zephan. 2.15. Against this City prophesied Jonah, Nachum,
Zephanie, etc.

It is at this day falsely called Mosall, and at that place Nestorius his
Sectaries have taken their Shelter, that Heretic of Constantinople condemned
by a Synod at Ephesus, etc.

Arbelitis. (...) Ir. Bell.
Next unto Adiabene is Arbelitis, so called from the most ancient city Arbela,
which notwithstanding, what Strabo has said of the son of Athmoneus, I would
diligently derive of (...) Ir Bell, that is the City of Belus, who was no doubt
the first founder thereof, after the death of Nimrod. At Arbela was that
bloody battle between Darjavesh and the great Alexander for the Empire of the
world, as the common tale goe's: but Arrian in the description of this
expedition affirms the contrary, from the testimony of two eie-witnesses,
Ptolemaeus and Aristobulus: adding that the battle was pitched at Gaugamela; the
same thing Plutarch has observed. (...), Scaliger gives the reason of this
mistake, Because, says he, Arbela was famous, and therefore better deserved to
carry away the credit of such a victory then Gaugamela, a poor obscure
Village, which before him Arrian has said, Solinus. Arrianus in expeditione
Alexandri. Strabo lib. 16. Geog. Scaliger in lib. de emendatione temporum.
(...) Gaugamela intestina Cameli significans.
(...). Gaugamela (says he) is no city, but a village, and but a little
village, the place no way famous, and bearing but a homely name. And therefore
he says, (...). Whereas he says that Gaugamela is known but by a homely
name, it deserv's further inquiry. Scaliger says, that the word Gaugamela is
in the language of the place as much as the inwards of a Camel, which
signification the word indeed will bear in the Assyrian tongue, but for what
reason? The learned Critic answer's, That some of the Ancients have said that a
Camel's Inwards were there interred. Causabon in his notes upon Strabo,
deriveth it from Geh and Gamal, Geh signifying an eminent high place; but
Strabo himself has given the best, and the most ancient Etymon, who sets
down that it was called Gaugamela, that is, says he, the House of a Camel: and
this will hold, for so Gaugamele might with a facile error be written for
Naugamela, there being no difference between Gimel and Nun, (...)
but a small apex or excrescence, which oft-times escape's the Printers
diligence, and more often might the Transcriber's haste: and seeing it was
Naugamela from (...) and (...) Nauh Gamal, it signifies properly and aptly the
house or habitatio of a Camel. The reason of this imposition is well rendered by
Strabo, because says he, Darius the son of Hystaspis bestowed that place of
rest and food upon his weary fainting Camel, which had tired out himself in
his hard service. At Gaugamela therefore, not at Arbele was fought that famous
battle of the two mighty Monarchs for the Diadem of the world, which
fortunate Alexander brought away, Heaven it self bearing witness thereto by an
Eclips of the Moon.

Not far from Arbela is the Mountain Nicatorium (...), as Strabo cal's it (for
in Ptolemie we find it not) Alexander the Great gave it that name from (...),
Ptolomaeus lib. Gaeog.
vinco, that it might be, as to this day it is, a constant Trophie of that
famous victory which this King atcheiv'd at Gaugamela.

In this Country of Arbelitis, Strabo also places the City Demetrias, as
also the Temple of Aeneas, and the Palace of the King of Persia, with the
bituminous Fountain, all which we have set down according to his description.

Upon the River Caprus stands Oroba; which Junius well conjectureth to be no
other, then that which Moses in Genesis calls Rehoboth. In the South coast of
Arbelitis, between Caprus and Gorgus, Ptolomie places Thelbe, which perhaps
was so called from Tubal, as also another City placed by the same Ptolomie in
Babylonia without our Chart, so called out of doubt from Tubalcain, for he
writes Thelbecain with no great error.

Arrapachitidis regio.
Next to Arbel^tis is Arrhapachitis, so called from Arrhapa, a City lying in
this coast East and South upon the limits of Apolloniatis. This Arrhapachitis,
Junius had once conceived to be no other but Arpatis, and the chief city
thereof to have been that Arpad, which is spoken of in the Kings, and elsewhere:
but this Learned Commentator corrects himself in the 49 of the Prophet
Jeremie, verse. the 23. This Coast doubtless took it is name Arpachetis, from
Arphacsad, the son of Sem, and brother to the founder Assure. Here lies Darna,
Obana and the rest, places better known by their names then ought else. Next
them the Sambatae, and below Appolloniatis, famous for the Metropolis from
whence it had it is name. These names are reckoned up by Vadian, Glarean,
Volateran, and Niger; men who altogether followed Ptolomie in their
Chronographie of the Land of Ashur: more then the names will hardly be found
either in them or elsewhere, only Apollonia, nor much of that. But (...)
deserv's our consideration, for which we gratify old Isidore the Characenian
cited by Athenaeus, for otherwise we had never attained to the knowledge of
that place which Moses calls Calanne in the land of Singar, for that Calanne
without question is the Metropolis of this Country Calonitis which our Author
old Isidore calls (...), as we have placed it. (...) says he, lies so,
(...) etc.
that it is separated from the Medes by the Mountain (...), as we have said.

Thus we have endeavored the delineation of the famous frontiers of old
Ashur, which the reader if he pleas may behold in our Chart; always provided
that he be not offended at this, that we have drawn the lowest parallel
equal to the highest of that Latitude; for it is easily known to my slender
skill, that seeing Topographical plains are all portions cut out of the entire
Spears, therefore the Parallels as they increas in Latitude ought to bear a
different proportion to their Meridians: yet this curious course we took not in
a matter that needs it not, but projected the Chart upon a Parallelogram,
because in a distance no greater, for a purpose of no greater moment, the
disproportion can nothing prejudice the Description.

THe State-Government of Assyria was Regal, it began in Tyranny, (...)
contrarium quod* Imperio reg. id est, (...).
which Aristotle cal's the Vice of a Monarchy: it continued under the
succession of absolute Princes from Jove Bell to Belshazar. The policy which
this Country did enjoie was as in all other Kingdoms, Ecclesiastical and
Civil. In their Ecclesiastical policy we consider their Religion. God they
served, but not the true; nor one, but many and falls. their Deities, for the
most part, were placed in Heaven; the Sun, Moon and Stars; and indeed, were men
allowed to choose themselves a God: this was somewhat a tolerable impiety, for
such great Astronomers to adore the Host of Heaven.

The Manner how they worshipped the Sun is set down by Macrobius, Macrobius
Saturna primo. Cap. 17 et 23.
who describes the Image under which this Planet was adored, adding unto his
description a Symbolical interpretation. To the Sun they sacrificed Horses, and
the (...). Herodot. lib. secundo De Mapogetis loquens. idem etiam Xenophon de
Armeniis scribit, eandem etiam caussam reddens lib. quarto, (...).
reason was, because they judged it convenient, that the most nimble God should
be served with the swiftest Oblations. The Altars whereupon these Sacrifices
were offered, they erected either in open Courts, as 2 Reg. Chap. 21. verse 5.
or else upon the tops of their Houses, as Zeph. 1.5.

Isaiah.
Tremelius supposes that the Prophet intends this God of the Sun by that
which he calls Nebo, but that deserves further inquiry: Doubtless Nebo was
some notable Statue among the Teraphins, and what they were we will now strive
to discover. (...) Taraph the root and singular of Teraphim seems properly to
have signified any dishonest disgraceful matter, (...)
as Elias Tisbites intimates in the word Taraph; where also he insinuate's
both the affinity and Etymology of the Latin word turpitudo, from this
Hebrew word Taraph. For so says he the Latins call, id quod turpe est (...)
Turpitudo. Turpitudo Tesbites in Taraph.
And for this cause the Hebrews called that Magical divination of their Heathen
neighbors which was made by enchanted Heads and Statues Turpah, and those
Images so charmed Teraphim: (...) Ex Pirke R. Eliazer perec. (...)
for the Teraphim were certain Lares or houshold-Gods in which the Devil made
answer to the simple Heathen; their making is thus set forth by Tisbites out of
Rabbi Eliezer. in the 36 Chapter whose words we may render in this manner,
speaking of those Idols, I have found (says he) that the Teraphim are thus
contrived. They cut the throat of a first born male, they pull off his head and
powder it with salt and odors, (Then) they write upon a plate of Gold the name
of an unclean Spirit putting that under the head, then place they this head
upon some wall, seting burning Lamps before it, and so worship in the presence
thereof, and of these Laban asked counsel, etc. as we have set down in the
margin foregoing. So the Chaldee Paraphrast in Hosee renders Teraphim by
(...) Mechauvi, Indicans, showing or declaring: For that was the condition of
these Teraphim, as Rabbi Chimchi also approves in the Root Taraph and Delrio
an expert Magician in his Animadversions upon the words of Laban.

The like is set down in the Book of R. Simeon Ben Jochai which is called
Zohar. fol. (...) upon the words of Moses, (...) And Laban went, etc. It is
therefore manifest, See M. Seldom De Diis Syris.
that the Teraphim were nothing else but the heads of first born males, made and
erected under the influence of some certain Planet under whom some certain Spirit
(as Orifieb over Saturn was predominant, whose name must be engraven in some
thin plate, and placed ceremoniously under the Head, this don, Lamps must be
solemnly burned before it, and then after some diabolical Exorcisms,
Necromantically performed the head shall prove vocal. The tale goe's current
amongst us, that our Countrieman Roger Bacon once framed such a kind of
Magical Machination in Brass. Doubtless Albert the Great spent thirty years to
frame out a statue like a man, and in the end by the apt composure of certain
engines and many moovable machinations, Aquinas hearing the statue speak brake
it to pieces.
taught the Image to speak; but 'twas much, if not Magic: for speak it did and
that so Articulately, that it well nigh frighted a great Schoolman out of his
wits, even Thomas Aquinas himself, as Boterus relates.

That which persuadeth us that the Idol Nebo was one of the Teraphim, is the
Etymon of the name; for Nebo is derived from a root, which signifies to
Prophecy or Divine, as they did by the Teraphim, for that reason of the word
is rendered by the Jews. (...) Cae^era lege in loco Citato (...), etc. The^c. in
pharmaceutria. (...), etc. Scholiast (...). Scholiastes ibidem. Qui sese
purificant in hortis pone Achad in medio, comedentes carnem porci,
Abeminationis, and muris, confundentur una dictum Jehovae. Isa. cap. ultimo.
So Abarbines upon that place in Isaiah, Nebo stoopeth.) That the Assyrians
used Teraphim is manifest by the Story of Laban. That they were noted
Magitians and Astrologers, Simoetha the Witch in Theocritus does manifestly
declare, where speaking of her Veneficial Philtra, she confesses to the Moon
in the Dorick Language that she learned those tricks of a Traveller that came
from the Land of Ashur, that is, (says the Scholiast) from a friend of hers
that was an Assyrian. Who also adds, that the Assyrians were a Nation in
Magic most exact. And therefore seeing it cannot be determined for certain
what this Nebo should be, I know not why this conjecture may not with others
have it is pardon, seeing it has brought some probability.

That therefore the Assyrians worshipped the Sun, it is manifest: as also that
they worshipped him not under the name of Nabo; this Nabo being, as we have
conjectured, some one more noted then the rest among the Teraphim, but if any
pleas to ask Antiquity for the name of this great God the Sun, he shall find
his Answer in Macrobius, who teleth us that the great God of Ashur was the Sun,
and that his name was Adad; which, says he, by Interpretation signifies
(one) so indeed (...) Ada in the Assyrian tongue does signify from the Hebrew
(...) Achad, unus. A greater testimony of this Idolatry then Macrobius, we
find in the Prophet Esaias in the last Chapter, where God threatens to confound
those that purify themselves in Gardens ((...) says the Text) Achar Achad,
behind Achad that is either the Temple, or rather sim Idol erected to the honor
of the Sun, not unhappily placed in the midst of their Gardens, where each
spectator might daily behold and admire the pregnant effects of the Sun's
vigorous influence, and powerful operation. It Is the accurate interpretation of
the learned Scaliger, in his notes upon the Greek Fragments, page 35, approved
also by another Scaliger of our own, M. John Seldom in that choice work of his
upon the Syrian Gods. Both these consent that the Idolatrous Rites spoken of in
the same verse, make but up a superstitious kind of Lustration. The former part
of their gloss is undoubtedly true, the later whether it be or no, it is no
way necessary for this place, nor (since they have said it) these years to
determine. If we nothing help, it shall nothing hinder that we add thereunto;
that in the verse, as we have set down, mention is made of Mice which bear
their share in the Abomination, for so says the Text. They that purify
themselves in Gardens behind Achad, in the middle, eating Abominable flesh, as
of Swine and Mice, etc.

Alexander ab Alexandro relates the most of the Ancient kinds of Lustrations,
but makes no mention of Mice. yet it is to be noted, that many rites
performed in these Exercises, were altogether Magical; in that sens the Mice
may take place, and com within the verge of their Gloss: for a Mous is (...),
an Elf which Conjurers are not unacquainted with. Hear what they say.

Take the liver of a Mous and give it in a Fig to the Swine and they shall
follow the doner which way or whither he lists. Pierius de Mure.
Pierius in his admirable discourse upon the Egyptian Hieroglyphics
introduces an experiment to prove this Charm, which himself saw at Patavium.

All this is the more probable, because as we have already prooved, our
Assyrians were greatly given to exorcisms.

And so we have don with their Idolatry to the Sun.

Herodotus tells further, that these Assyrians also worshipped the Moon, and
good reason, or else they had no God all night, a time as I suppose, wherein
they had most need. They worshipped the Moon under the name of Mylitta, which
word Scaliger has well noted, (...) Mylitta, Mylitta, sig. (...) In Notis ad
fragmenta Vet. Graecorum, etc.
in their Language signifies Genetricem, in which sens it may not unaptly be
applied to the Moon, whose power though ordinary, Philosophy supposes to be
merely passive, yet not without a Contradiction, the same Philosophy allowing
the light of the Sun to have a sensible and necessary activitie upon the
inferior bodies, allowing also the light of the Moon to be borrowed from the
Sun, and 'twere a notable incongruitie, that the same light should be active
in the Sun, and passive in the Moon; but if the Moon did nothing help the
second causses in Generation, yet in the bringing forth it is evident, for this
is most certain, though every Midwife has not observed so much, that the most
easy deliverie a woman can have, is always in the increas, toward and in the
full of the Moon, and the hardest labors in the new and silent Moon; which
Astronomers call the Synod or Conjunction, which was the reason that the
Midwives heretofore did always in such a case implore the aid of this Planet,
for the safe and easy deliverie of their Infants. Terent. Andria.
An Example hereof we may have one among many in the Comedy, where the woman
in the extremity of her travel, crie's out to the Moon, O Juno Lucina fer
opem. And this amongst others must needs be a reason why our Assyrian
worshipped the Moon, and why they worshipped her under that name. The Prophet
Jeremie makes mention of this worship in the 7 Chapter, where he calls the
Moon the Queen of Heaven, as our English Translation has very well rendered.
(...) Reginae Coeterum.
The Prophet adds that the Women made Cakes to this Queen; And why the Women?
First because the Moon was a Queen. 2. Because the Women at their labor were most
beholding to the Moon, who by her great moisture mollifie's the Secundine and
make's the passage easy for the deliverie of their children. This Custom of
offering Cakes to the Moon our Ancestors may seem not to have been ignorant of;
to this day our women make Cakes at such times, yea the child it self is no
sooner born, but it is baptized into the names of these Cakes; for so the women
call their babes Cake-bread. Add hereunto that the Saxons did Adore the the
Moon, to whom they set a day apart, which to this day we call Moon-daie.

And thus we have run through the chiefest Idolatries of this Nation: much
more might be said, and perhaps hereafter shall be: in the mean time we will
only add a Conjecture concerning Nisroc. Sennacherib, as he worshipped in the
house of Nisroc, was slain by his two sons; who or what this Nisroc should be,
is so doutbtful, that Peter Martyr could find nothing in all the Ancient
Writers to explain the matter, his own opinion depends upon the Etymon of the
word Nesrac which signifies (as he says) Deum fugae mollis, a God or a Jove
(...), whither as to a Sanctuary Sennacherib might betake himself, it may be
so, I rather suppose, if I may be so bold, that rac in this place signifie's
the Sun; for so this people sometimes called the Sun, as Francis Junius has
noted upon Shadrac in the Prophet Daniel. So then this Temple was an Asylum
built in Ninive, to the Honor and under the protection of the Sun, who was
therefore called Nesrac, that is the Sun of flight, for the reason given.

It might be added how these Nations applied their devotion to the rest of the
Planets, as to Venus that is Shar: in the honor of whom their Feasts were
celebrated by the same rites that the Roman Saturnalia, the servants sitting
down, and their masters attending: So also we might put in Chiun, whom some call
Saturn, but of these, See M. Seldom.
for ought I find the matter is not so manifest; it is only apparent that they
worshipped the Sun and Moon chiefly: and the rest of the Host of Heaven in their
order: but of that order and manner we have nothing certain yet to say, time
may perhaps favor our industry, and make us acquainted hereafter with that,
which now we must not be ashamed to confess our selves ignorant of. In the
interim, we must content our selves with what has been said, briefly
concerning their religious polity. Their Civil customs shall now take their
places.

The King of Ashur was assisted in the Civil Government by a trebble
Magistracy, chosen all out of the gravest and most noble within the Realm; The
first sort were to look to the placing of their Virgins according to that
manner which shall hereafter be declared: as also to give judgment in Matters
of Adultery, etc. The second in matters of Theft: The third in the rest.

Physicians these people have none, they being such who cannot save any man by
their profession, till they have lost some by their practice. The custom here
was, that all diseased persons should be conducted to the Marketplace,
convenient provision being made for their safety there. The reason was, that
all passengers by should visit them, by inquiring out the nature of their
diseas, and giving counsel for the remedy out of profitable experience made by
themselves, either in themselves or some others, upon the like occasion. And to
this purpose it was provided by a peremptory Statute, that no man should dare
to pass by the Marketplace, till he had made such inquisition as is
aforesaid. Herod. in Clio. Strab. lib. 16.

In this Country, it was not in the power of a private man to bestow his
daughter in Marriage, but this was don by a public Officer appointed for that
purpose. The manner was thus.

Once every year, all mariageable Virgins were brought by that officer into
the Marketplace, and there set to Sale; if they were beautiful, the fairest to
those that gave most: when all the best were thus bestowed, the Money which was
paid in for them, was given to the rest which were not so comely and
meritorious in their beauty; every one being supplied with a dowry
proportioned to her want: By this means it came to pass, that still the Gentry
and most wealthy amongst the Men had the fairest among the Women, they being
best able both to buie them and to keep them. Contrarily, the Commons and
poorer people, Strabo. Herod. ibid.
who had not means to compass the best, had means given them to be content
with the worst. A Law not so provident as plausible, and however it fitted
their Common wealth, it would be very unapt for ours.

Here follows a Custom most detestable and unfit for any. Every woman
throughout all the Country, was bound once in their lives to repair to the
Temple of Venus, and there to prostitute their bodies to whomsoever, that would
but throw down a certain piece of money, were it less, or more; which money was
given to the Temple, and to the honor of the Goddess. Their manner was thus.
The Women sat down in the Temple, distinguished one from another by little
lines of Cord, which he that would might take away, or break, if the Woman
seemed to be coie; and so take their Strumpet out of the Temple into a
by-corner, etc.

The Epistle of Hieremie, (if that be his which we find annexed to the
Apocryphal Baruch) makes mention of this horrible and impious practice.

(...).

And the women encompassed with lines, sit down in he Allies, burning Bran for
perfume: but if any of them drawn by some that passes by lie with him, she
reprocheth her fellow that she was not thought as worthy as her self, nor her
Cord broken.

This Venus also they called Mylitta, as they might for as good reason as they
did the Moon: but as in their Gods so in the names of their Gods, he that
reads shall find notable confusion. Master Seldom understands by Succoth
Benoth, nothing else but this Temple or Tabernacle of Venus: from Benoth also
he deriveth her name. Let the Learned examine it. Be the conceit true or
falls, it is attended with an egregious dexterity in the carriage, and
probability in the conjecture.

The Assyrians bury their dead Corpse in Honey, for the most part, and cover
over the bodies with the Wax, their manner of Lamentations for the Dead, is to
beat their breasts, and to besmear their faces with dirt not unlike in this to
the Egyptians, Strabo. Herod.
of whom, see what Herodotus writes in Euterpe.

Arrian makes mention of certain Sepulcres of the Kings of Ashur found by
Alexander amongst the Fenns in Babilonia:

(...). Lib. 7. expedit. Alex.
A like place to this I have not as yet found, etc.

Their Habit in Apparel was to wear long garments, one without of Woollen,
another under that of Linen, we may call the first a Goat, the other a shirt;
they had without these a white Mantle. They always wore rings upon their
fingers not without a seal, they never walked without a staff, and their staves
had knobs carved with a Rose, or Lilie, or such like. Herod. Strabo. ibid,

Against Ashur prophesied Balaam the Magician, Esaie, Jeremie, Zephanie, Nahum,
and others.

And this was the State of ancient Ashur, in her flourishing times, under the
famous Rulers of the first Monarchy.

In this Country these Kings acted their parts, especially at Babel and
Ninive; the Assyrian one while bearing Rule, otherwhile the Babylonian: as
hereafter shall appear.

Having thus briefly and rudely surveied the position and disposition of the
Land of Ashur, peculiarly and properly taken, especially the two famous and
Royal Seats of the Assyrian Monarchy, Ninive in Ashur, and Babel in her
borders: it remains that we address our selves to discourse the succession of
her Kings, which Chronologically undertaken, ought according to the rules of
that Art, to proceed either per (...), as the master Chronologer Eusebius has
don in his first books; or else per annos expansos, as the same has don in his
second. Upon which see Scaliger's most learned Animadversions, and his Notes
upon the first.

But the injuries of time have so far prevailed against the Method of this
Monarchy, that we cannot make use of any of these artificial ways, the
wounds in our golden head being so near to mortal, that no Principle or Rule
in Art may touch them to the quick; and therefore our industry must attemper
it self to the necessity of this Ataxie and confusion, which the neglect of
Ages past has breed in this unfortunate portion of History.

The first therefore and most Ancient Description of this Kingdom of Ashur was
performed by God himself, who upon a time discovered to the King of Babel, in
the night Visions, the State and nature of this Monarchy under the form and
figure of a golden Head: under the form of a Head, because it bare the first and
chiefest place among those Governments which were eminent in the World. A Head
of Gold; First, because it was the most renowned among the Monarchies, as Gold
among the Metals. 2. For it is great and admired Strength; Gold being the
strongest of all Metals, because best and most nearly compacted. And for this
cause also, this Kingdom in another Dream of the Prophet's own, is compared to a
Lion. 3. For it is Perpetuity; Gold being the most durable Metal; and this
Monarchy of the longest continuance, which also seems to be intended by the
Eagle's wings upon the Lion; for the Eagle is observed to be of a lasting
constitution, as King David intimates in the 5. verse of the 103 Psalm, and
notwithstanding this bird continued long, yet she might live much longer, but
that her upper beak crooketh in time over the lower, and so she fails, not
with age, but hunger.

See here the Prophets own Monument, as it is preserved unto us in the tongue
of the Chaldeans.


(...)

Nehuchadnezar's Vision.
Thou O King, art this Head of Gold. This Images Head was of fine Gold. After
thee shall arise another Kingdom inferior to thee. His Breast and his Arms of
Silver. And a third Kingdom of Brass. His Belly and his Thighs of Brass. And
the fourth Kingdom shall be hard as Iron. His Legs of Iron. And whereas thou
saw the feet part of Iron, and part of Claie; the Kingdom shall be divided,
partly strong, and partly broken. His Feet part of Iron, and part of Claie.

In this choice Lecture of Antiquity, which the Ancient of days vouchsafed to
read to his Prophet Daniel, to illustrate the night and darkness of the King of
Babel's dream; we find the vast affairs of the wider World, summed up into a
Microcosm, a stately statue of Heterogeneous structure, indigitates the various
passages and different occurrences, which had been, or were to be in the
world; and all this in a Dream, because all these things should pass away like
a Vision of the night.

In the Golden Head, behold pourtraied, as it were, the face of the first
Monarchy. In the breast of Silver, behold the second, stretching out her two
arms over the two mighty Kingdoms of Media and Persia. The brazen paunch swells
out in the ambition of proud Alexander. The thighs of the same Metal, but
weakened by division, represent the Successors of that great Captain, in special
the 2 more noted Rulers of the North and South. The Iron-leggs lighting upon an
Age like themselves, stand out for the So most of the Writers determine though I
will not as yet, but in the mean time I have set down the most ordinary.
Roman fury, whose Martial presumption, under the protection of their
Grandsire the God of Battle, crushed the rest of the World in pieces like a
Potter's Vessel. In the heat of these Commotions, behold a Stone cut out of the
Mountain without hands, and falling upon the Statue grind's it to powder. This
Stone the builders refused, but is now become the head of the corner. It Is that
Rock Christ, who instead of all these petit Dynastie's, has introduced an
everlasting kingdom, but his Kingdom is not of this World. In the continuance
and encreas of this spiritual Dominion, the strong union of the Iron legs
devide's it self, and becom's partly Claie, whilst the Roman Eagle displaied
with two Heads, declare's that the power of Rome is imparted to Constantinople,
and the Western Empire fallen under the rising of the Eastern.

Letting pass the rest of the members, only the head is that which we intend
to discourse of.

A golden Head, this Prophet stile's it, be it so: but it is now so far
distempered with the drossie injuries of time, that the greatest Alchimist in
History can scarce extract one dram of the pure and primigenious metal. Annius
a Dutch Monk undertook the cure of this broken Head, thinking to salv up the
matter, by stuffing up the wound with forged fragments, obtruded to the World
under the security of old promissing names of undoubted Grandies in
Antiquity; Egyptian, as Manetho; Chaldean, as Berosus; Persian, as
Megasthenes, whom he falsely calls Metasthenes. Munster undertook the defense
of this Annius his Countrieman, but without cause or Commendation, he that
would hear his reasons let him repair to his Cosmographie; Munsteri Cosmograph.
l. 3. c. 8. page 362.
and read the beginning of his discourse concerning Germany: many a creadulous
Reader has been deceived, by giving too much reverence to naked names for
Berosus his sake, believing Annius in that of Berosus, which Berosus never
dreamed of.

Scaliger therefore upon better consideration and stricter examination,
seriously abhor's him. Calvisius both refute's him and condemn's him: No master
in History, but denie's him: we may conclude him therefore Adulterine, and
yet not indicta caussa: for in the continuance of this discourse, we shall be
disturbed with unhappie opportunities to prove him so to be. In the mean time,
this supposititious crew shall nothing prejudice those precious relics of
lawful Antiquity, though they bear the same name with the Author of these
spurious pieces: for to refuse the good because the bad have usurped their
names, were a consequence most preposterous, best fitting the stubborn Logic
of a Jew, who therefore abhorred the true Christ when he came, because there
had been before him a falls Messiah called by the name of Jesus of Nazaret.

Leaving therefore this faithless Monk to his unadvised admirers, we will
follow the steps of sacred Moses, and the best of those Jewish glosses, whose
Autors have sat in Moses's seat; where these fail us, we shall have recours
to the better Berosus of the two, to the true Manetho, Megasthenes, Alexander
Polyhistor, Diodarus, Herodotus, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, etc. adding
conjectures where necessity enforces, but with that moderation that shall
best become our Minority. In the later part of the Monarchy, the sacred style
of the Holy Ghost will help us in the high Priest's Annals or Chronicles, in
the Prophets Esaie, and Daniel and els-where. Had the entire works of Berosus
the Chaldean Priest remained perfect to these days, or those two Volumes which
Juba wrote concerning the state of Ashur, this labor might have had better
success: we should also have been much informed by Abydenus, had not he
suffered wrack with the rest under the injurious behavior of a careless age:
however we will make the more of those chois remainders which are yet left;
out of which we will endeavor tenderly and carefully to gather together the
decayed pieces of this maimed Monarchy.

Though this Historical work in hand be in nature practick, yet it must be
indebted to the Theorie of this Art, for some certain terms, as Aera's or
Epoches, Characters of the Sun and Moon's Circle, the Eclipses, and the Letters
Dominical. First of all an Era in Theorical History, is a certain bound or
Terminus a quo, whereby they restrain the infinity and indifferency of
Computation. It was called Era from an indifferent error which escaped the
Transcribers of the Spanish Computation. In Libro de correctione Anni.
So Sepulveda (and he a Spaniard) conceives in his book of the Correction of
the Roman Year, where he says that His ancient Countriemen for the great
respect they bear to Augustus Caesar, thought nothing more worthy then his
Name, from whence matters Noteable might bear their Date; and therefore when
they would point out a Time wherein such or such a thing was don; they said,
Annus erat Augusti, it was such a year of Augustus: that form in time began to
be contracted when men wrote in haste, so that instead of Annus erat Augusti,
they set A. er. A. and after a little more negligence put this together and
spelt it into a word of Art; so that now Era in History signifies a
determinate and set time from whence Chronologers account their years, as each
man dateth his Letter in the Era of our Lord, when he sets down (as we do
at this time) dated the 20 of December, in the Year, that is, in the Era of
Christ, 1630.

Scaliger lighting upon this Conjecture of Sepulveda, reprehend's both the
Conceit, and the Author; Lib. de Emendatione temporum.
the Conceit because falls, as he intimates in the Chap. De Era Hispanica,
mainteining that the word Era signified as much with the Ancient Latins, as
Summa, and that in old Spanish Monuments, it was not set Era, but Era, and
therefore could not be corrupted out of A. er. A. The Author he reprehendeth,
because he seems to be so far in love with this new Conceit, that for no
other reason he writ the whole Book of the correction of the Roman Year,
only to acquaint the World with this plausible devise. A hard censure from a
matchless man, for whom it had been happy that he had been ignorant but of
this one thing, that he knew so much. James Christman, Keckerman's most
learned Master, fetches this word out of his Arabi^k. It was called Era says
he, from Arah; which in the Arabians tongue signifies computare, to reckon.
Ch^istm. i^ lib. de connexione Annorum.
The Reader may enjoie the privilege of this variety, and take his Chois, if
he take them all, he may perchance lack the right, and he shall not take
much amiss if he take any; by either, and by that we have said he may
easily understand in what manner the word is used in History.

In stead of Era which the Latins used, the Greeks write Epoche, the same in
effect; it being derived from the word (...); signifying inhibere, because an
Era or Epoche does restrain matters noted in Antiquity to that certain time
which is so called. Concerning the Circle of the Sun and Moon each Almanac can
tell; as for Eclipses, Simplicius in Secun^ lib. de Coelo.
the Babylonians being great Astronomers observed the most that were visible
in the Horizon of Ashur during the space of this Monarchy, as Misthenes
searched out in the Chaldean Archives, at the request of Aristotle in the time
of Alexander; but these (...) came not to our hands, where any such
observation shall be found to be, we will make use of that which is left,
and griev for what is lost.

That which first require's our diligence, is to find out whither this
Monarchy were the first; which will prove a question, though it is not
ordinarily doubted of. The reason of the Question is the account of Affricanus;
which Scaliger following finds it to reach backward beyond the Flood, and
therefore he sets down according to Julius Affricanus, two Dynastics before
this of the Assyrians; the first of the Chaldeans whose State was overthrown by
the Arabians, In libello Canonum Isagogic.
and then theirs by the Babylonians. The Scripture makes no mention of any
King before Nimrod, and this Monarchy of Syria is amongst all the Greeks and
Latins accounted the most ancient; yet if it were as Julius says, then were
they but some petit governments, or else, which is most true, this Assyrian
Monarchy was the first after the Flood, R. Aben Ezra.
which also is the very mind and speech of a great Doctor among the Jews.

The second thing to be don, is to find out the Era of this Monarchy, when
it first began; which that it may be the better performed, we must first make
sure of the great and grand Epoche of the World's Creation, unto which the most
of Nations direct their Chronologies. Supposing therefore out of Christian
Philosophy, that this World had a beginning, it is most probable that it began
in some Cardinal point of the Celestial Motions, either in the Solstice, or in
the Equinox. Gerard Mercator supposes the Worlds Creation to have been about
the Summer Solstice, the Sun being in Aries, but the Contrary will appear.
The greatest controversy hold's to the Equinoxes, the most holding that the
Creation was in the Vernal Equinox; the best, in the Autumnal. The Saeder Olam
or Jewish Chronology relates, that there was a great disputation between Rabbi
Josue and Rabbi Eliezer concerning this Era: Rabbi Josue striving for the
Vernal, Eliezer for the Autumnal: The Latter will be found to be the most
Orthodox in the opinion, as shall thus appear.

And first no man can Question, but that the world began in that Period, from
whence the old world reckoned their years, which he that makes trial, shall
find to be from the Autumnal intersection, as is most apparent in accounting
the time of the Flood. Scaliger in Cap. de Cond. Mundi.

This manner of Computation Abraham taught the Egyptians, as an Ancient Author
Alexander Polyhistor testifies. Eusebius. l 9. de praep.
This Custom the Egyptians long retained, the Opinion always: for so,
according to their mind, Julius Firmicus the great Astrologer reports that
this was current, that the World was Created in posterioribus Librae: as we
find, says he, in the Barbarian Sphere. He spoke with a respect had to the
Phenomenon of his time; but it appears plainly what the Egyptian Sphere,
which he calls Barbarian, See for the reason the great Critic upon the
Sphoera Barbarica of Manilius.
had determined for the Epoche of the World's Creation.

The like Attestation may be observed in the Ancient Hetrurians, whose custom
was at the beginning of every Year, in stead of other Kalendars, to fix a Nail
in their great Temple, which Festus Rufus and Livie witness to have been don in
the Autumn.

Add hereunto, that Moses calls that the seventh Month, which in some part
answers to the Autumnal Equinox: This Month was called Aethanim, which the
Chaldie Paraphrast expounding, confirms all that has been said in these
words.

The Month Aethanim, which is now the seventh, was anciently called the first
Month. Wherefore the Almighty God laid the foundations of this greater World
in the first day of the Week at Even, beginning the 26 of October. the first
portion of Aries being in the first House, and the first of Capricorn in the
tenth, Libra, in the seventh, and Cancer in the fourth. The Sun, if then he
had been, should have entered the first degree of Libra, Mercury the twelfth,
and Venus the fourteenth: The Moon at the Conjunction: Saturn in the first of
Aries, Jupiter in Virgo, Mars in Leo, and the Dragons-head in Pisces.

This was the figure of the Heavens when they were first formed, the same
being Astronomically calculated and erected according to Tycho's Tables. See
Calvisius.

The Era of the Deluge reckoned from hence will easily appear out of Moses,
who lists to search his Genealogies of the old World, shall find the sum to
be 1656 years, with a fraction of 46 days.

The Septuagint accounts more, the Samaritans less: (...) etc. Computus
Samariticus ad Scaligerum, id est, Min Adam el Mocho Meeth Shanah, etc, from
Adam to his death are 130 years, etc.

Saeder Olam, Rabba and Z^tah.
That which we have set down is the account of the Hebrews both in their great
Chronology and the less, and is most agreeable to their great Prophet Moses.
These things being don; we shall the better find out to what Era our
Kingdom of Ashur must be referred, which shall be found out in this manner.

A priori this cannot be, but a posteriori thus. It must be observed in what
year the City of Babylon was taken in the time of Alexander the Great, and
that may easily be accomplished by the help of the Olympiads, and Nabonassar's
Era. Calvisius, with others, has don it to our hands, and it is exact. It was
says he in the 3619 year of the World. This year of the World was the 1902
year of the Babylonish Monarchy, as the Chaldeans themselves declared to
Calisthenes the Philosopher who was employed in this search, at the entreaty
of his Tutor Aristotle, the latter sum being deducted from the former,
Simplicius in Secund. lib. de Coelo.
there remains 1717 the Epoche or Era which we sought for within a small
matter. And for this we are greatly engaged to the dextrous care of our great
Philosopher, whose diligence if it had not here also helped us, the beginning of
this Kingdom had put Chronologers to an endlels labor. And now we dare believe
Diodorus; he says that the state of Ashur stood from the first to the death
of Sardanapalus 1360 years, from thence to the taking of Astyages by Cyrus,
Clesius a Physician of Cnidus accounts 313 years, which thing happened in the
year of the world 3391, in the first year of the 55 Olympiad: so 313 added 1360
make up the Sum of 1673, which deducted out of 3391 the year of the destruction
of the Medes, there remains for the Epoche of this Babylonish Monarchy 1718.
Wherefore from hence we must begin to reckon the Acts, Lives, and Successions
of these Kings of Ashur: we begin therefore with the first; to wit, Nimrod.

NIMROD. Annus Mundi 1718. Ante Christ. Not. 2230. Cycle of the Sun 18. Cycle
of the Moon 12.
Nimrod.
NImrod was the son of Chus, and he the son of Cham, for so says Moses. And
Chus begat Nimrod; and going forward, describes the Man to be a Mighty
Hunter, so famous, that it became a Proverb to say, Even as Nimrod a mighty
Hunter before the Lord. The Text plainly shows that this Nimrod was a King,
when it says, That the beginning of his Kingdom was Babel; the same also in the
same words declares, that he was a Babylonish King; So that our Monarchy was
begun at Babel by Nimrod. In that he was called a Mighty Hunter, Aben Ezra
expounds it in the better part; but for that he is reprehended by Ramban,
who affirms that he was indeed a Hunter, but not to procure Gods Altars,
Offerings, as the other supposes, because it is said he was a Hunter, mighty
before the Lord; but he was called a Hunter, because he was so indeed; but not
so only, but an oppressor too: his continual conversation with bruit beasts
changed his humane disposition into a barbarous and agrestick behavior, and
the privilege of Dominion which he had long used over the beasts, he began to
usurp over Men. So Ralbag expounds, He began, says he, to be Mighty;
that is, (says the Rabbin) (...) parash. Noach. because he began to hunt after
Domination or Principality. fol. (...)
The same Rabbi in the same place says, that he was called a mighty Hunter,
(...) because he was mighty to hunt men, and to subdue them under him. Don
Isaac Abarbinel intimates a reason of men's subjection to him. (...) (...) that
is, Because he made himself a mighty Hunter of Beasts and subdued them, the
sons of men seeing that Bears and Lions were subdued before him with all their
might, they also for fear of him submitted to him.

It appears therefore by the general consent of the Hebrews, that this Nimrod
was the founder of the Babylonish Kingdom, and that by a Tyrannical kind of
absolute power, he subdued the world to this new kind of Government.

Among the Greeks, hear what Epiphanius has said, (...), etc. Others have said
as much.

Some have thought this Nimrod to be Ninus, others to be Belus, both
unadvisedly; for that Nimrod was not Ninus, Justin approve's out of his Author
Trogus Pompie; for it was, says he, from the beginning of this Monarchy till
the time of Sardanapalus 1300 years, but he reckon's that beginning from Ninus:
but we have proved before, that the Epoche of this Kingdom comprehends 60
years more, and therefore cannot begin in the reign of Ninus, but 60 years
before; which 60 years must be restored to some King before Ninus, either to
Nimrod or Belus, or else divided between them both, and that is most likely;
because Eupolemon an ancient Author makes mention of Belus the second, which
could not be without some reference to a Predecessor of the same name; and this
without all question was our mighty Hunter, who after he had possessed a
World of degenerate minds with the opinion of his greatness, easily wrought
the unsettled fancies of the Vulgar sort into a necessary and undoubted
superstition. The true God they had forgotten, or else they never knew him; a
God they must have, quia nulla gens tam barbara, etc. Nimrod opposes the
fortitude and felicity of his designs, and easily intrappeth a multitude to
worship him, who must needs worship some one, and besides him knew not whom:
therefore instantly they call him Baal; or as we corruptly write Bell; which in
our language signifies a Lord: and because after his death another succeeded,
both in his Place and Name, he was called Bell from his Dominion, and Bell the
second because Nimrod had reigned before him. This conjecture can produce a
Patron to enforce the probability. It Is Abarbinel upon that place in Esaie*
Bell is bowed down and Neho stoopeth. His words are these, (...) (...) read the
rest in that place.

The Rabbin says that the Latin Scribes have written that this Nimrod, who
reigned first in Babel, made himself a God, and commanded that they should serve
him, because 'twas he that first had builded Babel, etc. after this he made an
Idol after his own Image and called it Bell.

To this purpose the Rabbin concerning the Stature of Nimrod: I had said
nothing, had not Methodius said too much; who affirms, and from him Luca
Tudensis, that this Nimrod was no less then ten Cubits high, believ this that
will; if it were, or could be so, the Seventie Interpreters did well to call
him a Giant.

Of the manner of his death, Annius has made Berosus lie, Spirits took him
away; and Funccius will needs believ this, as appears by his Gloss upon the
Fiction, that is (says he) The Devils took him away for his grand Impiety,
etc.

Cedrene says, that Nimrod was called Evechous* this he took from an Ancient
Author Estiaeus of Miletum whose words are these.

(...), which either are the words of the Author we have said, or else Eusebius.
Vide Eusebium Scaligerianum. page 14.

I find in one of those Manuscripts which were transported from Baroeius his
most famous Library to the Universitie of Oxford, an observable abstract of
Chronology deduced from Adam, thence I transcribed what I found most
convenient, for the illustration of that which we have now in hand. First
therefore for the life of Nimrod, the Abstract says thus.

(...), Tale aliquod ad Cedrenum Lego and ad Chronicon Alexandrinum, ubi vide.
(...) and paulo post. (...) rurfus. (...), etc.

The Author we see gives a pregnant testimony to what we have said, See also
Cedren for this of Orion, and the Chronicon Alexandrinum.
adding also one thing more then we knew before that this Nimrod at his death
was Deified, as in his life we have proved, so that he seems to be a God
of some note, but if we mark, we shall find that his divinity transcend's
not the eight sphere.

As his place was changed, so his name, that from Earth to Heaven, this from
Nimrod to Orion: The Greek Poets would laugh at this, as we will now at them,
having undoubtedly found the truest meaning of this Constellation. I will not
burden the discourse nor imploie the page with their vain Fictions; who list
elsewhere to see them, let him repair to Higinus, Aratus, Manilius, Stoffler
upon the Sphere of Proclus, and the nameless Scholiast upon Caesar Germanicus
that was found in Sicile. This only I may say that, the Conceit was truly
Poetical; (...), that is, merely made, not told, as having no footstep in
Story, nor foundation in Verity, save only their misconceit of the name
Orion, quasi Vrion: This infirm Gloss upon that word, however at the best not
able to stand by it self, was after made far more impotent by their halting
between two opinions; one while conceiving Orion to be that he is; another
while to be Arctophylax: far widely guessing, the one being in the North, the
other in the South. See Hesychius in (...)* But how well our Author accords
with the truth, we shall see and greatly approve. That Orion was a Hunter, the
Greeks themselves con^ess. So Theon upon Aratus his Phenomenon page 539 of that
which was printed in quarto at Paris.

Moses records the like of this Nimrod; the Fables also say he was a King;
and in Jansson's Globes he is called Bellator fortissimus. The Astronomers of
Arabia call him (...) Algebar, that is as the Lxx does, the Giant. All this
agree's. Add hereunto his posture in the Heavens, highly becoming his
profession, to show he was a Soldier, he is placed with sword and Buckler,
and is therefore called by the sweetest Poet (...). Musaeus in Her. and
Leandro. (...).
To beetoken his Huntsmanship he holds in his hand the skin of a wild
Beast, and in the Asterisms of Caesar Germanicus, he has a Bow ready drawn:
besides this he has a Hare at his Feet, and the two Dogs behind. Cisleu from
Cesil because of the inconstant weather which is caussed at the rising of this
Star; for Cesil signifies inconstancy;, of this see R. Benjamin in his
Itinerarie.
Let now the Reader judge: nay Homer says, That is Orion's dog, in these words:
(...). to which Theon in Aratus adds, (...), etc. because Orion being a
hunter must have his Dog to follow him. Of this Orion Moses makes mention, if
he wrote the Book of Job, Chap. 9. and 9. yea God himself in the 38 of that
Book, because he had to deal with an Arabian, questioneth him in his own
Astrology, Can thou bind (says he) the swift influence of the Pleiades,
or loos the bands of Orion? The Original in both places, as also in Amos, who
had it from hence, is (...) Cesil, so called from the inconstancy of the
weather at the Astronomical Asscension of this Constellation: from whence also
their Month Cisleu.

That this Cesil here signifies a Star all agree, the difference is amongst
them, which of all those innumerable Lights, this Cesil should be. Hierome by
the instruction of his Jew no doubt, translate's it Orion. Rab Jonah in M.
Kimchi says, (...) that by this Cesil is meant that great Star which the
Arabians call Sohel: Rab. Jonah in Rab. K^mchi.
this Sohel is not Orion, but Canopus a bright Star that strike's the Horizon
of Rhodes, and is placed in the Argonavis, as James Christman most truly
collecteth out of the Arabian Alfraganus; and for this cause the learned
Linguist turn's head upon the whole strein of Interpreters who translate's
(with a general consent) Orion. I will not be so bold, because I am not so well
able: yet I should ask his leav to follow the old interpretation for one reason
of my own, because I see the Chaldee Paraphrast render's that word Cesil by
(...) which signifies a Giant; and therefore in all probability intended this
mighty Hunter great Nimrod, bold Orion.

The Reader may perchance ask one question, why Nimrods name should be changed
into Orion. I answer as near as I can conjecture, that this is the reason:
Being upon the earth as he was, he was fitly called Nimrod, which signifies
a Tyrant; but when he began to be numbered among the Stars of Heaven, he was
not unaptly termed Orion, (...) from (...), or which signifies the Sun, in the
plural in Chaldee (...) Orin, which signifies the conspicuous Lights of
Heaven, as these Stars in Orion rise to the elevation of Chaldea, glittering
(...). Hipparchus of Bythinia in his Asterismes.
upon the Equinoctial in the North and South part of Heaven.

Synchronism.
The Language is Confounded, and the Earth divided.

And therefore a man of note born at that time was called Peleg, that is
Division, from (...), dividere.

In Nimrod's time Serug deserves to be remembered, if that be true which
Suidas writes, (...)

The Author says, he was a Carver of Images, nay he adds, that he was a
teacher of Idolatry. If so, then this might be the man that made Nimrod God;
see Suidas in (...), and the same in Estiaeus of Miletum, whence Suidas had it.
Eusebii Scaliger, page 13.

Nahor is born in the thirtieth year of Serug, he lived one hundred and forty
eight years; and was Abraham's grandfather.

Nimrod teaches the worship of the Host of Heaven, makes the Sun the greatest
God above, and himself below. See Abarbinel, upon Genesis at these words: (...)
Abarb. in par. Noach.

Of the worship of the Sun we have already discoursed in the Manners of the
Assyrians; from these the Idolatry spread it self to the Egyptians, Persians,
Medes, and throughout the whole world: No Nation but worshipped the Host of
Heaven. The Scythians worshipped the North Star, and called it the Iron
immovable Nail. As for the Planets they were the constant Gods of all
Countries, to whom the very Week-daies have been by the most Ancient Nations
religiously dedicated. We will instance only in our own, Sun-daie and
Moon-daie from the Sun and Moon; Tuesdaie from Tuisco, Mercury; wednesdaie,
from Woden, Mars; Thursdaie from Thor, Jupiter; Fridaie from Friga, Venus;
Saturdaie from Seater, Saturn.

These were the first Gods the Greeks knew, and therefore they called from
these all other; (...), because these kept their continual course without
interruption.

The Paeonians adored the Sun under the form of a Cup-dish. (...). Maximus the
Tyrian, Sermon. 38. Because the Sun seems to resemble that form, and therefore
(...) is sometimes taken for Solis Orbis.

The Reason that moved Nimrod to command the worship of the Sun, was first, the
manifold benefits redounding to Men by this most glorious Planet: Secondly,
because the Sun was chief amongst the Planets, which these Nations easily knew
by their great searches of Astrology.

Nimrod teaches the worship of fire, as seeming to bear a great affinity with
the Sun; or else because it was the custom of Sem's God to answer by fire, as at
Abraham's offering when the birds were divided, and as some think, at Abel's
offering; for this was a great argument of God's acceptance if he consumed the
offering; which is the reason, that where the English Metaphrase reads, Thou
shall accept our offerings, Psalm. 51. The Hebrew says, Thou shall consume etc.
The like was don in the time of King Solomon, and in the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes under the Maccabees, whereof see Josephus in his Hebrew History.

It might therefore com thus to pass, that these perceiving that there was a
voice came in the fire, and the fire only appeared and consumed the offerings,
upon this conceit they thought reverently of the fire; This Idolatry also was
not contained within Vr of the Chaldees, but the Persian had it in high
estimation. Herod. Diodor. Q Curtius, Arrian, Strabo, etc. After these the
Trojanes, then the Romans.

Maximus Tyrius very elegantly reprehendeth this kind of Idolatry in his
Sermon aforesaid. Suidas and Ruffinus tell a Story of our Chaldeans concerning
their God Fire. Suidas thus, (...), etc.

The sum is, that the Chaldeans once upon a time carried their God about to
try the masterie amongst all others, so it came to pass that the fire consumed
all Gods that were made, of brass, gold, silver, wood or stone: but when they
came to Egypt, Canopus the Priest work't wililie, and to save the credit of the
old Gods, make's a new in this manner: He takes an old water vessel full of
holes, stopped up with wax, and upon this he set's the head of an old Idol, in
coms the fire, and being placed under the God, the wax melt's, and the fire
was extinguished: from henceforth the Fire lost it is credit among all Nations,
as it is at this day.

Belus 2.
THis Belus whether he were this Son or Nephew of Nimrod, or what affinity to
him he might have, Antiquity discovers not. Reyneccius is bold to conceiv,
that this was Arphaxat; if ye ask the reason, he answers, Because S. Cyril
calls this Belus Arbelus, which he indeavoureth to wring out of Arphaxat;
the conceit as I conceiv is slender, though this Author deserves well of all
Historians.

Sanchuniathen, an ancient Author among the Phoenicians, affirms that this
Belus was the Son of Saturn: This was Nimrod so called by the profane Autors,
as many have conceived: if so, then Nimrod is he of whom Ovid speak's, that
in his time the Golden age flourished, So Eupolemon.

Certainly that Conceit of the Poets, in comparing the Ages of the World to
Metals, seems to have sprung from Daniel's own Comparison, which he relates
out of the Kings dream concerning the Head of Gold, the Arms and Shoulders of
Silver, etc. In that sens, Nimrod might be Saturn; and Belus might be his
successor, to wit, Jove; for so this Bell was called: And thus, forgiving Ovid
the fable, this is nothing else, but what he has said, That the golden Age,
that is, the Age designed by the head of Gold, was in the days of Saturn, that
is, Nimrod. It Is ordinarily granted, that Ovid had seen the books of Moses, and
under the same privilege he might also read the Prophet Daniel, fetching his
golden days from hence, and Saturn from thence.

Whereas this Bell was called Jove, it is to be understood, that as Bell was a
name proper, first to the true God (for so he is called in Osee,) so Jehovah
also was a sacred expression of the Trinity in Unity at the first, and
afterward by the Sacrilege of a crooked generation unaptly given to these
arrogant Kings. Belus perhaps first called the Sun so, and himself afterward;
as Nimrod did the Sun by the name of Bell: which name the Sun still kept in
Phaenicia long after these times, for there they called the S^n Baalsemen, that
is the Lord of Heaven. And that the Sun was called Jove, the Devil confesses
in the Oracle of Apollo Clarius.

(...)
(...),
(...).
When or where this Bell died it is unknown; and how many years he lived, is
altogether as uncertain: this only is true, that 60 years must be distributed
between him and his predecessor, but at what proportion this distribution
should be made is no way manifest.

Synchronismi.
OF the Sicyonians. See Pausanias, Suidas, Homer remembers them. Iliad b.

The Kingdom of the Sicyonians was founded in the Reign of Belus in
Peloponnesus.

(...). The same see also in the successions of Affricanus. both say that this
Kingdom was first founded by Aegialeus, from whom Peloponnesus was first called
Aegialia. Note the Antiquity of the Greeks, whose first beginings were founded
in Sicyonia: which place was so called from Javan, who first pitched his Tent
there, For Sicyon is (...) Succoth Javan, or it may be set Succah Jon, the
dwelling of Javon, by whom throughout the whole Scripture the Hebrews
understood the Greeks: hence Jones, and the Ionick tongue, in which the most
ancient Poets are exstant.

Terah the Father of Abraham is born.

Ninus.
THis Ninus was the Son of Belus, so all profane History affirms by a common
consent, Justine, Diodorus, and the rest.

The brief discourse of this Kings life, see in Justin. Ctesias of Cnidas wrote
the better part of his more noble expeditions, but Diodorus confesses that
none ever writ them all. Diodorus ex Ctesia. He made war with many Nations,
and was the first as these Autors think that violated that community which men
formerly enjoyed. It seems he was the first that they knew; but Moses tells
us of one before him, and Eupolemon of another.

Ninus made war with the King of the Bactrians, in which war his Captain Menon
fell in love with Semiramis in which suit Ninus was corrival and got the
Gentlewoman; not her good will; doing not what she would, but what he listed;
for that, Menon becom's desperate, and for the loss of his Love cast's away
himself. Ctesias.

Colophonius Phaenix a Poet, has thus set forth the life of this Prince. (...),
(...), etc.


Ninus vir quidam fuit, ut audio, Assyrius, qui auri Mare possidebat: Et alia,
copiosius quam arena est Caspia.

Astra nunquam vidit, nec forsitan id optavit.

Ignem apud Magos Sacrum non excitavit.

Et lege Statutum est: Deum nec Virgis attigit.

Sacrificiis, Deos non est veneratus: jura non reddidit.

Subjectos sibi populos affari non didicit: ac ne numerare quidem.

Verum ad edendum, ac bibendum strenuissimus.

Vinumque miscens, caetera in Saxa amandabat.

Vir ille ut Mortuus est, hoc de se testimonium reliquit omnibus.

Sepulchrum hoc conspicatus, nunc ubi Ninus sit, Audi.

Sive sis Assyrius, sive Medus, sive Coraxus, sive a supervis Indus capillatus;
frivola non denuncio.

Quondam ego Ninus fui, Spiritumque vitalem, hausi: Nunc vero aliud nihil, quam
serra factus sum.

Quicquid comedi, habeo; quicquid volupe mihi fuit.

Et quiquid pulcharum foeminarum in amore lascivii.

Opes, quibus eram beatus; inimici coeuntes.

Auferent, hoedum ut crudum quae bacchantur Thyades.

Ad inferos cum descendi, nec aurum, nec equum.

Nec argenteum currum egi.

Cinis jam multus, qui olim Mitram gestavi.

Athenaeus lib. 12. Diodorus speaking of this Ninus gives another report, for
he says this Man was (...), born to be Martial, and valorous even to
emulation.

Ninus made war with the Armenians in which case their King Barzanes perceiving
himself too weak, conquered his enemy by his submission: which Ninus
ingeniously apprehending, as generously rewarded, and restored the Kingdom to
the King again. Diodor. lib. 2.

Ninus dies, and was buried in the Palace, in memorial of whom was erected a
most stately Monument in Height nine furlongs, and in breadth ten: a wonderful
sumptuous Tomb, if Ctesias say true. But Scaliger says, that he was Scriptor
Nugacissimus; If he were, I wonder much that Diodorus should so often use his
Authority, as is most certain that he does.

Concerning the City which Ninus builded, the Author of the Chronological
Abstract before cited, says thus, (...).

Synchronismi.
FRom Ninus to Sardanapalus is 1300 years. Justin out of Trogus Pompeie.

Zoroastres reigned in Bactria, Justin.

Farnus in Media. Diod.

Ariaeus in Arabia. Diod,

Barzanes in Armenia. Diodorus.

In the time of Ninus also Vexores was King of Egypt. Tanais of Scythia.
Justine ex Trogo.

Salian thinks it absurd that there should be any King before the division
of the World, and therefore condemns Julius Affricanus for his Dynasties of
the Arabians, and reprehendeth Justine for these Kings of Egypt and Scythia,
which are set down by Trogus Pompeie. So, as if the succession had been long.
But Justine, and these Autors deserv our credit: for the Era of the Egyptian
Dynastie, or the Scythian, I find in the false Berosus too much, elsewhere too
little, Diodorus is best, but with him the first Kings of Egypt were all Gods.
See further, Diod. Lib. 1.

In the Reign of Ninus great Abraham was born.

Because the Nativivitie of this famous Patriarch Abraham is of special note and
use in History, it seems to deserv more at our hands, then to be carelessly
committed to the protection of a bare Assertion; meriting rather some
peremptory proof, especially since learned Scaliger has conceived the
contrary. Rather therefore then we will doubt of his credit, we will for his
sake call the truth in Question, doubtingly demanding

Whether Abraham were born in the 43 year of King Ninus, yea or no?

A great Master in History, and our only guide in Chronology affirms,
Eusebius Pamphilus, and he out of the reverend relics of old Castor,
Thallus, etc. first in his first Book, and again in his second, which he
calls his (...). In both he uses these and the same words.

(...), etc. the same Author pleasing himself in the verity of this persuasion,
repeat's the same again in his Evangelical Preparative, where he bears
witness to himself, and to what he had said elsewhere, -- (...) (...). (...).
ita Epiphanius lib 1. pagina 10. edit Basiliensis.
The Reader may be pleased to note his confidence in these words (...); and
his great industry herein, in those (...), etc. George Cedren and Epiphanius,
no way mistrusting such elaborate Canons, Ced^enus in, Compendio Histor.
take it for granted; proposing and approving the Authority of this great
Chronologer. (...). Wonder we then what should moov great Scaliger to set down
Abraham born in the year of Beluchus, long after Ninus. His follower and
admirer Helvicus has no other reason but the authority of his great example.
The truth is Scaliger confesses that his forerunner in this conceit was George
Syncellus, a Monk. This George was learned but (in the opinion of Scaliger) a
most severe Critic, and Censorious judge of Fusebius Pamphilus, whose
Chronology he transcribed and examined. In his Examination, he found that
Eusebius undertaking to follow Affricanus, yet when he com's to the Trojan
times, forsakes him, interrupting the succession by rasing out four Kings at
once. Thus indeed Eusebius has don. Salian a diligent Writer among the
Moderns, Animad. version. Scalig. ad Eusebium, pagin. 15. and in No it is.
excuses the error of his History, by the Heresy of his profession: as if an
Arrian (if he were one) might not be a good Historian. We shall forbear to
seek to save his credit, by discovering so much of his infamy: but the reason
why he thus did, was to rectify the errors of Affricanus, whose Chronology
though it will no ways hold in all points, yet it best agrees this ways; for
if we restore him his four Kings again he himself will be found subject to
greater inconveniences, and more abound in Anachronisms, then before. This I
then rather incline to, for my own particular, because I have considered, that
though George Cedren professes himself in the first page of his work,
constantly to follow the aforenamed Syncellus, yet in this matter he refuses
him: at once acknowledging and leaving his error, for Cedren plainly sets
down our Patriarch born in the 43 of Ninus as aforesaid. Thus to the probable
falsehood of renowned Scaliger, Thus also Salian, Funccius, Angelocrator,
Alapide, Narclerus: but this later desscenteth one year, or else the the Printer
was too blame
we have set down the probability of the contrary; to his greatness we
oppose three to one, and those all great, who cannot but demerit our belief,
because their process is Astronomical, and their Chronologies faithfully
contracted out of the larger Volumes of Celestial Revolutions and infallibly
grounded upon the Laws of Heaven. These are Gerard, Merca^or, Cethus,
Calvisius, and Capellus; who all consent in this, that Abraham was born in the
43 of Ninus, which was the thing to be proved.

This Man for his Admirable skill in Celestial contemplations was noted by many
Autors among the Heathen. Herataeus of Abd^ra wrote whole Volumes of his Acts
and Monuments. Berosus observes that he was a great Astronomer: and Josephus
says he read this part of the Mathematics to the Egyptians.

Nicolas of Damascus relates a brief Story of his life agreeable to Moses.

Alexander out of Eupolemon makes mention of this Abraham, testifying that he
was the inventer of Astrology among the Chaldeans, they tell also of his
Expedition, and Melchisedeth, etc. Eusebius.

Artapanus records, that the Jews were called Hebrews from Abraham; he says
also that Abraham went into Egypt and taught the King Astronomy, the Kings
name he calls Pharetho, his words are (...): He would say Pharaoh. Thus
Artapanus in Eusebius. (...).

Melo in his Discourse against the Jews writes also of this Abraham, and says
that he was so called, to express thus much in force, to wit his Father's
Friend, one part of his name signifies a Father indeed; and the other,
according as it might be written, might be forced to signify a Friend: but
let that pass. This Melo tells of his two wives, of his sons by both, and
summeth up his whole Story. Of these testimonies: See more in Eusebius Pamp.
(...).

Concerning Abraham thus Eusebius.

(...). page 19.

See also what Julius Africanus has storied of Abraham, and his Expedition to
Pentapolis. Eusebius. (...), page 19.

Semiramis.
ALL Writer have showed their good will to make the world acquainted with the
renown of this manly woman, but in their discourse there has been as much
deceit, as in her desert. Diodorus confesses her pedigree to have no better
Authority then from the Fables. The most say she was the Wife of Ninus; so
Ctesias and Diodorus, and many besides: but Conon in Photius says, she was
the Mother of Ninus, (...), But the error of this ancient Author is most
apparent, for by Ninus he means Ninias, who also was called (...), as
Affricanus witnesses: and so indeed she was the Wife of Ninus, and the Mother
of his son Ninias, which Conon undoubtedly meant: for he says that the reason
why she was supposed to be his wife was, because she unwittingly lay with
him. Justine expound's the Autors mistake, who says indeed that she would
have been incestuous with her Son; which fact her son by an unnatural kind of
piety, punished with her life.

Because Diodorus says, that when this Semiramis was exposed (according to the
Ancients) a Shepherd took her in, whose name was Simma. Reyneccius conjectures
from hence, that she was the Daughter of Sem. It Is uncertain who, or what she
was: Semiramis she was called, which because it signifies a Dove in their
language, therefore it seems her Subjects for the sacred memory of her names
sake worshipped the Pigeons ever after.

But Scaliger says he finds no such word in Syriack in that sens; the
Critic shall be pardoned for that, it is like there is now no such world;
However, there might Vetus verborum interit aetas, Et juvenum ritu, florent
(...) modo nata, vigentque. So the Poet in his Art Poetica.

Words have their ages: the Obsolete die, and young Phrases grow up and thrive
in their places. Hesychius emboldeneth us, for he says that,

(...). If Semiramis be a Wood-Pigeon in Graece, it may perchance have been an
Hous-Pigeon in the Country of Ashur.

Semiramis her exploit of the Elephants in the Bactrian and Indian war, see in
Diodorus.

The German Writers say, her son Trebeta built Trevers, which they
peremptorily conclude out of their own presumption upon the rotten reputation
of an old eaten Epitaph.

Of the great Stone which this Queen caussed to be cut out of the Armenian
Mountains, see also Diodorus lib. 2.

Justin relates out of Trogus Pompeie, that this Queen after her Husband's
death, fearing in the subjects hearts some disloial prejudice of her son's
minority, invested her Majestical spirit in her son's habit, and approved her
self to be by valiant acts, not what she was, a woman; but what they thought
her to be; a Prince discreet, politic, and most fortunate.

This Queen built the walls of Babylon. So Ovid, as we have said; so Dionysius
Afer (...)
(...).


The Anonymus Scholiast upon Aristoph. says, that she builded the City.

(...).

And so many others have been deceived with her fame, and attributed to her
name the building of the City, who had erected nothing but the walls, nor
those walls whereof Diodorus speak's; for both those, and the City were
builded by a Syrian King: as Didorus confesses of the Horti pensiles, and
might have don of these also; however he, and they that think otherwise,
deceiv themselves: for this was don by the King of Babel, as we will prove out
of Berosus, in the life of Nebuchadonosor.

Semiramis reigned 42 years, Justine, Africanus.

Semiramis erected her self a Tomb, inscribed thus, What King soever wants
money, let him open this Monument, and take his desire. This Darius Hystaspis
assaying to do, found a check within the Tomb, wherein the Queen had thus
written, Nisi vir malus esses, haud sane mortuorum loculos scrutasses.

Synchronismi.
SEmiramis fenceth in Babylon the Head-Citie with a famous wall, Coctilibus
muris cinxisse
Semiramis urbem.
Ovid. Metamorph. She builded a Wall, but not that famous Wall which the
Greeks tell of, but for that are reprooved by the true Berosus.

In the time, and by the appointment of Semiramis the first Eunuchs were
instituted: This the Queen did for necessity, but the Kings after her used it
amongst their royal superfluities: a thing ordinary in the Persian and
Babylonish Court.

That this Queen was the first appointer of this chaste attendance for her
Bed-cham^^^ Ammianus testifiet^.

In honor of Semiramis the Kingdom of Ashur bare the Dove in their Coat armor;
but it is out of my element to blazon it, either by Planets or otherwise: for
this Coat Armor is scarcely found among the Heralds: nor can it be certain
what the Field was, though the charge is known to be a Dove, yet because it is a
Princes, one thing is undoubted, that Emperors and Kings ought to bear Gold in
their Arms, and then it might be thus;

The Field is Sol, a Dove volant proper, etc.

Learned Pierius endeavoring as near as he can to read all things in Egyptian
Characters, supposes the Story of Semiramis her Dove, to be Hieroglyphical,
noting out her notable lasciviousness; for so he says, that this Queen was
venereous.

Autors indeed are diverse; but the most are of a contrary opinion. Many
suppose that place in the Prophet Hieremie, (...) Mippene hreu haionah, fugite
a facie Columbae, to be understood of the Assyrians, because as we said, they
bare the Dove in their Warlike ensigns. So Cornelius a Lapide, and many
others, following the Interpretation of Hierome, who at the 13 of Esaie
writes, that God calls Nebuchadnezar, Columbam. So a most Ancient Saxon
Translation in the Library of Christ-Church in Oxford, from the face of the
sword of the Kulver. If the Interpretation pass, as it may, that which has
been said may make for the illustration: for then it is thus, Flee from the
Sword of the Dove, that is, from their sword who displaie their Banners in the
field with the Ensign of a Dove.

Heralds may here take notice of the Antiquity of their Art, and for their
greater credit, blazon abroad this precious piece of Antientrie; for before the
time of Semiramis we hear no news of Coats or Crests.

Zames sive Ninias.
OF this King see Justine out of Trogus Pompeie.

A fragment out of Ctesias in Athenaeus relates, that he was a Luxurious
Prince.

(...) etc. Sic Ctesias.

Diodorus also makes mention of this Zames Ninias, in whom see further.

That this Ninias spent his time otherwise then became a Prince, Trogus
relates in Justine in these words.

Filius ejus Ninus contentus elaborato a parentibus imperio, belli studia
deposuit and veluti sexum cum matre mutasset, raro a viris visus in foeminarum
turba consenuit. Posteri quoque, ejus exempla sequuti, responsa gentibus per
internuncios dabant.

Synchronismi.
ABout the time of this Ninias, happened that remarkable Judgment of God upon
Pentapolis, or the five Cities, to wit, Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim and
Segor; which deserv's to be remembered as well by us, as a profane Historian
Cornelias Tacitus; whose attestation to Moses in this matter is well worth our
consideration.

The Author having described the Lake of Sodom, adds as follows,

Haud procul inde campi, quos olim uberes magnisque urbibus habitatos, fulminum
jactu arsisse, and manner vestigia, terramque specie torridam vim frugiferam
perdidisse. Nam cuncta sponte edita, aut manu sata sive herba tenus aut flore,
seu solitam in speciem adolevere, atra and inania velut in cineres evanescunt.
Ego sicut Judaicas quondam urbes igne coelesti flagrasse concesserim, ita
halitu lacus infici terram, corrumpi superfusum spiritum eoque foetus segetum
and Autumni putrescere reor, Solo, caeloque juxta gravi. Tacitus Hist. lib. 4.
page 619. Lipsianae editionis in octavo.

The Author of the Abstract before mentioned, when he comes to Ninus, sets
down to succeed him one Thourias, who was called Ares, to whom he says they
made the first Statue, and called it (...), (that is Lord God:) of which says
he the Prophet Daniel has made mention. Suidas either had this from this
Author, or he from Suidas, who has written the same; for as I know not the
Author, so neither his time. It was after Eusebius; how long, I yet cannot tell,
whereas they cite Daniel, we are to understand, not that Man of desires, but
his name's sake, entitled to the Story of Bell and the Dragon, which who will
may read more at large in Hebrew, then it is found in Greek, if they will
patiently revolv the Stories of Josippus the Jew, called also Gorionides. After
Thourias the Abstract places Lames, then Sardanapalus; omitting that whole
succession of Affricanus without recompens, more then of Thourias and Lames,
neither of which are known.

Thus far the better hand of pure Antiquity has helped us.

Julius Affricanus reckons up ^he Kings from Zames to Sardanapalus; and after
him Eusebius: and amongst the Moderns, Funccius, Angelocrator, Henningius,
Reyneccius, and diverse others. Those that deserv greatest commendation, are
first and chiefly Sethus Calvisius in his judicious Chronology: After him
Salian in his Annals; so Joseph Scaliger in his Isagogical Canons.

However I might have both their help and Authority, yet I forbear so to fill
up the great Chasm in this part of our Monarchy: yet it shall not be said
that I refused to follow such great Leaders, for a little reason.

Amongst others, these two have principally persuaded.

First because the Account of Africanus, reckoned per (...), that is, summing up
the years of each King together, agrees not with the Computation of the years
in general.

Secondly, because we find in Autors of undoubted Credit, some Kings of Ashur,
whom notwithstanding we find not in the succession of Africanus: as for
Example, Moses makes mention of Amraphel, whom the Hebrews would have to be
Nimrod: grounding their conceit upon a fabulous Etymology; because they say
Abraham was brought before Nimrod for burning his Father Terah's Idols, and
being then but three years old, discoursed before the Tyrant concerning the
Creator of Heaven and Earth: Nimrod proudly replied, that it was he that made
the Heavens and the host of Heaven; if so said Abram, then say thou to thy Sun,
that he should rise in the West, and set in the East, and I will believ thee;
Nimrod thus exasperated with the childs audacitie and discretion, command's
that he should be cast into the fire; therefore the Jews say, that he was
called Amraphel from (...) amar and (...) phul that is dixit descend, he said
to Abraham, go, go down into the fire, and this say they is Vr of the
Chaldees, out of which God brought Abraham. This Story is in the Book of Maase
Torah (...) and postea. (...) See Munster's Annotations upon Genesis where
these words and the entire Story is set down out of the aforesaid Book* but
this discourse is idle.

Again Suidas makes mention of one (...), who rained after Ninus; and
Macrobius of one Deleboris: but of these or either of them, Africanus says
nothing. Some would have that (...) or (...) in Suidas to be Arius in
Affricanus: their reason is a Conjecture from another name, which this (...)
had: for which see Suidas, in this word Thurias.

Besides all this, Diodorus reckons but thirti^ Kings from Ninias to
Sardanapalus; But Affricanus accounts more. This disorder and disagreement in
the matter has moved us to break of the Succession in this place from Ninias
to Sardanapalus, interposing one only Prince, of whom Diodorus makes mention,
that in his time happened the Noble Expedition of the Argonautes, and the wars
of Troie. The King's name was Teutames; but in what place to rank him, I find
not, not following Affricanus.

So does the Abstract, leaving out all those Kings which in Affricanus and the false Berosus were suspected adulterine: a thing in this nameless Author much to
be regarded; for certainly he took it for granted, that this part of the
Succession was merely lost, and without hope of recoverie. I will add one
reason more, which at this instant take's me up, that the maintainers of these
Kings, reciting their names, put's the Readers off so slenderly, that we
cannot but suspect them; for of each King they still disgracefully report that
he did nothing worthy of memory: a likely matter, that all those Kings were
idle.

The Trojan war is famous, and a great part thereof Fabulous.

For the History, see Dictys the Cretian, and Dares the Trojan; translated,
the one out of the Phoenician Language, Or rather our own Josephus Iscanus.
the other out of the Greek tongue by Cornelius Nepos; though some have called
in question the credit of both these.

See also Valerius Flaccus in Latin, and Apollonius in Greek for these
Argonautes.

The last King therefore of the first state of this Monarchy was Sardanapalus;
as Diodorus and Trogus make mention. Diodor. lib. 2. Justin ex Trogo libro. 1.

Sardanapalus.
He was the son of Anacyndraxis. A most obscene and most lascivious Prince,
set forth not only in his nature, but his name also, as Cicero has observed.

Justine relates his wanton and enormous practices; so Diodorus, and
Athenaeus, Suidas, and many more: scarce an Author that past by his infamy,
without a reprehension and reproach.

An Ancient Author, Duris in Athenaeus deserves to be read concerning the
manners of this womanly and effeminate Prince: Hoc solo imitatus virum, (says
Justine) in this only he was like a man, in that he burned himself. Of the
manner how, read Athenaeus; and of the reason why, see Causabon's discourse upon
that place.

The most renowned Atchievment that ere this Prince brought to pass was, that
he built two Cities in one day, Tarsus and Anchialus: as the Epitaphsi make
mention in the Autors aforenamed.

For so Aristobulus report's, that his Tomb was set at Anchialus thus inscribed,

(...). that is, Sardanapalus, Anacyndraxi filius, Tarsum and Anchialum eodem
die condidit. Ede, bibe, lude: nam caetera omnia nec hujus sunt: that is, not
worth a sillip. For so his Statue was carved, as if his hands had given a
fillip, and his mouth had spoken those words.

The like Epitaph was inscribed upon a stately Monument in Ninive, in the
Chaldee tongue, which the Greek Poet Chaerilus thus translated:

(...), Caetera vide apud Amyntam (...). Athenaeus.

The like was at Tarsus, where S. Paul was born: at which this Apostle without
question alluding to that place. (...). Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall die.

The great Enormities of this King brought forth the Confusion of the Kingdom,
the instrument whereof, was the Rebellion of his Captain Arbaces Governor of
the Medes, with whom Sardanapalus fought for the Monarchy, and got the
victory once, and the second time: upon which success the effeminate Prince
presuming, the third time in a secure disdain went not in person, because also
the Oracle had undoubtedly foretold, that the State of Ninive should never
totter, till the River Tigris proved hostile; which in the Kings judgment could
never be. But it fell out otherwise; for in this third Skirmish, Tigris
swelling over his bounds, by the vantage of a greater flood then ordinary,
played an unneighbourly part, and battered down his own borders; at whose
irruption a great part of the impregnable wall was laid level with the ground,
the city it self opening to her adversaries, to check the vice of her
Governors.

Synchronismi.
Tarsus and Auchialus founded by Sardanapalus in one day.

In the time of Sardanapalus, Arbaces was Governor of the Medes, and Belochus
of the Babylonians. Much question might be made in this place, what King
continued the Monarchy; whether Belochus were Phul, or no: or if not, who this
Phul might be. A question to this purpose is largely discussed in Sir Walter
Raleigh's History; yet notwithstanding that, and what has been elsewhere said
of that, I ingeniously profess that I am ignorant at this time where to place
this Phul: yet for the present, I observe the common order.

PHUL. Circa Annum Mundi 3182.
Phul
IS an Assyrian name, as Scaliger witnesses: sometimes used alone, as here;
elsewhere in Composition, as in this Kings Successor, Tiglath Phul Afer.

Synchronismi.
IN the time of Phul, Menabem was King in Israel; 2 Kings 15. Josephus, Sed.
Olam.

In Egypt reigned Mycerinus, (...): whose Life and Acts are recorded by
Herodotus in Euterpe.

The Oracle brought word to this King that he should from thenceforth live but
six years, and die in the seventh. The King hearing this, commanded that
certain Lamps should be made for the night time, which he had purposed to
spend in jovialtie, whilst others slept; that so he might delude the Oracle,
and live twice the longer by taking so much more notice of his days.

See Herodotus in Euterpe, page 140. circa ista verba.

(...), etc.

About this time Nabonassar lived; of whom see Ptolomie, but he was not yet
King.

Vzias was now King of Juda: in whose days happened that notable Earthquake, of
which Josephus relate's, that in the horror thereof, a Mountain toward the West
cleft in sunder, and removed from it is proper place the space of four Furlongs,
or half a mile; and further it had proceeded, had not a greater Mountain toward
the East stayed it is Course.

Of this Earthquake the Prophet Amos makes mention: by occasion whereof, see
what Aben Ezra says upon that place, page (...); and also what Kimchi says in
the next side, in that Edition which Robert Stephanus put forth.

Tiglath Philassar.
THis King subdued Galilee.

He also carried the Tribe of Napthali into Captivity.

Synchronismi.
IN the time of Tiglath Philassar, Achaz reigned in Judah: 2 Chronicles. 28.

This King had a famous Dial: and therefore the invention of the Sciateries is
more Ancient then Anaximenes. This Dial was a South Vertical, placed upon the
wall of the Kings Palace: So a Lapide: and it stand's well with the explication
of the Phenomenon of the Sun's Retrocession. And that it was a Dial, see Peter
Novius, and Clavius, two incomparable Mathematicians, the one in his second
Book of Navigation; the other, in the first of his Gnomonicks.

Salmanassar.
Ordinary Chronologers commonly conceived this Salmanassar to be Nabonassar,
of whom Ptolomie speak's: But Scaliger dispute's the point against all.
Calvisius also; but this last, especially against Funccius. Both agree, that
this Salmanassar was not that Nabonassar. Scaliger gives the reason, both from
the name, time, and other Circumstances: which though Sir Walter Raleigh
admire's, yet he condemn's. Time now gives not leav to enquire, much less to
determine the differences. Sethus Calvisius places the Prince about that time
we have set him. His time is much to be enquired after, it being a most
famous Epoche, from whose time Chronology can demonstrate by the aid of
Astronomy, that the Affairs passed since that time, are registered in Heaven.

Who so says that Salmanassar was Nabonassar, is deceived; as afterward shall
appear: neither is he any other but himself, and none otherwise called.
Scaliger was bold to call him Merodac; but he repented of that in his Canons
Isagogical.

Synchronismi.
HEre begineth, or not far of, that Nabonassar's famous Era, from whence
Ptolomie in his Almagest accounts the Celestial motions.

He ruled in Babylonia, in the year of the world. 3203, the Circle of the Sun
being 19, and the Circle of the Moon 15, the Dominical Letter E. Upon the 26
of February at Noon, the Sun's mean motion being 45 Minutes in Pisces, the
Moon in the eleven degree of Taurus, and 22 Scruples.

The Original of the Samaritans, out of a Colonie transplanted by the King of
Ashur, they were called Cuthaei, because there came most from Cuth, as Elias
Tisbites in voce (...) Cuth.

Sennacherib.
OF his behavior to King Hezechiah, see the Prophet Esaie, and the High
Priest's Annals or Chronicles.

The Egyptians in Herodotus tell a most memorable story of this King: That
going forth with his Army against Egypt, it came to pass that one night a
Plague of Mice came upon him, and unweaponed his soldiers, by devouring their
Harness-ties of Leather. In memory whereof the Priests provided a statue like
this Prince in stone, holding a Mous in his hand, with this Inscription;

(...).

Who* ere beholds me, let him learn to be religious; Herodot. in Euterp.

Some suppose, that this intend's that great foil of this kings Army by the
hand of an Angel. An Angel might do both.

This Sennacherib was slain by his Sons in the Temple of Jupiter (...), or
Nisroc. See the reason in Rabbi Solomon upon that place. See also the Hebrew
Edition of Apocryphal Tobit the first Chapter.

Synchronismi.
HEzechiah, King of Judah.

In his time happened, that strange Phenomenon when the Sun went ten degrees
back. Peter Nonius the Portugal discourses of this wonder and proves it to
be a Miracle, because it was don in the temperate Zone: for (as he proves)
Jerusalem is so situate. This he conceives had been no wonder between the
Tropicks: but he is twice deceived; first because the Sciatericks teach, that
if in the Temperate Zone a Plain be elevated less then the Sun's declination,
the same would com to pass. 2. He supposes the wonder to be in the Shadow's
going back, which was not; but in the Regress of the Sun it self; for the
Shadow might have gone back naturally.

Asarhaddon.
HE reigned after the death of his Father, and after this King we read of no
successor he had; and therefore History guided by the Circumstances of time,
conclude's that this was the next vicissitude, wherein the Assyrians again lose
their Power; and the Babylonians continue, and end this first Monarchy.

Some have thought that the Kings of Babel only in this last succession were
set forth by the Golden Head: So Hugh Broughton, a most learned man: but there
is nothing to defend his Tenet, but his Authority: and that he shall have in
some other thing.

The better to understand the Babylonish Monarchy, we will set down their
Succession, which Ptolomie has recorded from Nabonassar, to the end of this
Kingdom. Scaliger made much of this rare Canon, but obtained it not in the
perfection: Sethus Calvisius has the right which he he obtained of an
English man, the then Dean of Paul's.

Kanon asileon.
(...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

This I transcribed out of the Greek Manuscript which we have extant in the
Archive of our Public Library; and a most precious Monument it is, as Sethus
Calvisius truly conceived of it.

The First King in this last Dynastie of Ashur was
Nebuchadnezar.
FOr the Composition of his Name, see what Scaliger says, where he sets
down the Simples of the Babylonish names.

The Canon cal's him (...); and there he succeeds (...), so Nabopolassar was
the Father of Nebuchadnezar. He is called sometimes Nebuchadonosor; That he
was the son of Nabopolassar, this Canon in Eusebius page 38 says plainly in
these words.

(...). This was put in by Eusebius, or else left out of that Canon which we
have in the Archives.

Funccius therefore does ill to make Nebuchadnezar to be the same with
Nabopolassar, which Calvisius has observed, and for other, and better reasons
refuted.

Megasthenes the Persian thus writes of this King.

(...) (...), Eusebius p 41. etc. i.e. That this Nebuchadnezar was more famous
then great Hercules, and that he subdued Lybia, Asia. etc.

The same Author reports, that the Chaldeans relate, that this King returning
home, fell mad: and being in a Fanatic vein, foretold the destruction of
Babel,

(...), etc. that is, I Nebuchadonosor, O Babilonians, foretell your ruin,
which neither Belus our Progenitor, nor our Goddess Beltis shall be able to
persuade the fates to remove away. There shall com a Persian Mule, etc.
meaning Cyrus. Caetera vide page 41 Eusebil scaligeriani.

The Author intends that story of this King, recorded by Daniel, that he was
among the beasts, etc.

Thus Megasthenes has storied.

Berosus the Chaldean relates also the notable expeditions of this famous
Prince, and of his sumptuous buildings; and to him he attributes the walls of
Babylon, the Temple of Belus, the Horti pensiles: and reproves the Greeks for
their vanity, in making Semiramis the Founder of that famous City; which also
is the conceit of Annius in the life of Semiramis, where he introduces his
Berosus to averr that Semiramis built this place from a Town to a City; where
the Monk, by a necessary and egregious oblivion, forgot his Method, and made a
matchless Author contradict him self. Were there no other reason to disprove
this false Berosus, but this one, it alone were sufficient: when we find, that
Annius his Berosus sets peremptorily down, that Semiramis built Babylon; and
yet Berosus in Joseph and Eusebius Pamphilus sets down the quite contrary,
and reprehendeth the Greeks for their vanity in affirming that which the other
Berosus does. For the building of Babylon, notwithstanding it is certain that
Nimrod began, Belus continued, and Semiramis enclosed it with a wall: but not
that great and mighty wall; for this was the work of our King; as also the
Horti pensiles, which Curtius and Diodorus witness to have been don by a Prince
of Syria, at the request of his wife the Queen; whom Herodotus calls
Nitocris, as Scaliger conceives.

Nebuchadnezar also built the Temple of ^el, and in fine, set his last hand to
the entice consummation of a sumptuous City; which make's him cry out in the
height of his ambition (...) etc. Is not this great Babel which I have built?
etc. Dan. 4.

This Nebuchadnezar after he ruled over Babel 43 years, he fell into a diseas
and died. Berosus in Josepho adversus Ptol. Appion. Canon. His death was sudden
according to Megasthenes: for he says, that when he made an Oration to the
Babylonians, he suddenly vanished. See the fragment in Josephus, Africanus, or
Scaliger.

Synchronismi.
JUdah carried Captive the first and second time.

In his time flourished the Prophet Daniel, the most learned among the Captives.

Daniel built a stately Tower at Ecbatane in Media, which Josephus says, was
to be seen in his days, no way diminished by age, but remaining in the same
fresh and sumptuous manner, wherein it was first erected. Joseph. lib. 9. c. 12.

After the Captivity of Jehojakim, Nebuchadnezar came up also against
Jehojakin, and carried him also away Captive; for says he, thou Jehojakin
art no better then thy Father: and taunted the King with a Proverb of those
days. (...) Which in plain terms is, From a bad Dog will never com good
Puppies; which is all one with that of the Greeks, (...).

For this, see the Jews Chronology, or the Saeder Olam Rabba.

Nebuchadnezar makes war with Pharaoh Neco, for his pride, which he conceived
out of the victory which he had gotten of King Josias.

Of this Neco, Herodotus makes mention; and of a great Battle which he fought
with the Syrians at Magdol.

(...)

Nebuchadnezar destroieth the State of Tire, in the reign of Ithobalus.
Philastratus apud Josephum in historiis Phaenicum. Saedar Olam Rabba in the
Acts of Nebuchadnezar.

Nebuchadnezar is driven from Men, and falling mad, lives no other life then a
beast. This he did till seven times had passed over him. Daniel. Saedar Olam
Rabba, Josephus.

Hevil Merodac
SUcceeded after Nebuchadnezar; so says the aforementioned Berosus, and
Megasthenes: they say also, for his libidinous courses he was slain by his
Sister's husband, Neriglosoroor, who reigned after him in his stead. This
Neriglosoroor must be he whom Daniel cal's Belshazar.

Synchronismi.
JEhojakin restored to his Liberty. 2 Chronicles. Saeder Olam Rabba.

Belshazar.
THis was the last King of this Monarchy. Why the Canon, and Berosus, with
Megasthenes should call him as they do, the reason may be, Because these Kings
had new names when they came to the Crown, and those were named from their
Gods. So this King being a private man, might be called Neriglissoroor; but
when he had the Kingdom, he was honored with the name of Bell, and called
Belshazar.

This King makes an impious Feast, and profane's the Vessels of God's House, to
quaff in to the honor of Shac: for so these Feast days were called, (...): and
they were like the Roman Saturnalia, as we have said, and as Berosus
expounds in Athenaeus; and Causaubon out of him. Scaliger also in his Notes
upon the Greek Fragments.

In this Feast the King's heart was very merry: the manner is expressed by the
Prophet Daniel. In the midst of this profuse Jovialtie God interposeth his
Doom: His Fate is written in Chaldee upon the Wall, (...)

And now it is plain to read. Meneh. For God has numbered this Kingdom, and
finished it. Tekel. God has weighed this Golden Head in the balance, and found
it wanting. Perez. This Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

In the same night was Belshazar the King of the Chaldeans slain.

Synchronismi.
JOsephus interposeth some Kings in this last Succession, more then what the
Scripture makes mention of; and therefore must herein be neglected, and left
to the fruition of his proper sens. The truest opinion is grounded upon God's
own Prophecy to the Jews, that they should serve Nebuchadnezar, his son, and
his son's son; that was Evilmerodac, and Belshazar, and it is observable, that
the Abstract aforementioned sets down the Succession, though not in the
same order, yet at the same number: His words are -- (...), etc. He invert's
the order, which might not be his error, but the Scribes: 'twas facile, and
more likely.

This order and number also the Saedar Olam exactly retains.

FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION AND USE OF THE Terrestrial Globe.

By JOHN GREGORY, Master of Arts of Christ-Church in Oxon.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE DEVS PROVIDEBIT. I. Y

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Laurence Sadler, and are to be sold
at the Golden-Lion, in Little- Britain. 1649.

decorative header with animals and plants
The Description and Use of the Terrestrial Globe.
THe Terrestrial or Earthly Globe is an artificial Representation of the Earth
and Water under that form and figure of Roundness which they are supposed to
have, describing the Situation, and measuring the Compass of the Whole Frame,
and describing the Situation and measuring the Distances of all the Parts.

This Description is either of the Earth and Water both together, and it is don
by Circles; or of the Water considered by it self; and is not so much a
Description of that, as of the Mariner's course upon it, or to show The Way of
a Ship upon the Sea. And this is don by lines called Rumbes, which are not all
Circles, but otherwise drawn according to the Point of the Compass, at which
the Mariner set's forth. But of the Compass and these lines in the second
Place; and first of the Description of the Whole Frame by Circles. Now look
what Circles were imagined upon the Earth, the same are expressed upon, or
framed without the Globe; and they are the Greater, or the Less. The Great
Circles without the Globe are two; the Meridian and the Horizon: the one of
Brass, the other of Wood. Circles indeed they are not so properly called; for,
in the rigorous sens, no Line is supposed to have any breadth, as both these
have: But that was for the more convenience; for something more then ordinary
was to be written upon them. And moreover they could not have been so disposed
of, as they are, without the Globe, if they had not been exact Lines. But Use
will have it so, and we must call them the Meridian and Horizontal Circles.

Of the Meridian without the Globe.
THe Brass Meridian is divided into 4 equal Parts or Quadrants, and each of
them subdivided into 90 Degrees, that is 360 for the whole Circle. The reason
why this Circle is not divided into 360 Degrees throughout, but still stopping
at the 90th, and then again beginning 10, 20, 30, etc. is, because the Uses of
this Meridian, so far as in Degrees they are concerned, require not above that
Number. As for an Example: One use of the Meridian is to show the Elevation of
the Pole, but the Pole cannot be elevated above 90 Degrees. Another is to show
the Latitude or Distance of a Place from the Equator, which also can never
exceed the 4th part of the Circle; for no Place can be further distant from
the Equator then the Pole, which is just that Number of 90 Degrees.

Upon one of the North Quadrants of this Meridian, of some Great Globes, the
Climes are set to the several Degrees of Latitude; and the Length of the
longest Day under the several Climes: which (if the Geographers would think
so) might very fitly be placed on the Lesser Globe's; for it were but dividing
a Quadrant of the wrong side of the Meridian into 90 Degrees, and there would
be room enough. In some other Globes the Climes are cast into a Table, and
pictured upon some void space of the Globe. But the Division upon a Quadrant of
the Meridian, is much more artificial, as hereafter shall be understood. And
the reason why a North Quadrant only need to be divided, is, because for the
Climes of the Southern Latitude the reason is the same. And the reason why the
Division is made upon a North Quadrant rather then the South, is, because our
Globes are fitted for our Selves, and all our share of the Earth lies in the
North Latitude.

Of the Axel and Poles of the Globe and of the Hour Circle.
FRom the North and South Ends of this Meridian a strong Wire of Brass or Iron
is drawn, or supposed to be drawn (for the Artificers do not always draw it
quite through) by the Center of the Globe representing the Axel of the Earth.
The North End whereof stands for the North, the South End for the South Pole
of the Earth. Upon the North End, a small Circle of Brass is set, and divided
into two equal parts, and each of them into twelv, that is, twenty four in
all. This Circle is the only one above the Globe, which is not imagined upon
the Earth, but is there placed to show the hour of the day and night, in any
place where the Day and night exceed not 24 hours: therefore it is called
Cyclus Horarius. The Hour Circle, for which purpose it has a little Brass pin
turning about upon the Pole, and pointing to the several hours, which therefore
is called the Index Horarius.

The small Circle is framed upon this ground, that in the Diurnal Motion of the
Heaven 15 Degrees of the Equinoctial rise up in the space of every one hour,
that is 360 Degrees, or the whole Circle in the space of 24. So that the Cyclus
Horarius is to be framed to that Compass, as that every 24th part of it, or
one hour is to bear proportion to 15 Degrees of the Equator below it. And so in
turning the Globe about, one may perceiv, that while the Pin is moved from any
one hour to another, just 15 Degrees of the Equinoctial will rise up above the
Horizon upon one side, and as many more go down below it on the other side.
But this Circle is not much for the Geographer's use.

Of the Horizon.
THe other Great Circle without the Globe is the Horizon; upon which (yet not
as due to this Circle more then any other, but because there is more room) the
Geographers set down the 12. Signs with their Names and Characters.

And because every Sign of the Zodiac contains 30 Degrees, which is 360 for
the whole Circle, the Horizon is divided into 360 Degrees indeed as it ought,
but not from 10, 20, 30, 40, so throughout, but by Thirties, that is, 10, 20,
80. and 10, 20, 30. and so along to make the division conform to the 12 Signs,
to each of which, as I said, is allotted the Number of 30 Degrees. And the
reason of that is in reference to the Suns Annual Motion, in the Course whereof
he dispatcheth every day one degree under or over. So that he passes
through each of the Signs in, or in much about the space of 30 Days. So that,
though some of the 12 Months, answering to the 12 Signs, consist of one Day
more then thirty, and one of 2 Days less, yet take them one with another, and
the Days of every Month correspond to the several Degrees of every Sign, or
without any considerable difference. And after that rate, or much about it,
they are placed upon the Horizon, to show in what Degree, of what Sign the Sun
is every day of the year. And to this purpose there is set down upon the same
Horizon a Calendar, and that of three sorts in some Globes: Of two in the most,
the one whereof is called the Julian, or Old, the other the Gregorian, or New
Account, reckoning this latter 10 days before the former, and the third sort,
where it is found, thirteen. Now though it be true that the greatest part of
that which is written upon the Horizon, more nearly concerns the Celestial
then the Terrestrial Globe; yet it is not altogether unuseful here: and
especially it will be nothing out of the Geographer's way to take along with
him the ground of Difference in the 3, principally in the 2 sorts of Calendars.

The Reason of the Difference in Computation betwixt the Old and New Accounts.
A Year is that space of time in which the Sun goes through the whole Circle
of the Zodiac, as from the Tropic of Cancer, to the Tropic of Capricorn, and
so to the Tropic of Cancer again, or from the Equinoctial to the Equinoctial,
or from any other Point of the Zodiac to the same again. Now, because of the
unequal Motion of the Sun (depending upon reasons deeply engaged in the
Theorical Part of the Spheer, and therefore here to be taken upon trust) it
ever was, and yet is, a very hard matter to determine exactly in what space of
time this Revolution of the Sun in the Zodiac is made; insomuch that one said,
Censorinus de Die Natali.
that the Year consisted of so many days, and how much more or less no body
knows.

This uncertaintie brought so much confusion upon the Old Roman Calendars,
that Time with them was grown a Commodity, and bought and sold at a price.
Their Priests, who had to do with this Affair, having in their power to make
any year longer or shorter at their pleasure; which the Emperor Julius Caesar
looking upon as a matter no way below his greatest consideration, advised with
some Egyptian Mathematicians about it, by whose Instructions he found that the
Sun's yearlie Motion in the Zodiac, was performed in the space of 365 days,
and one 4th part of a day, or 6 hours.

The 6 odd hours he caussed to be reserved in store till every fourth year,
that is, till they made 24 hours, or one whole day; so accounting, that the 3
first years should consist of 365 days, and the fourth of 366, one day more;
and every fourth year was therefore (as still it is) called the Leap Year, and
the thing it self Intercalation, or putting in betwixt the Calendar.

'Twas very much that the Emperor did, and he left as much to do; for though
it cannot yet be found out exactly in what space of the time the Sun goes his
yearlie course, yet thus much is made good by infallible experience that the
Emperor's Mathematicians allotted too much for the Number of days: they were
in the right, for it is certain no year can consist of more then 365, but for
the odd hours it is as certain that they cannot be fewer then five, nor so
many as 6; so that the doubt is upon the Minutes, 60 whereof go to the making
up of an Hour; a small matter one would think, and yet how great in the recess
and consequence we shall see.

Julius Caesar allotted 365 days and 6 hours to this Revolution, but the Sun
goes about in less time, that is, (according to the most exact Account) in 365
days, 5 hours, 49 Minutes, and a little more; so that the Emperor's year is
much about 10 Minutes greater then the Sun's, which must of necessity breed a
difference of so many Minutes every year, betwixt the Year, which the Sun it
self describe's in the Zodiac; and That, which is reckoned upon in the
Calendar, which though for a year or two may pass insensibly, yet in the space
of 134 years it will rise to an whole day, that is the Beginning of the year in
the Calendar must be set one day back. As for Example: Let the year begin at
the Vernal Equinox or Spring: In the Emperor's time that fell out to be at the
24th of March, but now this year it fell out upon the 10th of March, 13 days
backwards, and somewhat more, and so if it be let alone will go back to the 1
of March, and 1 of February, till Easter com to be on Christmas Day, and so
infinitely.

To reform this difference in the Account, some of the later Roman Bishops
earnestly endeavored. And the thing was brought to that perfection it now
stands in (so much as it is) by Gregory the 13th, in the Year 1582. His
Mathematicians (whereof Lilius was the chief) advised him thus: That
considering there had been an Agitation in the Council of Nice somewhat
concerned in this matter upon the motion of that Question about the Celebration
of Easter: And that the Fathers of that Assembly after due deliberation with
the Astronomers of that time, had fixed the Vernal Equinox at the 21 of March,
and considering also that since that time a difference of 10 whole days had
been past over in the Calendar, that is, that the Vernal Equinox or Spring;
which began upon the 21 of March, had prevented so much as to begin in
Gregorie's days at the 10th of the same, 10 days difference or thereabouts;
they advised that 10 days should be cut off from the Calendar, which was don,
and the 10 days taken out of October of that Year 1582, as being the Month of
that Year in which that Pope was born; so that when they came to the 5 of the
Month, they reckoned the 15, and so the Equinox was com up to it is place
again, and happened upon the 21 of March, as at the Council of Nice. But that
Lilius should bring back the Beginning of the Year to the Times of the Nicen
Council, and no further, is to be marvelled at. He should have brought it back
to the Emperor's own time, where the mistake was first entered, and, instead of
10, cut of 13 days; however this is the Reason why these 2 Calendars, written
upon the Horizon, differ the space of 10 days one from the other. And as the
Old Account was called the Julian, from the Emperor; so the New is called from
Gregory the Pope and Lilius the chief Agent, the Gregorian or Lilian Account:
and the Julian is termed the Old Style, the Gregorian the New, as in the
conversation of Letters betwixt Us and Those on the other side of the Seas we
may perceiv; Theirs to Us bare date (for the most part) such a day of such a
Month, Stylo Novo; Ours to them such a day, Stylo Veteri: And Theirs may be
dated There, by their Account, and received here, before they were written by
Ours.

For the third Calendar there need not much be said, though it be more
absolute then the second; for it reduces the Beginings of the Year to the
Emperor's own Time, and so leaves the Old Style 13 days behind as it ought
to do. But it is very rarely found upon the Horizons of any Globes, neither as
yet translated to any Common Use. In the outermost Limb of the Horizon are set
down the Names of the 32 Winds of the Compass; to what end will be showed
hereafter.

Why the Meridians and Horizons which are so several upon the Earth, are but
single without the Globe.
THe Reason of this will be plain, if it be considered that the Horizons and
Meridians, in the use of the Globe, are to be a fitted to any particular place
at pleasure; at Oxford, Woodstock, Abingdon, etc. this could never have been
don upon the Globe it self; for there must a several Horizon and a several
Meridian have passed through every City, Town, or Castle upon the Globe,
which if it had been don, besides the confusion, the Circles would have put out
the Places; therefore it was ingenuously devised of those who first thought
upon it, to set one Meridian and one Horizon without the Globe to serve for all:
For in this case the Globe it self may be turned and applied to the Horizon
and Meridian with as much eas, as the Horizon and Meridian with impossibility
could not be applied to the Globe, as it will hereafter more plainly appear,
then it can do yet.

Of the Quadrant of Altitude, and the Compass.
MOreover then the Circles framed without the Globe, two other Appendents are
to be noted upon; the one relating to the Meridian, the other to the Horizon:
the first is the Quadrant of Altitude, and is a thin brass Plate representing
the fourth part of a Great Circle, and so divided into 90 Degrees, called
therefore the Quadrant; and the Quadrant of Altitude, because it measures the
height of the Stars upon the Celestial Globe, to which it most properly
belongs. The business it has to do in Geographie, is to set out the Zenith
of any Place, and consequently to show the Angle of Position, or Bearing of
one Place to another, as hereafter shall be taught. It is therefore affixed to
the Meridian with a little Screw-pin, to be removed at pleasure from any
Vertical Point of any Place, to the Vertical Point of any other. The second
is the Compass, which is a Needle touched with a Loadstone, and set in a Box
upon the Foot of the Horizon, upon the South side, such another as we see in
ordinary Pocket Dyals for the Sun. The Use of it here (as in those) is to
point out the North and South for the Rectification of the Globe, as shall be
more plainly said hereafter.

Of the Great Circles upon the Globe, and first of the Meridians.
THe Great Circles painted upon the Globe are the Meridians, the Equator, and
the Zodiac; where we must not think much to hear of the Meridians again. That
of Brass without the Globe is to serve all turns, and the Globe is framed to
apply it self thereto. The Meridians upon the Globe will easily be perceived
to be of a new and another Use. They are either the Great, or the Less; not
that the Greater are greater then the Less, for they have all one and the same
Center, and equally pass through the Poles of the Earth: but those which are
called Less, are of less use then that, which is called the Great, though it
be no greater then the rest. The Great is otherwise called the Fixed and First
Meridian, to which the Less are second, and respectively moveable. The Great
Meridian is as it were the Landmark of the whole Spheer, from whence the
Longitude of the Earth, or any part thereof is accounted And it is the only
Circle, which passing through the Poles, is graduated or divided into Degrees;
not the whole Circle, but the one half, because the Longitude is to be reckoned
round about the Earth. This Great Meridian might have been planted in any
place, as at York, or at Richmond, but must of necessity be set in one
certain place of the Globe or other, as it is in every several Globe, though
not in the same place in all.

Concerning the Difference of Geographers in the placing of their Great
Meridian, and the Causses pretending thereto.
IN assigning the place of this First or Great Meridian, I observe that the
Geographers, whatsoever, still fix it in the Western Parts: And the Reasons
are, not only because those were more discovered then the Eastern, to those who
had first to do in this matter; but more especially for that the Proper Motion
of the Sun and Moon is from the West to the East, contrary to their diurnal or
daily Motion; and therefore the Eclipses of the Moon are to be observed from
that Part, which is the most learned and certain Rule for the finding out of
the Longitudes of Places, by observing how much sooner the Ecclips begineth in
a Place more or less West then another. And moreover, wheresoever they place
their Great Meridian, they still reckon the Longitude from West to East, that
is, till they com up to 180 Degrees, or the Semicircle; where some of them stay
and begin the Longitude again toward the East, calling the first Half,
Eastern, the other, Western Longitude. But this Course, howsoever Artificial
enough, yet is not used by the later Geographers, for they account the
Longitudes in the whole Circle throughout from West, by the East to West again,
some few Spanish Geographers excepted, who, in the Descriptions of their New
Indies, reckon the Longitudes quite contrary, from East to West, but which was
thwartly in it self, and, in the proof, inconsiderably don. But as the
Geographers well enough agreed in the placing of this Great Meridian in the
Western Parts; so they have differed much more then it becomed them in
assigning out the Particular Place.

The Author of the Greek Geographie entitled to Ptolomie fixes the Great
Meridian (as Marinus the T^^ian (cited by Him) and the Ancients before them) in
H^ra; The Greek Meridian.
or Junonia one of the Fortunate Islands, as they were termed of old, from an
opinion of some singular Blessings imagined by the Ancients upon the Genius of
those Parts. They are now called by the Spaniard, Islas de Canaria: The
Canarie-Isles, better known to us by the Wines of that Name, for the most part
falsely so called. Ptolomie, as Pliny also, out of Juba the Affrican King
finds out but Six of these: but the late Discoverers meet with Seven: that
is, Lancerotta, Forteventura, Teneriffa, Gomera, Fierro, Palma, and the Gran
Canarie, which gives Name to the rest. For the Situation of these Islands they
lie not as Ptolomie placed them, within one Degree of Longitude, or little
less, but more scattering, and lifted up a little above the Tropic of Cancer
about the 30th Degree of the Northern Latitude, in that Part of the Western
(otherwise called the Atlantic) Ocean which trendeth upon the Coast of
Afric, and are therefore reckoned by Geographers to the Affrican Isles. This
was the furthest part of the Earth discovered toward the West to those of
about Ptolomie's time: therefore the Great Meridian was fixed there, in the
Isle Hera, or Junonia, as then it was called, now Tenariff: And from this
Meridian all the Longitudes in the Greek-Geographie are taken.

This the Arabian-Geographers knew well enough; The Arabic Meridian.
but holding themselves not to be inferior (as indeed they were not) either to
the Indefatigation or Skill of the Greek-Geographers, they hoped to have the
beginning of Longitude taken from them, which therefore they appointed to be
drawn up on the uttermost Shore of the Western-Ocean 10 Degrees more East then
that of Ptolomie: Alphraganus chap. 10.
but they deceived themselves doubly; for first, Their Meridian would not be
brought into Example by others: and again, It was not so improvidently
intended, as not to serve themselves. For according to the loss, or gains of the
Sea upon that Shore, their Longitudes have proved to be importantly different,
rightly enough assigned, but falsifying with the Place, as they are justly
served. There is not, for the present, any very great Use to the Geographer
of the Apabick-Meridian more then to know it; for the Turkish Histories are not
so completely derived down to us as to Describe the Territories by Longitude,
or Latitude. And for the Arabick-Nubian-Geographie Translated into Latin by
the Maronites, though otherwise of a rare, and precious esteem, yet is not
commended for this, That the Distances of Places are there set down by a gross
Mensuration of Miles: and John Leos Africa is not so well. But when the
Learned, and long promised Geographie of Abulfedea the Prince shall com to
light, there can be nothing don There, without this Meridian. The Prince
sets down the Longitude of Mecca 67 Degrees. The Greek Geographie 77: and
they are both right, and yet they differ 10 Degrees: for so much were their
Meridian set East, or West one then the other. Yet neither is this Meridian
presently altogether unuseful, for besides the Longitudes of some places noted
by Saracenus, Albategni and others, there is a Catalogue of Cities annexed to
the Astronomical Tables of the King Alphonsus accounted all from this Great
Meridian, but with this difference, That whereas Abulfedea the Prince sets
down but 10 Degrees distance betwixt the Fortunate Isles, and the Western
Shore. The Catalogue reckons upon 17, and 30 Minutes: a Difference too great
to be given over to the Recesses of the Ocean from that Shore, and therefore I
know not as yet what can be said thereto.

The Magnetical Meridian.
Our own Geographers, the later especially, have affected to transplant this
great Meridian out of the Canarie Isles into the Acores, or Azores, for so the
cerilla will endure to be pronounced. They were so called from Acor, which in
the Spanish Tongue signifie's a Goss-Hawk, from the great number of That Kind,
there found at the first Discovery, though now utterly disappearing. And it is
no stranger a thing, then that December should be called by our Saxon
Forefathers olfe Monat, that is, Wolf Month; for that in those Days this
Isle was mischievously pestered with such Wilde-Beasts, and in that Month more
ragingly, though now such a sight is grown so foreign to these parts, that
they are looked upon with the Strangeness of a Camel, or an Elephant. The
Azores are otherwise termed Insu;lae Flandricae, or the Flemish Isles, because
some of them have been famously possessed, and first Discovered by them. They
are now in number Nine: Tercere, St. Michael, S. Marie, S. George, Gratiosa,
Pico, Fayall, Corvo, Flores; they are situate in the same Atlantic Ocean, but
North-West of the Canaries, and trending more upon the Spanish Coast, under the
39 Degree of Latitude, or therebouts. Through these Isles the Late Geographers
will have the Great Meridian to pass, upon this conceit of reconciling the
Magnetical Pole to That of the World. Their meaning is, That the Needle of the
Mariner's Compass, which touched with the Magnet, or Loadstone, in duty ought
to point out true North, and South Poles of the World in all other Places,
performs it only in these Isles, whereas for the most part elsewhere it
swerveth, or makes a Variation from the true Meridian toward the East, or
West, according to tht unequal temper of the Great Magnet of the Earth:
therefore notwithstanding that the Greek Meridian was placed well enough in the
Canaries, (as indeed it was, and best of all, because once fixed there) yet it
pleased them to think that it would be more Artificial, and Gallant to remove
it into the Azores, where (as they would bear us in hand) the Magnetical Needle
precisely directs it self toward the North, and South of the Whole Frame
without the least Variation, which might seem to be a Natural Meridian, and
therefore to be yielded unto by that of Art, wheresoever placed before.

This Coincidencie of the Magnetical Meridian with that of the World, Some of
them will have to be in the Isles Corvo, and Flores, the most Western: Others
in S. Michael, Ridly's Treatise of Magnetical Motions. Chap. 36. Norman's New
Attrative, Chap. 9.
and S. Marie, the more Eastern of the Azores. It Is true indeed that the
Variation is less in these Isles, then in some other Places, yet it is by
experience found, that the Needle in Corvo North-Westeth 4 Degrees: in S.
Michael it North-Easteth 6 Degrees: And therefore the Great Meridian should
rather have been drawn through Fayal, where the Variation is but 3 Degrees to
the East; Or especially through the Cape of good hope, where the Needle
precisely points to the True North without any Variation at all by a River
side there, which therefore the Portugals have called Rio de las Agulias, The
River of the Needles.

But which is more, the Magnetical Needle has no certain Pole in the Earth at
all, and under the very same Meridian is found to vary in some places but 3,
or 4 Degrees; in other 17, and more; and which is wors (if it be true) the
Variation it self has been lately charged upon with a very strange and secret
inconstancy by the Professor in Astronomy of Gresham-College. He says that
the Variation of the Needle at Limehous near London, which Mr Burrows found to
be 11 Degrees, 15 Minutes, in the year 1580: M Gunter in the year 1622 found
it to be but 6 Degrees 13 Minutes. But He himself in the year 1634 found it
to be but 4 Degrees, or very little more; which in the space of 54 years is a
difference of 7 Degrees to the Less. So little reason is there why the Greek
Meridian should give place to the Magnetical, besides the great confusion which
must needs follow, as it has.

The Toletan Meridian.
But yet more impertinently, the Spanish Describers remembered before, not only
account their Longitude from East to West, utterly against all other
Geographie, but not contented with the Greek, Arabian, or any Magnetical
Meridian, must needs reckon their Indies from that of Toledo. But they are
very few that take this course, and this Pragmatical Meridian is only found
upon a Map, or two, but has not as yet gotten (nor is it like to do) any
relation to the Globe.

The Greek Meridian again.
As the case stands with the Great Meridian, the advice and counsel of
Stevinus a Dutch Geographer is very much to the purpose: That the Great
Meridian should be brought back to the Fortunate Isles again, that one certain
Isle of the seven should be chosen; and in That, one certain place; Exiguus
quidem, sed notabilis and perpetuus, As small, but as notable and perpetual as
it is possible. The Island he assigned was Teneriff, thought to be the same
with Ptolomie's Hera, or Junonia. The place Pico de Teide, or el pico, The
Peak, a Mountain so called from the sharpness of the top, and therefore the
place is Locus exiguus, as Small as could be, and it is Perpetual, for Hills are
everlasting; and as notable, for by the reports of some in Julius Scaliger it
rises above threescore Miles in height, which though it be more then is
generally believed, yet thus much is, That it is the highest Mountain in the
World.

This Johnson a great Master of this Art considering with himself, though in
his lesser Globe of the year 1602 he had made the Great Meridian to pass
through the Isles Corvo and Flores; yet since that, in his Greater of the year
1616 he has it drawn upon the Peak in Tenariffe, as he expresses himself in
a void place of the Globe. Only, whereas he adds that by this means the
Arabic Meridian, and That of Ptolomie will be all one upon the matter (which
he says was fit to be admonished) it must needs be mistaken. It Is true,
that the Canaries lie near upon the Coast of Afric: But the Arabians mean not
this so much by the uttermost Shore, as the uttermost Points of the Western
Land running along by the Streights of Gebal Taric, or Taric's Hill, as they
rightly (we Gibralter) call it, where the Pillars of Hercules were set of old,
as our Stories deliver, but of Alexander they say, to whom, and not to
Hercules the Arabic Nubian Geographer asscribeth this Labor, naming there the
very Artificers which that great King provided himself of to force out the
Straight; which may possibly be the reason, why the Arabians (over and above
their ambition of Change) draw their Great Meridian by this Part, in honor to
Alexander, whom therefore they call not so, but Dhilcarnain, that is, The man
of the two Horns, for that he joined the Ends of the Known World together by
those Pillars in the East upon one side, and these in the West on the other.
Which seeing it is so, the Reduceing of the Great Meridian to Tenariff again
will be so far from closing with that of the Uttermost Western Shore, that
according to the Account of some they will stand at 15 Degrees distance one from
the other, which also makes show of some reason of the Disagreement betwixt
Abulfeda the Prince, and the King Alphonsus in assigning the difference of the
Arabic Meridian from the Greek, the Prince allowing but 10, The Catalogue 17
Degrees, which was noted before.

For any concurrence therefore of the Greek, and Arabic Meridians by this
means, we are not to take the Geographer's word; but nevertheless to embrace
this Alteration of his Course in bringing the Greek Meridian to his place again.

The same advice of Stevinus is commended and taken by Will. Bleau (a man very
like to, if not the very same with Johnson himself) Cap. 4 of his first Part,
which teacheh the Use of the Globes according to the Improper Hypothesis of
Ptolomie (as the Title terms it) per terram quiescentem. For the second Part
makes good the same Use of the Celestial and Terrestrial Spheres by the
Supposition of Copernicus per terram mobilem. His words are Longitudo alicujus
loci, etc. The Longitude of any place is an Arch of the Equator comprehended
between two half Meridians, the one passing through the Place it self, the
other through the High Mountain called Pico de Teide in Tenariffe, Qui tam in
maximo nostro Globo Terrestri (says he) quam in variis Tabulis Geographicis a
nobis editis pro Initio Longitudinis terrae assumptus est, and pro eo in bac
descriptione semper assumatur, etc. And 'twill never be well with Geographie
till this be believed in, and made the common and unchangeable Practice.

What Course is to be taken with this Variety of Meridians, and how followed,
or neglected by the Geographers.
ANd now if one may make so bold as to give Law to the Geographers, it cannot
be denied but that the readiest and least entangling way of reckoning the
Longitudes is to meet again upon the first Meridian in Tenariffe, but for want
of this, and til it can be rellish't universally, the likest way to the Best
is for the Describers either of the Whole, or any Part of the Earth not to fail
of setting down the several Meridians obteining as then. Also the Difference of
Longitude betwixt these Meridians, and lastly which of those they mean to go
by. If I were to draw up (If I could) a New Geographie of the Whole Earth,
This, or the like to this ought to prepare to the Description.

That the Great Meridian by the most Ancient Greek Geographers was made to pass
through the Fortunate Islands, now called The Canaries. That from thence it was
translated by the Arabians to the uttermost Point of the Western-Shore. That
our own Geographers removed it into the Azores placing it some of them in S.
Michael, others in Corvo. That the Best of them brought it back to the Canaries
again, and drew it upon the Pico in Tenariffe; The same, or thought to be the
same with Ptolomie's Junonia. That the Difference of Longitude from El Pico to
the Arabic Meridian is 10 Degrees more East, according to Abulfeda the Prince.
From Pico to the Isle of S. Michael 9 Degrees. From Pico to Corvo 15, and both
so much more West. And such, or such a Meridian I mean to follow.

To this very purpose the same Abulfeda in the Introduction to his Geographie.
It is received by Traditon (says he) that the Inhabited Earth begineth at the
West in the Fortunate Isles, as they are called, and lying waste as now. From
these Islands some take the Beginning of Longitude. Others from the Western
Shore. The Difference of Longitude is 10 Degrees accounted in the Equator, etc.
As for the Longitudes reckoned in this Book, they are all taken from the Shores
of the Western Ocean, and therefore they are 10 Degrees short of those which
are taken from the Fortunate Isles, etc.

If we now exact (as I think we may) to this Rule, which has been lately don
by our own Describers especially, we may perhaps find it otherwise then we
thought for.

Here it will not need to take much notice of those who have described the
Situation of Countries by the Climes and Paralells. Thus much only, That they
had as good as said nothing. I confess I conclude under this Censure, the very
good Author of the Estates du Mond, translated by Grimstone. But it was to be
noted. For what if I say that Great Britain lies under the 9th and 13
Climates of the Northern Temperate Zone (as it is no otherwise Described to the
Site by a Geographer of our own) is this to tell where England is? No more then
to tell where the Streights of Anian are much about the same Clime and Parallel,
and yet 160 Degrees distant and more.

They are not much more accurate who Describe the Situation of Countries by
their Latitudes only as the Gentleman in his Description of Huntingdon Shire
inserted into M. Speed. And the most learned Sir Henry Spelman in his
Description or Northfolk. It is no more to say the Situation of this, or that
place then of any other in the Whole Sphere lying under the same Parallel. But
to say the truth, By reason of the Variety of Meridians. The Longitudes were
grown to such an uncertain and confused pass, that it was not every man's work
to set them down.

Mr Carew in his Survey of Cornwall sets down that Shire in the Longitude of
6 Degrees (I believ he meant 16) as most men account. But what does he mean
by that; or what manner of account is it which most men use in this case?
Norden in the Introduction to his Speculum Britanniae says, That the Center of
this Land, which he takes to be about Titburie Castle in Staffordshire is
21 Degrees and 28 Minutes of Longitude. But from what Meridian all this while?
for the Longitude may be many Degrees more, or less, or just so much as he
says, and yet all may be true.

M. Speed more particularly professes to follow Mercator; as in assigning the
Longitude of Oxford, he says, that it is distant from the West 19 Degrees 20
Minutes by Mercator's Measure. So M. William Burton in the Description of
Leichestershire. But how are we the wiser for this? Mercator's Measure was not
the same, for in his Globe dedicated to the Lord Granvella the great Meridian
passes through the Canaries; but in his great Map through the Azores. M.
Gabriel Richardson in the State of Europe yet more distinctly tells his
Reader, That the Longitudes in his book shall be taken from that Meridian,
which passes through the Azores. But whether from that in S. Michael, or from
the other in Corvo is not set down, and yet the Difference is 7 Degrees, and
more: But hear lastly the Kingdom's Geographer in the Preface to his Britannia.
At insimulabunt jam Mathematici and in crimen vocabunt quasi in Geographicis
Latitudinis and Longitudinis Dimensionibus toto Coelo aberrarim. Audi quaeso:
Tabulas Astronomicas, novas, antiquas, manuscriptas, Oxonienses,
Cantabrigienses, Regis Henrici Quinti diligenter contuli. In Latitudine a
Ptolomeo plurimum discrepant inter se fere conspirant: nec tamen Terram e suo
Centro dimotam esse cum Stadio existimo. His igitur usus sum, In Longitudine
autem nullus consensus, concentus nullus. Quid igitur facerem? Cum Recentiores
perpendiculum navigatoria pyxide Magnete illitum inter Azores insulas recta
Polum Borealem respicere deprehenderim, inde Longitudinis Principium tanquam a
Primo Meridiano cum illis dixi quam nec ubique (...) permensus sum. So the
Learned Cambden. Where note by the way, that if the Translator has rendered
the Book no better then he has this Claus of the Preface, the best course will
be for those that can, to read it in the Latin. The Autor's meaning I think
was this.

But now (says he) the Mathematicians will accuse and call me in question,
as if I were altogether out in my Geographical Dimensions of Latitude and
Longitude. But pray hear me: I diligently compared the Manuscript
Astronomical Tables of Henry the Fifth, as well the old, as the new,
Calculated for the Meridians some of Oxford, others for that of Cambridg. In
Latitude I found them to differ from Ptolomie very much, but well enough
agreeing among themselves: and yet I cannot think that the Earth is any whit
startled aside from it is Center, as Stadius did. These Tables therefore I made
use of. But in the Longitude I found no agreement at all. What should I do?
Considering that the Modern Geographers had found that the Needle of the
Mariner's Compass touched with the Loadstone directly points to the
North Pole by the Azorian Isles, I did as they did, and took the beginning of
Longitude from thence, as from the First Meridian, but which I have not always
set down exactly, or to a Minute.

And now the least that can be exspected is, that the Longitudes of all Places
in the Britannia are accounted from the Meridian which passes by the Azores.
But from which of the Meridians? If it be as the book expresses ab Vltimo
Occidente, it is from that of Corvo: then the Mathematicians have cause to
complain, for all the Longitudes are falls. But I can perceiv that the
Geographer, though otherwise most accomplished, yet was not so well seen in
this piece of the Skill; for though it be pretended in the Preface that all
the Longitudes in the Description shall be taken from the Azores, yet in
setting down the Longitude of Oxford, he says, That as he has it from the
Mathematicians of the Place, it is 22 Degrees from the Fortunate Islands which
can never be true, for it is but 19 from the Azores reckoning by S. Michael:
But this is not all: In assigning the Longitude of Pen-von-las; or, The
Land's-end in Cornwall, He says that is 17 Degrees a Fortunatis Insulis vel
potius Azoris, from the Fortunate Islands or rather from the Azores. But is is
the Difference so small did he think? But 9 Degrees at least.

But I find by the Longitudes that Mercator was the Man that set up all these
for Geographers.

Mercator first of all kept himself to the Greek Meridian, as, Appian, Gemma
Frisius, Maginus, and others; but understanding by Francis of Deip, an
experienced Mariner, that the Compass had no Variation in the Islands of Capo
Verde. And by others, that it had very little in Tercera, and S. Marie of the
Azores, but not any at all in the Isle Corvo, that he might go a mean way to
work, and compile with the Common Meridian of the World (as he took it to
be). He made his Great Meridian to pass (as himself says) betwixt the Isles
of Capo Verde and the Azores; that is, Through the Isles of S. Michael and S.
Marie, which was afterward taken for Example by Plancius, Saunderson, and the
common sort of others, so that little or no notice at all was taken of the
Meridian by Corvo, no not by those of the biggest: exspectation, as M.
Carpenter, M. Camden, M. Speed, and the rest; although this also was the known
Meridian of some Globes of the very same Times; and before that, that is, before
they had set their last hand to their Descriptions. And it is no mervail, for
Mercator's Longitudes were more exactly accounted then before, and therefore
they might well take his Meridian along with them. And 'twas not amiss to go by
the most received, but then they should have said so, and withal, have set
down the three several Meridians at least, and the difference of Longitude
betwixt them; and all this with more distinction then so, that another man
should com after them to tell themselves what Meridian they went by.

And thus much of the First, or Great Meridian.

Of the Lesser Meridians.
THe Lesser are those Black Circles, which you see to pass through the Poles,
and succeeding to the Great at 10 and 10 Degrees as in most Globes; or as in
some, at 15 and 15 Degrees Difference.

Every place, never so little more East, or West then another, has a several
Meridian. Shot-over has a distinct Meridian from Oxford, because more East;
Osney has not the same as near as it is, for it lies West of the City: The
exact Meridian whereof must pass directly through the middle; yet because of the
huge distance of the Earth from the Heavens, all these Places, and Places much
further off may be said to have the same Meridian, as the Almanack-makers
Calculate their Prognostications to such, or such a Meridian where they pretend
to make their Observations: But say too, that it may generally serve, etc. And
indeed there is no very sensible Difference in less then 60 Miles, upon which
ground the Geographers, as the Astronomers allow a New Meridian to every other
Degree of the Equator, which would be 130 in all, but except the Globes were
made of an Extreme and Unuseful Diameter, so many would stand too thick for
the Description. Therefore most commonly they put down but 18; that is at 10
Degrees distance one from the other, the special use of these Lesser Meridians
being to make a quicker dispatch in the account of the Longitudes. Some others,
as Mercator set down but 12 at 15 Degrees difference, aiming at this, That the
Meridians might be distant one from the other a full part of time, or an hour:
for seeing that the Sun is carried 15 Degrees off the Equinoctial every hour,
as was said before. The Meridians set at that Distance must make an hours
difference in the Rising or Setting of the Sun to the several places, as if the
Sun Rise at such an hour, such a day of the year at Oxford. In a place 15
Degrees more distant toward the East the Sun rises an hour sooner. In a place
15 Degrees distant toward the West, an hour later, the same day of this, or
that year.

Now because the Spaces of time are reckoned by the same Degrees of the Equator
as the Distances of Place, The Degrees of Longitude have been called Tempora;
which word Camden sometimes delights to use, as in the Longitude of Bath he
says it is 20 Temporibus, 20 Times, that is 20 Degrees distant from the Great
Meridian. He expresses by the same word in setting down the Latitude, but not
so cunningly as I think.

Of the Equator, and the Lesser Circles.
THe Equator is the Middle Circle betwixt two Poles graduated throughout, and
plainly dividing the Globe into two equal Parts, from North to South, This is
the Circle of Longitude, as the Meridian of Latitude; for Longitude is reckoned
in the Equator from the Meridian: Latitude in the Meridian from the Equator.

Crossing this Circle obliquely in the Middle is the Zodiac, the utttermost
extent whereof toward the North notes out the Tropic of Cancer; toward the
South, the Tropic of Capricorn, each of them distant from the Equator 23
Degrees, or not much more, as may be accounted in the Great Meridian.
Equi-distant from these, and at the same distance from the Poles as the
Tropicks from the Equator, are set down the Artick and Antartick Circles; all
offering themselves to sight by their Names, and distinction of Breadth, and
Color, more notably then the rest: by the rest I mean the black blinder Circles
equi-distantly remooved from the Equator at 10 Degrees difference, and serving
the same turn in the accounting of Latitude, as the Meridians at the same
distance in the reckoning of the Longitude. And these are called the unnamed
Parallels.

And so much of the Description of the Earth and Water together; Now of the
Waterie-Part by it self.

The Description of the Waterie-Part of the Globe by the Rumbes of the
Mariner's Compass.
THe Course of a Ship upon the Sea depends upon the Winds. The Designation of
these, upon the certain Knowledge of one Principal; which considering the
Situation and condition of the whole Sphere, ought in nature to be North, or
South. The North to us upon this side of the Line, the South to those in the
other Hemisphere; for in making this observation, Men were to intend themselves
toward one fixed part of the Heavens, or other, and therefore to the one of
these. In the South Part there is not found any Star so notable, and of so
near a distance from the Pole, as to make any precise or firm Direction of
that Wind. But in the North we have that of the second Magnitude in the Tail
of the Lesser Bear, making so small, and, for the Motion, so insensible a Circle
about the Pole, that it comes all to one, as if it were the Pole it self. This
pointed out the North-winde to the Mariners of old especially; and was
therefore called by some the Load, or Lead-Star. But this could be only in the
night, and not always then. It is now more constantly and surely showed by the
Needle touched with the Magnete, which is therefore called the Load or
Leadstone, for the same reason of the leading and directing their Courses: in
the Nature and Secret of which Stone, because the whole business of Navigation
is so thoroughly concerned, something is to be borrowed out of that Philosophy.

The Original of the Mariner's Compass from the Magnetical Constitution of the
Earth.
A Magnetical Body is described to be That, which hanging in the Aerial or
Aetherial Parts of the Univers, firmly seateth it self upon it is own Poles, in
a Situation natural and unchangeable, consisting also of some such parts as
separated from the rest can take upon them the nature and conditions of the
whole.

Under this Description the Magnetical Philosopher's comprehend the Globes of
Saturn, Jupiter, the Sun, etc. but because these Bodies are placed so far above
the reach of our Experience, and purpose; it shall be sufficient to make the
Description good upon the Earth.

To do this, I think I may suppose, First, that the Constitution of the Whole
Earth may be gathered from the prevailing parts, such parts especially as do
bear upon them the Marks and Signatures of the Whole.

Then secondly, That the parts of the Earth, which lie couched about the
Center, are not of a different or degenerous compliance from these which lie
scattered about the Surface; which if any body list to raise suspicions upon,
as Mr White has don, they may; but I am sure they were no nearer Him, when he
laid the Foundations of the Earth, then we.

The prevailing parts about the Surface of the Earth, are the Mines of
Loadstone, Steel, Iron, etc. of all which, it is certain, that they are endued
with a virtue Magnetical, which enableth them to place themselves in a set
position betwixt North and South: And not only these, but even Claie it self,
burnt to Brick, and cooled North and South, if it be hanged up in a close
place, and left to it is liberty, will seat it self in the same Situation.

But the most vigorous Magnetes are the Stone and the Steel, the Stone
especially: And the Steel has a capacity to receiv a stronger virtue from the
Stone, whereby it more firmly seateth it self in the North and South-Position
of the Earth, directly pointing out those Winds to the Mariner; not in all
parts directly, because in following the Constitution of the Great Magnete of
the Whole Earth, it must needs be here and there led aside toward the East or
West, by the unequal temper of the Globe, consisting more of Water then of
Earth in some places, and of Earth more or less Magnetical in others.

This Deviation of the Needle, the Mariners call North-Easting, or
North-Westing, as it falls out to be; otherwise and more Artificially, the
Variation of the Compass; which though it pretend uncertainly, yet proves to
be one of the greatest helps the Sea man has; for the Degrees of Variation,
which the place it self exactly observed, gives him a shrewd guess of the
same, when he meets with the same Variation again, unless the Variation it
self should be subject to a Change of Admirable Diminutions as the Late
Discoverer calls it in his Discourse Mathematical, etc.

This Needle, touched with the Stone, and directing toward the North and
South, the Mariners (as the Magnetical Philosophers) call their
Directorie-Needle, Mr Henry Gellibrand.
not only for the reason intimated, but to distinguish it also from their
other, called the Inclinatorie-Needle, because it is also found that the Needle
touched with the Stone, will not only turn toward the North, but make an
Inclination under the Horizon, as to conform with the Diameter or Axis of the
Earth.

This Motion of the Needle was accidentally discovered by Robert Norman, a Man
of great dexterity in the framing and dressing up of the Mariner's Compass. It
happened to him, that, as often as he had finished his Needles, and equally
poized them upon their Pins, he had no sooner touched them with the Stone, but
still the North-Point of the Needle would forsake the parallel Site in which
he had placed it, and incline it self to the Axis of the Earth. The reason
whereof not presently perceived, escaped a while, with a conceit, as if the
Artificer had deceived himself in ballancing the Needle; which therefore he
endeavored to correct with a little piece of Wax stuck upon the lighter End
(as he took it to be) till at last, being employed in the framing of a
Compass, the Needle whereof was to be 6 inches in length, and having polished
and levelled it with all possible care, and yet after the touching of it with
the Stone, finding one end to weigh down the other, he was forced to cut off
some part of the heavier end, (as he still mistook it) and so more, till he
had made the Needle unserviceable: whereupon, consulting with some knowing
Friends, he was advised to make some Instruments to try out the experience.
And it was found to be this very Inclination to the Axis of the Earth, and
proportionably, though not equally, answering to the Degrees of Latitude.

But this Inclination also, as the Direction, is variable, and for the same
causses of the Earth's unequal temper.

But all that which I have said will more evidently and expertly appear, upon
the Terrella, or little Earth of Lodestone.

As the Great Magnete of the Earth, so every Magnetical part thereof, and
every part of that, has Poles, Axis, Equator, Meridians, and Parallels of
it is own. The Magnetical Philosophers therefore, to represent unto themselves
the Great Nature of the Whole, take a strong small piece of a Rock, which
having reduced into a Globous form, they first found out the Poles by the
filings of Steel (or otherwise) which will all meet together upon the North and
South Points. A Circle drawn equidistantly from these describes the Equator.
This don, they take a small Steel wire, of about half an inch long, and apply
it to any part of the Equator, and it will precisely turn toward the North
and South Poles, which is Motion of Direction, and marketh out the Meridians of
the Terrella. But supposing a Concavitie to be let into this Little Earth, in
any part, either about the Equator, or betwixt it and the Poles: In that case
the Needle will not point directly to the Poles, but will make a Variation;
unless it be placed exactly toward the Middle of the Concavitie, and then it
makes no Variation at all, but turns directly, as before; which from the
Causses justifies the Directions, and Variations of the Compass, toward and
from the Poles of the Earth.

Remove this Wire from the Equator toward the Pole, and the one End of it will
rise up as Norman's Needle did, and the other End will stick down upon the
Stone, making an Acute Angle, and describing a Parallel. Remove it nearer to
the Pole, and the Angle will be less and less acute, till at a a certain
Parallel it become a Right Angle to the Stone. Remove it yet nearer, and the
Angle will be Recto Major, or more and more obtuse. Bring it up to the Pole it
self, and it will there stand bolt upright, and make one Line with the Axis of
the Stone; which makes good the Inclination of the Needle to the Diameter of
the Great Magnete: for if Norman had touched his Needle under the Line, it
would have stood level upon the Pin without any Declination at all. If he had
touched it in any place beyond the Line, the Inclination, would have been on
the South side; but living here more toward this Pole, it must needs fall out
as he found it. Nobile experimentum, as Dr Gilbert cal's it, and he is bold
to say, ut nullius unquam rationis aut mentis compos, etc. that he who had
considered of this, and holds not himself convinced of the Principles of
Magnetical Philosophy, is not to be taken for a man of sens or reason. I know
what Scaliger says to this; Gilbertus Medicus, etc. tres amplissimos
Commentarios edidit, in quibus magis mihi probavit Doctrinam suam, quam
Magnetis Naturam; nam incertior sum quam dudum. We know what he means by
amplissimos: but why tres Commentarios? Sure the Man had not read all his
Books, for the Dr wrote six: but England was a kind of Nazareth to this Great
Scholar; he would not endure any good should com out from hence.

But to give the Art and the Nation but their due: Norman Borough Wright
Gilbert Ridley Barlow Gill^b^and

As there is no point of Philosophy so admirable and secret with Nature as
this; so none so immerst in visible practice and experiment, and bred up from
the very Cradle to that growth and stature, which now it has in this very
Corner of the World, by English Men.

Many other Experiments of great Wonder and Satisfaction are made by the
Magnetical Philosophers upon the Stone; but to the purpose I speak of, these
are the Principal, which is, to give the Reasons of the Needles turning toward
the North and South, which is the Original of the Mariner's Compass.

The North and South Winds thus assured by the Motion either of Direction or
Variation of the Needle, The Mariner supposes his Ship to be, as it always
is, upon some Horizon or other. The Center whereof is that of the Ship.

The Line of North and South found out by the Needle, a Line crossing this at
right Angles shows the East and West, and so they have the 4 Cardinal Winds;
and the Indian They are drawn upon a white China dish filled with Water, upon
the Center whereof there hangs a Needle of 6 inches long.
Compass consists of no more. Cross again each of these Lines, and they have
the 8 Whole Winds, as they call them. Another Division of these makes 8 more,
which they call the Half Winds. A third makes 16, which they call the Quarter
Winds; so they are 32 in all. Martin Cortez notes, that some Mariners of his
time divided that Division over again, and so the Compass consisted of 64
Winds: but he notes also, that this Division was more exact then for the
Use. Every one of these Winds is otherwise termed a several point of the
Compass, and the Whole Line consisting of 2 Winds, as the Line of North and
South, or that of East and West, is called a Rombe. The Spaniards first gave
that Name, as Peter of Medina takes it upon them; yet not out of their own
Language, but fancying to themselves that the Lines of the Compass (as indeed
they do) much resembled the Spars of a Spining Wheel, which in Latin is called
Rhombus, from the Greek (...), to turn about, they call those Lines Rumbos: and
the Word has taken.

The Compass therefore is an Horizontical Division of the 32 Winds, upon a
round piece of Pasteboard set in a Box, in the Center whereof upon a pin of
Laten cinque bored, the Needle or Wyers, first touched with the Stone, are
placed. This Box hangs in another Box, between two hoops of Laten, that
however the outermost Box be tossed up and down by the Motion of the Ship, yet
the innermost may always hang level to the Horizon. It is placed in the middle
of the Pupe, upon a right Line imagined to pass by the Mainmast through the
Center of the Ship, and so puts the Pilot in his Way.

These Compasses are represented, as they may upon the Globe, by those Circles
which you see divided into 32 Parts with their Fleurc de Lis, always pointing
to the North. And though the Winds are not set down by Name, yet they may be
fetched from the Horizon without the Globe. And the Rumbes are drawn out at
length circularly, if the Course be upon a Meridian, the Equator, or any other
parallel; otherwise they are Helispherical Lines, as they call them, that is,
partly Circular, and partly Helical or Spiral, as you may see them described
upon the Globe.

In the Globes set out by Saunderson and Molineux, you have the Courses of Sr
Francis Drake, and Fourbisher's Voyages; and in Janson's Globe that of Oliver
Van-Nort described by the Rumbes, whereby you may judge of the rest.

The Knowledge of all this is not of less use to the Geographer, then the other
Description by Circles; as well for the Reading of Sea-Voyages and Discoveries of
New Lands and Passages, as for that the very Descriptions of the Earth, for a
great part, cannot be made without references to the Water.

As the Earth and Water are wholly represented upon the Globe, so the whole,
Janson's Globe of the Year 1616. The Great Meridian passes by the Pike in
Tenariff. The Lesser stand at 10 Degrees distance.
or any part of either may be described in Plano, or upon a plane Surface in
a Map or Sea-Chart. And of these also something shall be discoursed hereafter;
for the present,

Thus much of the Description: now follows

The Use of the Terrestrial Globe; and first of the Rectification.
THe first care of this is to see that the Foot of the Globe stand level or
parallel to the Horizon; for which purpose some Globes have a Plumb-line, and
there be that advise for a Triangular Level of Wood, with a Plummet for the
purpose, to be applied to any part of the Horizon, after the manner as the
Mechanics try their Planes: but the matter is not tied to such a severitie of
exactness, but that a good Eye may pass for a sufficient Judge. The next thing
is, that it be placed in the North and South-Position of the Earth as directly
as it may. This depends upon the knowledge of the Meridian of the place, but
may well enough be don by a Needle, whose Variation is known, such an one as
is used to be set upon the South side of the Foot of some Globes, for the same
purpose: then lift up the North Pole above the Horizon so many Degrees as will
answer to the Latitude of the Place unto which you mean to rectify, which
suppose to be Oxford, therefore the Pole is to be lifted up 51 Degrees, for
that is the Elevation of this Place: then find out Oxford in the Globe, and
bring it to the Brass Meridian, and there stay it with a piece of paper, or
the like, put between the Meridian and the Globe: And you have set before you
Oxford with the very same and all respects of Situation upon the Globe, as it
has upon the Earth it self. And this is called Rectification, or right setting
of the Globe.

By the known Place to find out the Longitude and Latitude, and by the known
Longitude and Latitude to find out the Place.
THese Terms of Longitude and Latitude are understood either of the same or
several Plates. In the first sens they are absolutely called the Longitude or
Latitude of this or that place. In the other sens we use to say, The
Difference of Longitude or Latitude between such and such a place. The
Longitude of this or that place is the distance of it from the Great Meridian,
to the Meridian of the Place reckoned in the Degrees of the Equator. The
Latitude of a Place is the Distance of the Equator from the parallel of the
place reckoned in the Degrees of the Meridian. Therefore if the place met with
be under the Great Meridian, it has no Longitude at all, as the Hill in
Tenariffe, unless it be in respect of some other Great Meridian, as that by
Corvo, or the other by St Michael; and of such a place it will be sufficient
to know the Latitude. So again, if the place met with be under the Equator, it
has no Latitude at all; and of such a place it s^^^^^ be sufficient to know
the Longitude. But if the place should fall out to be in the very
Intersection it self of the Equator, and the Great Meridian it has neither
Latitude nor Longitude; and of such a Place it is sufficiently said, that There
it is.

But if the known Place lie at any distance from the Equator, it is but
bringing it up to the Brass Meridian, and the Latitude is found by observing
what Degrees the Meridian sets off. Let Oxford be the Place you meet with,
turn the Globe till it lie precisely under the Meridian, and you will find
from the Equator 51 Degrees, 32 Minutes of Northern Latitude; and, by
consequence, you also have the Elevation of the Pole: for that is always equal
to the Latitude of the Place.

With the same labor you may find out the Longitude, if holding still the
Globe you observe the Degrees of Intersection cut off by the Meridian in the
Equator: as put the case for Oxford still, it will be found 22 Degrees from
the Fortunate Islands, says Camden; from St Michael in the Azores it is exactly
true by which the Preface promised to go; but from the Fortunate Isles or the
Pike in Tenariffe, not out 15.

In case any of the lesser Meridians happen to pass through the Place, you may
rekon of what number it is from the Great Meridian, as whether it be the 3d,
5th, 9th, etc. and so many times 10 Degrees, (for at that distance they are
set) is the Longitude of the Place. The same course may be taken by the
Parallels to account the Degrees of Latitude.

And as the Longitude and Latitude are found out by the Place known, so after
the same manner any Place may be found out by the fore-knowledg of them. This
fore-knowledg was first had by Observation of the Eclipses of the Moon, and the
Meridian Altitude of the Sun or Stars, but may be now more easily gotten out
of the Tables of Peter Appian, Gemma Frisius, Mercator, Ortelius, Tycho, and
that annexed to Mr Hues his Treatise of the Use of the Globes, wherein the
Longitudes and Latitudes of all the Principal Cities, Capes, Rivers, etc. are
set down, but not accounting all from the same Meridian, which therefore also
must be considered off: For the named Autors, Appian, Gemma Frisius, and Tycho
reckoned from the Canaries, the rest from St Michael in the Azores.

Of the Difference of Longitude and Latitude, and what is to be observed in
the converting of the Degrees of either into Miles.
THe Respect of several Places one to another, is called the Difference of
Longitude or Latitude, as the Latitude of Oxford is 51 Degrees, the Latitude of
Durham 55. The Difference of Latitude is 4 Degrees. The Use of Longitude and
Latitude, in the absolute sens, was to make out the Position of any Place, in
respect of the Whole Sphere. In this other meaning, the Intent is to show the
Situation and Distance of any Place from and in respect of any other. The
Situation of a Place to another Place, is otherwise called the Angle of
Position; but of the Distance first, and how that is to be made into Miles.

The several cases put by the Geographers of this Difference, are either of
Places differing in Latitude only, or Longitude only, or both. Places
differing in latitude only, are all such as lie under the same Meridian, but
several Parallels. This may so fall out, as that either both the Places may be
in North, or both in South Latitude, or one of them in each. If both the Places
lie in North or South Latitude, then it is plain, that if the lesser Latitude
be subduced from the greater, the Remanent of Degrees, multiplied into Miles
by 60, shows the Distance, as the Isl' de Maio in the Latitude of 14 Degrees;
and the Isle of St Michael 39 Degrees, are both under the same Meridian: the 14
Degrees are the lesser Latitude, which taken from the 39 the greater, the
remainder is 25, which multiplied by 60, gives the Distance in Miles. If one
of the Places lie in North, the other in South Latitude, add the Degrees of
both Latitudes together, and do the like.

The very same Course is to be taken, if the Places differ in Longitude only,
in case they both lie under the Line it self, because there the measure is in a
Great Circle, as in the Meridians of Latitude; but if otherwise it fall out to
be in any Parallel, on this or that side of the Line, the case is altered.

We take for instance the Difference of Longitude betwixt London and Charlton,
or Charls-Town, in Charlton Island, so honored with the Name of CHARLES Prince
of WALES, by Captain Thomas James, at his Attempt upon the North-West Passage
in the Wintering, the 29th of May, the Year 1632, which was the Day of His
Highness Nativitie.

The Difference of Longitude is 79 Degrees, 30 Minutes, as it was taken from an
Eclips of the Moon, observed there by the Learned Captain, October. 29, 1631, and
by Mr Henry Gellibrand at Gresham College at the same time. It is required
that this Difference of Longitude be converted into Miles.

The Latitude of Charlton is 52 Degrees, 3 Minutes; that of London much about
the same. Here the proportion of 60 Miles to a Degree, will over-reckon the
Distance almost by the half. The reason whereof shall be first reported out of
the Nature of the Sphere.

However it be certain, that the Artificial Globe (as the Natural is supposed
to be) is of a Form precisely round, and may be drawn upon all over with
Great Circles Meridionally, yet considered from the Middle Line to the Poles,
it has a sensible Inclination or Depression of Sphere, as it is termed in
their words, so that if the Artificial Globe be turned about upon it is Axel,
several parts of the same Body shall be more swiftly moved then other at the
same time; for it is plain, that the Equator is moved about in the same
duration of time, as the smallest Parallel, but the Circumferences are of a
Vast and Visible Disproportion, and therefore is not possible they should go an
equal pace.

It is upon the same grounds, that the Author of the Use of the Globe per Terram
mobilem will tell you, that in the Diurnal Motion of the Earth, though
Amsterdam (in the same Latitude with Oxford) keep pace with the Isle of St
Thomas under the Line, yet they are of a very different dispatch; for Amsterdam
goes but 548 Miles in an hour, whereas the Isle of St Thomas posteth over 900
Miles in the same space of time, which is after the rate of 12 Miles in a
Minute, and more. And all this is true (that is true to the Paradox) from the
Inclination of the Sphere: But more plainly yet.

We see that the Meridians upon the Globe are set at 10 Degrees Distance, but
we may perceiv too that this Distance grows less and less, as the Meridians
draw nearer toward their concurrence in the Poles, as the Globe it self does
from the Equator upwards, and therefore the Degrees however accounted
proportionable, yet cannot possibly be equal in the Lesser Parallels to those
in the Equator, but must needs make an orderly Diminution from thence to
either of the Poles.

When therefore it was formerly said that 60 Miles of the Surface of the
Earthly Globe answer to a degree in the Heaven, it is to be understood of the
Degrees of a Great Circle, and so is always true in those of Latitude, but in
the Degrees of Longitude it holds only in the Equator it self, but in the
Parallels more North, or South the proportion diminishes from 60 to none at
all. So that if I would convert the Longitudes of the Molucca's, or any other
parts under the Line into Miles, it is but multiplying the Degrees of Longitude
by 60 and the thing is don; but if I would do the like by Oxford, or any other
place betwixt the Equator and the Poles, I must first know what number of Miles
answers to a Degree in that Parallel of Latitude. The knowledge of this
depends upon the proportion which the Equator bears to the Parallels, which
is learned out by the skill of Trigonometrie, but need not now be so hardly
attained to; for the Proportions are already cast up into a Table by Peter
Appian in the first Part of his Cosmographie. They are there set down according
to the Rate of German Miles, one of which makes 4 of ours. According to our
own Rate they are as follows:

The Proportion of English Miles answering to their several Degrees of Latitude.
Degrees. of Lat. Miles English. Seconds. 1 59 59 2 59 58 3 59 55 4 59 51 5 59 46 6
59 40 7 59 33 8 59 25 9 59 16 10 59 5 11 58 54 12 58 41 13 58 28 14 58 13 15 57
57 16 57 41 17 57 23 18 57 4 19 56 44 20 56 23 21 56 1 22 55 38 23 55 14 24 54
49 25 54 23 26 53 56 27 53 28 28 52 59 29 52 29 30 51 58 31 51 26 32 50 53 33
50 19 34 49 45 35 49 9 36 48 32 37 47 55 38 47 17 39 46 38 40 45 58 41 45 17 42
44 35 43 43 53 44 43 10 45 42 26 46 41 41 47 40 55 48 40 9 49 39 22 50 38 34 51
37 46 52 36 56 53 36 7 54 35 16 55 34 25 56 33 33 57 32 41 58 31 48 59 30 54 60
30 0 61 29 5 62 28 10 63 27 14 64 26 18 65 25 21 66 14 24 67 23 27 68 22 29 69
21 30 70 20 31 71 19 32 72 18 32 73 17 33 74 16 32 75 15 32 76 14 31 77 13 30
78 12 28 79 11 27 80 10 25 81 9 23 82 8 21 83 7 19 84 6 16 85 5 14 86 4 11 87 3
8 88 2 5 89 1 3 90 0 0

KNowing then the Latitude of Charlton to be 52 Degrees, and that of London
much about the same: I enter the Table, where I find the Sum of 36 Miles, or
thereabouts to answer a Degree of that Parallel, therefore muliplying the
Degrees of Longitude by 36, it gives up the number of Miles from the Great
Meridian to the Place.

And very fit it were that these Proportions were written upon the Horizon of
the Terrestrial Globes, rather then the Calendars. And what else there is,
confessed by themselves to belong of right to the other Globe, and of little use
to the Geographer, till this will be, they may be cut upon a Silver-Plate, or
Ruler of Box, or some how, or other; for without this Table, the Use of the
Globe, as to this Case of Difference, is as good as none at all.

The last Case is remaining, which is put of such Places as differ both in
Longitude and Latitude; for the consideration whereof the Geographers have
devised several ways, as the Arithmetical way; That by the Sphaerical
Triangles, by the Semicircle, etc. But the working by either of these is of
more time and intricacie then was to be wished. The readiest of all, and not
much inferior to the certainty of the rest is the Geometrical way, as Peter
Appian (one of the Fathers of this Art) has termed it; and it is no more but
this: Let the two Places be the Isle of St Thomas and Tenariff in the
Canaries. Take your Compasses and set one Foot of them in Tenariff, the other
in S. Thomas, and keeping the Feet of the Compasses at the same distance,
remove them to the Equator, or Great Meridian, and see how many Degrees they
set off; for that number multiplied by 60 is the Distance of the two Places in
Miles. The ground of this Rule is, that the Distance of all Places not
differing only in Longitude, are to be understood to be in a Great Circle,
and it was known before, that the Degrees of such a one are severally answered
by 60 of our Miles upon the face of the Earth. You may do the like in the
Quadrant of Altitude as will be seen in the next Invention.

To find out the Bearing of one Place from another, and what is meant by the
Angle of Position.
THe Zenith is the Pole of the Horizon through which the Astronomers imagine
Circles drawn (as the Meridians through the Poles of the World) so dividing the
Degrees of the Horizon as to mark out the Site of the Stars from this or that
Coast of the World. And because these Circles are supposed to be drawn through
the Semt, or Semith Alros, that is The Point over the Head, or Vertical Point,
The Arabians called them Alsemuth, we call them still Azimuths. And for that the
Zenith Point still alters with the Horizon, these Circls could not have been
described upon the Globes, but are represented there by the Quadrant of
Altitude, which is the 4th part of any one of those, and most properly serving
the other Globe, yet upon the same ground is useful to the Geograher in setting
out that Angle which is made by the meeting of the Meridian of any Place, with
the Vertical Circle of any other and of the same, called therefore the Angle
of Position, or Site. To find this out you are to elevate the Pole to the
Latitude of one of the Places, then bring the Place to the Meridian, and it
will fall out directly to be in the Zenith of that Elevation upon this ground,
That the Elevation is always equal to the Latitude; then fasten the Quadrant
of Altitude upon the Zenith, and turn it about till it fall upon the other
Place, and the End of the Quadrant will point out the Situation upon the
Horizon. Let the Places be Oxford and the Hill in Tenariff, set the Globe to
the Elevation of Oxford, that is 51 Degrees of Elevation above the Horizon,
then bring Oxford to the Meridian, and it falls under 51 Degrees of Latitude
from the Equator, therefore it is found in it is own Vertical Point 90 Degrees
equidistantly removed from the Horizon: Fasten there the Quadrant, and move
about the Plate till it fall upon the Hill in Tenariff, and the end of the
Quadrant where it touches the Horizon will show that the Hill in Tenariff
bears from Oxford South South-West: and if you multiply the the Degrees of
the Quadrant intercepted betwixt the two Places by 60, you have the Distance in
Miles, which was promised before.

If you find, as you needs must, that the Proportion of Miles upon the Globe
does not always answer to that which we reckon upon in the Earth, you are
desired not to think much; for when it is promised that 60 of our Miles shall
run out a Degree of a Great Circle above, it is intended upon this Supposition,
as if the Earth we tread upon were precisely round as the Globe it self is,
and not interrupted with Rivers, Hills, Valleys, etc. which though they bear no
proportion otherwise, yet because it comes to pass by this that we cannot set
our course in a Straight Line upon the Earth as the Demonstration is forced to
presuppose, we must be contented if some difference fall out.

The more unhappie Difference will be found in the Longitudes themselves. The
Difference of Longitude betwixt Rome and Norenberg (as M. Gellibrand has
already made the Observation) is according te Kepler, but 4 Minutes of Time:
Lansbergh reckons it at 10 Degrees, Mercator at 12, Stadius at 18,
Longomontanus at 16, Stoffler at 18, Maginus at 26, Werner at 32, Origan at 33,
Appian at 34, Regiomontanus at 36: with discouragement enough it may be noted,
for the Places are very eminent, and of a near Distance: the Men professed
able, and for the most part reckoning from the same Great Meridian; and yet the
less to be wondered at, if we consider how much in this case must be taken
upon trust, even by these Men themselves. We must not think they all spoke this
of their own Knowledge, for it is certain the thing might have been, and is don,
though not without any at all, yet without any considerable disagreement. I
say the Longitudes for a very great part, are exactly enough agreed on. The
perfection is not one Man's, nor one Ages Work, and must be waited for. It
must not seem strange if I tell you that you may distinguish the more certain
from the doubtful by their dsconvenience, for where you find them to agree,
you have cause to suspect (for the most part) that they have lien long upon the
Lees of Time, not as yet enquired into. But if you find them to disagree, you
may conclude that they have been brought to a new Examination. And of these,
you are to take the latest, and from such (if it may be) as have don it by
their own Observation, as out of the Tables of Tycho before others. The
difference of Longitude by Tycho's Tables betwixt Rome and Norenberg is under 4
Degrees, which comes nearest to Kepler, who also took it himself from two
several observations of the Moon. There will still seem to be some want of
satisfaction, but it is sufficient for any man to know in this as much as any
other man does.

If you would convert the Degrees of Longitude into Hours (for this also may
be don as well into Miles) you are to allow 15 Degrees to one Hour, upon the
Reasons taught before; and that which will be gained by this is to know, by
how much sooner or later the Sun Rises, or Sets to one Place then to
another. As the Difference of Longitude betwixt Oxford and Charlton is 79
Degrees, 30 Minutes: that is, 5 Hours, 18 Minutes: and because Charlton lies
West from London, the Sun Rises so much sooner here then there.

To find out the several Positions of Sphere, Clime, Parallel, etc.
THe Latitude and Longitude of a Place once resolved upon, the other Accidents
of Sphere will follow of themselves: the Position of Sphere you cannot miss of,
for if the Place you try for have no Latitude at all, you know already that
it must of necessity lie under the Line it self, and therefore in a right
Position. If it have less, or more the Position is oblique. If it have as much
as it can have, that is the Whole Quadrant, or 90 Degrees, the Position is
Parallel; the reasons were told before, and may evidently be discerned upon
the Globe.

For the Climes and Parallels, and consequently the length of the longest Day,
The fore-knowledg of the Latitude leads you directly, in case the Climes be
set down upon the Brass Meridian, or in any void part of the Globe, otherwise
it is but entering the Table of Climes and Parallels proportioned to every
Degree of Latitude, and you have your desire. And as by the Latitude you may
find out the Clime, so if it happen that you knew the Clime before, as it may
in the reading of the Estats du Monde, or the like Describers, you may by the
Clime find out the Latitude; And you cannot know either of these, but you must
needs know the Zone: And if you know that, you can as easily conclude upon the
Distinction of Shadows, for you knew before that the Inhabitants of the Mid
Zone are always Ascii or Amphiscii; those of the two Extreme Periscii; those
of the two Temperate or Intermedious, Heteroscii. To find out the other
Distinction of Habitation you may do thus: Let Oxford be the Place; bring it
to the Meridian, where you find it to be 51 Degrees lifted up above the
Equator; account so many Degrees of Southern Latitude below the Equator, and
you meet with the Antaeci (if any be) in the Terra Australis incognita;
remove Oxford from the Meridian 180 Degrees, and you shall find your Periaeci
under the Meridian where Oxford was before, about the Bay of S. Michael in the
Kingdom of Quivira, and your Antipodes in the place where their Antaeci stood
before, but they are not, for the Place is covered over with Water.

There yet remains one way of Description, but out of Curious Art, and of no
great Instruction, yet because it is made use of by some Geographers, and not
left out by M. Camden himself in his Britannia, I may tell what it means.

Of Astrological Geographie, and to tell under what Sign, or Planet, a Region,
or City is subjected.
THe Wisdom of the Ancients (it was called so) held an Opinion that not our
selves only, the Little Worlds, but the Great Globe of the EARTH also is
particularly reigned over by the Dominion of the 12 Signs, and Influence of the
7 Planets; upon which Principle (as we receiv it by Ptolomie's Tradition) they
divided this Globe into 4 Quadrants by the Intersection of the Equator with the
Great Meridian passing by the Canaries. Every of these Quadrants they again
divided into 4 Trigons, consisting each of them of 3 Signs of the Zodiac, not
orderly, but so as that every Trigon night be made up of one Fixed Sign, one
Moveable, and the third Common, as they distinguish. The first Quadrant was
reckoned from the Vernal by the Pole to the Autumnal Intersection, and was
called the Quadrant of the Habitable World: for every one of the other three
was to that Time a Terra incognita. The first Trigon of this Quadrant falls
to the Dominion of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius. The Second to Taurus, Virgo,
and Capricornus, and to the Influence of such Planets as are connatural to such
Signs. So Britain France, Germany, etc. fall to the share of Aries and his
Planet Mars. Italy, Sicilie, etc. to Leo: Norwaie, Bavaria, etc. to Scorpio;
and so forwards, concluding all, and every Part and Province of the Globe under
one, or other of the Twelv. But this empty Speculation stopped not here, but
would make us believ too, that not Whole Countries only, but every City,
Castle, Village, nay, not a private House, or a Ship that ride's upon the Ocean
but is thus distinctly governed by their Planets. They do it upon this ground:
Those men allow as earnest a livelihood to the Beam in the Timber, and Stone in
the Wall as to themselves. And when the first Stone of a Building is laid, a
City or House is said to be born, and as Formal a Figure erected of that, as
of the Owner's Nativitie.

The Emperor Constantine (though you would not think it) at the Building of his
new Rome commanded Valens, (a named Astrologer of that Time) to Calculate the
Nativitie, and make Judgment of the Life and Duration of that Imperial City.
The Asscendent was Cancer, and the Astrologer said that the Empire should stand
696 years, and (whether he knew so much or not) he said true; the City lived
longer indeed, but all the rest was but labor and sorrow. And for a more
private Mansion, there is yet now to be seen the Nativitie of the Warden's
Lodgings of Merton College in one of the Windows; the Horoscope the same with
that of Constantinople; now look what Sign of the twelv shall be found to rise
up in the Horoscope or Angle of the East, that is the Sign-Regent of that House,
or City. Prepared thus, the Astrologers sit in Judgment upon the Inclinations
and Fatalities of States and Men: and how little soever it may seem to us, or
be in it self, it was of moment to some of old, for Tiberius (an Astrologer
himself) had the Genitures of all his Nobility by him, and according as he
found his own, or the Kingdom's Horoscope to be well, or ill looked upon by
theirs, so he let them stand, or cut them off by Legislative Astrolologie.

According therefore to this way of Description, the Kingdom of England is
Astrologically Sited in the first Trigon of the first Quadrant, under the
Dominion of Aries for the Sign, and for the Planet Mars; or otherwise under the
Dominion of Pisces, now in the Place of Aries, and the Influence of the Moon
and Mars. And Silen says, that the Planet of England is the Moon, and Saturn
of the Scots: Vnde homines illius regionis (says an old Astrologer) sunt vagi,
and instabiles, ludibrio exponuntur, nunc ad summum, nunc ad imum delati. So
the Jews and we are governed by the same Stars equally, as Cardan is pleased
to say of us; Cardan. in a Tetrabib. Ptolomaei, cap. 3. tex. 12.
A Rebellious and Unluckie Nation, ever now and then making of New Laws and
Rites of Religion to the better sometimes, but for, the most part to the worst.

Now take an Essaie by all the ways of Description in the Geographie of Oxford.

It lies in an Oblique Position of Sphere in the Northern Temperate Zone: The
Elevation of the Pole 51 Degrees, 30 Minutes: the Longitude from the Great
Meridian in Tenariff 15 Degrees: under the 8 Clime, and 16 Parallel: the
Longest Day 16 Hours. The Sign-Regent is Capricorn: the Noon-Shadows are
Heteroscian: We are Pericoeci to the Baie of S. Miguel in Quivira: Antaeci to
the Northern parts of Terra Australis incognita below the Promontorie: We are
Antipodes to none.

The Description and Use of Maps and Charts Universal and Particular.
IT was said before that as the Whole Earth upon the Globe, so the Whole, or
any Part thereof may be Described upon a Plane: And howsoever the Description
by Globe be confessed on all sides to be nearest and most commensurable to
Nature. Ptolom. Geograph. lib. 1 cap. 20.
Non facile tamen (says PTOLOMIE) magnitudinem praebet quae suscipere possit
multa, quae necessario suo collocanda sunt loco: neque descriptionem, ut unico
momento cerni valeat, toti figurae adaptare potest: sed alterum ad alterius
designatonem transfer necesse existit: hoc est aut visum, aut sphaeram:
quorum neutrum descriptioni, quae in plano fit, accidit, sed modum quendam ad
similitudinem sphaericae imaginis inquirit, ut distantias quae in ea statuendae
sunt, quam maxim commensuratas faciat, ac secundum eam apparentiam, quia cum
vera conveniat.

This manner of Description has multiplied into several ways of Device; not
only from the different Ingenies of the Artificers, but from grounds in the
Art it self, and from the several extents of the Known World at several times.
Possidonius conceived it into the Form of a Sling as the Archbishop of
Thessolonica notes to that of Dionysius, After (...), the Delineation whereof
is made by the learned Bertius, who notes also Ad Fundam Possidonii that
Possidonius did not this out of ignorance of the Spherical form of the Earth,
but pretending only to exhibit as much of the World as that time was made
acquainted with, which cast up together, was not much unlike to that Figure
which he fancied. Mercator describes it under the Form of two Hearts,
Orontius of one, and under the same Form is the Arabick-Map cited by Scaliger
and James Christman, and not wanting to our Public Library, together with the
Tabula Bembina, In Archiv. Bib. Bodleian.
or Egyptian Map of the World in Hieroglyphics, we are now for as great a
reason to call it Tabula Laudina, by whose vaste expense and Providence we are
possessed of that and the like Monuments of the rarest Learning.

Others have fancied some other ways; but leaving what may be supererogated by
Affectation, There be two manners of this Description according to Art. The
first by Parallelogram: The other by Planisphere.

The Description of the whole by Parallelogram.
THe Parallelogram used to be divided in the midst by a Line drawn from North
to South, passing by the Azores, or Canaries for the Great Meridian. Cross to
this, and at right Angles another Line was drawn from East to West for the
Equator; then two Parallels to each to comprehend the Figure in the Squares,
whereof were set down rather four parts of the World then the whole: And this
way of Description howsoever not so exact, or near to Natural, yet has been
followed even by such as still ought to be accounted Excellent, though it were
their unluckiness to light upon those needy Times of Reformation that had to
struggle with that great Neglect and Interruption which passed betwixt the
Days of Ptolomie and Our's. Mercator himself, I mean, Peter Plancius and
others of about that time, and more lately: And some of them did not perceiv but
that the Meridians might be drawn Parallel throughout, utterly against the
original Nature and Constitution of the Sphere, which the Plain Charts were
bound to follow at the nearest Distance. Upon the Globe it self we know the
Meridians about the Equinoctials are equi-distant, but as they draw up toward
the Pole, to show their distance is proportionably diminished, till it com to a
Concurrence; answerably the Parallels, as they are deeper in Latitude, so they
grow less and less with the Sphere; so that at 60 Degrees the Equinoctial is
double to that Parallel of Latitude, and so proportionably. This is the Ground.

It will follow from hence, that if the Picture of the Earth be drawn upon a
Parallelogramme, so that the Meridians be equally distant throughout, and the
Parallels equally extended; the Parallel of 60 Degrees shall be as great as
the Line it self* and he that coasteth about the World in the Latitude of 60,
shall have as far to go by this Map, as he that does it in the Equator, though
the way be but half as long. For the Longitude of the Earth in the Equator it
self is 21600; but in the Parallel of 60 but 10800, Miles. So two Cities under
the same Parallel of 60, shall be of equal Longitude to other two under the
Line, and yet the first two shall be but 50, the other two 100 Miles distant.
So two Ships departing from the Equator at 60 Miles distance, and coming up to
the Parallel of 60, shall be 30 Miles nearer, and yet each of them keep the
same Meridians, and sail by this Card upon the very same Points of the Compass
at which they set forth.

This was complained of by Martin Cortez and others. And the learned Mercator
considering well of it, caussed the Degrees of the Parallel to encreas by a
proportion toward the Pole.

The Mathematical Generation whereof M. Wright has taught by the Inscription
of a Planisphere into a Concave Cylinder, which because it cannot be expressed
in plainer Terms, take here in his own words, Cap. 2. Of his Correction of
Errors in Navigation.

Suppose (says he) a Spherical Superficies with Meridian's, Parallels,
Rumbes, etc. to be inscribed into a concave Cylinder, their Axes agreeing in
one. Let this Spherical Superficies swell like a Bladder, while it is in
blowing equally all ways in every part thereof (that is, as much in Longitude
as Latitude) till it apply, and join it self (round about, and all along
also toward either Pole) unto the concave Superficies of the Cylinder, each
Parallel upon this Spherical Superficies increasing successively from the
Equinoctial toward either Pole until it com to be of equal Diameter with the
Cylinder, and consequently the Meridians, still widening themselves til they com
to be so far distant every where each from other, as they are at the
Equinonoctial. Thus it may most easily be understood how a Spherical
Superficies may by Extension be made a Cylindrical, and consequently a plain
Parallelogramme Superficies, because the Superficies of a Cylinder is nothing
else but a plain Parallelogramme wound about two equal equidistant Circles that
have one common Axetree perpendicular upon the Centers of them both, Element.
lib. decimo. Cylindrus est figura quae sub converso circum quiescens alterum
latus eorum, quae rectum angulum continent, Parallelogrammo orthogonio
comprehenditur, cum in eundem rarsus locum restitutum fuerit illud
Parallelogrammum unde moveri coeperat. Axis autem Cylindri est quiescens illa
recta linea, circum quam Parallelogrammum vertitur. Bases vero Cylindri sunt
Circuli, a duchus adversis lateribus, quae circum aguntur, descripti.
and the peripheries of each of them equal to the length of the
Parallelogramme, as the distance betwixt those Circles or height of the
Cylinder is equal to the breadth thereof.

In this Parallelogramme thus conceived to be made, all places must needs be
situate in the same Longitudes, Latitudes, and Directions or Courses, and upon
the same Meridians, Parallels, and Rumbes that they were in the Globe, because
that at every point between the Equinoctial and the Pole, we understand the
Spherical Superficies to swell equally in Longitude as in Latitude, till it
join it self unto the concavitie of the Cylinder, so as hereby no part is any
way distorted or displaced out of his true and natural situation upon his
Meridian, Parallel or Rumb, but only dilated and enlarged, the Meridians also
Parallels and Rumbes dilating and enlarging themselves likewise at every point
of Latitude in the same proportion.

What the Author of the brief Introduction to Geographie means, where he
says, That this Imagination unless it be well qualified is utterly falls, and
make's all such Maps faulty in the situation of Places, I know not: The
conceit I am sure is grounded upon the very Definition of a Cylinder by the
21. lib 10. Euclid. It Is confessed to be but Hypothetical, which is ordinary
with Mathematical Men. The Business was (and it does that) to bring the matter
down to common apprehension.

But however this Description of the Earth upon a Parallelogramme may be so
ordered by Art as to give a true account of the Situation and Distance of the
Parts, yet it can never be fitted to represent the Figure of the Whole.

The Description of the Whole by Planisphere.
THis way of Description renders the face of the Earth upon a Plain in its own
proper Figure Spherically, as upon the Globe it self, Definit. 21, 22, 23.
the gibbositie only allowed for: Sed quicunque (says Bertius) Globum Terrae
institue^it in plano describere, deprehendet fieri id uno circuli ambitu non
posse.

As near to a Circle, as it might, Ortelius and others have described it upon
one Face. I have seen it don upon four Ovals, but keeping touch with the Nature
of a Circle, and of the sphere it self, it cannot well be contrived upon so
few as one, or more then two.

Suppose then the Globe to be divided into two equal parts or Hemispheres.
This you know cannot be don but by a great Circle. And therefore it must be
don by the Equator or Meridian, for (the Colure is all one with the Meridian)
the Horizon cannot fix, and the Zodiac has nothing to do here. Res est
admodum impedita (says the same Bertius) and per quam difficilis orbem
terrarum ejusque parts describere, and quod in natura cernitur exact in
Globo, aut tabula spectandum repraesentare observato partium omnium situ and
figura, etc. cum suis Longitudinibus, Latitudinibus, Intervallis, and respectu
ad parts Coeli, prima and naturae proxima ratio est Spherica: Secunda ea, quae
ad Sphaeram maxim accedit ducta in plano, vel Tabula, quam idcirco vulgus
Planisphaerium vocat. Sunt autem ejus modi duo. Vnus qui Sphaeram secat in
Equatore, and duo efficit Hemisphaeria plana quorum in singulis Polus centri
loco est. Circulus autem Equinoctialis loco peripheriae. Alter, qui Sphaeram
secat. In aliquo Meridiano ita ut Poli in singulis Hemisphaeriis Hemisphaeriis
supra infraque compareant in extremitate axis. First then

Of the Section by the Equator.
BUt before that, it must be commonly said of both these Sections, that the
Translation of a Sphere from its profunditie to a Plain of two only
Dimensions, Lineal and Superficial, has its Generation and Flux (I speak it in
their words) from Optical or Perspective Imagination. They would have you (and
by the Law of Art they may in infinitum and impossibilia postulare) to suppose
the Eye placed near about the Center of a Sphere of Glass, inscribed with
Meridians, Parallels, etc. in the direct manner as upon the Globe you see the
Eye so placed within the concave of this Sphere and fixed upon the Pole, will
comprehend a Section upon the Plane of the Equator, describing the Meridians by
Right, and the Parallels by Circular Lines: or fixed upon some point of the
Equator, the Meridian which is drawn by that point and the Equator it self will
appear in Straight, all the rest in Crooked Lines; for, if the the Eye be
fixed upon any point of the Equator, the Meridians and Parallels will be
transferred to Sight, so as to be themselves the Bases of so many visual
Cones, the tops whereof shall meet in the same point of the Great Meridian; or
if the Eye be fixed upon the Pole, the Parallels will present themselves in like
Cones, the sides whereof shall be terminated by the Meridians, and therefore
the Meridians ought to be Straight Lines, and the Parallels Whole Circles.

The Projections are both according to Art; but because the comprehension
thereof cannot be familiar without saying too much to the purpose before hand
concerning the Optical Pyramid, and the Angle of Vision, these things I
require; and point you to a more capable way of Conception.

Suppose the Globe of the Moon in opposition to the Sun, then she is at the
fullest. Let her be Rising up in the East, and by the help of Refraction
appear, as sometimes she does, in Diameter so big as a Bushel (as the Country
expresses) suppose another World there, (some Brains do more then so) but do
you only suppose it; and suppose also this Lunarie Earth to be written upon
with Meridians, Parallels, and all other Distinctions of the Sphere, and as
visible as the Body it self. The Globe of the Moon you may be sure is as
solid and gibbous as that of this Earth and Water, and yet it is presented to
your eye in the figure of a Planisphere. The reason is out of Perspective from
the infinite distance. If you grant (as you cannot deny) but that your Sight
is deceived in the Soliditie, you may very well suffer your self to be
cozened on in the Inscriptions. These Meridians and Parallels upon this Globe
of the Moon, swell out there in whole Circles, in the very same manner as upon
the Artificial Globe it self, and yet suppose them to be drawn there by either
of the two Sections the Equator or Meridian, as the body of the Moon it self
seems to you flat, and yet is not, so the Meridians and Parallels would
represent themselves in the very same figure and distance as you see them here
below upon a paper Planisphere.

By this deceit you may perceiv what is meant by that, which would not look so
plain, if it were expres't by the punctilio's of Art.

Suppose the Globe to be flatted upon the Plain of the Equator, and you have
the first way of Projection, dividing into the North and South Hemispheres, as
you may see here in the Map.

The Pole is the Center, the Equator is the Circumference divided into 360
Degrees of Longitude; the Oblique Semicircle from Aries to Libra, is the
North-half of the Zodiac; the Parallels are whole Circles; the Meridians are
Straight Lines; the Great Meridian is divided into 90 Degrees of Latitude (and
passes by the Canaries); the Parallels are Parallels indeed, and the Meridians
equidistantly concur, Geograph. cap. 24. lib. 1.
and therefore all the Degrees are equal. After this way of Projection
Ptolomie describe's that part of the Habitable World, which was discovered to
his time.

Among the late Geographers first, and almost only Postellus and the Noter
upon him Severtius have much admired this manner of Section. The Noter says,
Sicque haec Mappa omnium praestantissima, quae verius quam reliquae orbis
planiciem refert, ob certissimos ac evidentissimos suos Indices plures,
faciliores, ac magis ad oculum perspicaces, usus babet.

Since that, Berlius very earnestly and angerly recommendeth it to the
Mechanics: Consulent sibi and publico (says he) si modum istum reddant
familiarem. But of the other way he says, Hic autem modus cum sit omnium
nequissimus, est omnium operosissimus, and tamen hodie in maximo usu. Tantum
valet apud vulgus praeconcepta opinio: which though it may be true enough, yet
we are to hear what Ptolomie has to say himself.

Of the Section by the Meridian.
He confesses the other way to be easiest, but Porro similiorem etiam
(says he) and magis commensuratam descriptionem orbis in Tabula faciemus, si
Lineas Meridianas imaginatione concipiamus ad similitudinem Linearum
Meridianarum in Sphaera, ita ut aspectus, seu oculorum axis in Sphaerae
positionem penetret, and per Sectionem quae ad asspectum est Meridiani qui
Longitudinem terrae cognitae in duas dividit parts, and Paralleli, qui and
ipse bifariam ejus Latitudinem, nec non centrum spherae, quo ex aequo termini
oppositi visu comprehendantur, and appareant, etc.

Quod vero talis descriptio sphaericae formae similior sit quam prior, per sese
patet: quoniam si Sphaera fixa maneat, and non circumvolvatur, quod and tabulae
contingit necessario, quum per medium descriptionis visus constituitur, unus
quidem medius and meridianus per axem asspectuum seu visus in planum cadens in
imaginatioonem rectae prebet Lineae: qui vero ex utraque hujus part sunt
omnes, ad ipsum secundum concava conversi apparent and magis illi, qui plus ab
eo distant, quod and hic observabitur, cum decenti convexitatam analogia.

Suppose the Globe to be flatted upon the Plane of the Meridian and you have
the other way of Projection. The Equator here is a Straight Line; the Great
Meridian a whole Circle; the Lesser are the more, so as they com near to the
Great: Therefore that which passes by the point of concurrence in the Equator,
and divides the Longitude of either Hemisphere into two equal parts is a
Straight Line; and Ptolomie says, that this is the more natural way of
Description; and yet it is certain that in this Section the Meridians do not
equi-distantly concur. The Parallels are not Parallels indeed, and therefore
all the Degrees are unequal.

However this later way is that which is now most, and indeed altogether in
use.

Example of this in the Description of the Planispherical Map of Hondius.
THen holding our selves to the more usual way of Projection instead of any
other (for the difference would not be much) we set before us the two
Hemispheres of Hondius of the year 1627 projected upon the Plane of the
Meridian, you may understand it thus. Take the Globe out of the Frame and bring
the Great Meridian to the Brass Meridian and you have the East and West
Hemisphere. Suppose these two Hemispheres to be flatted upon the Plane of the
Meridian, and the Imagination produces these two faces of the Earth presented
upon the Map.

The Great Meridian passes by St Marie and St Michael of the Azores, as you
may see in the North-West Quadrant of the East Hemisphere. And yet the
Description subjoined to these Hemispheres reckons Longitude from the Isles
Corvo and Flores, and to make you sure that it does so, it is said there about
the later end, that in the Azores the Compass varieth not at all (about Fayal
and Flores) and that for no other reason he took the Longitude of the Map from
thence, and not as Ptolomie from the Canarie Isles. The Mistake is too great to
fall from his own Pen; but it seems the Description was made for some other Map
of Hondius where the Meridian passed by the Azores, and ignorantly afterward
intruded upon this, by the Printers or some others, if it were not so the
oversight is the greater.

This Meridian is of necessity doubled upon the Plane, and yet is to be
supposed as one, which is easily don, if you reflect your conceit back upon the
Nature of the Sphere, for do but fancy the two Faces into a Globe again, and
the two Meridians will become one. You are to conceiv as much upon the lesser
Meridians: And you may see too that they do not equally concur, for those two
which are drawn quite cross to the Equator, precisely in the middle from 90 to
90, are straits Lines; all the rest as they more depart from the strait Lines,
so to follow the Nature of the Globe they are more and more Circles, and at a
farther distance.

In the Northwest Quadrant of the East Hemisphere, you have the nine Southerly
Climes set down, as in the brass Meridian of Saunderson's Globe. The Northern
Climes the Author thought not fit to distinguish, but in the East Semicircle of
the same Hemisphere, you have the length of the longest Day in hours and
minutes, to every several Degree of Northern, and of Southern Latitude, which
by a more exact and shorter cut, does the Business of the Clime and Parallel
without more ado, which therefore by some are accounted but superfluous Terms of
this Art.

In the East Semicircle of the other Hemisphere you have the proportion of
English Miles to the several Degrees of Latitude for both Quadrants, to the use
whereof there is nothing here anew to be said.

The Line crossing the two Hemisphers is the Equator, in the Degrees whereof
the Longitude is to be reckoned from S. Michael; and so the Latitude in the
Great Meridian, no otherwise then as it was taught upon the Globe it self,
though not with equal Art and assurance from the reasons of Deficiencie in this
way of Projection rendered before.

Neither ought any thing to be repeted over upon the Zodiac, the Tropical,
the Polar, or Parallel Cirles, for they are all the same, and of the same use
as upon the Globe, the Cards, and Rumbs are alike.

The little Circles or Roundlets dispersed here and there about the Hemispheres
for the most part give account of the several Degrees of Variation of the
Compass in North-easting or North-westing, as also in what Places there is no
Variation at all, so as the Straits of Magellan the Roundlet there says, Ad
fauces freti Magellanici deviatio Acu 6 Grad. Orientem versus; That the Needle
North-easteth six Degrees.

In the Southern Quadrant of the Eastern Hemisphere you have set down three
ways of measuring the Distance of Places. The first performs by a Globe: the
second by an Astrolabe: the third by a Semicirle: but the second and third, as
not of that readiness in working as the first, may be passed over.

The first in effect is the Geometrical way, Accipe Globum, quamvis exiguum,
etc. Horidius advises you to have a kind of Terella, or little Globe, not
adorned with all the requisites of the Sphere, but only traced over with
Meridians, the Equator, and the Parallels: the Meridian and Equator to be
divided into Degrees. No more but so, Let the two Places into whose Distance
you enquire be London and Paris, find the Longitude and Latitude of both the
Places in the Planisphere; then again find the same Longitude and Latitude
upon the Globe, then set one foot of your Compass upon the Place where London,
and the other foot where Paris should be upon the Globe, and bring your
Compass with that Distance to the Equator: And the Degrees intercepted,
multiplied into Miles by 60, show the Distance. This is as much as to tell us,
that in measuring the Distances of Places there is no great trust to be had to
any Planispherical Projection whatsoever: for though that by the Section of the
Equator be nearer to the Sphere then this by the Section of the Meridian, yet
they are both equally engaged in this Imperfection that they cannot satisfy
for the gibbositie of the Globe.

The Description and Use of Particular Charts.
PArticular Maps are but Limbs of the Globe, and therefore though they are
drawn asunder, yet it is still to be don with that proportion, as a remembering
Eye may suddenly acknowledge, and join them to the whole Body.

They are most commonly described upon a Parallelogramme, but their relation to
the Body it self is not to be judged by this. It is not don to that end, but
that being but Parts and Members severed from the Whole, they yet might make
show of as great an appearance of Integrity as could be allowed.

Their Place in their Body is to be esteemed from their proper Lineaments,
drawn within the Square, that is, such Portions of Meridians and Parallels as
they consisted of in the Globe it self.

Briefly to the Constitution of a particular Chart, These Moments especially
make up the Projection, the Graduation, The Reference to the great Meridian,
the Scale, and the Compass.

Projection.
The Projection is most commonly (as I said) upon a Parallelogramme, sometimes
inscribed with an Oval, as the Map of Flanders, and Germane Basse in Ortelius;
or upon a Circle, as that of the North Pole in Mercator's Atlas: And because no
Region is exactly square or round, so much of the bordering Territories are
usually thrust in, as may not only declare the Bounds, but fill up the Square
too.

The Projection is mainly concerned in the fore-knowledg of the Longitude and
Latitude of the Country: And the Latitude is to be expressed by Parallels
from North to South, as the Longitude by Meridians from West to East, each of
them at 10 Degrees distance, or the Meridians at 15, as the Geographer shall
pleas, and may be drawn either by Circle, as the Maps of Asia and America in
Ortelius his Theatrum; or by right Line, and that either extended, as in the
Map of Africa there, or only begun upon the Parallelogramme, as in the Map of
Europe; and then the two extreme Parallels may be the North and South sides of
the Parallelogramme: but if they be right Lines, they are not (that is, the
Meridians are not) to be drawn direct or parallel, but inclining and
concurring to confess the Nature of the Whole, whereof they are such parts, and
the named Parallels are more notably to be distinguished then the rest, if they
have place in the Map, as in that of Africa you have the Equator, and both the
Tropicks either graduated, as the Equator, or drawn double at least, as the
Tropicks, etc.

For the Graduation. Graduation.
The Degrees of Longitude are most commonly divided upon the North and South
sides of the Parallelogramme. The Degrees of Latitude upon the East and West
sides, or otherwise upon the most Eastern and Western Meridian of the Map
within the Square, as in the Descriptions of Ptolemie continually; or if the
Projection be upon a Circle, as that of the North Pole in the Atlas, the
Degrees of Longitude are set upon the uttermost Parallel, and those of Latitude
upon a portion of the Great Meridian, answerable to the Semidiameter of that
Latitude. And the Climes may be set down to the Degrees of Latitude, as in
the Description of Portugal by Vernandus Alvarus. But it has seemed good to
some Geographers, nay, even to Ortelius himself in these particular Descriptions
for the most part to make no Graduation or Projection at all; but to put the
matter off to a Scale of Miles, and leav the rest to be believed. Whether this
or Mercator's way in the Atlas were more Artificial, I will not judge in the
cause of the King of Spain's Geographer.

For the first Meridian, Reference to the great Meridian.
It is a fault you will more generally find, that there is very seldom any
expression of that Reference, so that though there be Graduation, and the
Longitude set before your eyes, yet you will find your self uncertain, unless
it be told you before, that the Longitudes in Mr Camdem, Speed, Nordon, and
the late English Describers generally are taken from Mercator's First Meridian,
by S. Michael in the Azores, though some of them indeed (and not M. Camdem
only, but such too as made it their business to do otherwise) have proposed
the Matter in effect to be don by the Canaries as the Author of the Brief
Introduction to Geographie, (if I understand him) in these words.

Upon the Globe there are many (Meridians) drawn, all which pass through the
Poles, and go North and South; but there is one more remarkable than the rest
drawn broad with small Divisions, which runs thorough the Canarie-Islands or
Azores, Westward of Spain, which is counted the first Meridian in regard of
reckoning and measuring of Distances of places one from another; for otherwise
there if neither first nor last in the round Earth: But some place must be
appointed where to begin the Account: And those Islands have been thought
fittest, because no part of the World that lay Westward was known to the
Ancients further than that: and as they began to reckon, there we follow them.

But as concerning Mercator himself you have more to look to. Mercator's
constant Meridian was that by S. Michael, and so you will find it in the
Atlas, set out by Rumuldus. But in that of Hondius Edition lately translated
into English, you will find it otherwise, though you shall see too in what a
fair way you are to be deceived of this also.

In the Description of Island, page 33. The Book says, It is situated not
under the first Meridian, as one bath noted, but in the eighth Degree from
thence. To which the Margin (but not knowing what) says,

That this first Meridian is a great Circle rounding the Earth from Pole to
Pole, and passing thorough the Islands called Azores, and namely the Isle of S.
Michael, as the same Noter to page 10.

He might think he went upon aground good enough; for in the seventh Chapter
of the Introduction, Mercator himself, says thus:

Ptolomie has placed the first Meridian in the Fortunate Isles; which at this
day are called the Canaries. Since, the Spanish Pilots have placed it in the
Isle of Goss-hauks, which in their Language are called Assores, and some of them
placed it in the middle of Spain, etc.

Now we must hold (says he) that the Longitude is a certain space or
interval of the Equator closed between Meridians, the one from the Isles called
Azores, from whence it takes the beginning; the other, from that Place or
Region, whereof we would know the Distance.

And yet for all this the Longitudes in that Book are accounted from the
Canaries, as you may see in the East Hemisphere, and in the general Description
of Africa. The Editioner Hondius would have it so, and (which is marvel the
Marginal Noter could choose but know) he himself in the very Beginning makes
this Profession of it;

Ptolomie, says he, and we in this Book do make the Longitude to be a
segment of the Equator comprehended betwixt the Meridian of the place, and the
Meridian of the Fortunate Islands, for from these Islands the Beginning of
Longitude is taken, etc.

Having saved you this Labor in Mercator, you may now be told what is to be
don with Ortelius.

For his own Descriptions he always takes to Ptolomie's Meridian by the
Canaries, as you may see in his Universal Face of the World, and in the General
Description of Africa, to the Description of Hispaniola, Cuba, Culiacan, etc.
he gives this Admonition.

Sciat Lector Autorem Anonymunt, qui hanc Culiacanam regionem, and has insulas
perlustravit, and descripsit, Regionum Longitudines, non ut Ptolomaeus aliique
solent; a Fortunatis insulis versus Orientem sumpsisse, sed a Toleto Hispaniae
umbilico Occidentem versus ex Eclipsibus ab ipsomet observatis deprehendisse.

The like Note he affixeth to the Description of New-Spain: his meaning in
both is, to let the Reader know that the Describer (who ever he was) did not
in these Maps account the Degrees of Longitude, as Ptolomie, from West to East,
and from the Fortunate Isles; but from East to West, and from the Meridian of
Toledo Hispaniae Vmbilico; which is the meaning of Mercator, when he says,
That some of the Spanish Pilots placed the Great Meridian in the middle of
Spain. And if you look upon the Longitude in the North and South sides of the
Parallelogram, you shall see the Degrees reckoned backwards contrary to the
received manner of Graduation. It is no very hard matter to reduce these
Longitudes to the ordinary way, but rather then so, your may have recours to
the Later Description of America, by Leat and others.

For the Scale, in particular Maps extending to a considerable portion of
Longitude and Latitude, it depends for the ground upon the Degrees of the
Great Circles, and the Proportion of Miles in several Countries to any such
Degree. But in Lesser Descriptions it has more to do with the known distance
of any two, or more places experimentally found, or taken upon trust of Common
Reputation.

Here it is not to be thought that the Longitudes and Latitudes of all Places
in a particular Chart need to be taken, but of the Principal only, the rest
to be reduced by the Radius, the Angle of Position, and the like; and much
also in this matter uses to be given to the Common Supputation; all which,
the last especially are the Causses why the Maps agree no better, for of all
other the Account of the Common People is most uncertain.

The French Cosmographer of Amiens before named, when he took upon him to
find out how many of their Leagues answered to a Degree, took his Journie
from Paris as directly under the Meridian as he might, till he rode 25
Leagues according to the Account of the Inhabitants of the Place. Nec tamen
vulgi supputationem satiatus (says he) vehiculum quod Parisios recta via
petebat conscendi in eoque residens tota via 17024 fere rotae circumvolutiones
collegi, vallibus and Montibus (quod facultas nostra ferebat) ad aequalitatem
redactis. Erat autem rotae illius diameter sex pedum, sexque paulo magis
digitorum geometricorum, ob idque ejus ambitus pedunt erat viginti seu passuum
quatuor. His ergo revolutionibus per quatuor ductis reperi passus 68096 qui
milliaira sunt Italica 68, cum passibus 96. In his return to Paris he took
Coach, the Diameter of the Wheel was 6 foot and a little more, therefore the
Circumference 20 foot, that is, 4 paces. He reckoned upon the way 17024
circumrotations of the Wheel, which multiplying by 4 the Numerus factus was
68006 paces, which amounted to 68 Miles Italian, and somewhat more. And yet
according to Common Supputation they that reckon most, reckon but 25 Leagues to
a Degree, and 60 Miles to 25 Leagues 8 Miles less. The Cosmographer adds
indeed, that by the same experiment he sound, that the French-League was of a
greater proportion then two Italian Miles.

If it could be exspected that so exact a course might be taken in all
particular Mensurations, we might put the more trust in the distances, and yet
you see we might fail too. It is enough in such a case to know the reasons of
those uncertainties where the thing it self is so insuperable.

The Difference of Miles in several Countries is great, but it will be enough
to know that the Italian and English are reckoned for all one, and four of
these make a German Mile; two, a French-League; three, and somewhat more, a
Spanish-League; the Swedish, or Danish Mile consists of five Miles English,
and somewhat more.

Now as the Miles of several Countries do very much differ, so those of the
same do not very much agree: and therefore the Scales are commonly written
upon with Magna, Mediocria, Parva, to show the Difference.

Of Common English and Italian Miles 60 (as you know already) answer to a
Degree of a Great Circle: 68 says Fernelius: it ought to be 63 and somewhat
more by the Semidiameter of the Earth, as it was taken by Mr Edward Wright near
Plimmouth-Sound; dut 60 is most commonly believed and is the proportion (which
in a very small matter) received by Ptolomie himself from Marinus the Tyrian
with this approbation: Ptolom Geograph. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Sed in hoc quoque recte setit partent unam qualium est circulus maximus
trecentorum sexaginta, quinginta in terra constituere stadia, id enim
confessis' dimensionibus' consonum existit.

Of common Germane Miles 15 answer to a Degree; of common French-Leagues 25; of
Spanish-Leagues 17; of Swedish and Danish 10.

In some Maps you shall find the Miles thus hiddenly set down, as in that of
Artois in Ortelius and elsewhere. And the meaning still is, that you should
measure the Milliaria magna upon the Lowermost Line, the Parva upon the
uppermost, and the Mediocria upon the Middlemost.

Scala Milliarium.
scale of miles 1 2 3 4 5 6



In some other Maps, as in that of Westphalia in the same Author, you will find
the Scale written upon with Milliaria magna, mediocria, and Horae itineris. To
which you are to note, that some Nations measure their ways by hours,
concluding of the Distance from the time spent in the going, the proportion
whereof may be gathered from this note upon the Description of Helvetia.
Continet autem Milliare Helveticum, ut nunc utuntur, spacium duarum horarum
equestris; duarumque and dimidiae pedestris itineris. Computantur ergo octo
millia passuum Italicoram pro uno milliario Helvetico.

Therefore one Hour-Mile of a Journie upon Horse, answers to four English
Miles: And yet it is set down before the Atlas that the proportion of
Itinerarie Hours to a Degree is 20: They cannot both be true, it is enough to
show how uncertain this way of measuring needs must be.

For the Use of the Scale it is but setting one foot of your Compass in the
little Circles of the places and bringing the Compass kept at that Distance to
the Scale, and you have the number of great or middle Miles, according as the
Inhabitants of those places are known to reckon.

The Compass is set down to show the Bearing of Places, and by what Wind and
Way the Mariner is to shape his course from Port to Port, as in the Universal
Maps and Globe it self.

Example of all this in the Description of Saxton's Map of England and Wales.
ALl this may be exemplified in some one Particular Chart. The example uses to
be given in the Description of France, but might more properly be made upon a
Map of our own Country. There be several of these as that of Humfrey Llyid,
that of Wortnel, Mr Speed's Descriptions and others; but we choose that of
Saxton, a man recommended unto us by Mr Camden himself in the Preface to his
Britannia.

Nonnulli erunt fortasse qui Tabulas chorographicas hic exspectent quas
lenocinante pictura oculis esse jucundiores, and in his Geographicis studiis
plurimum interesse fateor; maxim si mutis Tabulis literarum etiam lumen
accedat. Hoc taemen praestare facultatis non est nostrae; and Angliam
accuratissime in Tabulis seorsim ornatissimus Vir Thomas Seckfordus Regiae
Majestati a supplicum Libellis, suis impensis, and Christophori Saxtoni optimi
Chorographi opera, magna cum laud descripsit.

Saxton drew up Typographical Descriptions of this Kingdom by the Shires and
Counties into a set Volume of Tables; but whatsoever can be severally said of
them may better be spoken all at once upon his great Chorographical Map of the
Whole. A Description, which if it exceed not (as I think it does) yet may
compare with any particular Table made or to be made of any Country
whatsoever.

The Description is of England only and Wales, that it might be the more
exact and useful, which exspectation is so accurately answered that the
smallest Village may be turned to there; Henxey or Botlie, as well as Oxford.

It is described upon a Parallelogram: the North and South sides are Parallels
of Latitude divided into Degrees of Longitude. The East and West sides stand
for Meridians, and are divided into Degres of Latitude, and every Degree
subdivided into 60 Parts but so, that a Degree of Longitude answers but to so
many parts of a Degree of Latitude, as it ought in that Parallel. The
Parallels as the Meridians are set down at one Degrees distance: the Parallels
are Parallels indeed; the Meridians are Straight Lines, but more and more
concurring from South to North, as is required from the nature of the Sphere.

The Latitude of the Countries is from 50 Degrees 8 Minutes to 55 and 50
Minutes. The Longitude from 17 to 25 Degrees and 9 Minutes: And it is reckoned
from St Michael and St Mary's in the Azores, as the Geographer himself there
expresses: Longitudinis gradus ab eo Meridiano capiunt initium qui per Divae
Mariae Insulam transit, quae omnium Azorearum maxim ad Orientem vergit.

The middle Parallel of the Parallelogram is at 53 Degrees of Latitude and
passes by Newcastle upon Tine. The Middle Parallel of the Country it self is
somewhat of a Lesser Latitude, and may be imagined to pass a not much besides
Tidburie Castle in Staffordshire, as Mr Norden thought. And indeed
Staffordshire has been anciently accounted the Middle of England: and the
Inhabitants of that Shire are called by BID Angli Mediterranei.

The Scale of Miles is answerable to one Degree of Latitude, and is also
divided, as they, into 60 Parts. And a Degree of Longitude answers to so
many Parts of that 60, as it ought in the Parallel of 50 Degrees of Latitude,
that is 38 Miles or thereabouts; and therefore the graduation both of the
Scale, the Parallels, and Meridians is exact and according to Art. And in
measuring the Distances of the Places, it is all one to set the Compass upon the
Minutes of Latitude as upon the Scale it self.

In finding out the Longitude, or Latitude of any City or Town in the Map,
the manner is the same as in any other, for the Longitude is to be reckoned
in the North and South sides, the Latitude in the East and West sides of the
Parallelogram.

But the Situation and Distance of the Places in a particular Chart are most of
moment, the Situations are plain. The Distances in this Map, where I could
prove them experimentally, for the most part were found true. They cannot be
exact in any Map whatsoever, as Mr Norden himself, who labored much in this
matter makes his complaint in that necessary Guide, added to a little, but
not much augmented, by the late Editioner. The setting down of the places
themselves in the void Angles of the Squares pretend's very well, but there was
not room for the purpose; yet in one respect the New Book bettereth the Old, in
that the Bearing of Places is annexed by an expression of the Points of the
Compass upon every Square.

In some Maps of Particulars Countries you may possibly find the Meridians
drawn directly without any hope of Concurrence. And Ptolomie says it makes
no matter so this caution be observed: Preterea nil referet si
aequidistantibus usi fuerimus Meridianis Lineis rectis, quoque Parallelorum
dummodo solum parts distantiae Meridianorum eam rationem sumant ad distantias
Parallelorum quam maximus habet Circulus ad illum Parallelum, qui in Tabula hac
medius erit.

It is all upon the first main ground of the Depression of the Sphere, which in
any Descriptions in any considerable Distance from the Line, cannot really
be made good upon a Plane, but it to be answered by proportion; for which
cause Marinus the Tyrian condemned all Descriptions in Plano; but Ptolomie
showed his Error. And from the same Principle is to be derived the
understanding of those Titles written over some Descriptions in the Atlas, as to
that of Bellovacum, or the Country of Bollonia. The Description is, The
Meridians thereof are placed at the Parallels 50, and 45. So to the Description
of the Landgraviate of Hessen; The Title is, The Meridians are distant
according to the proportion of the 510 Parallel to the Great Circle. The Author
himself gives you the reason of it in his Admonition set before the
Description of France, page 242.

Of Topographical Maps, and for an Example the Description of Middle sex by Mr
Norden.
Geograph. lib. 1. cap. 1.
NOw that you may not be mistaken in Terms, the Description of the Whole
whether by Parallelogramme, or Planisphere is most rightfully called Geographie
in Plano.

Geographiae proprium est (says Ptolemie) unam and continuam terram cognitam
ostendere quemadmodum se habeat natura and positione.

The Description of any very great part of the Earth, as France, England, or
the like, is most properly called Chorographie.

Ptolomie himself goes no further in distinctions; for having said, That
Geographie is an imitation of the Picture of the Earth, with intimation of
reference to the drawing of the lesser Worlds; he adds, Porro finis
Chorographicus connexione particulari continetur, veluti si quis aurem tantum
aut oculum imitetur. And indeed the Tables of Ptolomie needed no other
Difference in terms. But the late Geographers finding it fittest of all to make
Descriptions of small Parcels of the Earth, as Shires and Counties to us, the
Circles of the Empire in Comparison to the Greatness of that, and the like;
They have fallen upon a third member of this Division, calling these kind of
Descriptions Topographie, though Ptolomie did minutissimas proprietates
Chorographiae attribuere. And the word it self will not allow of any very
great Distinction from the other, if it had not been gained upon by Use.

Now as there is no Chorographical Map or Description of the whole Region, or
Country of this Kingdom can be more exactly according to Art, or according to
Industry more particularly performed than that of Saxton, so for the
Descriptions of the Shires or Counties thereof (which must then be called
their Topographie) No man whatsoever has lighted upon a more exact and present
way of Delineation then the Industrious Norden.

The intent of this Man was to make an absolute Description of the Whole, and
every part of this Kingdom of Great Britain: It pleased him to call this
purpose, Speculum Britanniae. The first Part whereof (which is only completed)
affords us a general Description of the Kingdom, with a particular
Description and Topographical Table of Middlesex. The Table is projected upon a
Parallelogramme, the sides whereof are divided into Miles, so that though the
sides look like Meridians and Parallels; yet they are not so, but a mere Scale,
from which therefore are drawn cross the Table small black equidistant lines,
looking also like to Parallels and Meridians, but serving only for the readier
taking of the Distances, the Divisions of these Lines from East to West
standing for two, from North to South for four Miles. The Letters upon the East
and West side, and figures upon the North and South side, serve for the finding
out any place by the Direction of the Alphabet: For Example, The Alphabet,
says Brentford. H. 12. See H in the East or West side, 12 upon the North or
South side, and then by the Square made by the black Lines you fall upon the
Place. The Figures here and there about, which in the Parallelogramme, 2, 3, 4,
5, and to 11 Note out the Principal Highways from London thorough Middlesex,
as number the 4 by Northolt is to show the way to Vxbridg, and so to Oxford,
etc. This is told you in the Speculum, fol. 49. a. And these Highways are
distinguished out by the Lines of Points; for that of One is to define out the
Bounds of the Shire, as you may see upon the West side it passes by the River
Colne to Shyreditch, etc. The Capital Letters A, B, C, etc. are to distinguish
the Hundreds of the County, as the Speculum says, fol 13. A.

The Compass of 8 Rumbes in the North-East Angle of the Map is of the same
known use as in any other.

Thus had this indefatigable Man intended to all the Shires of this Kingdom,
and he seems to intimate in the Preface to his Guide, as if the Maps were
fully finished. And yet there are but very few of them to be commonly met
with, but for Alphabetical Descriptions (the most useful way that ever was or
could be devised, especially in small Geographie. I think the Work never went
further then Middlesex (for ought at least as I can find.) The Greater or Less.

Of the Resemblance of Countries, and to other things in Art or Nature.
ANd this also as a Cerimonie of the Art is not to be omitted. That the
Geographers in their Descriptions not unusually (where it may stand with any
due proportion) do fancy the fashion of this or that Country to be like such
or such a figure, elsewhere found in some other things Natural or Artificial: our
own Island uses to be likened to a Triangle, and it does not much abhor from
that Figure.

Antiquissimi Scriptores in Polydore Virgil have resembled the Vectis Insula or
Isle of Wight to an Egg. Peloponnesus of old has been likened Platani folio to
a Plantane Leaf. Strabo likened Europe to a Dragon. Some of late have likened it
to a King's Daughter. Spain to be the Head. Italy the Right Arm, Cymbrica
Chersonesus the Left, France the Breast, Germany the Belly, etc. Asia by some
is likened to a half Moon. And of Africa one says, That it is like the Duke of
Venetia's Cap. The same Strabo compared Spain to an Ox-hide stretched out.
Pliny and Solinas likened Italy to an Ivie-leaf, but the late Geographers
more comparablie to a Man's leg.

This is the rather noted, because some Maps also are drawn according to this
manner of Fancy, as that of Belgia by Kerius within the Picture of a Lion; for
so those Countries have been resembled.

This cannot always fall out, for when Maginus comes to tell the Form of
Scotland, he could liken it to nothing at all.

Of the old and new Names of Places, and other Artificial Terms met with in the
Maps.
IN reading the Descriptions you will find great difference betwixt the New
and Old Names of the Places, as for Hispalis of old, the new Descriptions read
Sevil: for the Adriatic, Sea, Golfo di Venetia: for the Baltic, Mar de Belt,
and the like.

In the Descriptions themselves distinction is most commonly made of this, if
the Describers be as they should; but in the Maps it is not (indeed it could
not be) so usually observed. To supply this, you have the Introduction to
Geographie by Cluverius, where the Old and New Names are still compared, the
omission whereof is no small fault in some Describers of our own.

But especially for this purpose is the Thesaurus Geographicus Ortelij. A
Geographical Dictionarie so called, and is a present Satisfaction in this case.

You will meet also with certain Terms of Art, (so after a sort they may be
called) as Sinus, Fretum, a Baie, The Streights, and the like; and though it
seems to belong unto this place to tell what they are, yet will it not be
much to the purpose to make so diligent an enumeration as some would have us, of
the Terms Natural and Artificial in Geographie and Hydrographie. In the Natural
appertaining to the Earth to tell what Nemus, Saltus, Arbustum, Virgultum, etc.
the difference betwixt a Bush and a Shrub: In the Artificial to go down from
Regnum, Territorium, etc. to Vicus, Pagus, Villa, Tugurium, and to say that
the definition of a Cottage is Rustica habitatio tecta ulva palustri. In the
Natural Terms, Ad aquam spectantibus; Mare, Fretum, Sinus, etc. till you com to
Torrens, Palus, Stagnum, Lacus, Rivus. Nothing but a Ditch left out. And Rivus
is so called, (...), because it runs along. In the Artificial Terms you are
there taught the exact Description of a Cistern, of a Fishpond and a Sink, and
all this under the Title and Protection of Geographie. But excepting those,
which you cannot choose but know; these are the Terms.

Insula.
An Island. Strabo called the Whole Globe of the Earth by this Name, because it
is encompassed round by the Ocean. This then may be the Great Island. The Less
are such parts of the Great, as are surrounded by the Waters. It is called by
the Italians, Isola; by the French Isle; by the Spaniards Ysla; by the Dutch
Insel and Eijlandt, all which (the Maps so severally naming according to the
Country) is not told you in vain.

Continens.
A Continent, or Part of Land not separated by the Sea, as the Continents of
Spain, France, etc. The Belgians call it Landtscap sonder eylandt, A Landscape
or Region without an Island. It admits of another Sens in the Law: For
Vlpian said, Continentes Provincias accipi debere, quae Italiae conjunctae
sunt. Tryphon. de Excusat. Tutor. L. Titius, Testamento Romae accepto aut in
continentibus, subaudi locis.

It is otherwise termed, Terra firma; by the French, Terre ferme; by the
Italian, Terra ferma; by the Spaniards, Tierra firma, the firm Land. In Greek
it is called, (...) Epirus, (...) (says the Author de Mundo) (...) in Insulas
and Continentes divisit.

Peninsula, or Pene Insula. An Island almost, only in one part joining to the
Continent, Peninsula.
and that part uses to be called Isthmus, Isthmos.
or otherwise, A Neck of Land: Est angustia illa intermedia inter Peninsulam,
and Continentem, and veluti quaedam Cervix, quae a Continente, velut a corpore
gracilescens Peninsulam cum Continente tanqua^ caput cum reliquo corpore
connectit.

The digging thorough of these Necks of Land has been often undertaken, but
not without a secret kind of fatalitie.

The most famous Isthmus accounted is that of Corinth, hindering the
Peloponesus from being an Island, and so putting the Ships to a Circuit about;
and therefore (as you may observe Pliny to say) Demetrius Rex, Dictator
Caesar, C. Princeps, Domitius Nero, perfodere tentavere infausto (ut omnium
patuit exitu) incoepto. Dion says that Nero's undertakings were entertained
with a spring of Blood first, and after that auditi mugitus, ululatusque
flebiles, visaque formidabilia Spectra and Simulacra multa, horrible and
fearful yells were heard, and many formidable apparitions seen. Yet Demetrius
is said to have desisted by the advice of the Artificers, who brought in word
that the Baie was higher upon the Corinthian side, which would not only prove
dangerous by Inundation, but make the Streit unserviceable when the work was
don.

Herod of Athens, Nicanor, Seleucus, Caelius Rhodiginus Lection. Antiqu. lib.
21. cap. 19.
and others are summed up by Rhodiginus for the like Attempts, and same
success: And Philip the second of Spain had once in his mind to cut through
that Straight of Land (I may call it so) betwixt Panma and Nombre de dios to
make that vast Peninsula of Southern America (as but for this it were) an
Island; but upon further consideration he fell off from the Design.

The like undertakings were forbidden the Cnidians by the Oracle of Apollo; and
Pausanias thinks he can tell the reason: Quoniam rebus divinitus constitutis
manum injicere non licet.

And yet the Arabic Geographer not having heard of any such things, tell's
the Cutting of the Streits of Gibralter, but like another story: Indeed he
saie's 'twas don by Alexander the Great, Qui operariis, atque Geometris ad se
convocatis suum de acida illa terra fodienda, and canali aperiendo animum
explicuit praecepitque illis ut terrae solum cum utriusque maris aequore
metirentur, etc. The sum is, that by the help of Alabii the Geographer, and
other Mathematicians he brake through the Isthmus and made it a Streit of
Water.

For the Metaphor the Physicians are even with the Grammarians, for Galen
says, Galen ad 3 Sent. Hippoc.
Tonsillas esse locorum ad Isthmum pertinentium inflammationes. Per Isthmum
vero oportet intelligere partem illam quae eos and gulam interjacet, quae per
Metaphoram quandam ita nominatur abiis, qui proprie dicuntur Isthmi. Sunt autem
angusti qui them terrae transitus inter duo maria sitae. And Julius Pollux has
it, Guttur propter angustias Isthmum dici.

A Promontorie: Mons in Mari prominens, Promontorium.
A Mountain or Head of Land butting out upon the Sea. Sceglia sepra acqua in
mare, otherwise Capo: so the Spanish El Capo de tierra en mari, A Cape or Head
of the Earth in the Sea. It Is commonly noted in the Tables by the first letter
of the word C, as in the Map of Africa in Ortelius, C. de buona speransa, Caput
bonae spei, or The Cape of good Hope. As they set down R for Rio Rivus: R. de
la plate, The Plate River: P for Port, P. Grande, P. del Nort, etc. Y, or Ya
for Ysla: Y del Poso: Ya del Principe and the like.

Fretum.
An Isthmus, or Streit of Water. Mare angustum, and quasi brachium Maris
interceptum inter duo littora. So callled a fremitu Maris, for which cause in
the High Dutch it is called De Sund, from the Ancient Saxon suno, as Kilian
has noted: Sond or Sund says he, Vet. Sax. Fretum.

You meet it often in the Dutch and Danish Maps, as Milvarts sont, Golber sont;
but especially that most famous Streit upon the Baltic Sea, which not unlike
the Castles upon the Hellespont commands all the Ships in their passage. It
is called by them Sond, or Sund: by us the Sound. Instead of Fretum the Italian
writes Streto, or el Streto: the Spaniard Estrecho, as Estrecho di Gibralter:
Gibraltarec it should be, as was formerly noted, for the Mountain (from whence
the Streit is named) is so called by the Arabic Geographer, and he says also
that the Gebal (so they call a Mountain) was named from Tarec, the son of
Abdalla, who made good the Place against the Inhabitants.

Sinus.
A Creek or corner of the Sea insinuating into the Land. It is otherwise called
Baia, a Baie: a Station, or Road for Ships: a Gulf, as Golfo di Venetia, Golfo
de S. Sebastiano, etc.

Pierre.
A Peer from Petra, because of the Congestion of great Stones to the raising up
of such a Pile. It Is a kind of small Artificial Creek or Sinus, as the Peer of
Dover: the Peer of Portland, etc.

The Concernment of All This.
THe things we talk of all this while how like soever they may look to a
Book-man's business, yet are such of themselves as Kings and Princes have found
their States concerned in.

Zon. Annal. Tom. 2. page 397
Zonaras will tell you that in Domitian's time it cost one Metius his life
(...) for having a Map of the World hanging in his Chamber. The fault indeed
was that (as common fame rendered him) he was thought to asspire to the Empire;
of the truth whereof, it was taken to be a sufficient assurance, that he
should have so dangerous a thing about him as the picture of the Provinces.

Of what importance Julius Caesar, Antonine, and the other Emperors held these
Descriptions is manifest by their very own Itineraries yet to be seen. Felix
Maleolus in his Dialogue of Nobility mentions a Description of all the World
(the known Ali as then) begun by Julius Caesar, and finished by Augustus, in
which he saw set down Gentes and Civitates singulas cum suis distantiis.

The Tabulae Putingerianae annexed to the Descriptions of Ptolomie by Bertius
are famous in this kind. The Notitia utriusque Imperii singularly to the same
purpose. Alexander the Great went upon no Design without his Geometers, Beton
and Diognetus. They are called by Pliny Mensores Itinerum Alexandri, and their
Descriptions were exstant in his time. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 17.


The great Defeat given at the Streights of Thermopylae only for want of
cunning in the Passages is notoriously known. But the Experience of these
things is harder by. Not a day of these we have now, but needs thus much of
a Geographer. And for want of such help Julius Caesar, Quando voluit Angliam
oppugnare refertur maxima specula erexisse, ut a Gallicano Littore
dispositionem civitatum, Roger Bacon Perspect. Did. ult. page 166.
and castrorum Angliae praeviderit, possent enim erigi specula in alto contra
civitates contrarias, and exercitus, ut omnia quae fierent ab inimicis
viderentur, and hoc potest fieri in omni distantia qua desideramus; etc. says
Roger Bacon in his Perspectives.

It is propounded by a man ingeniously enough conceited, as a device nothing
besides the Meditation of a Prince to have his Kingdoms and Dominions by the
direction of an able Mathematician, Geographical Garden.
Geographically described in a Garden-platform: the Mountains and Hills being
raised like small Hillocks with Turfs of Earth, the Valleys somewhat concave
within: the Towns, Villages, Castles, or other remarkable Edifices, in small
green mossie Banks, or Spring-work proportional to the Platform: the Forests
and Woods represented according to their form and capacity, with Herbs and
Stubs, the great Rivers, Lakes and Ponds to dilate themselves according to their
course from some Artificial Fountain made to pass in the Garden thorough Channels,
etc. All which may doubtless be Mathematically counterfeited, as well as the
Horizontal Dial, and Coat-armor of the House in Exceter College Garden.

It is known too that a Gentleman of good Note not far from this place caussed
the like Geographical Descriptions to be curiously wrought upon his Arras,
wherein he beholds the Situations and Distances of the Country, as truly
and more distinctly than in any Map whatsoever.

Geographical playing-cards.
The Author of the complete Gentleman tells of a Pack of French Cards which he
has seen, The four Suits changed into Maps of several Countries of the four
parts of the World, and exactly colored for their Numbers, the Figures 1, 2, 3,
9, 10, etc. set over their Heads. For the Kings and Queens the Portraictures of
their Kings and Queens in their several Country habits, for the Knaves their
Peasants and Slaves, etc.

It is certain that the greatest and most public affairs of any State have
their dependence upon foreign Cases past, or especially present. There is not
so great an alteration in the Whole, as some Men think. The Carriage of Matters
in times-by gone are not so unlike the things we now presently do, as not to
give us aim at the least. The Great is the same World, as the Little is the
same Man, though now more stricken in years; and moreover the Comparison
fails in this, that in every Age some men have atteined to their own
ripeness, though to that of the Whole Great Man none could but the Grandees of
the Present. It yields thus much, that the Face and Picture of all instant
Actions may be seen by reflection in the future; or if the same Age look upon
the Turk, or Venetian upon us, and we upon them the like, or not much less,
will be the necessities of conversation with Record and Story. There can be
nothing don in that, without an interview of the Places which must needs be
seen either with our own Eyes there, or with other Men's in a Map.

FINIS.

