EPIPHANIA, OR A Discourse upon the Manifestation of CHRIST to the Gentiles By
the Appearance of a STAR.

By FRANCIS GREGORY D. D. And Rector of Hambleton in the County of Bucks.

Printed for THO. BOWMAN, Anno Domini 1678.

To the Right Honorable HENRY LORD ARLINGTON, Lord High Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household One of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.
My Lord,
SHOULD I say any thing, in this Public manner, of Your Lordships Merits,
Worth, and Parts both Natural and Acquired, though Flattery it could not be,
yet Vanity it would; because it were to say no more than that, whereof every
man, who is not a stranger to your Person, is already satisfied.

And to tell the world how much, and in what way, your Lordship has obliged
me, is but an Easy and Trivial kind of Gratitude. But as mean a Return as it
is, I must make This or None. For, as your Honors Soul is too Generous to
expect, and your Fortunes too ample either to need or admit, a just Recompense;
so are mine too slender to make one.

The truth is, where there is an utter Impossibility to repay a Kindness, it
would be something like Ingratitude so much as to attempt it; and he, who does
but offer at a Return for Great men's favors, does thereby derogate from them;
he makes them less by thinking them capable of being recompensed.

But though it be too great a Presumption, in such a case, to attempt a
Satisfaction; yet, that debt, which can never be discharged, must be upon all
Occasions, and now is upon This, Gratefully acknowledged.

But had your Lordship never obliged me, by any considerable Kindness, to make
this Public Adress; had not Gratitude nivited me to it, yet even Prudence
would. For, such is the main Subject of this Discourse, that it can not be
Entitled to any Person for its Patron so fitly, as to your Honor.

Qua proprie Magia nuncupatur, perfecta creditur, and summa Scientiae potestas;
quando Persarum lingua est Magus, non fere alius qua^ Divinoru^ Interpres et
Cultor. Caelius Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 9. c, 23.
For the Persons, concerned herein are the (...), the Wise men of the East. And
if this Character of theirs be, as several Authors think, and our own
Translation intimates, not only free from all imputations, but an Elogy and
Title of Honor; to whom could I have more properly recommended the Story of
these Great Sages, then to your Lordship, who are, in this and all other their
Laudable Endowments, so hugely like them? a Person of such eminent Prudence,
Wisdom, and understanding, as to be singled out of Three Nations, as the
fittest man therein, to be made the Principal Secretary of State; and still to
have the same Influence upon the Kin g of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
as these Wise men once had upon the (...) -- the Persian Monarch.

Besides, the Thing much concerned in this little Tract is a Star, which being
with us the highest Badg of Honor, it was not possible for me to Dedicate a
subject of this nature to any fitter Person than your Lordship, there being no
man, whose blood is not Royal, that does more highly deserve to wear one.

But whilst I do thus Publicly acknowledge my Obligations to your Lordship, I
shall only contract upon my self new scores, and render my Debt so much the
greater. For if it shall please your Honor to permit these Papers to walk
abroad under the Protection of your Great Name, it will yet further oblige
their mean Author to pray for the continuance of your Lordships Prosperity in
this world, and the Assurance of your Felicity in the next, which is, and ever
shall be, the Earnest Petition of

Your Lordships most obliged and humble Servant. Fran. Gregory.

St. Matthew. 2. 2.
We have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him.
AS the day of our blessed Saviors Nativity, is commonly styled by Ancient
Writers Basil. M. de hum. Christi generat. p. 593.
(...), the Appearance of God, so this day, which is the Twelfth from that, and
the last of our Christmas Festivals, is usually called (...), the Epiphany, or,
Manifestations.

The Names of Festivals ordinarily running in the Plural Number, as the (...)
among the Grecians, and the Saturnalia, among the Romans, and the (...), among
the Jews; we are the less concerned to assign a Reason, why our (...) should do
so Aust. in Epiph. Ser. 1.

Bern. in Epiph. Ser. 2.


too. And yet St. Austine, and perhaps from him St. Bernard, have left us this
account. Tres apparitiones Domini legimus, etc, we read of Three Manifestations
of our Lord; that to the Wise men of the East, by the Appearance of a Star at
or near his birth; That to St. John Baptist, by a voice from Heaven, and the
visible Descent of the Holy Ghost upon him at his Baptism; and that by the
Miraculous Transubstantiation of Water into Wine to the Guests and Waiters at a
Wedding. And if all these Appearances of Christ, according to the Tradition of
Antiquity, did happen, as St. Bern. tells us, Vna quidem die, sednon uno
tempore, though not in the self same Year, yet upon one and the same Greg. Naz.
Orat. 40. p. 351.
Day, we have a sufficient reason, why that Greek Father might style it in the
Plural number, (...), the day of Appearances.

The Solemn Observation of this Festival is no kin to any of those Jewish
Feasts, which were Antiquated and Abolished at and by the coming of Christ; nor
yet is it any late Superstitious invention of any Party of men; but an Ancient
and laudable usage of the Christian Church. Indeed, Aug. in Epiph. Ser. 2.
I read of some, who refused to observe it: Saint Austine tells us. Diem istum
Donatistae nunquam celebrare voluerunt, The Donatists, those notorious
Schismatics of those times, whose Progeny and Spawn are some of ours, would by
no means keep thisday. But as for himself, and indeed the whole Catholic
Church, he thus professes. Nos hunc diem hodie celebramus, we do now celebrate
Aug. in Epith. Ser. 2.
this Festival; and that In unitate Gentium, according to the uniform practice
of all Christian Nations.

And that the Observation of this day was more Cyprianus de Stella and Magis.
Ancient than St. Austin's time, is evident, as from that forenamed instance of
Gregory Nazianzen, so from that elder expression of St. Cyprian too, who
mentions, Epiphania Solennia, the solemn Celebration of the Epiphany.

That, which gave the first occasion to the Annual observation of this day, and
is still the ground of its continuance, was and is the great mercy of God in
revealing the Birth of his Son, and offering salvation by him, as well to the
Gentiles, as to the Jews.

Those Select Persons of the Pagan world, to whom God was pleased so early to
manifest the Nativity of his Son, and so to bring them unto Aug. in Epip. Ser.
2.

Cyprian. de Stella and Magis.


Bethlehem, are styled by the Fathers Primitiae Gentium, the first fruits of
the Gentiles. And who these men were, and what information they had, that the
so long expected Messiah and King of the Jews was now actually and newly born;
we have this fair intimation given us by the Evangelist, and that from their
own Mouths, We have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him.

The Text contains Three things considerable.
1. The Persons, to whom God was now pleased to reveal the birth of his Son,
We.

2. The Occasion, Means, or Instrument of this Revelation. We have seen his
Star, The same God, who thought fit to declare the Nativity of his Son to
certain Jews by the message of an Angel, was pleased to reveal it to certain
Gentiles, by the Aug. in Epith. Ser. 2.
Information of a Star, which Star St. Austine does therefore call Linguam
Coeli, The Tongue of Heaven.

3. The Design and end of this Revelation; the Intention, which God had
therein, together with the use, which these men made thereof, We are come to
Worship him; an act, wherein they did wisely comply with the purpose of God.

1. The First thing in the Text is the Consideration of the Persons to whom God
was now pleased to reveal the Birth of his Son, We, Which Persons may be
considered, First, As to their Nation. Secondly, As to their Title, and
Character, Thirdly, As to their Quality, and Fourthly, As to their Number.

1. These Persons in the Text may be considered as to the Nation, in which they
dwell, and from which they came.

The Evangelist says only in General, They came (...) from the East, but from
what part of Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 6.

Basil M. de Christ. gener.

Greg. Naz. adv. Jul. Orat. 3.


the East, he does not tell us. That they came (...), from the Persians
country, is the Assertion of St. Chrysostom; and accordingly great St. Basil
styles them, (...), Men of a Persian Extraction; The same Gregory Nazianzen
seems to intimate, when he says (...), The Magic Art is a Persian thing.

Cypr. de stella and Magis.
There are some, who think, that they came from Mesopotamia; St. Cyprian says
expressly, a fluminibus Aethiopiae, they came from the Rivers of Ethiopia* but,
notwithstanding these opinions, it is more probable that they came from Arabia.
For, Grot. in loc.

Maidonat. in locum.


as Grotius well observes, Munera, quae attulerunt, Arabica sunt, and so
Maldonate, Ipsa munera Patriam produnt, whence they came, we may guess by what
they brought, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, which were the great Commodities
of Arabia the happy.

Psalm. 7^. 10.
This last opinion seems to be countenanced by that expression of the Psalmist,
which literally belongs to Solomon, but is thought to have had a second
completion in Christ, The Kings of T^rshish and of the Isles shall bring
presents; the Kings of Arabia Hieron. (...) locum.
and Sheba shall offer Gifts; which latter clause St. Hierom, and our old
Translation, reads thus, Reges Arabum the Kings of Arabia shall offer gifts,
and withal St. Hierom tells us, Hoc in Magorum muneribus inchoatum: the first
accomplishment of this Prophecy, as it relates to ourblessed Savior, was by
the gifts of These very men in the Text.

But whether these men were Persians, or Arabians, or of some other Nation it is
not much material, as to any concern of ours. That, wherein our Interest lies,
is sure enough; namely, that they Cyp. de Stella et Magis.
were none of the Jcwish nation; but, as St. Cyprian styles them, Alienigenae,
Aliens and Strangers, Basil. M. de humana Chr* generat.
(...), says great St. Basil, They were men of the Pagan world; and, as Zegerus
calls them, Exordium, ac Typus Gentium crediturarum; They were the Beginning,
the Pattern, and Representatives of all the Gentiles that should afterward
believe in Christ. And, upon this consideration, do we upon this day solemnly
bless our God for their access to Christ, as being the first instance and Type
of Ours.

2 These Persons in the Text may be considered as to that Title and Character
that is given them.

The Evangelist tells us in the Verse immediately before the Text. There came
Wise men from Magiam festo plausu sapientissimus quisque excipit, veneratur, ac
colit, ut quae altior fit* sanctiorque Philosophia Gaelius Rhod. lect. antiq.
l. 9. cap. 23.
the East, so we; but the Greek thus, There came (...), Magicians, a word of
promiscuous use, which sometime signifies that which is Good and laudable; and
sometimes that which is Bad and detestable; for

1 To be a Magician does sometimes imply no more than to be a very Learned and
knowing man; and more particularly in that part of learning, which relates to
the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

That these Magicians in the Text were such only in this first and commendable
sense, is the opinion Theophyl. im locum.

Munst. in locum.


of several Interpreters, (...), These Magicians were Astrogolers, so
Theophilact; Munster calls them, Praecipui siderum contemplatores, Men very
Eminent for their contemplation of the Stars. Which is in it self a thing so
laudable, that Maldonate supposes the Evangelist to give them the Name of
Magicians, honoris causa, as an Elogy and high Commendation; as being a Title
of the same nature with that of Caldeans amongst the Assyrians, that of
Gymnosophists or Brachmanes amongst the Indians; that of Hierophantae amongst
the Egyptians, and that of Druids amongst the Gauls, all which are Terms of
Honor and Veneration.

And suitable to this opinion does our Translation give them this favorable and
friendly Character; There came Wise men from the East: such as the old Greeks
styled, (...), the Sages of their times; as if God, being willing to give the
whole worid an early notice that he sent his son to Redeem persons of all
sorts, men of all capacities, was pleased to reveal his birth, as to some
illiterate and silly Shepherd among the Jews, so to some Learned men amongst
the Gentiles.

2. To be a Magitian does sometimes signify to be a Conjurer; one, that deals
with a Familiar Spirit; one, that receives Informations and Assistances from
Hell.

Drusius ex Numenio et Nathana.
Such were Jan^es and Jambres, (...), says Numenius, Sacred Scribes or Priests
of Memphis, but withal Principes Magorum, the very chief of those Egyptian
Conjurers, who, through the permission of God and help of the Devil,
counterfeited the Miracles of Moses, and thereby contributed a great deal
toward the hardening of Pharaoh's heart.

Eus. Hist. l. 2. c. 14.
Such an one was that infamous Simon, Surnamed Magus; who was, as Eusebius
styles him, (...), a a Notorious Impostor; one, that through the Devils
assistance proved so lucky in his cheats, that, as Acts 8. 10.
the Evangelist says, he was thought to be the great power of God. So strongly
had he bewitched the Citizens of Rome, (...), Eus. Hist. l. 2. c 14.
says Eusebius, that in honor of him they erected a Statue to him with this
Inscription. Simoni Sancto Deo, To Simon the holy God.

Erasm. in locum.
From this Black-art does Erasmus acquit the men in the Text. Nemo maleficas
arts somniet, etc. Let do man dream that they used this devilish Art, and so
Munster, Non quod Magiam exercuerunt, sed Munster. in locum.
eam tenebant, ut confutare possent, They are called Magicians, not that they
themselves did exercise that hellish Art; but that they learnt and understood
it in order to confute it.

But although these Interpreters have such charitable thoughts of these
Magicians in the Text; yet others there are, who judge more hardly of Origin.
adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 45.

Bas. de hum. Christi generat. p. 591.

Aug. in Epiph. Ser. 2.

Grot. in locum.


them. For, Origin seems to mention them, as men (...), that conversed with
Devils; and Great St. Basil says of them (...), etc. They gave themselves to
Incantations, St. Austin mentions Impietas in Sacrilegiis Magorum, the
Wickedness and Sacrilege of these Magicians, and that they were such in the
worst sense, Probabile est, It Is probable, so Grotius, Non dubium est, There is
no doubt, so Ravanellus.

And indeed this consideration of these Persons is very consistent with the
design of God in the Incarnation of his Son, whom He sent amongst us to save
some of the highest Criminals, as well as other Orig. adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 47.
who are much less Offenders. Upon which account, Celsus in Origin quarrels with
our blessed Savior for chosing such men to be his Servants, as were (...),
Publicans and Seamen, both which were commonly observed to be Vile and Wicked
Persons; so impious, that they are styled in a certain Epistle, ascribed to St.
Barnabas, (...), Wicked even beyond all wicked Examples.

But what such profane wretches, as Celsus, cast as a Reproach upon our blessed
Savior, was indeed the greatest Argument of his Goodness, and one main design
of his coming into the world; for thus he tells us, I came to call Sinners to
repentance. Mat. 9. 13.

Drusius in Mat. c. 9. v. 10.


What kind of Sinners does he mean? Peccatores (...), says Drusius he means
even the most Notorious Sinners that can be; an evidence whereof God gave the
world betimes, in that he was pleased, by an extraordinary course, to reveal
the birth of his Son, not only to certain Sheepherds, that more simple,
harmless, and innocent kind of Persons; but even to these Magicians in the
Text; who, if Sorcerers and Conjurers, as many suppose, were certainly some of
the vilest of men; so vile, that they were to dye without mercy by the express
law of God. And if such as these, upon their Conversion, were not excluded from
having a share in the benefits and satisfaction of Christ; there is no sinner
so great, but, if he will timely come in, as these men did, he may yet find the
same Acceptance.

3. These Persons in the Text may be considered in respect of their Station and
Quality in the world.

Zegerus in locum.

Cypr. de de stella et Magis.


As to this, Zegerus tells us, Haud quaquam viros vulgares ac Plebeios, These
Magicians were Persons of no small account; St. Cyprian calls them
Tantinominis Personae, Men of a very great Esteem and Reputation; men of high
Authority in matters Sozom. Hist. l. 2. c. 9.
both Religious and Civil. Sozomen says of them (...), These Magicians amongst
the Persians did, as a Tribe of Priests, manage the whole concerns of their
Religion. Socrates Hist. l. 7. cap. 8.
And as to matters of State, Socrates tells us, (...). They were men of great
Prevalence and swayed much with the Persian King.

So great an esteem had the people for them, that Tertul. adv. Judae^s.

Post ablatum Mago Imperium etc. Sen. de Ira. l 3.

Theophyl. in Matthew. c. 2.


Tertullian tells us Magos Reges fore habuit Oriens, The Eastern nations did
commonly elect their Kings out of their Magicians. And that these very men in
the Text were Kings themselves, is the opinion of many. Theophylact styles them
(...). Persian Kings. St Cyprian says apparuit stella Regibus, the star
appeared to the Kings, not that any of these was (...) the great Persian
Monarch, but that every one of them are thought by these and other Authors to
have been Princes.

And perhaps God Almighty, by sending these great men to wait upon his Son,
might intend to give the world an early intimation, that the design of his
Incarnation was to save men of all ranks and Qualities, in evidence whereof
his birth was revealed, as to the sheepherds being men of low degree and
slender fortunes, so to these Magicians in the Text who were Persons of great
wealth and Honor.

4. These Persons in the text may be considered in respect of their Number.

The Evangelist, not telling us how many these Magicians were, has left
Interpreters at liberty to make their own Conjecture. Some have thought Maldon
in locum.

Drusius in locum.


them Fourteen, others Twelve; but the most received opinion is, that they were
but Three; whose Names were, Jaspar, Melchior, and Balthazar.

That Three they were, is guessed, because the Evangelist does still call them
(...) Magicians, not in the Dual, but Plural Numder; and that there but Three,
is believed, because their Gifts were no more. For this S. Austine is very
positive, Tres sunt, and singuli singula offerunt. Three they were, and each of
them brought his Particular Present; one his Gold, another his Frankincence,
and the Third his Myrrh.

And who can tell but that God was pleased to reveal the birth of his Son to
such a small number of these great and rich men, to let us know betimes, that
the greatest part of Converts to the Christian faith should consist, as it
certainly did in those early ages, of Mean and Inferior Persons, a thing,
which the Enemies of our Religion did observe and laugh at.

It was the matter of Julian's scoff, that the Professors of Christianity
generally were, as St. Chrysostom. in Cor c. 2. v. 16.

Menucius Fell. Octav.


Chrysostom expresses it. (...), Servants, Nurses, Midwifes, Eunuchs, etc. So
he in Minucius Felix, who calls them Profanae Conjurationis Plebs, and again,
de foece infima Collecti, the profane Rabble, the very Dregs and Scum of
mankind; as if that calumny of Celsus had Origines adv. Cells. l. 30. p. 137.
been true, (...), etc. No man, that is Learned, or Wise, must a Proselyte to
Christ.

That these General Imputations were uttery falls, we have, besides other
Instances, a fair Intimation in the Text; wherein we find several persons,
miraculously brought unto, and certainly believing on the Son of God, who were
men of a very considerable Quality and great esteem in the World. But withal,
it was the observation of St Paul, not many wise men after the flesh, not 1
Cor. 1. 25
mot many mighty, not many noble are called. And such were these Magicians,
(...), Men of great wisdom, (...), Men of great Authority; and, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
that St. Paul's Character may exactly answer their condition, it is very
probable, that they might be, (...), Men of noble birth too. Now, though some
Persons of this high rank and Quality were so early brought to Christ yet,
according to the Apostles assertion, they were (...) not very many. They are
presumed to be but Three, which might be looked upon as a sad Presage and
Instance, that the future number of great men, which should in after ages
believe on Christ, was like to prove but small. And so we pass from the
Persons, to whom the birth of Christ was now revealed, to consider.

2. The occasion, Instrument, or means of this Revelation; and that lies in
those words, we Hammodus in locum.
have seen his Star in the East, (...), at its rising, so some; but most
Interpreters read it, as we do in Orient in the the East. i. e. Eastward from
Jerusalem.

Concerning this Star in the Text we shall enquire into these Four things; 1.
what kind of Star this might be. 2. why this Star is called (...), His Star,
our Saviors Star. 3. when this Star might first appear, and* 4. How these Wise
men might know this Star to be the Star of Christ, and what they might gather
from it.

1. The first thing considerable about this Star in the Text is it is Nature and
Quality, what kind of Star it might be.

That it was indeed a very Glorions light is generally agreed on; St. Cyprian
calls it, Praeclari Cypr. de stella and Magis.
luminis stellam, a Star of eminent splendor; So exceeding bright, that, St.
Chrysostom says of it, Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthaeum.
(...), it out-shined the very Sun it self,

Sciscitantur an Prodigium s^t, an Sidus. Sen. Not. qu. lib. 7.
But what kind of Star it was, whether it were such as the same Father speaks,
(...), in Nature and Reality, or in Appearance only, it is a thing very
uncertain* for

Maldonatus in locum.
1. Some few there are, who imagine, that it might be a Real Star; one of those
luminous and heavenly bodies, which God created in the beginning.

(...). Origin in Joan. p. 27.
And as for those difficulties, wherewith our Sar, in this notion, would be
attended, arising from its Motion, Station, and other Circumstances; the
favorers of this opinion do answer them all only by appealing to the
Omnipotence of God. They tell us, that God, with whom all things are possible,
the same God, who did make the Sun stand still at one time, and perhaps go back
at another; might, and peradventure did, by the same Almighty Power, remove
some glorious Star from its proper Orb, to the lower region of the Air, to be
(...), the Torch-bearer of his Sun, to light him into the world, and to guide
these Wisemen to the place of his birth. But

2. The Generality of Interpreters are of another mind, and do think that this
Star in the Text was only Equivocally such, as having the Name and Resemblance,
but not the Nature and Quality of a Real Star. Bs. M. de humana Christi gener.
p. 592.


St. Basil tells us that it was, (...), not Greg. Nys. in diem Christ. natalem.

Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Mathaeum.


of the Real Stars; Gregory Nyssene, calls it, (...), one of the New
Prodigies of Heaven; and as for St. Chrysostom, he delivers his opinion thus,
(...), This Star was none of those numerous ones, which were made at first. And
for this opinion there are some probable Reasons given; for

1. This Star was such, as had never been observed or seen till now.

Orig. adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 45.

Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Mat.

Basil. M. de hum. Christi genesis p. 591.

Aug. Ser. 5, and 7* in Epiph.


So thought Origin, (...), we judge this Star to be a New one, so new, that St.
Chrysostom styles it (...), a Star that was a Stranger* Accordingly S. Basil
styles it (...), an Unusual Star; St. Austine calls it Sidus novum, an again,
Stellam ignotissimam, a New Star, a most Unknown one; and tells us withal, that
as it never appeared before this time, so was it never seen any more after it
had once conducted these Wisemen to the place of our Saviors birth. But

2. The Region, wherein this Star was seen, was much Lower than that of other
Starts.

Origin, adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 45.
For whereas other Stars are situated, as Origin speaks, (...), Either in the
Firmament it self, or in those Orbs, that are next below it; this Star in the
Text was seen far Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Ma,.
below the Moon, and near the Ground. Thus St. Chrysostom, (...), This Star
leaving the Altitude of other Stars came down; Theophil. in locum.
but how low did it descend? Theophilact answers, (...) etc. it came down so
low, as to be a near neighbor to the Earth; much nearer then any other Star,
even in its Perigaeo; so near, that it seemed to stand just over our Saviors
head,

And indeed there was a necessity, that this Star should thus Descend, because
otherwise it could not have done that work, for which, it was designed; for the
business which it had to do, was to conduct these Magicians, not only to the
Country or Town, but to the very particular House, where our Savior was, which
work it could never have done, had it been at the same height with those other
stars which shine and are fixed above. For although such and such Stars or
Comets raised up high, may be guessed to be Perpendicular and Vertical to such
and such whole Kingdoms and large Nations of the world; yet that any Star, at
so vast a distance, should directly and certainly point at any Particular
House, and that but a Little one too, as this Star visibly did, no intelligent
Person will imagine.

Upon which account St. Chrysostom says (...), This Star came down, and so
even without a Parallaxe, showed these Wise men the place, where our Savior
was. And if so, if this Star in the Text was so much lower then all other Stars
besides; we may conclude, that, if there were no Miracle in the case, it could
not be any of that glorious number.

3. This Star in the Text may well be thought to have been much less then any
natural Star whatever.

1 Cor. 15.
St. Paul tells us, and our own Eyes may do so too. One Star differs from
another Star in glory: Keckerm. Syst. Astron. l. 1. c. 2.
They differ in Degrees of their light, and in Quantity of their dimensions.
For, if our Mathematicians Gassendus I^stitut. Astr. i. 2. c. 14.

Galaxia coelestis tratactus infinitis stellulis, quas Sporades vocant,
instratus et luminosus. Fromondus Meteorol. l. 2. Art. 2.


do not misinform us, there are several Stars, that are an 108 times bigger
then the whole* Terrestrial Globe; whereas those (...), in the Milkey way, if
Stars indeed, are supposed to be far lesser Gemmes; Stellulae, diminutive
Stars, so do Authors style them.

But how small soever any Star among the Six several Magnitudes, may seem to
be; we may rationally presume, that this Star in the Text, notwithstanding its
glorious light, was yet far less. For, had it been of any such Magnitude* as
came any whit near to that of other Stars, it could never have led the Wise men
so directly, as it did, to that Particular place, where our blessed Savior was
found by them. For, had the Circumference of this Star been any way
proportionable to that of other Stars; when it came to Bethlehem, and there
stood still, it must have hung,, like a Vast Canopy, not only over the whole
Town, but the whole Country round it; and so having an equal aspect upon all
the Houses there, it must needs have left the Wise men very uncertain, which
might be the right One. But since we have a very fair intimation from the
Evangelist, that, by the standing still of this Star, the Wise men were enabled
so readily to know and distinguish the House, where our Savior was, from all
its Neighbors; we may thence inter, that this Star was so little, as to be no
real Star at all.

4. The Motion of this Star in the Text differed from the common Motion of all
other Stars besides. And this difference lay in Two things;

1. This Star in the Text did not take the same Course with other Stars.

Chrysostom. Hen. 6. in Matthew.
St. Chrysostom tells us, (...), Never did any Star go the same way with this.
For, whereas the Sun, Moon, and other Heavenly Luminaties do move from East to
West, this Star moved, as the same Father says, (...), from the Bear, i. e.
from the North to the South, a Motion, says Grotius, Praeter naturam, and
citra exemplum, Preternatural, and without Example.

2. This Star in the Text did not move with that Uniformity and Constancy that
other Stars do.

Greg. Nys. in diem Christ natalem. p. 776.
The Fixed Stars have indeed, as Gregory Nyssene words it, (...), a Station so
firm and settled, that they never move, except it be as Parts of, and together
with their own Orb. And as for those Lunaris orbita, caeterorumque supra lunam
meantium motus nec haesitat usquam, nec resistit. Sen. Naturalium. qu. l. 7. 10.
few other Stars, which have a Distinct and particular Motion of their own,
(...), says the same Father, Their Motion never cease.

But this Star in the Text seemed to be of a double or middle Nature, (...),
says he; It sometimes moved, and it sometimes stood still; So the Evangelist
tells us, (...). It went before them, but by and by, (...), It stood; a
sufficient Argument to prove, that, if there were nothing Miraculous in it, it
could not be a Real Star; no Fixed Star, because it sometimes Moves; no Planet,
because it sometimes stood. But if it were indeed no Natural and proper Star,
What was it then? There are Three opinions about it:

1. Some think this Star in the Text was nothing Basil. M. de hum. Christi genesis
p. 592.

Origin adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 45.


else but a Blazing Star or Comet, kin to those, which St. Basil styles (...),
or as Origin calls them, (...), raised at this juncture of time by the
overruling providence of God, purposely for this Occasion.

Basil. ut supra
St. Basil himself contradicts this Opinion, and gives his Reason, why This
Star could not be a Comites habet suam sedem. Sen. qu. Not. l. 7.

(...). Eus. Hist. l. 3. c. 8. Orig ubi supr.


Comet, thus, (...) etc. Comets are Fixed, Unmovable, and so Circumscribed by
their own matter in some particular places, as this Star was not. But, I find
that Origin had other thoughts concerning it, (...), etc. We suppose this Star
to be the self same kind with Comets, etc. So he, and many others. But,

2. There are some, who think that this Star in the Text might be the
Ever-blessed Spirit of God. As if the same Spirit, who was pleased afterward
to descend in the shape of a Dove at our Saviors Baptism; had also descended
now at his Birth, in the form of a Star, that so he might Visibly attend the
wonderful Nativity of that Blessed Babe, whom he had already so miraculously
framed in His Virgin Mothers Womb.

3. There are others, who think that this Star in the Text was, not the Spirit
of God, but some one of His glorious Angels.

We read that an Angel was employed to declare the Conception of Christ to his
Mother, His Birth to the Sheepherds, and why not to these Wise Chrysostom. in
Matthew. Hom. 6.
men too? St. Chrysostom calls this Star (...), an Angelical Power, and after
him Theophilact, (...), an Angelical Theophil. in locum.
Power appearing in form of a Star.

This Conjecture is grounded upon the Motions of this Star, wherein it seemed
to be guided with a great deal of Reason, even like that Pillar of the Cloud,
which of old divided betwixt the Camp Exodus 14. 20.
of Israel and that of Egypt. For Theophilact tells (...), etc. Orig. adv. Cells.
l. 5. p. 238
us. (...), etc. when the Wise men went forward, the Star moved; and when they
rested, the Star stood still.

To this St. Chrisostom adds another Circumstance to prove this Star to be
(...), a most Rational Power; and that because it did either Conceal or Show it
self, according as the Design of God and the Exigence of things did so require;
as if this Star, according to that of the old opinion of the Platonicks, had
been endued with Sense and Reason; and had some glorious Angel, not only to
assist, but even to inform it too. And thus much for the Nature and Quality of
this Star.

2. The second thing considerable about this Star is the Relation, wherein it
Stands. The Text styles it, His Star: but why His?

Doubtless, there is no Star whatever but is our Saviors right; they are all
His, because he Made them; they are all His, beeause he Upholds and Overrules
them. But this Star in the Text was His for a more peculiar reason. St. Basil
says of it, Bas. M. de hum. Christi genesis p. 593.
(...), It was some Persons star, and purposely made for the service of that
Person; who that Person was, and what Service it did him, Gregory G. Naz. Orat.
4. p. 112.
Nazianzene tells us, (...), It declared the Advent and Presence of Christ Cypr.
de Stella and Magis.

Tertul. adv. Judaeos.

Origenes in Joan. Tom. 2. p. 27.


Wherefore St. Cyprian calls it, Parvuli nati Index: and so Tertullian, Index
and dux: and Origin style it, (...). All which expressions are so many
Intimations, that this Star was called* His Star, because it was designed by
God to declare the birth of His Son, and to guide the Wise (...).

Basil. M. de hum. Christi genesis p. 592.

Chrysostom. Hem. 6. in Matthew.


men to him. But

3. The Third and last thing considerable about this Star is its Significancy;
what there was in it, that could move these Wise men to believe, that it was
indeed His Star; such a Star, as did certainly signify, that the promised
Messiah was now actually and newly born.

St. Chrysostom says well, (...), It was not possible for these Wise men ever
to have known the birth of Christ from the bare appearance of this Star without
the Concurrence of some other Circumstances, which might contribute their
Evidences too. For, although a long and frequent Orig. adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 45.

Grot. in loc.


Observation has taught the world, that Comets do often portend (...), says
Origin; Nova Imperia says Grotius, Translations of Kingdoms, and Changes of
Government: yet that a Particular Prince should be born, at a Particular time,
in a Particular Town, to Rule over a Particular Nation, is a thing not to be
conjectured, much less Concluded, as this certainly was, from any Star.

Wherefore it is generally believed, that this Star did only give these Wise men
some little Intelligence thereby to prepare them for a Greater; that God was
pleased to deal with them, as being Astrologers, according to their Art; and by
the Information af a new Star to fit them the better for some other way of
Revelation. About which, there are these Three Opinions.

1. There are some, who think that God might be pleased to reveal the birth of
his Son to these Magicians by the Testimony even of those very Devils, with
whom they are supposed to have had very frequent dealings.

But, whether these Devils themselves had yet any certain information
concerning the birth of Christ, is a thing, which admits of some debate. It Is
thought by several Interpreters, that the Devils had no certain knowlede of our
Saviors Person till after his Baptism and Temptation in the Wilderness; and
it is probable enough, that God might conceal his birth from them, least
otherwise they should have raised more bloody Tyrants, than one single Herod to
have destroyed him in his Infancy.

And yet some strong suspicions of his Birth the Devils might have from several
Circumstances; for there were such and such things already done in order to it;
the Prophecies, which concerned it, were Accomplished, the Time was come, and
the Birth of their Messiah was now grown the Expectation and the common
Discourse of the Jewish Nation; Orig. adv. Cells. l 1. p. 46.

Basil M. de hum. Christi genesis p. 591.


there was also the Apearance of this New and Glorious Star; and besides all
this, Origin tells us (...), the Devils did now find, that their Power was now
suddenly Broken, they were disabled from doing their usual feats; they could
not now give these Magicians in the Text those assistances, which once Greg.
Naz. adv. Julian. Orat. 4. p. 127.
they did; their Oracles began to be silenced, (...), so Nazianzene.

And that these Oracles ceased, either immediately upon, or within, a very
short time after, the birth of Christ, we may well conjecture from that answer,
which the Devil of Delphos returned to the Roman Emperor, who consulted him,
and that Fevard. in Iren. adv. Haer. l. 4. c. 14.
Duplici Hecatombe says Feverdentius, with an extraordinary Sacrifice, even a
double Hecatomb. But what said the Devil being so highly treated? Nicephor. l.
1. c. 17.
Me Puer Hebraeus, etc. There is an Hebrew Child, that stops our Mouths, and
commands us back to Hell.

And truly, this unexpected and sudden failing of the Devils Power, being
added to the cousideration of this stupendous Star, might well fill these
Magicians with wonder, and give them just occasion to believe, that there was
now upon earth some Greater Power then that of Hell, though where, and in what
Person that Power did reside, the Star as yet had not showed them.

2. There are others, who think that the birth of Christ, and the meaning of
the Star, was revealed to these Wise men in the Text by the Ministry of some
glorious Angel.

They, who think that this Stat its self was an Angel, need go no further to
find out these Wise men's Intelligencer. But, besides this opinion, there is a
Tradition, which tells us, that there was both a Star and an Angel too; a little
Boy in the body of the Star, discoursing with these Wise men, informing them
that the long expected Messiah was now newly born; and withal, commanding them
to go and do, what they did. But the uncertainty of this leaves room for a
Third opinion, which is more probable, and that is this.

3. There are many, who suppose that these Wise men in the Text might take
occasion from the Appearance of this Star to believe that the Messiah was born,
by virtue of a certain Divine Revelation, that was for merly made to Baalam,
and stands Recorded by Moses thus. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, Numb.
24. 17.
and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, a Prophecy, which the Ancient Jews
did certainly interpret of their Messiah; which was so generally known Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 6.
and took for granted, that a certain Impostour, (...), says Eusebius; Filius
Mendacii, said the Jews; who yet pretended to be the Christ, thought it his
great Concern to Name himself (...) The Son of a Star: and that he did, if
Aynsworth Aynsworth in Number. 24. 17.
guesses right, with a cunning respect to this Prediction; though Grotius thinks
that he might take that name from the Place of his Birth or Habitation.

Greg. Nyss. in Christi natalem. p. 775.
Now, it is attested by several Authors, that these Magicians in the Text were
either of the Posterity of this Balaam themselves, or at least next Neighbors
to them, that certainly were so. And if so, it is very like that they might know
their Forefathers Prophecy, and what Interpretation was Cypr. de stella and
Magis.
generally put upon it, and so might wait for its Accomplishment.

This being granted, it is easy to think that this so glorious a Star, so much
differing from all other Stars besides, might well mind these Magicians of
their Forefathers Prophecy; and not only so, but the Appearance, and, as some
think, the Long Continuance of this Star, in Conjunction with other
Circumstances, might possess them with a strong belief, that the Jewish Prince,
whom Balaam had Basil. M. Hom* 25. de hum. Christ. genesis p. 592.

Orig. adv. Cells. l. 5. p. 46.


Prophesied of, was now actually born; so thought St. Basil, (...) etc. and so
Origin, (...), etc. Seeing the Star, that Divine Prodigy, and being acquainted
with the Prophecy of Balaam, they took it for granted that the Messiah was
born; and in confidence thereof they undertook their Journey, and at length
gave the Jews this account of their so doing, We are come to Worship him. And
here 4 things may be enquired into. 1. Whence these Wise men came. 2. Wither.
3. When, and 4. Why.

1. We may consider from Whence these Wise men did come, They came from Persia,
say some; from Arabia, say others; from Mesopotamia, says a Third; from
Ethiopia, says a Fourth; but, be it which it will, it is sure that their way
was Long, and Athanas. Tom. 2. p. 315.

Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew.

Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8.

Theophyl. in 2. Matthew.


their Journey great.

For, so do all Interpreters tell us, They came (...), from far, so Athanasius;
they came, (...), from a Country very remote, so St. Chrysostem. Eusebius
styles their Journey, (...), so great a Journey; such a Journey, says
Theophylaus, as required, (...), a great deal of time to go it; and get perhaps
not so much as he imagined.

And how does the Practice of these Magicians condemn many of Us, who declare
to the world that we have nothing more of Christianity, then the Name? The Text
tells us of certain Strangers, men of great Note in their Country, and came many
Scores of miles to find out, and wait upon our Newborn Savior; but, alas! what
do we do? we think it much to come One mile, perhaps one Furlong; nay,
sometimes we will not come from the very next Door to worship God.

Certainly, God is much more indulgent and kind to us of the Christian Church,
then ever he was to the Members of the Jewish, both as to the Materials and
Circumstances of his Worship. He requires not from us either such costly
Sacrifices, or such chargeable Journeys, as he did from them. For thus did
Moses command the Jewish nation, Three Exodus 23. 17.
times in the year shall all thy Males appear before the Lord God. But where
must it be? at the Tabernacle where ever it should be pitched; but afterward,
at the Temple where ever it should be built. Which being at Jerusalem, the
Evangelist says, In Jerusalem Joh. 4. 20.
is the place where men ought to Worship. Besides their Weekly services in
their Synagogues, which answer to our Parochial Churches; the whole body of
their Men, that were able to travel, at what distant soever they dwelt, were
commanded, at three Solemn Festivals every year, to go up and worship at
Jerusalem; and our Savior himself, whilst he was yet but a Child, did do so.

And yet notwithstanding this express command from God; Jeroboam, that
notorious Hipocrite, for his own ends, could tell the People thus, It is too
much for you to go up to Jerusalem. He seems cunningly to consult his
Subjects ease; but, in truth, his design was to settle himself the more firmly
upon his Throne.

And thus does the Devil, for his own designs, deal with many of us; though
the Place, where we are more publicly and solemnly to worship God, be at no
great distances from us; not half so far as the Markets and Faires, which we
readily go to; yet this cunning Devil, for the Establishment of his own
Kingdom, is apt to tell us, either more immediately by himself, by our own
seduced Hearts, or else by such and such cursed Tools and Instruments of his,
1 Reg. 12. 8.
It is too much for you to go up to the Temple of God. And that the Enemy of
our Salvation may have the fairer pretense to withdraw silly souls from our
Solemn Assemblies, he takes the same course, which Jeroboam did, He sets up his
Calves in Dan and Bethel, an Anabaptist prating in this Conventicle, and a
Quaker in that; Only here is the difference, whereas Jeroboam's Calves were made
of Gold, these of ours are made of a far more ignoble Metal; Men so Dull,
Heavy, and Ignorant; but withal, so Presuming, Bold, and Confident; as if
their Skuls were made of Lead, and their Brows of Brass.

But were all our Calves like his, Golden Ones indeed; were all the Teachers of
our Private meetings persons of Inoffensive lives, and as Choice Abilities as
some few of our Dissenters are or have been; yet methinks to worship our God in
Dan and Bethel, when we should be doing it at Jerusalem; to worship God in
this Corner and that, when we should be in the Temple, were a thing more
inexcusable in Us then in the Jews, because We have not so fair a Pretense for
it, as They.

For, we cannot well pretend, what Jeroboam did, It is too much for you to go
up to Jerusalem, the Way is too Long, and the Charge too Great; Their Temple
stood at a far greater distance from most of them, then our Churches do from
us. But suppose we were at much greater distances from the place of Gods
public worship then indeed we are; yet to encourage our coming to it for the
more solemn service of our God, we have a fair example in the Text; where we
find some Persons of Considerable Quality, Men of Great Parts and Learning,
Wise men, who did not stick to come a very great number of Miles purposely to
attend our blessed Savior, and show him that respect, which was his due; for,
they tell us, We are come to Worship him; Come, though their way was Long, and
their Journey exceeding great.

2. We may consider the Place, whereunto these Wise men came, What the First
place was, Mat. 2. 1.
the Evangelist tells us, There came Wise men from East to Jerusalem, but why
so? Jerusalem was not the Place of our Saviors Birth, and what then did these
Wise men there?

It Is sure, that as yet they did not know in what particular place the Messiah
was to be born; and as Basil. de hum. Christi Genesis p. 593.
for the Star* (...), says St. Basil; that had now Aug. Ser. 2. in Epiph.
withdrawn it self and disappeared. Whereupon these Wise men, having lost their
Guide, and being wholely left to themselves and their own Conjectures, thought
it much more likely to find this Royal Babe in the Royal City rather then in
any other plate whatsoever.

Non it a natus est, ut Reges nascuntur in Seculo, etc. Aug. Ser. 2. in Epiph.
But since our blessed Savior was not now to come into the world with that
Magnificence and Splendor, which commonly attends the Birth of Secular
Princes; since he was to appear in a state of Humiliation, and in the form of a
Servant rather then that of a Temporal King, such as these Wise men thought
him; that the Place of his Birth might be suitable to its other Circumstances,
it must not be the Great Metropolis, but a Little Town; and there too, no well
Furnished Chamber, but a Stable.

This being a thing* which these Wise men could never have imagined, God was
pleased to send them to Jerusalem, there to receive Information from the most
Learned men of the Jewish Church; that so these Strangers finding him at
Bethlehem, which the Jews themselves acknowledged to be the Place of his Birth,
might be the more Confirmed in their Faith, and receive yet some further
assurances, even from This Circumstance of his Nativity too, that he was indeed
the promised and true Messiah.

And here might we stand a while and admire the most Wise Counsels and
Providence of our Good and Holy God! who would not conduct these Wise men
directly and immediately to Bethlehem; but he was pleased to lead them first to
Jerusalem, designing thereby, as to reproach the Magorum illuminatio magnum
testimonium Caecitatis Judaeoru^. Aug. Ser. 2. in Epiph.
Jewish Nation for their gross infidelity, so to send these Strangers home with
the greater satisfaction, and stronger Faith.

3. We may consider the Circumstance of Time, when these Wise men came. In
order to this, we shall enquire into these Three things. 1. When that Star,
which occasioned their Journey, might first appear. 2. When these Wise men,
upon the Appearance of this Star, might First enter upon their Journey. 3.
Within what Space their journey might be completed. As to every one of these
Particulars, I find a variety of opinions amongst Interpreters, who are led
only by Probabilities and Circumstances, there being nothing certain in any one
of our Evangelists to determine the matter this way or that. For,

1. There is no Text, which specifieth the Precise time, when this Star did
First appear. There is little said more then this, We have seen his Star in the
East, but when they saw it First, they have not told us.

The precise time of this Stars first appearing being left by our Evangelists
at great uncertainties, Expositors have took their liberty to make their
several Conjectures, and thus they do it. Theophylact Theophyl. in* 2. Matthew.
says, (...), This Star appeared before our Lord was born* but how long* St*
Chrysostom answers, (...), A very Considerable Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew.

Aug. Ser. 7. in Epiph.


time before; and what that time might be, St. Austine tells us more
particnlarly thus, Ante firm biennium, Almost Two years before.

And why the Star should appear to these Wise men so long before our Saviors
Birth, Theophylact gives us this Reason, (...), So far distant from Bethlehem
was their habitation, that had not the Star given them warning of Saviors
approaching Nativity so Long before hand, they could not have come timely
enough to the place of his birth to find him there, and to do what they did,

But notwithstanding this opinion of these eminent men, thus backed with so
considerable a Reason, Basil. M. de hum. Christi Gener. p. 591.
other Interpreters are of a different judgment. For, Great St. Bastl tells us,
(...), The Wise men saw the Star arising Origin. adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 45.
at our Lords Birth; and before him Origin, (...); What wonder is it, that such
a Star should arise, not, before, but (...)* at, the birth of so great a
Person? So they.

2. There is no Text, which specifieth the precisetime, When these Wise men did
first begin their journey.

That they did not set out Immediately upon the very first Appearance of this
Star, may well be guessed; for, it is not likely, that such Great and Prudent
Persons would, rashly and on a sudden, undertake so long a journey. No, before
they did, Basil. M. de hum. Christi gener. p. 591.
St. Basil tells us, (...), They took some time to contemplate this Star, and
maturely consider what it meant.

And although we should suppose the Appearance of this Star many Months before
our Saviors birth; yet that these Wise men were not certainly informed what
this Star did signify, till Christ was actually born, seems to be St.
Austin's judgment; for thus he tells us, Eo die, quo natus est Stellam
viderunt; Aug. Ser. 40. in Epiph.
and quem natum indicaverit, agnoverunt, The same day, wherein Christ was born,
they saw the Star; and whose Birth it signified, they knew; and being now
satisfied of this, Ex illo die, etc. says he, from That very day they began
their journey, though Theophylact give it an Earlier Epoch, and a much longer
date. But

3. There is no Text, which denotes the Precise time, when these Wise men
Arrived at Jerusalem, and went from thence to Bethlehem.

Mat. 2. 1.
The Evangelist says no more then this, When Jesus was born there came Wise
men to Jerusalem, but when they came, how soon, or how long after his birth, he
does not tell us.

Theophylact mentions, but withal rejects, the opinion of some, who thought
that these Wise men were so Long in coming, that when they came they found him
(...), Two years old. For which Conjecture there is no other ground, save only
that bloody command of Herod for the Murdering of all Infants thereabouts,
which were of that age or under.

But this Reason will not do; it will not follow, that our blessed Savior must
then be Two years old, because such a merciless Tyrant, in the excess of his
Cruelty, and as he thought, in the depth of his Policy, to secure himself of
this blessed Babe amongst the rest, judged it his concern to murder all other
Infants that were so.

That these Wise men came at least within Forty days after our Saviors birth,
seems evident Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew.
from our Evangelists; who tell us, that within that space of time he was
removed from Bethlehem, where yet the Wise men found him. St. Chrysostom says,
(...), They worshipped Aug. Ser. 1. in Epiph.
him being yet in his Swaddling Clours; and St. Austine* says ad Cunabula
pervenerunt, They came to his Cradle, and lest that expression should not be
enough to prove his being still at Bethlehem, and Aug. Ser. 2. in Epiph.
less then Two years old, he elsewhere tells us. In praesepitunc jacebat, He yet
lay in the Manger, which doubtless he did not very long.

No; it is believed that these Wise men were at Aug. Ser. 4. in Epiph.
Bethlehem on the Twelfth day after that of Saviors birth; so testifies St.
Austine, who speaks of the Epiphany thus, Hac die magi Dominum nostrum adorasse
perhibentur, The Wise men are reported to have worshipped our Lord upon This
day; and that Hammondus ii locum.
not in the Anniversary return of that day in the next year, as some have
thought; but in the self same year, wherein Christ was born, the very First
Twelfth day from his Nativity. That this must needs be St. Austine's meaning,
is evident from what he says elsewhere. For. having newly mentioned the birth
of Christ, he adds these words, Aug. Ser. 7. in Epiph.
Paucis diebus inde transactis, hodie magi ab orient venisse creduntur, The
Wise men from the East are believed to have come this day, being but a few
days after that of our Saviors birth.

And if so, we must needs grant, that when once they were satisfied and fully
informed, what the Star did mean, and that our Savior was now newly Born, they
made very little delay, at least if the Star appeared not, 'till his birth was
over. But they quickly mounted their swiftest beasts, their Cyprianus de stella
and magis.
Camels, say some; their Dromedaries, say others, that so they might with the
more speed attend upon our Newborn Jesus.

And does not this Practice of theirs condemn a great deal of ours? For, when
they came to worship our blessed Savior, they were very Nimble at it; quick,
even to admiration. For, considering the great distance of their own dwellings
from the place of our Saviors birth, the difficulty and wonder of their coming
so soon, is one of the greatest Arguments, that are urged against it. But it
seems, come they did, a vast Journey, some hundreds of Miles; and yet within a
very few days too.

Such was the Practice of these Men in the Text; but pray tell me what is ours?
Certainly, we have as much need, as great Reason, as high Obligations, and many
more Invitations to worship Christ, then they. What Invitations they had, more
then that one of a Star, we are not sure. But suppose that according to the
several Conjectures of Interpreters, they knew and rested upon the old Prophecy
of Balaam; or, suppose they had some glorious Angel to be their Informer, yet
their Advantages of knowing Christ were not like ours. For, whereas they had a
Star to guide them, we have a Sun; whereas they had one single Prophecy, that
was Mysterious and dark, we have a great many clear ones; and whereas it is
possible that they might have an Angel to instruct them, it is sure that we have
a God.

And since our Informations concerning Christ are more and much clearer then
theirs were, let us consider whether our Practice be suitable to our knowledge;
whether we attend our Saviors service with the same readiness and eagerness as
these Men did.

For, no sooner were these Wise men satisfied of our Saviors birth, but away
they went, that they might wait upon him with all speed imaginable. The same
thing the Evangelist observes of the Sheepherds too; for, when the Angel had
informed them that Christ was born, telling them the Place, wherein they might
find him; and giving them a Sign, whereby they might know him, the Text says,
they came with have, they did not loyter Lu. 2. 16.
and delay their Attendance, as we do.

There is not a man amongst us, but is sufficiently instructed where our
blessed Savior must now be waited on; not in a dirty Stable, not in a Barn,
Apot. 2. 1.
but in his Holy Temple; not lying in a Manger, but walking in the midst of his
Golden Candlesticks. And perhaps we are so conformeable to the Ancient Practice
of all other Churches, and the present Commands of our own; as that we do
repair to those Places, that are consecrated and set apart for the Public and
Solemn worship of our Holy God. But, are we as quick as the men in the Text?
alas! we are generally too slow and backward; we are easily detained from the
Temple of God, and that perhaps by Profaness and Irreligion; perhaps by some
trivial buisiness; perhaps by some idle and wicked Companions; upon one account
or other, we do not come to attend our blessed Savior, 'till the better part
of his service be over.

Sure I am, this of ours, as it is bad in its self, so is it a very sad thing in
its Sgnification too: for, it is a shrewd Symptom that our Hearts are naught; it
betrays the Hypocrisy of our Spirits, and gives the World just occasion to
suspect, that although we do at length betake our selves to the Public Service
of God, yet we do it against our Inclinations. For, were we as willing to
attend our blessed Savior, as the Shepherds or the Magicians were; there is
nothing, but invincible necessity that should hinder us from being with him as
quick, as They; who tell us in the Text we are come, and upon what Errand they
came, the next words inform us, (...), we are come to worship him, concerning
which we may enquire into these Two things. First what that worship was, which
these Wise men gave to Christ. Second why they did it. As to the First, their
worship consisted in these Two things;

First, One part of their worship, Homage, and Respect to Christ, did consist
in their Humble Deporment and Reverential behavior whilst they were in his
Presence.

Mat. 2. 11.
The Evangelist tells us, when they saw the young Child, (...), They fell down
and worshipped; not only with their Knees; but, if Erasmus guess right,
Prostrati, they fell with their very Faces down to the ground. They did, what
Grotius Grotius in locum.
observes out of Livy, More adorantium procubuerunt. They Fell down, as men are
wont to do in 1 Cor. 14. 25. Job. 1. 20.
the highest Act of Adoration. So he in St. Paul, falling down on his face, he
will worship God; so Job, He fell down on the ground and Worshipped. Certainly
there is no gesture imaginable, whereby the men in the Text could possibly have
expressed a greater Inward Veneration and respect to Christ, then they did by
This.

And how stands the case with us in this Particular? when we come to worship
our blessed Savior, as these men did, what Gestures do we use? are we in all
our Addresses to God, as Humble and Reverent as They? are we upon our Faces or
Knees? are we down upon the Earth, and, were it in our power, would we yet be
Lower still? No; we are, many of us, grown too* Bold with Heaven; so Rude and
Slovenly are we in our addresses to the Son of God, that we behave our selves
toward him, as if we were, not Servants, not Petitioners, but rather his
Equals. When we are in his Presence; when we speak to him, or he to us, so
clownish and unmannerly are we in our deportment toward him; that he might
well say to us, what an Emperor once did to a saucy Petitioner, Nescivi me
tibi esse tam familiarem, I did not know that you and I were so familiar.

But O! may me learn a more Christian behavior in our worship of God even from
these very Pagans in the Text! They fell down and Worshipped, There is no one
Posture, that can possibly become us more then this; these men have set us such
a Copy, as we cannot mend, but should Transcribe; they have given us such an
Example, as we cannot better, but yet must Imitate and Reach.

Secondly, Another Part of that Worship, Respect and Homage, which these Wise
men showed toward our blessed Savior, did consist in those Presents, which
they gave him.

Matt. ^. (...).
The Text says, They presented unto him Gifts, but what were these Gifts of
Theirs? Such doubtless as were suitable to the present Condition and Quality of
his Person; Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, but how much of these? the Context
gives us a fair Intimation, that the Quantity was considerable; for, the
Evangelist tells us, (...), When they had opened their Treasures, they presented
unto him Gifts, Certainly, they, who were so Great men, who came so long a
Journey purposely to testify their Respects to our blessed Savior, and in
order thereunto brought their Treasures with them, would never present him with
any small Trifle, a little Gold, a little Frankincense, a little Myrrh, some
trivial matter, which might have seemed an Affront rather then a Respect. And
that their Presents were indeed no small Ones, we shall the more easily be
induced to believe, if

Secondly, we shall consider the Motive of their respect to Christ, the Ground
and reason why they worshipped and presented him so and so.

Past all peradventure they did not do, what they did, from any designs of
their Own, such at least as related to the advantages of this World. It Is St.
Chrysostom's demand, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew.
what hopes could they have to receive any Advancements or Honors from a new
born Babe, and such a Babe, whom they found yet lying in a Manger? No; the
great Motive, why they came and worshipped him, was the Consideration of his
Person. Whether they were satisfied of his Digninity by the Appearance of his
glorious Star; or whether they understood his Greatness by the Prophecy of
Balaam, or the Information of an Angel; we have reason to think, that one way
or other they were convinced, that our blessed Savior was the very greatest
and most honorable Person, that the World ere saw. It Is easy to believe, that
they conceived these Two Notions of him;

First, It Is very reasonable to believe that they took him to be somewhat more
then an Ordinary Prince.

Mat. 2. 2.
Indeed, when they came to Jerusalem, their demand was only this; Where is he,
that is born King of the Jews? But did they think him an Ordinary King? If so,
what meant they by their coming thither, and that, (...), from so Chrysostom. ubi
supra.
great a distance, purposely to adore him? Suppose it were, as St. Chrysostom
speaks, (...), the custom and fashion of those Eastern Countries to
congratulate the birth of Princes, and welcome such Royal Babes into the World
with rich and various Presents; yet this respect was never showed to any
Newborn King, but such as were their Neighbors.

Aug. Ser. 2. in Epiph.
It Is the observation of St. Austine, Multi jam nati Reges Judaeorum, We read
of many Kings formerly born in the Jewish Nation; but, amongst them all, never
was there so much as one, that was treated, even in his Cradle, with so much
respect from strangers. Wherefore since these Persons in the Text, being men
both Great and Wise, did think fit to travel so many Miles into a strange Land,
and to carry their Treasures with them, thereby to testify their respect and
their Homage to our Newborn Savior; such an address as this, being without
any Precedent, and beyond all Examples, looks like an Argument, that they
believed him to be, not only a King; but, as indeed he was, the King of Kings,
such a King as the World never had besides.

Secondly, It Is not hard to believe that these Wise men in the Text had
received some Informations of our blessed Saviors Divinity too.

True it is, when they came to Bethlehem, they found nothing at all about him,
that might show him to be, what indeed he was. They there saw no Stately
Palace, no Bed of State, no Golden Cradle, no glorious Mantles, no such
Attendance, nothing of that Splendor, that might be suitable to a Royal Babe,
much less to a Son of God. Had they conceived no other Apprehensions of him,
then such as might have been framed from his Present Circumstances, they would
have been so far from reverencing him, as a God; that they might very justly
have thought him one of the Lowest of Men.

But although they found him in a Stable, in sorry Rags, in a Manger; or,
which was almost a thing as mean, in a Poor Mothers Arms, without any thing of
Attendance near him; yet notwithstanding all these discouragements, they did
the thing, for which they were come, and that was this, (...), They fell down
and worshipped him.

Grot. in locum Persis Patria lex est, ut Regis congressum affectans non prius
confabulandi fiat compos, quam illi cul^um exhibeat adorationis, Caelius. Rhod.
Lect. Antiq. l. 11. c. 28.
It Is the Observation of Grotius, that this kind of Adoration, though the
Grecians would never show it to any mortal Man, yet was it used in those
Eastern Countries, from whence these Wise men came, toward their Kings and
Princes. But surely had these Persons in the Text took their measures of our
blessed Savior barely from those Circumstances, wherein they found him; they
might have forborne their intended worship, having as little reason from any
thing about him to think him King, as God.

But that from some Information or other they Aug. Ser. 1. in Epiph.
were satisfied of his Deity, St* Austine does plainly tell us, Deum
cognoverant, They knew him to be Chalcidus in Platonis Timaeum.
God; so he. And long before him, Chalcidius, a Pagan Writer and a Platonic
Philosopher, speaks of them thus, Dicuntur quaesisse recentem ortum Dei, etc.
They are said to have enquired for a God late born, and according to that
apprehension of theirs, Vota tanto Deo convenientia nuneuparunt, They presented
him with such Oblations, as were suitable to the Majesty of so Great a God.

The truth is* that common Interpretation, which the Fathers do generally pass
upon these Wise men's Presents, do seem to intimate their belief, that these
Magicians had some apprehensions, that this Orig. adv. Cells. l. 1. p. 46.
Newborn Babe was, (...), God and Man too, (...), One compounded and made up of
God and Man, as Origin speaks. That they had instead such Conceptions of him
were a thing very easy to be believed, if we can but suppose that these Wise
men themselves had, in the Choice of their respective offerings, any
Consideration of those things, which the Fathers generally ascribe unto them.

What their Presents were, the Evangelist tells us, Gold, Frankincense, and
Myrrh, but why these rather then any think else? Did the Providence of God so
order the matter, that these Magicians should, by a kind of secret Instinct,
bring his Newborn Son this present of God, that he might be provided with
something to bear his Charges into Egypt, and keep him and his Parents during
the time of their approaching Exile there? Were this supposed, as to their
Gold, yet what means their Frankincense and Myrrh? did they present him with
Myrrh to anoint and cheer his tender Body; and, as St. Bernard fancieth, with
Frankincense Bernardus in sentent. p. 506.
to perfume* and sweeten that nasty Stable, wherein they found him? Had God any
particular and special design in all this? Or did the Wise men themselves, of
their own motion, pitch upon these Presents, barely as being the Choycest
Commodities, which their own Country did afford them?

That there was some Significancy in them, and that these Magicians did,
through a Divine Impulse upon their Spirits, make choice of these particular
Presents rather then any other matters whatsoever, not barely for the Value of
the Things themselves, but rather from a respect had to the Quality of our
Saviors Person, is, so far as I can Irenaeus adv. Haer. l. 3. cap. 10.
find, the Universal opinion of the Fathers. Irenaeus tells us, Per ea, quae
obtulerunt, munera, ostenderunt quid erat, quod odorabatur, They declared by
their Gifts, who and what manner of Person he was, whom they adored. Thus does
Great St. Basil. M. de hum. Christi Gener. p. 592.

Greg. Nyss. in die^ Christi natal. p. 782.


Basil testify, (...), They gave him Gold, as to a King, (...), says Gregory
Nyssene, they gave their Frankincense to him, as to a God, and as for their
Myrrh, a thing used in the Emblaming of Dead Bodies to preserve them from
Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 38.

Orig. adv.

Cells. l. 1. p. 46.


Putrefaction, they gave him this, (...), says Gregory Nazianzene; or, as
Origin phraseth it somewhat better, (...), as to a mortal Man, who was to Die
and be Buried, but withal to see no Corruption.

And if we may suppose that the Wise men in the Text had indeed these*
Apprehensions concerning Christ; if we may take it for granted, that
notwithstanding the great Poverty of his present Condition they did yet believe
him to be a King and a God; we have very little reason to wonder that they
should come so many Miles to attend, worship, and present him so and so.

It Is fan greater wonder, that we, who are the Members of the Christian Church,
should fall so extremely short even of these very Strangers in showing those
respects, which We, much more then They, do ow to Christ. For, although that of
St. Bernard. Ser. 1. in Epiph. p. 73.
Bernard be a truth, Qui illos adduxit, ipse and instruxit, the same God who
brought them to worship his Son, had also himself taught them; that he was his
Son indeed; yet it is not easy to imagine, that these Wise men should know as
much concerning our Savior, being then but in his Cradle, as we do now. It Is
like enough that they might hear him Crying like a Child in his Mothers Arms;
perhaps they might see him, like other Babes, Sucking his Mothers Breasts; it is
certain that they could then see nothing about him with an Eye of Flesh, but
such mean Circumstances, as might have rendered him an Object rather of
Compassion and Pity then of Worship and Adoration. We cannot say, that They did
then foresee, what we do now know of Christ; the stupendous Miracles of his
Life, the mighty wonders of his Death, his Raising himself and others from
their Graves; and whether they had yet any distinct and explicit belief of his
Ascension into Heaven, and his Session at Gods Right Hand, we cannot tell.

But yet notwithstanding, though they saw sufficient Evidences of his presenc
Poverty, but possibly as yet knew very little of his Future Glory, having seen
no other visible* Character thereof, for ought we know, save only that of the
Star; yet, as St. Bernard speaks, Procidunt, They fall down Bernar. Ser. 1. in
Epiph. p. 75.
before him, V^nerantur, ut Regem; adorant, ut Leum, they Worship him, as a
King; and which is infinitely more, they Adore him, as a God.

And if so, how much more are we obliged to do so, who have his Gospel, and are
acquainted with all the Stories which concern him? We do not now see him in a
Stable, but do verily believe him to be upon a Throne; we do not now find him
in the Arms of Mary, his Poor Mother, but do believe him to sit at the Right
Hand of God, his Father; what Signal Testimonials he had of his Divinity both
from Heaven and Hell; from the voice of his Father, from the descent of his
Spirit, and from the Confessions of the very Devils themselves, it is like
enough, that these Wise men in the Text did never know, as we do. It Is very
probable, that they might be all in their Graves, before our blessed Savior
did manifest any thing of his Glory; and by his holy Life, excellent Doctrine,
and mighty Works, declare himself to be the Son of God.

And if They, long before any thing of this was done, did thus adore him, even
when he was but a Babe, and that, in all outward Appearance, but a very Poor
one too, what then should we do? We, who know what incomparable Sermons he
Preached, and what stupendous Miracles he wrought; We, who find him so often
waited on by glorious Angels; We, who may well be supposed to have many more
Demonstrations of his Deity then these great Men in the Text, what must we do?

'Tell me, shall we, who have a long time professed the name of Christ, deal
more rudely with him, then these Magicians did, who were mere Strangers to him
and Proselytes but of a Day? They came a long Journey to Worship him, and shall
we think much to step over the Threshold? They fell down before him in a
Stable, and shall not we do as much in a Church? They presented him with Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh; and have we just nothing for him? He was pleased to
give himself both to and for the Sonns of Men, and shall we make him no Returns
at all? Yes; let us present him with our selves, and when we do so, we shall
but give him, what is his own.

Let us show our selves to be like the Persons in the Text, Wise men indeed, by
offering to our blessed Savior the self same Presents, which They did. Let us
give him something of our Gold by works of Charity to his distressed* Members;
Let us give him something of our Spiritual Myrrh by the Purity of our Lives,
and Acts of Mortification; let us also present him with our Spiritual
Frankincense by our Prayers and Praises in this World, that so we may do it in
the next by our Thanksgivings, Doxologies, and Hallelujah's, for ever and ever.

Dxa THe.

