THE GRAND PRESVMPTION Of the ROMAN CHURCH In Equalling their own TRADITIONS TO
THE Written Word OF GOD.

By FRANCIS GREGORY, D. D. Rectour of Hambleton in the County of Bucks, and one
of his Sacred Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most
Sacred Majesty. 1675.

THE GRAND PRESVMPTION OF THE ROMAN CHURCH In Equalling their own Traditions to
the Written Word of God.
Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, etc.


It Is the Observation of St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad Col. c. 1. v. 1.
and an undoubted Truth, (...). All the Epistles of St. Paul are sacred; but
yet there is something more then ordinary in those Epistles of his which were
written and sent to such and such Churches or Persons when he was in his Bonds,
Theophyl. in Argum. Epist. ad Col.
whereof this to the Colossians was one. Theophylact reckons up five several
Epistles written by St. Paul whilst he was a Prisoner. (...). The Epistle to
the Ephesians, to Philemon, to Timothy, to the Philippians, and this to the
Colossians, were written by St. Paul when he was in Bonds. That this Epistle
was certainly written at Rome, we learn from its ancient Postscript; which is
confirmed by the express Testimony of Oecumenius, (...), Oecum. in Argum.
Epist. ad Col.
St. Paul sent this Epistle from Rome. Chrysostom. ad. Col. c. 1. v. 1.
And that it was one of the latest, we gather from St. Chrysostom, who says
that the Apostle wrote it (...), toward the End of his Preaching; so late,
that Chronologers place it in the sixtieth year of Christ.

Who these Colossians were, and in what Region of the world their City stood,
we learn from several Authors. (...) so St. Chrysostom: Chrysostom. ad Col. c. 1.
v. 2. Theophyl. in locum eundem.

Oecum. in locum eundem.


and after him Theophylact, (...), or (...) says Oecumenius; Colosse was a
City of Phrygia, (now called Chona) as is evident, in that Laodicea was within
its Neighborhood. This City Herodotus styles (...), Great; and Xenophon
calls it (...), Prosperous, thriving, rich: so great, and so rich, that
Pliny, reckoning up Phrygiae oppida celeberrima, the most famous Towns of
Phrygia, counts this for one.

In this renowned City the Gospel was planted by Epaphras: which being done,
the Devil, according to his usual manner, raised up such and such Heretics to
subvert it. Theoph. in Argum. Epist. ad Col.
Thus Theophylact, (...), There was a certain wicked Opinion spread amongst
them: and what that was he tells us: (...), (...) They supposed that Man has
access to God and the Father, not by the Son, but by the Angels. But besides
this heterodox and monstrous Opinion, Theodoret says, Theodoret. in Argum. Ep.
ad Col.
(...), They had many Greek and Jewish Observations, mingling Heathenish
Philosophy with Christianity, reducing the abrogated Ceremonies of the Law, and
confounding Christ with Moses. The consideration of these erroneous Opinions
and Practices, which Epaphras had made known to St. Paul, The^
did (...), move the Apostle to write this Epistle; wherein, besides the Proem
and the Epilogue, he lays down, (...), the great Doctrines and Principles of
Faith: he also gives them, (...), such and such moral Instructions and Rules
of life. And because it was impossible for him in one short Epistle to
illustrate or comprehend (...), the whole entire Systeme and Body of
Christianity, in all its distinct and particular branches; he therefore refers
them to that comprehensive and perfect Rule, the written Word of God, as being
sufficient to arm them against all Heresies, to confirm them in the Faith, and
guide them in their Conversation: and that is the business of the Text, Let the
word of Christ dwell, etc.

The words contain a necessary Exhortation, given indeed immediately to that
Church whereunto St. Paul wrote and directed this Epistle; but designed and
intended for all Churches, yea and Persons too, where the Gospel is or shall be
preached for ever. We have in them three things considerable.

1. The Matter or Object of that Endeavor and Study to which the Apostle does
invite us; and that is, (...), the word of Christ. But what is that? Cornelius a
Lapide answers thus, Doctrina and Evangelium Christi, It Is the Doctrine and
Gospel of Christ: and thus Calvin, who tells us, Vult Doctrinam Evangelii illis
esse familiarem, The Apostle would have the Doctrine of the Gospel to be
familiar to them. Estius expounds it thus; Fides seu Doctrina Christi, the
Faith or Doctrine of Christ: (...), the Instructions, the Doctrines, the
Admonitions, whereby Christ teaches us; so Theophylact. Our learned Davenant
extends the Expression farther, and takes in the Old Testament too: Evangelium,
vel Doctrina Scripturarum; St. Paul means either the Gospel, or the whole
Doctrine of the Scriptures. Accordingly St. Chrysostom here tells the Laiety,
(...), St. Paul permits you to read the Scriptures. So that by the word of
Christ in the Text we may very well understand both the Testament: which
Latitude of Interpretation is countenanced by some Manuscripts, which read it,
as Grotius observes, (...), the Word (not, of Christ, but) of God. And so the
Arabic Version, Sermo Dei, the Word of God, even the whole Sacred Writ.

2. The (...), or Manner, which the Apostle prescribes, and every man must
observe, in his reading and studying the Word of Christ. It Is thus expressed,
(...), let it dwell. What Is that? Ne patiamini Verbum Dei, quasi peregrinum,
foris stare, sed intromittatur in domicilium Cordis vestri, says our excellent
Davenant; Do not suffer the Word of Christ to stand without doors, like a
stranger, but admit it into the inward man: and when once it is received, keep
it fast; nunquam ex animis vestris abeat, let it never go out of your minds; so
Grotius. It Is the Observation of St. Chrysostom and Theophylact, (...) St. Paul
does not barely say, Let the word of Christ be in you; but, let it dwell, and
that (...), richly, i. e. (...), in great abundance. It Is not enough to
acquaint our selves with a few Passages only; but we are concerned to study
Prophetas, Apostolos, Evangelistas, says Bishop Davenant, the Prophets, the
Apostles, the Evangelists, even the whole written Word of God.

3. The Persons whom St. Paul does thus exhort to read, study, and familiarly
acquaint themselves with, the Word of Christ. The Text says, (...), Let the
Word of Christ dwell in you. But who are they? Certainly the self-same persons
to whom he directs his whole Epistle; and that stands thus inscribed, Col. 1.2.
(...), To the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse.
The Expression takes in not Archippus, not the Bishop, not their Ministers
only; but the common people, even all that professed the Faith of Christ too.

The first thing considerable in the Text (and which alone I shall here handle)
is the Matter or Object of that Study whereunto St. Paul does here invite the
Colossians and all Christians whatsoever; and that is, (...), the Word of
Christ, the Law and the Gospel, Moses and the Prophets, the Evangelists and the
Apostles, the Old Testament and the New. Now that whatsoever is contained in
any of these most certainly is, and may therefore most justly be styled, The
Word of Christ, is evident upon a twofold ground.

1. Christ is the Efficient Cause of all the Scripture; each of the Testaments
has him for its Author. See this distinctly in three Particulars.

First, Christ is the Great and undoubted Author of the Law. Joh. 1.17.
Origin. in Joannem.
The Evangelist indeed tells us, The Law was given by Moses: but how that was
Origin tells us, who thus distinguishes; (...) We understand that the Law was
given by Moses, but not from him. Doubtless Origin means the same thing which
Erasmus thus expresses, Erasm. in Joann. c. 1.17.

Cast. in Joann. c. 1.16. Acts 7.38.


Moses Legis Author non fuit, Moses was not the Author of that Law; no,
Castalio tells us, Quod Lex data est, Divini fuit Beneficii, The giving of the
Law was from the Kindness of God. As for Moses, it is said, he received the
lively Oracles; (...), says St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Joan. 1.17.
he received the Law from another; and so proved not the Legislator to
establish and make the Law, but a Minister, an Herald, a Scribe, to receive,
proclaim and write it. So that Ebion, that pestilent Heretic, had no reason to
think Moses, who is said to have given the Law, to be upon that score a greater
man then Christ.

But although the first Promulgation and Delivery of the Law upon Mount Sinai
cannot possibly be ascribed unto Moses, yet it seems very clearly to be
attributed unto Angels. Thus St. Paul, For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast, etc. What word was that? Theophylact tells us, Theophylact. in locum.
(...) the Apostle means either the Decalogue, or generally all Commands
dispensed by Angels under the Old Testament. Thus St. Chrysostom, (...), the
Decalogue, Chrysostom. in locum.
the Commandments: Lex Mosis, the Law of Moses; so Grotius. And of this Law the
Apostle does elsewhere thus affirm, (...), it was ordained by Angels. Galat.
3.19.
How so? Ministerio Angelorum, by the Ministry of Angels; so Clarius. It Is the
observation of Grotius, that the Law was pronounced by some one of the Angels,
others attending round about him.

And that the Law was indeed delivered by some one single Angel, we learn from
that of St. Stephen; Act. 7.38.
This is that Moses who was in the church in the wilderness, with the angel
that spoke to him in the mount Sina: (...), with the Angel, the expression
imports that it was some one particular Angel who pronounced the Law. But what
and who this Angel was, it is somewhat uncertain. Grotius says, Grot. in Heb.
2.2.
it was unus ex praecipuis Angelis, one of the chiefest Angels; it was such an
Angel as was counted worthy to represent the person and bear the name of God.
So Moses tells us, God spoke all these words. Exodus 20.1.
And as Moses gives him this glorious Title, so does this Angel himself assume
and own it; I am the Lord thy God, etc. And that he was so indeed, the people
believed; The Lord our God has showed us his glory, Deuteronomy. 5.24.
and we have heard his voice: we have seen this day, that God does talk with
man, etc. From these expressions several Interpreters do gather, that this
Angel who delivered the Law was the Second Person in the Trinity, whose various
Appearances under the Old Testament were nothing else but, as St. Austine calls
them, Symbola and Praeludia Incarnationis, the Symbols, Tokens and Essays of
his Incarnation.

Gregorius Naz. Orat. 49.
This is that which Nazianzene confidently affirms, Filium Dei in Monte Sina cum
Mose locutum esse scimus; That the Son of God upon Mount Sina did discourse
with Moses, is a thing that we know. Chrysostomus in Act. 7.30.
And to this purpose does St. Chrysostom expound that passage of St. Stephen,
He was in the wilderness with the angel. What Angel means he? St. Chrysostom
answers, (...) It Is the Son of God whom he calls an Angel: and again, a
little after, (...) the expression shows, that the Angel who appeared to
Moses was the Angel of the great Counsel: Dionys. Areop. Coelest. Hierarchiae
c. 4.
and who is that? Dionysius the Areopagite answers thus, (...), Jesus himself.

And indeed, that it was some Person of the Blessed Trinity that delivered the
Law, was the Opinion not only of Philo the Jew, but of St. Cyprian, Justine
Martyr, Tertullian, and some other Fathers of the Christian Church, who
affirmed with one consent, revera fuisse Deum, that it was God indeed. But let
us admit the Opinion of these learned and pious men to be a mistake, and that
of St. Dionysius to be a Truth; Dionys. ubi supra.
(...) The Scriptures teach us that the Divine Law was handed to us by Angels:
Joseph. l. 1.5.
so Josephus too; (...) Our most excellent Doctrines and most holy Precepts
were delivered to us by Angels.

Well, suppose it be certain that Angels, properly so called, had to do with
the delivery of the Law; yet this does no way hinder but that Christ may be,
and surely is, the Legislatour still: for whatever this Angel, whoever he was,
delivered upon Mount Sina, was the Dictate of God. So the same Authors tell
us. (...), The Law was given by God; so Dionysius: (...), The Law was delivered
by Angels, who had learned and received it from God; so Josephus.

And what Person of the Godhead it was, August. Contra Adimantum c. 9.
Saint Austine thus informs us. Quemadmodum Verbum Dei, quod est Christus,
loquitur in Propheta, sic and in Angelo loquitur; As the Word of God, which is
Christ, speaks in a Prophet, so does he speak in an Angel too.

I remember Caelius Rhodiginus tells us that the Lawgivers of the Nations were
very ambitious to make their Subjects believe, Cael. Rhodig. l. 18. c. 19.
that all the Laws which they established were derived from some Deity or
other. Thus Trismegistus fathered his Laws upon Mercury; Draco and Solon theirs
upon Minerva; Zamolxis his upon Vesta; Plato his upon Jupiter and Apollo; Numa
his upon Egeria, etc. Now that Divine Honor which they sought for their Laws
ours has, which undoubtedly is the Law of a God, or, as my Text words it,
(...), the word of Christ, that Glorious Lawgiver, with whom those of this
World whom Seneca mentions for the wisest, Solon, Lycurgus, Zaleucus, Seneca
Epist. 9.
Charondas, etc. are not once to be named.

Secondly, All the Prophecies of the Old Testament have Christ for their
Author too.

It Is certain, that those Holy men who delivered the Prophecies of the Old
Testament to the Jewish Church were inspired from Heaven; and hence it is that
the Scripture styles a Prophet (...), Deuteronomy. 33.1.
a man of God, 2 Pet. 1.20.
i. e. a man commissioned, authorized and informed by God. St. Peter tells us,
No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, (...) of
private incitation, so our learned Hammond renders it: the expression imports,
that the Prophets were not suae mentis, sed Divini Consilii, Interpretes, as
Cameron words it; they did not reveal their own minds, but God's. Thus St.
Paul, Heb. 1.1.
God spoke by the Prophets; they were (...), men carried, acted and taught by
God.

And what Person of the Trinity it was that inspired these Prophets St. Peter
tells us, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Thus Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 11.5.
The Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak, Thus says the
Lord, etc. There was (...), says Cameron, the Spirit of God did invade, seize
and enter the Prophets of old: and, upon that score, those Messages which they
delivered and left upon record are commonly styled (...), the Holy Writings;
or, as Dionysius calls them, (...), the Discourses, Sermons, or Words of God.

And as the Prophecies of these Holy men with a respect to the whole Trinity
are indeed the Word of God; so likewise with a more particular Appropriation to
the Second Person they may be justly styled, according to the expression in the
Text, (...), the word of Christ. For that this Blessed Spirit, by whom these
Prophets were infallibly taught and guided in all their Messages, is indeed the
Spirit of Christ, it is an Article of our Christian Faith, delivered to us both
in the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds. For although the Title that was expressly
given the Spirit by the ancient Fathers of the Greek Church in the Creeds of
Nicaea and Constantinople were only this, (...), the Spirit that proceeds from
the Father; yet that it was their constant belief that the Spirit did also
proceed from the Son, Pearson on the Creed. Epiphanius in Ancor.
our excellent Bishop Pearson has undeniably evinced from several expressions
of Epiphanius, who thus affirms, (...), The Spirit of God is the Spirit of the
Father and the Spirit of the Son too; (...), he is from the Father and from the
Son: and that, doubtless, not only as he was anciently termed (...), receiving
from the Father and the Son; but, (...), proceeding too.

And this Procession of the Spirit from the Son though the Scripture does
nowhere deliver in express and open terms, yet it does virtually contain and
justly warrant it. For as he is styled the Spirit of the Father, so is he as
plainly styled the Spirit of the Son too: so St. Paul, Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son. And as he is styled the Spirit of
God, so is he styled the Spirit of Christ too: thus the same St. Paul, Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, etc. So then, it is evident that this
Blessed Spirit by whom the Prophets of old were inspired and acted is indeed
the Spirit of Christ. So much St. Peter does yet farther assure us, 1 Pet. 1.11.
The Spirit of Christ which was in the Prophets, etc. And methinks if that Holy
Spirit by whose immediate Inspiration all the Prophets did speak and write were
and is the Spirit of Christ, we may easily grant that every Truth which these
Prophets, by the Guidance of this Spirit, have delivered and left upon record,
is (...), the word of Christ.

Thirdly, The New Testament has Christ for its Author too. Romans 1.9.
It Is often styled (...), the Gospel of Christ. St. Paul calls it (...), the
Gospel of the Son: and well he may, for all the Sermons recorded by the four
Evangelists are the Sermons of this Son; all the mighty works registered in
these several Gospels are the Miracles of this Son; all the Promises that are
anywhere delivered by St. Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, are the Promises of
this Son; and whatever Truth we find mentioned by any one or all the
Evangelists, it is the Doctrine of this Son. Thus St. Paul, God has spoken to
us by his Son, Heb. 1.2.
etc. Under the Law God spoke by Angels and Prophets, that were his Servants;
but under and in the Gospel he has spoke more immediately by Christ, Who is
his Son.

And as the main Passages recorded by the four Evangelists were thus
immediately delivered by Christ in his own Person: so likewise those holy men,
who were Amanuenses Dei, the Secretaries and Penmen of the Spirit, to write
what our Savior did and preached, and so to transmit his Truths, his Commands
and his Miracles to all succeeding Ages, were provided and raised by Christ
too. Ephesians. 4.11.
So that Text informs us, He gave some Apostles, and some Evangelists, etc.
(...), He gave, etc. but who is that? Idem ipse Christus, so Estius; (...), so
St. Chrysostom: it is Christ, it is the Son, that gave. But what did he give?
(...), Apostles, such as St. Paul, Silas, Barnabas, etc. to preach the Gospel;
and (...), Evangelists, (...), so St. Chrysostom: he gave St. Matthew and
others to write the Gospel, and by so doing to convey it sincere, pure and
incorrupt to all Generations. And this does Saint Paul acknowledge; Romans 1.5.
By Christ we have received Grace and Apostleship: hence does St. Peter style
himself thus, Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.1.
etc. Christ himself was known by the name of (...), the Apostle of his Father;
but St. Peter and St. Paul were His.

And as these Apostles received their several Commissions from Christ, so were
they careful to preach those very Doctrines which Christ himself had taught
them. Thus St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23.
I have received of the Lord, that which I delivered unto you. Non confinxi pro
Ingenio meo, etc. says Cameron: St. Paul did not invent, but receive, what
Truths he preached and wrote; they were not the Issues of his own Brain, but
the Revelations and Dictates of Christ. And if so, if the Evangelists and
Apostles, who preached and penned the whole New Testament, were not only
raised by Christ, but infallibly taught by his Spirit too, we may conclude,
that this holy Gospel, which was published and registered by these inspired
Persons, is indeed (...), the word of Christ. But,

2. The Scriptures are, and may be justly styled, (...), the word of Christ,
not only as he is the Author of the whole, but also as he is the chief
Subject and Matter of the most material Passages that are found therein. See
this again in three Particulars.

First, Christ is the grand subject Matter of the Law. Gal. 3.24.
St. Paul tells us, the Law was our Schoolmaster: but what Lessons does it
teach us? the Text answers, the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ: it is evident that Christ was taught even by the Law. Thus Calvin, In
tota Ceremoniarum Pompa quicquid oculis ingerebatur, id quasi notam Christi
impressam habebat; Whatever Ceremonies the Law commanded, they were so many
Types and Representations of Christ.

And that Christ was indeed the Person concerned and aimed at in the Law, it
seems very evident from that expression which St. Paul borrows from the
Psalmist, Psalm 40.7.
In the volume of the Book it is written of me, etc. (...), in the head of the
Book. But what book does he mean? Saint Augustine answers, librum Psalmorum,
the Book of Psalms. But that cannot well be, because the Psalms in David's time
were not yet collected into a Book. St. Hierom therefore expounds it thus, In
the volume of the Book, i. e. In principio Genesis, In the beginning of
Genesis. But if not so, if St. Hierom were mistaken in the particular Text to
which the Psalmist refers; yet we have all reason to believe that he meant
the writings of Moses: for, as Ludovicus Cappellus rightly observes, in David's
age there was scarce any other part of God's Word yet written praeter
Pentateuchum, besides the Pentateuch, and perhaps that of Job. And to confirm
this Interpretation of the Text, it is observed by several Authors, that the
five Books of Moses were usually styled by the Jews, (...) says Muis, (...)
says Cappellus, (...), The Book; i. e. the chief and most excellent Book.

But whether the Psalmist, and after him St. Paul, do particularly mean these
Books of Moses or not; it is sure enough that our Blessed Savior was much
concerned in them. So much does he himself expressly tell the Jews, Moses wrote
of me. Joh. 5.46.
It was one great Argument whereby our Blessed Savior did convince the Jews of
gross Hypocrisy. (...), says Christ, Ye do stoutly contend that ye believe the
Writings of Moses, and do what he commands; but indeed there is no such
matter: for had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; were ye indeed
his Disciples, ye would have been mine too; for he wrote of me.

And that he did so indeed, is farther cleared from that Discourse which our
Blessed Savior had upon the day of his Resurrection with the two Disciples
upon the way. The Text says, Luke 24.27.
he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself:
but whence took he the first rise and ground of his Discourse? the Text answers
thus, (...), beginning from Moses. So then it is evident that Moses, who was the
Penman of the Law, was the first Penman of the Gospel too; he was an
Evangelist as well as a Prophet: and although he represented Christ, as Grotius
words it, (...), by symbolicall Types and Figures; though his Doctrine of the
Messiah was involved and wrapped up, as Dionysius phraseth it, (...), in sacred
Veils; yet, sure we are, the Matter of his Writings is (...) as well as Law.

2. Christ is the great and principal Subject of the Prophets too. The
miraculous Conception, the wonderful Nativity, the holy Life, the ignominious
Death, the honorable Burial, the stupendous Resurrection, the glorious
Ascension and Session of Christ at God's right hand, and his coming again to
Judgment, are all recorded by the Prophets. Insomuch that it seems very
strange, that the Jews, who had long expected their Messiah, should not
discover Christ to be the man. St. Paul tells us, They that dwell at Jerusalem
and their Rulers knew him not. Act. 13.27.
But what made them to be thus ignorant? The reason follows thus, They knew not
the voices of the Prophets: the Text imports, that whosoever knows the Prophets
must needs know the Messiah too; which is a convincing argument that they wrote
about him.

The Evangelists do often tell us, that such and such Passages relating to
Christ, such and such Circumstances that did attend his Life and Death, were
signal Accomplishments of such and such Predictions. What expression more
frequent then this, Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet?
Yea, if it were fulfilled, then was it spoken too; if there was an
Accomplishment, there must be a Prophecy too. And the truth is, the Prediction
is often urged as the great reason of the Event in several Passages that relate
to Christ. Thus St. Matthew, Matt. 1.22.
All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet.
And thus our Savior himself seems to argue; Luke 24.44.
All things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me. Whatever stands written in the
Prophets, we find accomplished in the Evangelists: his very Death, of all
things in the world the most unlikely, could not be excepted. Matt. 26.54.
Thus it must be; the Son of man must suffer and die; but why so? he tells us,
The Son of man goes, as it is written of him: written where? and by whom? St.
Peter answers, Act. 3.18.
God beforehand had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should
suffer. It Is evident from these and many more like expressions, that Christ,
and the things of Christ, were the great Argument, the principal Subject, nay
the only Theme, upon which the Universality of the Prophets did both speak and
write.

3. Christ is the great Subject of the Evangelists and Apostles too. What is
the grand Argument of St. Matthew's Gospel, the very first Verse thus informs
us, The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ. Zegerus tells us, Hoc ceu
Titulo totius rei summam, omnemque Evangelicae hujus Narrationis praesignat
Historiam; The Evangelist in this short Title informs us what is the Sum and
Argument of his whole Discourse: and that is, says Clarius, tota Servatoris
Vita, the whole Life of our Blessed Savior.

Indeed Erasmus affirms, Hic Titulus non est universi Argumenti; This Title,
which St. Matthew does here prefix before his Gospel, does not comprehend the
Sum of his whole Book: and Grotius contends, that it is but (...), a partial
Inscription, referring only to Christ's Original. But however, what we want
in the Title, we have in the Book, which from the beginning to the end contains
nothing else but the Conception, Nativity, Life, Death, Burial and Resurrection
of Christ.

And as for St. Mark, who, as St. Austin observes, did little more then
epitomize St. Matthew's Gospel, he thus enters upon his work; The beginning of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And that this is indeed Operis Titulus, the Title
of his whole Book, which comprehends the sum of all his following Discourse,
and shows that his design was to treat of nothing else but Christ, is the
acknowledgement of Erasmus, who denies St. Matthew's Title so to be and do.

And what is the Subject Matter of St. Luke's Gospel, Act. 1.1.
himself acquaints his friend Theophilus: The former Treatise have I made of
all that Jesus began both to do and teach. Partitus est omnem Christi Vitam in
Facta and Doctrinam, says Erasmus; St. Luke does here divide the whole Life of
Christ into the Miracles which he wrought, and the Sermons which he preached;
and tells Theophilus, that these two were the great Contents of his former
Book. Thus Grotius: Haec verba brevem Evangelii descriptionem continent; These
words contain a short description of St. Luke's whole Gospel, and show that
Christ is the Subject of it.

And as for the Acts of the Apostles, Quid aliud est quam Evangelii pars? says
Erasmus, What is it else but a part of the Gospel? What contains it but an
History of what the Apostles did and suffered upon the Account of Christ?

And what Saint John, our fourth Evangelist, treats of, the very first line of
his Gospel tells us, In the beginning was the Word: It Is but one Word that
makes up his whole Book, and that Word is Christ.

So then, it is clear enough that Christ is the only Subject of all four
Gospels; but what do the Epistles treat of? St. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John do
write of Jesus; but what does St. Paul do? It Is sure that no Apostle preached,
no Apostle wrote so much as he; but what is his Subject? The Text answers, He
preached Jesus: Act. 9.20. 2 Cor. 4.5.
himself confirms it, We preach not our selves, but Christ. And as he preached,
so he wrote too: it is easily seen, that in all his Epistles there are but few
Passages to be found that do not one way or other relate to Christ. So that,
upon the whole matter, we may safely say, as Maldonate does, Maldon. in Luc.
24.27.
Tota Scriptura Christum loquitur, The whole Scripture speaks of Christ. So
Cornetius a Lapide too, Cornel a Lap. in Heb. 10.7.
Tota Scriptura pro Argumento suo habet Christum; tota circa Christum versatur:
All the Bible, the Old Testament and the New, Moses and the Prophets, the
Evangelists and the Apostles, do all treat of Christ; as Christ is the Author
of all Scriptures, so is he their great Subject matter too. And if so, we may
well conclude, that the whole Bible is, what the Text styles it, (...), the
Word of Christ. And since it is so, these Inferences will undeniably follow.

I. That the Scriptures have in them more of Excellence, Wisdom, Purity and
Holiness, COROLLARIES.
then any or all other Writings whatsoever.

Indeed, there may be, and certainly is, somewhat of worth in many other books
besides: it is possible sometimes to find Gold among rubbish, and a Jewel may
lie upon a dunghill. That there are many things of great use in Humane, nay, in
Heathenish, Authors, no sober person, that reads and understands them, will
deny. So excellent are the Writings of Plato, that I find him styled alter
Moses, Cael. Rhodig. Antiquit. l. 30. c. 3^.
a second Moses; and the Ancients commonly surname him (...), Plato the Divine.
Such are the Morals of Plutarch, (a man styled (...), the Venus of all
Philosophy) that it was judged the fittest book to be preserved, if all books
were to be burnt but one. Nay, so choice an Author is that very Poet Homer,
that Dionysius calls him (...), most Divine. And methinks that little Poem of
Pythagoras deserves its name, and those few lines of his are justly styled
(...), Verses of Gold.

What great use may be made of Heathenish Moralists, Historians and Poets, we
learn from those great Examples and learned men, the Primitive Fathers, Justine
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, etc. and amongst the Latins,
Tertullian, Austine, Hierom, Cyprian, Lactantius, and many others, who
overthrew the Idolatry of the Gentiles, and convinced the Nations of their
abominable Superstitions and Practices, by the clear Testimonies of their own
Writers. And in so doing these great Luminaries of the Christian Church did but
follow the Example of St. Paul; who, to convince Pagans and Infidels, took
Arguments from their own Authors, and translated some Verses of Callimachus,
Epimenides, Menander, and Aratus, into the Word of God, and thereby made them
sacred. And doubtless there is a great truth in that expression of Scultetus,
Scultetus de Quaestione, Utrum Theologo, etc.
Fructuose ancillantur Sacris, etc. The Testimonies of Humane Authors do
contribute a great deal toward the Confirmation of many Truths, and the better
understanding of the Oracles of God.

And if there be such a worth in the writings of other Authors, who were but
Men; what value shall we set upon the Scripture, which is the undoubted Word of
God? If the Laws of Solon be choice; what is the Law of Moses? If the Ethics
of Aristotle, Epictetus, Hierocles, Cicero, Seneca, and many others, be
excellent; what then are the Proverbs of Solomon? If the Discourses of Plato be
Heavenly; what then are the Sermons of Christ? Nay, if the Epistles of St.
Austine, St. Hierom, St. Bernard, and other Fathers, be even Divine; what are
St. Paul's then? Remember, other Writings are but the Writings of Men; but
these are God's: other Books at best contain but the word of such and such a
Saint; whereas our Bible contains (...), the Word of Christ.

II. That every man stands obliged readily and firmly to believe whatever the
Scriptures contain and assert to be a Truth.

I remember, St. Paul demands of Agrippa, Act. 26.27
Believe thou the Prophets? and our Blessed Savior himself demands of
Martha, Believe thou this? Joh. 11.26.
Certainly, were not man grown strangely sottish, such demands as these would
have no place: and yet methinks it is a stranger Question which Christ put to
the Jews, How shall ye believe my words? Joh. 5.47.
But what should hinder? Is it possible for man to pretend any reason why the
words of Christ should be so much as once suspected? So great is his Authority,
so unquestionable is his Veracity, that his bare affirmation is a sure ground
of Faith. Thus the Evangelist, The man believed the word. Joh. 4.50.
But what moved him so to do? the Text answers, and assigns this Reason of his
faith, The man believed the word that Jesus had spoken. And such is every word
which our Bibles contain; it is the Word of Jesus: and, upon that score, if we
are the Disciples of Jesus, we stand obliged to do what his other Disciples
formerly did, Joh. 2.2^.
They believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said. The truth is,
the whole Scripture is nothing else but a Systeme of Words and Sentences which
Jesus has said and caused to be written: and if so, there is not a Verse,
there is not a Line to be found, but requires and deserves our Faith. See this
especially in three Particulars.

1. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we are obliged
to believe it in all the matter of History which is contained therein.

There are indeed such and such Historical Narrations found in the Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles, so strange and miraculous, that, were they found in
any Book besides, we might perhaps without any blame suspect the Writers Faith,
and warrantably suspend our own. Did we read in Herodotus what we read in
Moses, that this glorious fabric of Heaven and Earth was created without any
more ado then only this, (...), And God said, Let there be this and that;
where is the man that, barely upon such an Authority, would believe it? Had
Plutarch written the Life of Moses, as he did the Lives of Greeks and Romans;
had he recorded the wonderful Works of God in Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in
the Wilderness; had he told us of a Rod that became a Serpent, of Waters that
were consolidated into a Wall, of Rocks that were rarefied and melted into
Wells, of Bread dropped down from Heaven, the Taste whereof was grateful to the
Vnicuique Manna secundum propriam voluntatem in ore sapiebat, Aug. in Ep. 118.
various Palates of every one that ate it: or, had Ovid told us, and only he,
or some other Author like him, that the whole World was once drowned with
water, and shall one day be burnt with fire; that a Woman was turned into Salt;
that a King became a Beast, and fed on grass like an Ox: had he told us, that
the Chariot of the Sun, that wheels round the world with so strong and quick a
Motion, stood still at one time, and went back at another: or, had some Humane
Author, who is of the greatest Credit, told us, what the Prophet Daniel
peremptorily does, namely, that a man was cast into a Den of hungry Lions, and
yet remained untouched; that three persons were thrown into a flaming Furnace,
that was heated seven times more then ordinary on purpose to consume them, and
yet remained not only unburnt, but even unsindged too: or, had any such Writer
told us, what the Evangelist does, Matt. 11.5.
The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead are raised up: Such stories as these, had they been
delivered by any humane and vulgar Author, must needs have exceeded all the
faith of the most credulous person which the whole World affords.

But although these Stories to carnal Reason may seem very strange and
improbable; though the matter of fact be in it self so hard and difficult, that
it does rather discourage then induce us to believe them: yet since we find
these things expressly and clearly delivered in our most holy Writ; since we
find them strongly attested by Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles; we cannot,
with any show of Reason, without a great deal of guilt and sin, not only deny
our Assent, but even so much as suspend our Faith: and that because the whole
Scripture, which contains these historical Narrations how strange soever, is
(...), the Word of Christ, that Christ who did not, will not, can not lie.

2. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we are obliged
to believe it in all the Promises which it contains.

1 Pet. 1.4.
What those Promises are, St. Peter tells us; Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises. The Promises of God are exceeding great
in their number, and exceeding precious in their nature too: there is not any
one amongst them but is of more real value then the whole world besides: so
many, so sweet, so excellent are they, that a poor humble soul, who has the
greatest Interest in them, scarce knows how to believe them; as if they were
too good to be true. That an offended God, upon the shedding of a few
penitential Tears, upon a little Humiliation, Contrition and Reformation,
which cannot possibly make the least Satisfaction for those frequent Injuries
which man has done him, should ever be so gracious, as to promise him that
signal and inestimable Blessing, even the full Remission of all those
Transgressions, which would otherwise have certainly damned him for ever! That,
upon the Submission of a Sinner, God Almighty should promise to advance that
Rebel to a Throne, whom he might have justly laid in that infernal Gaol, to
be wrapped up in flames and chains of darkness, and that for ever! That upon
some few Acts of such and such an inconsiderable service, which adds nothing to
the ever-blessed Majesty of Heaven, the Great God should promise no less a
Reward then an immortal Crown of Glory! Certainly, were such Promises as these
reported by some mere man like our selves, nay more, were they delivered to us
barely by an Angel from Heaven, they would not easily be believed. For, when
some dejected and contrite Soul does seriously consider with it self the
dreadful nature of its Sin, the worthlesness of its Repentance, the manifold
imperfections and small value even of its highest Services, it can hardly enter
into its head, that the one should so easily be forgiven, and the other so
highly rewarded.

But although the Sinner, from the sad apprehension of his own Guilt, and his
great Unworthiness of those unvaluable Privileges which are the Subject matter
of the grand Promises of the Gospel, may find in himself just cause to fear
their Performance: yet when he seriously considers whose Promises they are, and
where they stand recorded, he has far greater reason to conclude their full
Accomplishment. St. Paul tells us, Heb. 10.23. 2 Cor. 1.20.
He that has promised is faithful: and again, All the promises of God in
Christ are Yea and Amen. True it is, Man is but a poor Worm, a Sinner, a Rebel,
unworthy to share in those glorious Promises that stand recorded in our Bibles:
but what then? shall we take occasions from the Demerits of Man to suspect and
question the Truth and Faithfulness of God? We must acknowledge that Promises
of Pardon, Life, eternal Bliss and Glory, are such mighty things as pass our
Understanding; but must they therefore exceed our Faith? Methinks it should be
as easy for us to believe them as it is to read them. Certainly, if there be
nothing too great for God to promise, there is nothing too hard for God to do:
whatever good words his Mercy has made him speak, his Power and his Truth
confirms: and for all this we have the Great Charter of Heaven, a sure word of
Prophecy, even that blessed Security, which is (...), the Word of Christ. But,

3. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we are obliged
to believe it in all the Threatenings which it contains.

That the various Menaces recorded in Holy Writ are indeed most dreadful
things, whosoever does but read them must presently acknowledge. The Prophet
tells us, Ezekiel. 18.4.
The soul that sins, it shall die. What a sad condition then is the
incorrigible Sinner in! Ps. 9.17.
The Psalmist tells us, The wicked shall be turned into Hell. A dismal sentence
surely! And, what is worse, the Evangelist, the very Gospel tells us too, Apoc.
20.10.
They shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. What a killing word
is this! So terrible are these and many other Comminations which we find most
plainly delivered in our Bibles, that of all the Passages recorded therein
these are they which man is most unwilling to believe. As for our scoffing
Atheist, he is loath to believe that there is any such Being as an holy God, to
call him to a strict account in another world for what he has done in this; he
will not be convinced that there is a most glorious Heaven to invite him to
Holiness, or a most dreadful Hell to scare him from Sin. And as for other
ordinary Sinners, how apt are they to create themselves a God made up of
nothing else but Compassions, Bowels and Mercy only? They read indeed such
and such dismal Sentences denounced, in God's name, by his Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles; but withal they look upon them but as so many (...),
Bugbears and Scarecrows only. They cannot imagine that it is consistent with
the Goodness of God, no nor with his Justice neither, to put such sad
Threatenings of his in execution. For, say they, what great injury does a little
Sin do to God, that he should ever think of such a strange Revenge? When a man
enjoys the pleasure of his Lust, what harm thereby can he do his Maker? If God
be not one jot the better for all our Services, can he be so much the worse for
our Miscarriages, as to punish us so severely, and that for ever? Is it
imaginable, that for such and such Offenses, committed in a short space of
time, a God, that has proclaimed himself so Good and Gracious, should revenge
himself upon a poor inconsiderable worm by inflicting the most tremendious
Torments, and those everlasting too? Yea, so reasons the foolish Heart of man:
but what say the Wisdom and the Oracles of God? Matt. 25.46.
These shall go away into everlasting punishment; so says one Evangelist:
Their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched; Mar. 9.44. Luke 16.24.
so says another: I am tormented in this flame; so writes a third. Now,
whatever the Sinner may dream to the delusion and ruin of his immortal Soul,
all these Expressions, and many more of a like nature, are expressly delivered
in our Bibles, and so require our Faith; we find them in the Old Testament, we
find them in the New: and if so, we are obliged most readily and firmly to
believe them, because both these Testaments, even our Law and our Gospel, are
(...), the Word, the infallible Word, of Christ.

III. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we are
obliged to obey it in all the Commands which it contains.

It Is not enough to give credit to the Holy Scripture in whatever it says, but
we must also yield an universal Obedience to every thing that it does require.
For, as every Assertion contained in Sacred Writ, as being the Word of Christ,
deserves our Belief, in respect of his Truth and Faithfulness: so every Precept
delivered therein, as being the Word of the same Christ, expects our Obedience,
in respect of his absolute Sovereignty and Dominion. See this in two
Particulars.

I. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we must obey
it in all its Positive Laws, by doing whatever it does require.

There are indeed many severe Commands which the Scriptures lay upon us: such
Injunctions has the Law imposed, and such Duties does the very Gospel exact,
as are quite contrary to the corrupt Inclinations of humane Nature, and
consequently seem exceeding harsh to Flesh and blood. Such was that unexpected
Command of God to Abraham, Genesis 22.2.
Take thy son, thine only son Jsaac, whom thou love, and offer him up for a
burnt-offering. Such another was that to Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.49.
Go up to mount Nebo, and die. And such is that recorded by the Evangelist,
Matt. 5.29.
If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, etc. and again, Luke 18.22.
Sell all that thou have, and distribute to the poor, etc. Certainly these and
many other like Commands, at the very first hearing, sound exceeding harsh and
so severe, that were they imposed by any person of but ordinary Authority, man
would rather hazard his displeasure, then obey his will by doing that which, in
his own apprehension, does so much tend to his Disadvantage. Should a man, like
our selves, require us, upon the first wanton Glance of our dearest Eye, to
pluck it out, rather then run the danger of second; should any man, like our
selves, command us to lose the greatest Estate, rather then deny or dissemble
the smallest Truth; should any worldly Power enjoin us to lie in the flame our
selves, rather then cast a little Incense into it; where dwells the man that
would not disobey?

But although the matter of several Commands be so distasteful to flesh and
blood, and seems so contrary to that which man is apt to count his great
Interest in the world, that, with some little plausibility and pretenses of
carnal Reason, it is wont to discourage and retard our Obedience: yet the due
consideration of that Authority, Dominion, Wisdom and Goodness which has
imposed these Commands, even the severest of them, should excite and quicken us
to obey. We are strictly charged to renounce the World, so far at least as it
stands in competition with its Maker: and if this seem a difficult task, let us
remember who it is that has enjoined it. We are bid to mortify our members,
to crucify our old man, to subdue and kill our dearest lusts: and if these and
the like injunctions do not please us, yet let us consider where they are
recorded. There is not a man amongst us but does avouch and own Christ to be
his Lord, and the Scripture to be his Rule: and if so, since all these
Commands, how displeasing soever to the nature of man, are imposed by this
Lord, and contained within this Holy Writ; it is certain that we stand obliged,
by all that Service and Homage we ow our Lord, and by all that respect we
pretend to every Sacred Text, to obey even the most unwelcom Precepts, by doing
whatever is required in any page or line which contains (...), the Word of
Christ.

2. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we are all
obliged to obey it in all its Negative Precepts, by forbearing whatsoever it
does forbid.

It Is not enough for the Servants of Christ to perform those Duties which his
Laws require; but we must not meddle with any Sin which they do prohibit. It Is
indeed very easy to believe, that there are several Prohibitions found in Holy
writ that do as much oppose man's worldly Interest, and cross his corrupt
Inclinations, as many of its Positive Commands. So licentious is the nature of
man, that it makes him impatient of all Restraints. We are grown like some
fiery horses, that will endure a Spur rather then a Bridle; that never fret and
foam so much as when they are strongly curbed. It Is somewhat hard to determine
whether Sins of Commission or of Omission be the greater: whether that man bids
the higher defiance to the Majesty of Heaven who neglects what the Great God
requires; or he who does what the same God forbids. Nor is it easy to say,
whether the perverse Will of man does more incline him to disobey such and such
Positive Laws, or to violate such and such strict Prohibitions. It Is sure that
God's Positive Commands do frequently require from us such and such things
which do by no means please us: and it is as sure that the Prohibitions of God
do restrain and give us check in those things which our corrupt nature does
hugely like and love. When God Almighty gives us this Prohibition, Lev. 19.13.
Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against thy neighbor, doubtless
he lays upon us as hard a Task as when he exacts from us this or that.

But however, though God Almighty be pleased by his Negative Precepts to cross
our corrupt Inclinations, to tie up our hands and chain our irregular and
extravagant Affections; though the Scriptures deny us those matters which we
fain would enjoy; though we must not do what we infinitely desire; though we
must not have what we strangely long for: yet notwithstanding we must gladly
suffer our selves to be overruled, we must readily and cheerfully submit to
the Wisdom and Pleasure of God in all this; being well assured, that there is
no one Prohibition, that does concern us, but is a part of that holy Writ which
is (...), the Word of Christ.

IV. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, we are all
obliged to read and hear it with that Attention, Meekness, Fear and Reverence,
that well becomes it and us; it to receive, and us to show.

What a great deal of Respect the ancient Servants of God have expressed
toward the Holy Writ, is sufficiently evident from those reverential Gestures
of body that have been used both by the Minister that read, and the People that
heard. What Posture the Minister, who read the Word, was wont to use, the
Scriptures tell us; They stood, Nch. 9.3.
and read in the book of the Law. Our Savior himself did so in the Synagogue,
He stood up for to read. Luke 4.16.
And thus St. Paul, Act. 13.16.
He stood up, and said. It Is the observation of St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in
locum.
(...), It was the constant Custom of the Jews so to do. True it is, the
persons who expounded the Law did sometimes sit. Thus our Blessed Savior, when
he began to make his Sermon, it is said, (...), he sat down: and from his
example, the Primitive Bishops (...), Clem. l. 2 Constitut. c. 11.

Grotius in Matt. 23.2.


sat in the Church and preached. But as for the (...), the person that read,
his constant custom was to stand.

But what then? Suppose that not only the Reader of the Law but its Expounders
too had for ever been accustomed and obliged to stand, yet what Reverence does
this import? It Is certain that amongst the Nations of the World, Tacitus Dial.
de Oratoribus.

Ludovicus de la Cerda in Virgil. Aen. 6. Cicero de Orat.


mos erat Oratorum stare, it was the general practice of Orators to stand and
speak. Amongst the Romans it was not only Tully's Practice, but his Advice
too: Oratoris staus sit erectus, Let an Orator stand erect and upright
whenever he makes a speech. It was thus amongst the Grecians too. How often does
Homer introduce such and such a person (...), rising and standing up to speak?
His excellent Commentatour tells us, Eustathius Il. (...). p. 46.
(...) Amongst the Ancients, if the King himself made an Oration,
notwithstanding his Majesty, he was to stand up and speak. The reason of this
Custom the same Author gives us thus, (...) and thus Grotius too, ut rectius
ab omni caetu exaudirentur; The Speaker, who-ever he were, stood up, that he
might be the better heard by the whole Assembly.

But certainly, besides this Convenience of the People's better hearing, there
was some farther reason why the Minister, who read or preached the Word, did
rather stand then sit: and what that was, Carthusian gusseth well; ut Concioni
ipsi honorem impertirentur; or, as Lorinus words it, Lorinus in Act. 1.15. and
13.16.
reverentiae causa: They stood to testify what a reverential respect they had
for that holy Word which they delivered.

And, doubtless, upon the self-same account did the People stand to hear too.
Such was the Custom in the Church of the Jews. So the Scriptures tell us, Ezra
opened the book in the sight of all the people; Nch. 8.5.
and when he opened it, all the people stood up: recti steterunt, they stood
upright; so Vatablus. Grotius observes, that the whole Assembly stood dum ipsa
Legis verba legebantur, whilst the express letter of the Law was in reading:
and he tells us out of the Talmud, that this Practice continued in the Jewish
Church even till our Savior's time; Ad tempora Gamalielis stantes dudicere
Legem, Till Gamaliel's time they stood whilst they learnt the Law. And as the
Jews stood whilst the Law was read, so did the Primitive Christians whilst the
Gospel was pronounced too; and particularly that (...), that select Portion of
the Evangelists which we now commonly call by that name. This Ceremony of
standing up at the Gospel is laudable in it self, and venerable for its
Antiquity too. The first Constitution of it is ascribed by some to Clemens; but
by most to Anastasius, the first of that name, who was not Pope, but Bishop, of
Rome. Nay, such a reverential Respect had the Servants of God for his Word, and
every Part thereof, that, as the Jews stood at the reading of the Law, and the
Christians generally at the pronouncing of the Gospel; so the Greek Churches,
Microl. c. 9.
as Micrologus tells us, were wont to stand ad lectiones Apostolicas, even when
the Epistles were read too.

And lest all this Respect to the Word of God should seem too little, they
thought fit to testify what great Reverence they had for the Holy Scriptures
by standing up, not only whilst they were read, but whilst they were expounded
too. Thus Lorinus, Lorinus, in Act. 1.15.
Auditam olim a stantibus Concionem, etc. The people of old stood, not only
whilst the Psalms and Chapters were read, but whilst the Sermon was preached.
Nor was this Posture used out of necessity, but from their own election and
choice. They who thus stood at the Sermon were not only men of low degree, who
perhaps might want a convenient place to sit; but even the noblest Persons, who
might have commanded what Seats they pleased. Eusebius. de Vita Constant. l. 4. c.
33.
Thus Eusebius reports of Constantine the Great, (...) When he heard the
Sermon, he stood as well as the meanest person there. Nay, he would by no means
be entreated to sit down; so says the Historian, (...) the Bishop even begged
of him to sit down and ease himself upon a Royal Throne, that was there placed
purposely for him; but he would by no means use it. But what was his reason?
why would he not sit? did he choose to stand barely out of courtesy and
complement to the Bishop or the whole Assembly? did he stand barely to evidence
his Humility and Condescension toward his People? No; himself gives us another
reason for it, (...) To stand whilst we hear the Oracles of God, is no more
then what Religion it self commands us. Such was the Judgment and such was the
Practice of this renowned and glorious Emperor. And yet lest this expression
of Reverence toward the Word of God should prove too short, some higher ones
have been used. I remember what Cornelius a Lapide says of Charles Borromaeus,
Bishop of Milan, Sacram Scripturam, ultimis vitae suae annis, Corn. a Lap. in
Epist. ad Hovium.
non nisi nudo capite and flexis genibus venerabundus lectitavit, he read not
the Holy Scripture, no not in his Old age, but with a bare head and a bended
knee.

Such has been the Devotion of Saints in former Ages and other Churches: but
how stands the case with us this day? What high Esteem, what inward Veneration
have we for God's Holy Word? Alas! it is but sad to consider, that the
generality of Christians do commonly read and hear the Word with less regard
then the profane Sinner reads his Romance or Play-book. We hear the Sermon as
if it were but an ordinary Discourse, trivial in it self, and of no great
Concern to us. It Is certain that the looseness of our deportment and carriage
in the House of God, where the Scriptures are solemnly read and preached, is an
infallible Symptom of our great Irreverence, and does most surely betray the
cursed Indifference and Slightness of our spirits. But let us remember what our
Savior himself commands us, Luke 8.18.
Take heed how ye hear. It Is impossible to hear with too much Caution; we
cannot read with too great Reverence: and amongst many Reasons this is one,
That blessed Word which we read and hear is (...), the Word of Christ.

V. Since the whole Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of Christ, let us
consider how much to blame the Roman Church is in equalling their Traditions to
it, yea and in preferring them before it too.

That the Roman Church should endeavor by all possible means to keep up and
vigorously assert the Credit of their Traditions, we cannot wonder; because
they have no other way to maintain several Doctrines of theirs, which they are
loath to part with, and yet can never prove them by the Written Word. Their
Doctrines of Indulgences and Purgatory are so advantageous to them, that
Chemnitius has adventured to say, Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trident.
Coelum potius quam Purgatorium sibi eripi paterentur, They would rather part
with Heaven then with Purgatory. And since this Doctrine is so dear to them,
who can blame them for magnifying those Traditions of theirs, by which alone
this and several other gainful Doctrines of their Church are countenanced and
supported?

What a great Esteem they have for their Traditions, we learn from their own
Authors. Methinks Cornelius a Lapide ventures somewhat high, Cornel. a Lap. in
1 Cor. 11.2.
when he tells us, Lex Tradita aeque obligat atque Lex Scripta, The Traditional
Law does oblige as much as the Written. That of Aquinas says the same;
Traditiones Religione una cum Scripturis sunt tenendae, Traditions are to be
observed with the self-same Veneration as the Scriptures themselves. But what
need I mention particular persons, when the Conventicle of Trent, which, being
approved by the Pope, is owned by them as the Representative Body of their
whole Church, has proclaimed their Determination in this matter to all the
World by this Expression; Council. Trident. Session. 4.
Traditiones ac Scripturas ipsas pari pietatis affectu and reverentia suscipit
ac veneratur SS. Synodus Tridentina, The Holy Council of Trent does receive and
reverence such and such Traditions with the self-same Respect and Devotion
which it has for the Scriptures themselves?

This Expression of those few Romish Bishops that were now convened at Trent
sounds somewhat high: and yet methinks Bellarmine, as if he were above the
Council, and willing to show himself rather Pope then Cardinal, outgoeth the
Canon of Trent, and braves it thus; Bellarminus de Verbo non scripto, l. 4. c.
7.
Quaedam sunt Traditiones majores quoad Obligationem quam quaedam Scripturae,
There are some Traditions that lay upon us a greater Obligation then some parts
of the Written Word. It were worth the while to enquire a little what those
Traditions should be that are more binding then Scripture it self. We cannot
reasonably imagine, that such a man as Bellarmine, that Illustrissimus
Cardinalis, should be so fond of any Traditions that are merely
Ecclesiastical, as to tell the world, that the Church, or any Member thereof,
stands more obliged by these then by such and such Texts of Law or Gospel. No,
it is the ingenuous Confession of this Illustrious Cardinal, De Verbo non
scripto, l. 4. c. 2.
that Ecclesiastical Traditions are nothing else but Consuetudines quaedam
antiquae, vel a Praelatis vel a Populo inchoatae, quae paulatim, tacito
Consensu populorum, vim Legis obtinuerunt, certain ancient Customs, begun
either by the Prelates or the People, which by degrees, through the People's
tacit Consent, obtained the force of Laws. And certainly, that such Traditions
as are acknowledged to be from men, whether the Laiety or the Clergy, Councils
or Popes, should ever be thought more binding then such and such Portions of
Scripture, which the whole Christian Church does own and confess to be the
infallible Word of God, should not easily be affirmed. We must therefore grant,
that those Traditions which Bellarmine asserts to be more obliging then some
Portions of Scripture must be of at least an equal Authority with the written
Word; which cannot be maintained without plain and equal Proofs, that such
Traditions are Divine or Apostolical.

That our Blessed Savior and his Apostles might do many Miracles that are not
written, we are not afraid to grant: That our Blessed Savior and his Apostles
might preach many Sermons, and deliver several Discourses, which are not upon
Record, we are not unwilling to acknowledge: There might indeed be several
Sayings of our Lord's omitted by the Evangelists, as well as that mentioned by
St. Paul, Act. 20.35.
Remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give
then to receive. Lorinus in locum.
Lorinus observes, Non exstat in Evangeliis ista Sententia, sed Apostolorum one
circumferebatur, This Sentence of our Blessed Savior's is nowhere recorded in
the Gospel, but was delivered by his Apostles by orall Tradition. And perhaps
that other Sentence ascribed to Christ, though nowhere written in our Bibles,
might notwithstanding be his too; Nunquam laeti sitis, nisi cum fratrem vestrum
videritis in Charitate, Be never merry, but only then when ye see your Brother
in Charity. These and some few more Sentences, not found in Sacred Writ, are
imputed to our Blessed Savior: and so is that too, by some to Christ, by
others to some Apostle, Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. cap. 7.
(...), Be skillful Exchangers: which words are styled in Eusebius (...), an
Apostolical expression.

And the truth is, that the Apostles might receive from Christ, betwixt his
Resurrection and Ascension, directions to ordain Rites and Ceremonies, that
concerned the Administration of God's public Worship and the exterior
Discipline of the Church: and that these Orders and Determinations of his
touching the Circumstances of God's Service were delivered to their Successors
by word of mouth, and were not presently registered, we are not forward, nor
indeed any whit concerned, to deny. But withal, the Church of Rome stands much
obliged to prove, and that with clear Evidence and unquestionable Authority,
that those present Traditions of theirs which they do so stiffly contend for,
equal to, and in some cases prefer before, the written Word, are indeed those
very Traditions which were recommended to the Church by Christ or his Apostles.

This, I confess, the Romanists do pretend and promise to do: but if they
fail, what then? It Is the confident expression of Bellarmine, Bellarm. de Verbo
Dei non scripto. l. 4. c. 3.
Non est Audaciae aequare aliquid non scriptum Verbo Scripto; It Is no saucy
thing at all to equal something unwritten to that Word which is written: nor
does he think that expression of his too bold, Traditio sola sufficit,
Scripturae non sufficient; Tradition alone is enough, but the Scriptures alone
are not sufficient. Methinks such persons are much obliged to prove that these
Traditions of theirs are indeed of Divine Authority, since they have a greater
esteem for them then for the known and sure Word of God. For if it should
happen that these Traditions, which are so highly magnified, should be found
and proved the bare Inventions of men; those persons would appear somewhat too
bold and saucy indeed who have preferred them before the certain and infallible
Decrees of Heaven.

This Aquinas well understood, and therefore knew himself concerned to maintain
the Divine Authority of those Traditions, whereof he does thus pronounce;
Verbum Dei bifariam dividitur, in Scripturam and Traditiones, The Word of God
is twofold, Scripture and Tradition. Thus Bellarmine too, who styles Tradition
Verbum Dei non scriptum, the unwritten Word of God. And their Conventicle of
Trent says, that their Traditions were vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a Spiritu
Sancto dictatae, delivered immediately by Christ's own mouth, or dictated by
his Holy Spirit.

Thus does the Church of Rome pretend a full and Divine Authority for several
Traditions which they hold, though not recorded in our Bibles. And if this
Assertion of theirs in favor of their Traditions can be proved with as
convincing Arguments as those whereby the Authority of the Scripture is
confirmed, we shall with equal Respect, even as the Romanists do, embrace them
both. For though it be certain, that the committing of the Word of God to Ink
and Paper was an excellent means to preserve it entire, and to secure it and us
from Frauds, Cheats and Falsifications: yet the Members of the Reformed
Churches have not so far lost their Religion and Reason, as once to imagine,
that the bare writing of the Scripture should create and give it that Authority
which is inherent in it. Insomuch that if any Traditionall Doctrine or
Practice, that is now taught and used in the Roman Church, can be sufficiently
proved to have been originally delivered by Christ or his Apostles, we shall as
readily believe and do it, as any thing else whatsoever that is required or
delivered in any part of the Written Word.

But if bold and confident Affirmations be enough to justify Unwritten
Doctrines and Vsages, what Religion, what Sect, what Heresy will want such and
such Pretenses to plead for the Vindication of it self? It Is well known, that
the very Heathens pretended that, as Plato words it, Plato 1. de Legibus.
(...), the Disposition and Institution of their Laws, such especially as
concerned their Religion, how absurd soever, was from God. It is the
observation of Bellarmine himself, Bellarm. de Verbo Dei non scripto. l. 4. c.
4.
In Alcorano passim legimus, ipsum Alcoranum de Coelo a Deo missum: It was, it
seems, the pretense of that grand Impostour Mahomet, that even his Alcoran came
down from Heaven, and was dictated by God. Eusebius tells us, that Menander,
who was indeed but a Sorcerer, and the real disciple of Simon Magus, did
pretend himself to be sent from Heaven. And that famous Heretic Cerinthus,
whose very presence made St. John fly out of the Bath, who was an Enemy to the
written Word of God, did make his Followers believe, that he received his
Doctrines, though detestable enough, by Revelation from Angels. But what sober
person gave any credit to him?

And what if the case stand thus with the Roman Church? what if those
Traditions which they father upon Christ and his Apostles were indeed none of
theirs? Sure we are, it was so with those superstitious Jews, who, in our
Savior's time, owned and stiffly maintained, as the Papists now do, a twofold
Law, (...), a written Law, and (...), an unwritten Law, or, (...), secondary
Laws, (...), Hearings, (...), the Law in the mouth, and generally styled (...),
Traditions.

These Traditions they received from the great Synagogue; that Synagogue
derived them from the Prophets; the Prophets from the Elders; the Elders from
Joshua; Joshua from Moses; and Moses himself from God: so they pretended.

But notwithstanding these fair Insinuations and plausible Pretenses of theirs,
to render their superstitious Rites and Customs the more acceptable to the
ignorant and credulous Multitude, what was indeed their true Original we learn
from Christ and his Evangelists, who style them (...), the Traditions of the
Fathers; (...), the Traditions of the Elders; (...), the Traditions of men: and
our Blessed Savior, speaking to the Pharisees, calls them (...), your
Traditions: not Moses his, not the Prophets, not God's; but your own.

And as it was thus in the Jewish Church, so may it well be in the Roman too:
it is very probable, that many Traditions which there are ascribed to Christ and
his Apostles might deduce their Original from some other hand. Such counterfeit
Traditions do we read of, that were obtruded upon the Church in the Apostles
names, very early indeed, even whilst the Apostles themselves were yet alive.
So much does that expression of St. Paul seem to intimate, We beseech you,
brethren, 2 These. 2.2.
that ye be not troubled, neither by word nor by letter, as from us. Grotius
tells us, Multi fabricabant Epistolas sub Apostolorum nomine, There were many,
even in that Age, that framed Epistles in the Apostles names, and ascribed
their false Doctrines unto them. The same trick several Heretics used in
succeeding Ages. Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trid. ex
Clem. Strom. 7. Sympson's Eccles. Hist.
that Basilides, one of those Heretics who were justly styled Borboritae,
Coenosi, though he broached most detestable Doctrines, yet had the Impudence to
affirm that he learnt them from Glaucias, whom he pretended to be the
Interpreter of St. Peter. It Is also recorded, that Marcion in the Second Age of
the Church, who was justly styled by Polycarp Primogenitus Diaboli, the
Firstborn of the Devil, though he affirmed a Plurality of Gods, though he
denied that our Blessed Savior was, Ignatius in Epist. ad Smyrnaeos.
as Ignatius expresses it, (...), though he denied the Verity of Christ's
Humane nature, and consequently the Reality of his Sufferings; yet he had the
face to brag, that he received these abominable Doctrines from the Disciples of
St. Matthias. And certainly, if such damnable Heresies were broached thus
early, and pretended to be received from Apostolical Tradition, we have no
cause so easily to comply with such and such Doctrines of the Romish Church
which have no warrant in the Written Word, barely because they assert them to
be of Divine Original.

But since an (...) will not do; since bare Affirmations in matters of such
great Concern will not be accepted; the Champions of the Roman Religion find
themselves necessitated to produce some Proofs, which they pretend to be Great
ones too. And amongst them all I meet with none that offers more fair then
Bellarmine, whose Pretensions are so plausible, that if he prove an honest man,
and make good his word, this whole Dispute will be over; and I dare engage,
that the Reformed Churches will pay the self-same Respect to Traditions which
the Pope and his Council of Trent do give them. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei non
scripto, l. 4. c. 3.
For thus he tells us, Traditiones eas tantum recipimus pro Apostolicis, quas
firmis Testimoniis Antiquorum probare possumus esse Apostolicas; We receive no
Traditions for Apostolical, but such alone which by the firm Testimonies of
the Ancients we can prove to be such indeed. The Testimonies urged by
Bellarmine and other Catholics in behalf of their Traditions are drawn from
Scriptures, Popes, Councils and Fathers; each of which we shall examine.

I. The Champions of the Roman Faith do pretend to prove their Traditions by
several Texts of the Written Word; the chief whereof are these.

1. That Expression of our Blessed Savior to his Apostles recorded by the
Evangelist is one, I have yet many things to say unto you, Joh. 16.12.
but ye cannot bear them now. Hence Bellarmine argues thus, Constat Dominum
multa dixisse quae non sunt scripta, It Is evident that our Lord spoke many
things that are not written.

But it will be no injury to Bellarmine's reputation, if we do not count him
infallible, since he was, and would be, no more then a Cardinal; having begged
of God, as some say, that he might never be Pope, lest perhaps he might
probably be damned too; being, it seems, of the same mind with Marcellus the
Second, who said, Non video quomodo qui altum hunc locum tenet salvari possit,
I do not see how the man that holds this high place can possibly be saved.

But let us view his Argument. Christ said, I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now: What then? The Cardinal thus infers, It Is
evident that our Lord spoke many things which are not written. MethinKs this
Consequence is not necessary, nor can be proved, from this Text at least, I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. All that can
be gathered from this Text is only this, That our Lord did not speak at this
time several matters which he had to say to his Apostles, because they were not
then fit to receive them. Yea, but the Cardinal farther adds, Illa quae
promittebat Dominus se dicturum, dixit haud dubie post Resurrectionem suam,
Those things which our Lord promised that he himself would say, without all
doubt he did say after his Resurrection; and that St. Luke does testify thus,
Act. 1.3.
He showed himself alive to his Apostles after his passion by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God.

Whether these things which our Blessed Savior delivered to his Apostles were
afterward recorded by them or not, can neither be proved nor denied by any
solid and certain Arguments, except it can first be infallibly known what his
several Discourses were St. Chrysostom tells us, (...), Christ, at his several
Apparitions to his Disciples after his Resurrection, spoke words that savoured
not of man, but of the Spirit. But whether any of these words were written,
this general expression of St. Chrysostom's leaves us uncertain still. But
mark another. Act. 1.2.
The Text says, He gave commandments to the Apostles. But what Commands might
they be? were any of them written, or were they all afterward delivered to the
Church by Tradition? What the great one was, St. Chrysostom tells us, (...), Go
and teach all nations, etc. and that, to be sure, is found upon Record.

But the Truth is, that expression of Grotius is undeniable, Multa dedit
Praecepta quae hic reticentur, Christ gave the Apostles many Commands which the
Evangelist in that place has not set down: but can the Romanists make it out,
that no Evangelist, no Apostle has set them down elsewhere? Lorinus in locum.
I grant indeed, that if Lorinus have guessed right at the Subject matter of
our Savior's private discourses with his Apostles after his Resurrection,
there is little or nothing of it in our Bibles: for, concerning Christ's talk
with his Disciples, this man, as becomes a Jesuit indeed, gives us his Opinion
thus, Exposuit Authoritatem summi Pastoris, and Hierarchiam totam
Ecclesiasticam, and formas ritusque Sacramentorum, ac inprimis Sacrificii
Missae cultum, and Invocationem Sanctorum, Dies festos, etc. He declared the
Authority of the Pope, the whole Hierarchy of the Church, the forms and rites
of the Sacraments, and especially the Sacrifice of the Mass, Invocation of
Saints, the Observation of Holy Days, etc. It Is well guessed, bold Jesuit! but
are these indeed the Doctrines which our Blessed Savior, as Bellarmine says,
promised to teach his Apostles after his Resurrection? are these indeed the
Lessons of which Christ said to his Disciples, Ye cannot bear them now? The
truth is, neither Christ himself, nor any of his Apostles, could have born such
Lessons at any time whatever.

But certain it is, those Doctrines which the Apostles could not have well born
before Christ's Passion, and were therefore adjourned till after his
Resurrection, were, and must needs be, of another nature: indeed, what they
were in particular, cannot certainly be known. Aug. in locum.
Thus St. Austine, Quaenam ista sunt quae Ipse non dixit, temerarium est velle
praesumere and dicere; To affirm what those things were which Christ himseIf
did not now declare, were rash and bold. Quis nostrum dicat, ista vel illa
sunt? Who of us can tell whether it were this or that? And yet for all this,
whatever St. Austine thinks, that Jesuit Maldonate, as if he knew what Christ
was pleased as yet to conceal, tells us with more of Confidence then Truth:
Dicimus ex hoc loco constare Christum non omnia dixisse quae ad salutem nostram
putabat pertinere; idemque fecisse Spiritum Sanctum credendum, etc. From the
warrant of this Text we do affirm, that Christ told not his Disciples whatever
he thought pertinent to our Salvation; and that the Holy Ghost did not
afterward do it neither, we have cause to believe. Nay, to make way for
Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the Pope's Authority to create new Articles of
Faith, he makes bold to add thus much; Idem ab Apostolis factum: ut non omnia
scripta, multa etiam ne viva voce traderent, The same thing was done by the
Apostles too: insomuch that they did not deliver all matters of Salvation in
their Writings, no nor many so much as by word of mouth.

It Is strange to think into what Absurdities and Contradictions the Romanists
do run themselves, that they may justify those Doctrines and Practices which
they are loath to part with. For this Jesuit Maldonate declares his opinion,
that there are some matters of Salvation that were neither taught by Christ,
nor by his Spirit, nor by his Apostles, either by Writing or Tradition: and yet
Cardinal Bellarmine does positively affirm, that the Church of Rome holds no
Doctrines, maintains no Traditions, save only such as they can clearly prove
to be from Christ or his Apostles.

But as to those forenamed Discourses, wherein our Blessed Savior did
privately instruct his Apostles, and whereupon the Roman Church does mightily
ground their Doctrine of Tradition: though it cannot be certainly discovered
what was the very Subject and particular Arguments of our Savior's frequent
Talk with his Disciples at his several Apparitions to them after his
Resurrection; yet perhaps some probable guesses may be given; and accordingly
several Conjectures are offered us by Interpreters. Origin. adv. Celsum l. 2.
So Origin, (...); etc. What were those many things which Christ had to say to
his Apostles, which they could not bear? He answers thus, (...), etc. It was
the design of our Blessed Savior to teach his Disciples the utter abolition of
the Ceremonial Law, and the Mosaicall Ordinances. So St. Chrysostom guesseth
too, (...), etc. Whether our Savior speaks of the Abrogation of the Law, etc.
And to this Christ might well refer, when he said, I have yet many things to
say, but ye cannot bear them now; considering how hard it was for them, who
were Jews, and the professed disciples of Moses, to embrace a new Religion, and
quit the Principles of that wherein they had been born and bred. Nor indeed had
this Discourse as yet been seasonable; because the Ceremonial Law was not
abrogated till the Sacrifice, Death and Passion of Christ, which then was not
actually accomplished.

But besides this Guess of Origen's and Chrysostom's, St. Austine gives us
some ground for another, when he tells us, Aug. in locum.
Mori pro Christo nondum idonei erant Apostoli, The Apostles were not as yet
fit and strong enough to die for Christ. Which expression gives us a fair
Intimation of St. Austine's Judgment concerning our Savior's words, I have
many things yet to say: but about what? probably about their Sufferings and
Martyrdom: but, says Christ, ye cannot bear them now? But why not now? Surely
it was now a time of trouble and sorrow with them; their hearts were almost
broken already with the consideration of their dear Master's approaching Death
and Passion: and therefore, says St. Austine, Nunquid debuit illis ovibus dici
in illo Tentationis articulo, quod certare usque ad mortem pro veritate
oportebat, and pro Christi nomine vel Doctrina sanguinem fundere? Was it
seasonable for Christ to tell his Apostles, in this juncture of time and hour
of Temptation, since as yet they were but as sheep infirm and weak, that they
must expect to shed their blood and suffer death for the Truths, Doctrines and
Name of Christ? No; our Savior was pleased to reserve these Lessons, that as
yet might have seemed too harsh, as Origin words it, (...), for a fitter
Opportunity, namely, the time after his own Passion and Resurrection.

That these Opinions of Origin, Chrysostom and Austine, concerning the matter
of our Savior's personal Discourses with his Apostles betwixt his
Resurrection and Ascension, which the Romanists urge for their Traditions, are
but conjecturall, we do acknowledge: but withal, we do avouch that they are
ten times more probable then that of Lorinus. For, that the many things which
the Apostles could not yet bear, and therefore Christ did not deliver till
after his Resurrection, should be such as concerned the Abolition of the
Mosaicall Law, or the Disciples own Sufferings, rather then the Authority of
the Roman Bishop, the Invocation of Saints, and other superstitious Doctrines
and Practices now taught and used in the Roman Church, as delivered by Christ
in his forenamed private Discourses with his Apostles, is much more consonant
to Christian Religion, humane Reason, and the Authority of the written Word.

And if so, if we may take the Judgment of Origin, Chrysostom and Austine,
whose Opinions in this matter are countenanced by Holy Writ, rather then the
Judgment of Lorinus, whose Opinion in this case the Scriptures themselves
oppose; though there be in this business no Certainty on either side, yet if we
have fairer Probabilities on our part then the Romanists have on theirs; if it
be more likely, that the many things which Christ had to say before his
Passion, but did not for prudentiall considerations actually declare till after
his Resurrection, might concern, as the forenamed Fathers probably thought, the
Abrogation of the Jewish Religion, the Calling of the Gentiles, and the
Martyrdom of his Apostles, rather then those unwarrantable Traditions for which
the Romanists do now contend; how then comes Bellarmine to assert that they are
not written?

But, upon the whole matter, the Truth is this: Since it is altogether
impossible to find out what those many things were which Christ had to teach
his Disciples before his Death, but did not do it, because as yet they could
not bear them, till after his Resurrection; it is equally impossible to prove
that they are or are not registered. But if the Romanists are of another mind,
and will undertake by infallible Testimonies to demonstrate to us what were the
particular matters of our Savior's several Discourses at the time of his
several Apparitions to his Apostles before his Ascension, then will we also
undertake to demonstrate with equal evidence, when and by what Apostles
whatever he so delivered stands recorded. And till the Roman Church shall make
this out, certain we are, that those words of our Blessed Savior, I have yet
many things to say, assisted with those of St. Luke, he spoke of the kingdom of
God, prove not the thing for which our Adversaries urge them, namely, That
there were several necessary Doctrines delivered by Christ to his Apostles
after his Resurrection that are nowhere found in the written Word of God.

2. But since these forenamed Texts will not do their desired work, the
Champions of the Trent Faith, who are resolved to endeavor the Justification
of every Article maintained and concluded on by that illegal Conventicle of a
few suborned, packed and titular Bishops, are obliged to try some other, if
possibly they can find the least Countenance for their Traditions in Sacred
Writ.

There is another expression of the Evangelist St. John that is often urged as
a Text that will do their business indeed; Joh. 20.30.
and thus it runs, Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book. No; it is observed of St. John by
one of the Greek Fathers, that he wrote (...), many of Christ's Sermons, but
few of his Miracles. For it is certain that his Gospel, at the request of the
Bishops of Asia, and in opposition to the Gnostics and other Heretics, was
written last; upon which score he did advisedly pass by those Miracles which
were already recorded by the other Evangelists; and so might well tell the
world thus, Many other signs truly did Jesus, which are not written in this
Book. And withal, it is observable, that the Evangelist does not mention (...),
other Doctrines, but (...), other Miracles, which are not written in his
Gospel. But what then? what Evidence gives this to those Traditions about
matters of Faith and Manners, which the Roman Church pretends to be as
necessary to Salvation as those great Doctrines of Christ and his Apostles
which are clearly found in the written Word?

I remember that St. Chrysostom and some other Interpreters do restrain this
expression of the Evangelist to those Miracles only which Christ wrought after
his Resurrection, Many other signs truly did Jesus. Here Theophylact puts the
Question thus, (...); What Miracles were those which the Evangelist here speaks
of? were they such as our Savior wrought publicly and before his Passion? He
answers thus, (...). So Saint Chrysostom conjectures too, (...), It seems to me
that the Evangelist means those Miracles which were done by our Savior after
his Resurrection; and that, (...), only for the sake of his Disciples. And
methinks this Conjecture of St. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and others, has a
very fair foundation in the Text it self, which tells us, Many other signs did
Jesus, which are not written in this Book, (...), in the presence, not, of the
multitude, but, of the Disciples, and probably the Disciples only; and that
with a design to confirm his Apostles, who had been too incredulous, in the
faith of his Resurrection. And certainly, if these Miracles of Christ were
wrought in private before his Disciples, and for their sakes only, to be, as
Theophylact styles them, (...), Evidences and Proofs of his Resurrection, to
remove their personal doubts, to satisfy their Curiosity, and to establish
their Faith; it is not easy to imagine, that the omission of some of these
Miracles by all the Evangelists should any way countenance the Traditions of
the Roman Church, nor prejudice the Faith of the Universal, which has
otherwise such abundant Testimonies of Christ's Resurrection from the written
Word, that it cannot need the Assistence and Supplement of Traditions for its
Confirmation in that, or indeed in any other, Article of its Belief.

And as for those mighty Works of wonder which were publicly wrought by our
Blessed Savior, to prove his Commission from God, and to confirm the Divinity
of that new Religion which he was then to introduce into the world, that they
were not all written, we do easily grant. There might be several Miracles done
by Christ which St. John and the other Evangelists thought fit to pass by, ut
minime necessaria, says Grotius, as things no way necessary to be recorded.
For although our Blessed Savior, being desirous to do good wherever he
came, and being willing to convince the whole Jewish Nation that he was indeed
the true Messiah, had frequent occasions to work various Miracles, because he
went to several places, and conversed amongst several companies, where he met
with diverse objects of Mercy, and various persons that were to be brought over
to his new Religion: yet we do affirm, that any one Miracle of his, being
rightly considered and duly weighed, had been enough to have satisfied all its
Spectatours, that the Person and Doctrine of Christ were both approved and sent
by God. And this blessed effect some one single Miracle did sometimes produce.
When Christ had raised Lazarus from the dead, we are immediately told upon
that, Joh. 11.45.
Many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus did,
believed on him.

And if so, if one Miracle were sufficient to secure that End for which all
Miracles were wrought, it is sure that we have enough recorded. What though the
Apostles did not register all the Miracles of Christ (...), one by one, and
with all those Circumstances that did attend them? St. John says, they could
not do it: Joh. 21.25.
If they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self
could not contain the books that should be written. But what then? are we
obliged to run to unwritten Traditions? are we bound to believe the Truth of
all those Miracles which, as some say, Christ wrought in Egypt, when he was but
a Child, as much as those which he wrought in Israel, when he was a Man, and
thereby showed himself to be the Son of God too? Are we no more bound to
believe the miraculous Stories of the Four Evangelists then that related by
Sozomen, Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 21.
who tells us, that when Christ, in his Infancy, was entering into Hermopolis,
there stood near the way an exceeding high tree, which, as our Savior passed
by, did (...), bow down his branches to the very ground, and thereby owned and
made obeisance to its Lord? Of this Miracle Maldonate says, Maldon. in Matt.
2.14.
Merito Traditio videri potest, It Is a Story that well deserves the name of a
Tradition: and Sozomen says, (...), This Story, and some other miraculous ones
too about the same Tree, are testified by the Inhabitants of Egypt and
Palestine. But are we therefore obliged to believe them with the same credit
which we give to the Gospel? No; though all Christ's Miracles are not written,
yet there are enough recorded to confirm our Faith: so St. John assures us,
These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ's, the Son of
God, and that believing ye might have life through his name. And methinks,
since the Evangelists have written, as St. Chrysostom does express and affirm,
(...), so many of Christ's Miracles as are a sufficient ground of Faith, such a
Faith as will undoubtedly save us; we need not run to Traditions for more. But
however, though the Evangelists have omitted such and such of our Savior's
Miracles, yet that is no proof that they have also omitted such and such
material Doctrines of his, that are necessary to Faith, Manners, and Salvation,
which must therefore be supplied, as the Roman Church pretends, by such and
such unwritten Traditions. But yet,

3. There are some other Scriptures urged by our Adversaries, which, they hope,
and make poor ignorant souls believe, will infallibly do their work; such
Texts, wherein Traditions are not only mentioned, but in express terms
recommended and enjoined too.

2 These. 2.15.
That of St. Paul is one, Stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by word, or our epistle. The observation of Traditions is that
which St. Paul does here require, and elsewhere commend too, 1 Cor. 11.2.
I praise you, brethren, that ye keep (...) the traditions as I delivered them
to you. Hoc loco se armant Papistae ad tuendas suas Traditiones, says Calvin,
The Papists arm themselves with this Text to defend their Traditions. So does
Cornelius a Lapide, who says, but without a warrant, Hinc manifest sequitur,
non omnia quae fidem and mores spectant esse scripta, sed multa viva voce
tradidisse Paulum and Apostolos, It Is evident from hence, that all things which
concern Faith and Manners were not written, but that St. Paul and other
Apostles did deliver many things by word of mouth. And thus Estius observes out
of Theophylact, whose words are these, (...), It Is clear from this Text, that
St. Paul and other Apostles delivered many things which they committed not to
writing: and thence Estius does thus infer, Locus hic palam facit pro
Traditionibus non scriptis, iisque necessario tenendis, This place is a clear
Evidence for unwritten Traditions, and proves it necessary to observe them. In
answer to this Text we shall enquire into these three things.

1. We shall enquire what Traditions St. Paul here means, what their nature
was: whether they concerned matters of Faith, and any such Points as are
necessary to Salvation; or whether they respected such things only as
concerned Order and Decency, the exterior Discipline and Government of the
Church. Let us view the words again, and consider what St. Chrysostom thinks
concerning them. I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and
keep the traditions, etc. Here St. Chrysostom puts this Question, (...); What
all things does the Apostle mean? He answers, (...) St. Paul's discourse had
been about not wearing of long hair, and not being covered in the Church; and
for their observation of his Traditions in these matters only does he now
commend them. So thinks St. Chrysostom: and learned Grotius is of the same mind
too, who tells us, Hic significat Praecepta quaedam pertinentia ad (...), St.
Paul by his Traditions does here mean nothing else but certain Rules which he
had formerly delivered to the Corinthians concerning Decency and Order.

And if these be the Traditions in the Text, pray, who gainsayeth them? Not the
Church of England; no, nor the Calvinists neither: for does not Calvin himself
thus acknowledge? Calvin. in 1 Cor. 11.2.
Ego autem non nego quin aliquae fuerint Apostolorum Traditiones non scriptae;
sed non concedo fuisse Doctrinae parts, nee de rebus ad Salutem necessariis.
Quid igitur? quae pertinerent ad Ordinem and Politiam. I deny not but that
there were some Apostolical Traditions unwritten; but I do not grant them to be
matters of Doctrine and necessary to Salvation. But what were they then? why,
such as concerned Order and Government. And the truth is, that these Traditions
mentioned by St. Paul in the forenamed Texts were any other, the Romanists can
never prove, and consequently gain no Advantage from them.

2. We shall enquire whether these Traditions, mentioned by St. Paul as
delivered by word of mouth, might not afterward be written.

It Is sure that the Traditions in the Text, if, as St. Chrysostom and Grotius
have conjectured, they were only such as concerned Order and Decency, and
particularly about wearing of Hair, and uncovering the Head in holy Assemblies,
they are recorded; and that in the self-same Chapter too. And it is very
possible, that whatsoever in any other place St. Paul styles a Tradition, might
afterward be written notwithstanding.

I remember, Grotius tells us, (...) est id quod docetur: Whatsoever is taught,
whether by word or writing, is called a Tradition. It Is used in both senses by
the ancient Fathers, yea and by the Apostles too. Thus St. Cyprian, Cyprianus
ad Pompeium Ep. 74.
Vnde est ista Traditio? utrumne de Dominica and Evangelica Authoritate
descendens, an de Apostolorum Mandatis atque Epistolis veniens? Whence is that
Tradition? comes it from the Authority of our Lord and his Gospel, or from the
Commands and Epistles of his Apostles? It Is evident by this expression, that
St. Cyprian acknowledges, that though this or that be written, yet it may be
styled a Tradition notwithstanding. So he farther explains himself a little
after, Si ergo aut in Evangelio praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum Epistolis aut
Actibus continetur, observetur etiam and haec sancta Traditio; Let this holy
Tradition also be observed, if it be commanded in the Gospel, or contained in
the Epistles or Acts of the Apostles.

And that the self-same Truths which St. Paul and other Apostles preached to
the world were afterward written, either by themselves or some body else, Adv.
Hareses l. 3. c. 1.
is evident from that expression of Irenaeus, Matthaeus in Hebraeis ipsorum
lingua scripturam edidit Evangelii, cum Petrus and Paulus Romae evangelizarent
and fundarent Ecclesiam. Post vero horum discessum, Marcus, discipulus and
Interpres Petri, and Ipse quae a Petro annunciata erant per scripta nobis
tradidit; and Lucas autem, sectator Pauli, quod ab illo praedicabatur
Evangelium in libro condidit. The same thing is thus attested by Eusebius,
Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 8.
(...), etc. St. Matthew wrote his Gospel amongst the Jews in their own
language, whilst St. Peter and St. Paul preached and founded a Church at Rome.
And after their departure, St. Mark, who was the Disciple and Interpreter of
St. Peter, delivered in writing the things which St. Peter had preached: St.
Luke also, who was the follower of St. Paul, compiled in a Book that Gospel
which St. Paul had published. Iren. adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 1.
So Irenaeus says again, Evangelium, quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt, postea
per voluntatem Dei in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, That Gospel which the
Apostles had then preached, they did afterward deliver to us in the
Scriptures, and that by the will, pleasure, and command of God.

And doubtless St. Paul intimates as much in that expression of his, 2 These.
2.15.
Hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or our epistle.
What he had formerly taught them by word of mouth, and what he had already
delivered in his former Epistle, is here equally called a Tradition. For, the
truth is, the Substance of St. Paul's Sermons and Epistles, the Subject matter
of his Preaching and his Writing, was all one. This seems clear from that
expression of his, Phil. 3.1.
To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it
is safe. What same things does he mean? St. Hierom tells us, Eadem repetere
quae praesens dixeram, To repeat the same things with my Pen, which I delivered
with my Tongue when I was present with you. And thus did other Apostles and
Evangelists too; what they spoke at one time, that they wrote at another. Thus
dealt St. Luke with his dear friend Theophilus, whom he first instructed by
word of mouth, but afterward by writing. So Theophylact tells us, Theophil. in
praefat. Lucae.
(...), I formerly catechized thee without writing, but now by giving thee a
written Gospel. But what does this written Gospel contain? new lessons or old
ones? did St. Luke speak one thing, and write another? No; the reason why he
wrote, Theophylact gives us thus, (...), I do by writing strengthen and secure
thy mind, lest it should forget what things had been formerly delivered by word
of mouth. So he tells us again, (...), I have therefore written thee a Gospel,
that thou may the more firmly remember and keep the things which thou have
been taught by word of mouth.

And that St. Paul dealt thus with the Churches to whom he preached and wrote,
we have ground enough to believe; it is more then probable, that the self-same
Traditions, in all necessary points of Faith, which he taught them by word of
mouth at one time, he also penned at another. Methinks we may very rationally
collect this from what St. Chrysostom says concerning that speech of St. Paul,
^ Cor. 11.2.
ye keep the traditions as I delivered them to you: Hence that Father thus
infers, (...), Therefore at that time St. Paul delivered them many things
without writing. We grant it; but withal we must observe St. Chrysostom's
(...), then, at that time; an expression, doubtless, that has little of savor
in it, if he does not mean, that what St. Paul did thus deliver by orall
Tradition at one time, he also wrote at another. And although the Epistles of
St. Paul being written to particular Churches or Persons, upon particular
matters, in answer to such and such particular Questions, and against such and
such particular Opinions and Heresies, he had not a fair occasion in every, or,
perhaps, in any one single Epistle, to give an account of every thing relating
to Christ and his Religion: yet we do affirm, that if we take all his Epistles
collectively and together, we shall find, that the whole Sum of that Gospel
which St. Paul preached to the world by word of mouth is so fully delivered in
them, that whosoever shall believe the Truths and perform the Duties contained
in them, though he know no Scripture besides, shall certainly be saved. Nor
indeed was it necessary that St. Paul should undertake to set down the whole
Doctrine of Christ in every or any one of his short Epistles, since it was
sometimes his command, and might always be his just expectation, that that
Epistle which he wrote to one Church should be communicated to others also, for
their farther Information too. And certainly, if all the necessary Points and
substantial Parts of that Religion which St. Paul preached to the world by word
of mouth were afterward recorded either by himself in his own Epistles, or, as
Eusebius and Irenaeus testify, by St. Luke in his Gospel; the Roman Church
will never be able to justify their unwritten Traditions, those at least which
they urge as necessary, from any one Instance or Expression of St. Paul. But,

3. We shall enquire whether the Traditions now contended for in the Roman
Church be the same, or of a like nature, with those the observation whereof St.
Paul requires from the Thessalonians, and commends in the Church of Corinth.

This Consideration is of great concern: for, if the Traditions of the Roman
Church be of another kind; if they shall prove to be the late and new
Inventions of men, not so much as thought of in the Apostles days; the whole
case is so altered, that I do not see how it is possible for them to find the
least Countenance from St. Paul. For all that St. Paul does either require or
commend in this matter is, the observation of those Traditions only which he
himself, who was guided by God's infallible Spirit, had delivered to such and
such Churches: they are his own words, Ye keep the traditions as I delivered
them; and again, Hold the traditions which ye have been taught by word, or our
epistle. Here St. Hierom notes, Quando sua vult teneri, non vult extranea
superaddi; Whereas St. Paul commands them to observe his Traditions, he does in
effect forbid them to introduce strange ones of their own. Now whatever
Traditions the Church of Rome pretends to have been delivered by St. Paul to
the Churches of Christ without being written, are of these two kinds.

1. It Is pretended that St. Paul, and other Apostles too, delivered some
unwritten Traditions that concerned necessary Points of Faith, Worship,
Manners, and Rules of Righteousness.

^ Cor. 15.3.
Thus he tells the Corinthians, I delivered unto you that which I also received,
how that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, etc. and again,
1 Cor. 11.23.
I received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc. It Is evident
from these Texts, that these Traditions which St. Paul delivered to the Church
concerning matters of Faith and Worship he received from God, and found them
suitable to the written Word.

Now let us consider whether the present Traditions of the Roman Church about
matters of Faith and Divine Service be such too: if they are, Cornel. a Lap. in
1 Cor. c. 16. v. 2.
we oppose them not. They tell us, that the Observation of the Lord's day is an
Apostolical Tradition: we contradict it not, because we find ground for it in
the written Word; we also find it mentioned by the Primitive and early Fathers.
Ignatius (if yet that Epistle of his be not corrupted) tells us, Ignat. Epist.
ad Trallianos.
(...). The Jewish Preparation was the day of Christ's Passion, their Sabbath
of his Burial, and our Lord's day of his Resurrection. It Is mentioned by
Tertullian, who says, Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, Tertul. de Corona.
Greg. Naz. Orat. 43.
To fast on the Lord's day we count it sin. It Is mentioned by Nazianzene, who
styles it (...), (...), etc. It Is from the great Probabilities given us in the
written Word, and the pregnant Testimonies of Antiquity, that the Reformed
Church does observe this Tradition which concerns the Lord's day with greater
strictness then the Roman.

They tell us again, that the Baptism of Infants is an Apostolical Tradition:
we are so far from contradicting them, that we do not only practice it our
selves, but maintain it against all Opposers, because it is mightily
countenanced in Sacred Writ, and commended to us by all Antiquity. Dion. Areop.
de Eccl. Hierarch. p. 151, etc.
I remember, Dionysius the Areopagite (if he that goes under that name be
indeed the man) tells us, (...), that Children who were yet incapable to
understand the Mysteries of the Gospel were made partakers of Divine
Regeneration; and says, that the Church observed this Practice, (...), being
taught so to do by ancient Tradition. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 40.
Accordingly Nazianzene thus advises, (...) etc. Have thou an Infant? let him
be sanctified from his Infancy. Cyprianus in Epist. ad Fidum, de Infantibus
bapt.
And so St. Cyprian and other Bishops give their Judgments, Prohiberi non debet
Infans qui recens natus, etc. The Infant that is but newly born must not be
debarred from Baptism. Whoever denied this was condemned by the Church; Council.
Carthag. Can. 112.
and accordingly the Council of Carthage, which consisted of two hundred and
seventeen Fathers, passed this Sentence upon him, (...) Whosoever denies that
little Children newly dropped from their Mothers Womb ought to be baptized, let
him be Accursed. These and the like Authorities do induce us to believe that
the Baptism of Infants, though nowhere in plain terms commanded in Scripture,
is yet a Divine Tradition; and upon that well-grounded Confidence our Church
does as constantly practice and as strongly defend it as ever theirs did or can
do.

They tell us again, that the Institution of our Christian Festivals, and the
observation of Lent, are Apostolical Traditions. Well, though they will find
it a difficult task to prove them such; though the first Institution of Lent is
by some ascribed to Telesphorus; and though about the observation thereof there
was, and that very early too, (...), doubts and various opinions, Irenaeus in
Epist. ad Victorem. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
as Irenaeus and Eusebius tell us: yet, because our Christian Fasts and
Festivals are very suitable to Scripture-Rules, and were observed as great
helps to and expressions of their Devotion and Piety by our religious
Ancestors, and indeed the Universality of the Christian Church, we do readily
embrace and practice both.

But when our Adversaries press upon us, under the notion of Apostolical
Traditions, many things of Faith and Worship defined in their late Conventicle
of Trent, though altogether unknown to the first and purest Ages of the
Christian Church, and contrary to the written Words; we find reason to lie
under the Anathema's and Excommunication of the Roman Church, rather then to
comply wit^ it in those Doctrines and Practices of theirs which are so
exceeding far from being Apostolical^^

They tell us, indeed, that their Veneration (...) Saints is practiced juxta
Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae usum, Council. Trident. die prima S^ss.
ult. Can. de Sanct. invoc.
a primaevis Christianae Religionis temporibus receptum, according to the use
of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, and was received from the beginning of
the Christian Faith: whereas the Invocation of Saints, now practiced in the
Roman Church, Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 627.
is not mentioned by any of the Fathers till above two hundred years after
Christ; and consequently cannot be imagined to be an Apostolical Tradition.

And as for the Roman Custom of Praying for the dead, by the Practice whereof
in former Ages they would fain establish their Doctrine of Purgatory, and that
especially to keep up the credit of their dear Indulgences: though we find this
excess of groundless and useless Charity used in the Christian Church, and
that somewhat early too; though St. Cyprian, in the third Century, Cyprianus
Epist. 66.
mentions Oblatio pro Dormitione, and Deprecatio nomine defunctorum; though
Tertullian, in the same Century, Tertul. de Corona.
mentions Oblationes pro defunctis; nay more, though Dionysius the Areopagite
(who, Dionys. de Eccl. Hier. c. 7.
if he be the man, lived in the first Century) tells us, (...), The holy Priest
makes an holy Prayer for, or over, the dead: yet none of all these do assert
this Practice to have had its Original from any Divine or Apostolical
Tradition, as the Roman Church contends. Tertullian, indeed, concerning this
and some other Practices used in his time confesses thus, Si legem expostules
Scripturarum, nullam invenies, If you require a Scripture-command for this and
that, there is none to be found: upon which score he ascribes these things to
Tradition; but whence that Tradition took its rise, he does not tell us. But
the truth is, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Philip. c. 1. Orat. 3. in Mort.
St. Chrysostom does; who, in the behalf of persons deceased in the Guilt of
sin, exhorts his hearers thus, (...), Let us assist and succor them to our
utmost power. But what can surviving persons do for the relief of departed
Sinners? he answers, (...), let us both pray for them our selves, and beseech
others to do so too. And that the Dead should be particularly remembered in the
Prayers of the Church at the celebration of the Lord's Supper, he says, (...),
it was ordained by the Apostles, and that not in vain. And that this Practice
spread and continued in the Church after St. Chrysostom's time, is evident from
that expression of St. Austine, August. de Cura pro mortuis gerenda.
Non parva est universae Ecclesia Authoritas, quae in hac consuetudine claret,
ubi in precibus Sacerdotis, quae Domino Deo ad ejus Altar funduntur, locum
suum habet etiam commendatio Mortuorum. It Is clear indeed from these words,
that to remember the dead in their most solemn Prayers at the celebration of
the Eucharist, was grown, in St. Austine's time, the general Custom of the
Church: but that this Custom had its Original from the Apostles, he does not
say. Nor indeed could this be the Institution of the Apostles, that there
should be a particular Commemoration of the dead, and a solemn form of Prayer
put up to God on their behalf, at the administration of the Lord's Supper,
Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trident. p. 535.
if that Observation be true which Chemnitius ascribes to St. Hierom, St.
Gregory and others, in these words, Apostolos ad solam Orationem Dominicam
celebrasse actionem Mysteriorum Divinorum. If this be so, that the Apostles
themselves used no other Prayer but the Lord's alone at their Celebration of
the Eucharist, how can it be imagined, that those solemn Supplications which in
aftertimes were made for the dead at the Altar should be of Apostolical
Institution.

But however, though the Church of Rome may pretend, but cannot prove, (for one
St. Chrysostom is not enough) Apostolical Tradition for such and such
Doctrines and Practices of theirs; yet what Authority from Christ or his
Apostles can they plead for those Articles of their new Creed, which their Pope
Pius the Fourth has impiously imposed upon the Church of Christ, and added to
that received Nicene Creed, as if it were of equal Credit even with that, and
to be believed upon penalty of Damnation?

When St. Paul delivered such and such Traditions to the Christian Church, he
tells us, (...), I received of the Lord: but could Pope Pius say as much of
his? and can the present Church of Rome say as much of theirs, when in their
newfound Creed they teach us to say, I profess that there are truly and
properly Seven Sacraments of the new Law instituted by Christ? Do they indeed
gather this Article of their Faith, as we do all those in the three received
Creeds, from clear Testimonies of Holy Writ? or do they collect this Doctrine
and number of their Seven Sacraments, as their Patriarch of Venice is said to
have done, Joh. 6.9.
from that particular expression of St. Andrew, when he told his Lord, There is
a lad here which has five loaves and two fishes? When they require us to say,
I profess that there is a true, proper and propitiatory Sacrifice offered to
God in the Mass for the Quick and the Dead, do they indeed father this
Tradition upon St. Paul, who says, Christ was once offered; Heb. 9.28. Heb.
10.14.
and again, Christ by one offering has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified? Again, when they teach us to say, I profess that in the Eucharist
the Bread and the Wine (and why not their Water too?) are transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ, do they ground this Tradition upon the words
of Consecration, This is my Body; when Scotus himself, who was one of their own
great Champions, has told the world, that the words of Christ do not
necessarily import it, and that Transubstantiation (for which Bellarmine indeed
corrects him) was no Article of Faith till the Lateran Council? When they teach
us to say, I acknowledge that under one Kind whole and perfect Christ and the
true Sacrament is received, do they ground that Doctrine upon a Canon
established by the Council of Constance, or upon the Example and Command of our
Blessed Savior, who delivered both the Elements to all his Communicants, and
gave them this express injunction concerning the Cup in particular, Drink ye
all of this? And that this Command of our Blessed Savior was observed in the
Primitive Church, where the Minister, according to Christ;s own Example,
delivered the Consecrated Cup to all the Communicants, Ignat. in Epist. ad
Philadelph.

Dion. Areop. de Eccles. Hier. c. 3.


is evident from the Testimony of the most early Fathers. (...), says
Ignatius; and (...), etc. says Dionysius: there was then one Cup distributed
to all. And if this were the known Practice of the Primitive Church, what
ancient Tradition can the Roman Church produce for their Communion in one Kind
only? Again, when they bid us say, I do constantly hold that there is a
Purgatory, do they derive this Tradition from the writings of Plato, who
mentions three Receptacles for departed Souls; or from those Expressions of
Prophets or Apostles, which say of all departed Saints, They rest from their
labors, and of all departed Sinners, They shall be turned into hell? Once
more; when they would have us believe that Saints and Angels are to be
worshipped, that there is a Veneration lawfully paid to the very Relics of
Saints, to the Cross of Christ, to the Images of the Virgin Mary, etc. do they
ground this Tradition upon the Second Commandment, (which they could as
willingly blot out of their Bibles as they have done out of some of their
Catechisms,) or upon any Expression of St. Paul, both which do flatly condemn
the Worshipping of any Creature? No; it is well observed by Calvin, Calvin. in 1
Cor. 11.2.
Sub Traditionum titulo includunt omnes crassas abominationes manifesto Dei
Verbo contrarias; The Romanists under the name of Traditions do include all
their gross Abominations which are directly contrary to the Word of God; and
so are far enough from being those traditionall Doctrines, or any whit like
them, of Faith and Worship, that are recommended by St. Paul, who imposed not
any Belief or Practice upon the Church but what was, as himself words it,
(...), according to the Scriptures. But,

2. It Is urged by the Roman Church, that St. Paul, and other Apostles too,
delivered some unwritten Traditions to their immediate Successors which
concerned the external Discipline, Order, Policy, Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church.

Well, and who denies it? not Calvin, who, though he were a great opposer of
superfluous and burdensome Ceremonies, does yet grant thus much; Paulus,
Ecclesiae Corinthiacae primus fundator, Itstitutis piis and honestis eam
formaverat, ut decenter and ordine illic agerentur omnia: St. Paul, who was the
first Founder of the Church of Corinth, did so form it with pious and laudable
Institutions, that all things there might be transacted without the least
Indecency or Disorder. So runs that written and well-known Rule of his, Let all
things be done (...), 1 Cor. 14.40.
decently and in order. But besides this Rule that he has left upon Record, he
farther tells them, The rest will I set in order when I come. And what he did,
or enjoined to be done, in pursuance of this Promise, perhaps might be never
written.

But* as Calvin demands, Quid hoc ad insulsas Ceremoniarum nugas quae visuntur
in Papatu? quid hoc ad Superstitionem plusquam Judaicam? What Is all this to the
insipid and foolish Ceremonies of the Roman Church? how does this justify
those Superstitions of theirs that are more then Jewish? So numerous are their
Ceremonies, that I cannot imagine what St. Austine would have said, had he
lived in our times, who thus complained of his own, Aug. in Epist. ad Januarium.
Religionem servilibus oneribus premunt, ut tolerabilior sit conditio
Judaeorum, etc. The Condition of the Jews, in respect of burthensom Ceremonies,
was more tolerable then that of Christians.

I remember, Bellarmine reckons up no less then twenty two Ceremonies used in
the Roman Church in the Administration of Baptism; and tells us, that they are
all of Apostolical Institution, or at least of great Antiquity: some of which
are these; Exorcisms, Salt, Spittle, Chrism, the Wax-taper, the white
Apparel, and the Kiss, etc. And as to the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
Bellarminus de Romans Pontifice l. 4. c. 16.
the same Bellarmine tells us, Apostoli legem condunt, ut sumatur ante omnes
alios cibos, nimirum a jejunis; the Apostles established a Law, that it should
be received before all other food, that is, by persons fasting. And yet that
Rule of St. Paul, which the Romanists can never satisfactorily answer, stands
upon record to the contrary, 1 Cor. 11.34.
If any man hunger, let him eat at home. Lutherus contra Hen. Oct.
Hence Luther tells King Henry the Eighth, Apud nos non peccat qui modeste
ederit and biberit ante Communionem, With us the man does not sin who eats or
drinks moderately before the Sacrament. And it is well known, that the Primitive
Christians, who were very tender of all Apostolical Institutions, did, at
least in some places and upon some days, in imitation of our Blessed Savior,
receive the Sacrament after Supper. So much may we collect from that expression
of St. Austine, who grants, Aug. Epist. 118. ad Januarium.
Institutum esse multis locis, ut die Paschae post refectionem Deo offeratur,
etc. that it was the Custom of many places, to offer (the Eucharist) to God
after meat. And Sozomen tells us, Sozom. Hist. l. 7. c. 19.
that some also dined before the reception of the Sacrament: (...), They coming
together on the Sabbath toward the Evening, and having already dined, they
partake of the Mysteries. Corn. a Lap. in 1 Cor. 11.21.
From this Authority Cornelius a Lapide is forced to acknowledge thus much,
Perduravit hic mos in nonnullis Ecclesiis per multa secula, This Custom of
eating before the Sacrament continued in some Churches for many Ages: and yet
is fasting an Apostolical Institution? is it indeed Consuetudo necessario
servanda? a Custom that must of necessity be observed, Bellarm. de Missa l. 2.
c. 14.
as Bellarmine contends?

But since Tertullian has given us a fair Intimation, Tertul. l. 2. ad uxorem.
in that expression of his, Non sciet maritus quid ante omnem cibum sumas, etc.
that in his time the Sacrament was received before all other food; since
Nazianzene has assured us, Naz. Orat. 40.
that the Eucharist was celebrated in his Church (...), before Supper; Aug.
Epist. 118.
and since St. Austine has told us, Per universum orbem mos iste servatur, The
Custom of receiving the Lord's Supper fasting is observed by the whole
Christian Church throughout the World: we look upon it as a laudable Practice,
and use it as an ancient Rite, though it will be hard to prove it an
Apostolical Institution. For St. Austine's Placuit Spiritui Sancto, etc. urged
by Bellarmine, will not evince it; no, not upon the Principles of his own
Church: for it is well known, that the Pope and his Councils do commonly ascribe
to the Holy Ghost as well their own Determinations, as the Tradition of
Christ's Apostles.

But although our receiving the Eucharist fasting were granted to be the
Dictate of God's Holy Spirit, signified to the Church either by the Apostles
themselves, or their immediate Successors in that Age wherein the
extraordinary Revelations of the Holy Ghost were as yet continued; though, I
say, this Ceremony of receiving the Sacrament fasting were certainly of Divine
or Apostolical Institution; yet doubtless several Rites recommended and used
by the Roman Church in the Administration of this Sacrament are not so. For,
who commands that the Sacramental Bread must needs be broken into three Pieces,
as if there were some great Mysteries signified by a threefold fraction? Who
requires the Circumgestation of the Host? Who commands the Priest to sign
himself, the Altar, the Book, the Elements, and all the Congregation, with the
Cross? Was it some Apostle, or their own Alexander, which ordained that the
Sacramental Wine should be mixed with Water? What warrant can be pretended from
the command or example of Christ, or any Apostle of his, for putting the
consecrated Bread, not into the Hand, but the Mouth, of their Communicants? I
remember that Canon of the Council of Altissiodorum, a Town in France, Council.
Altissiod. Can. 36.
Non licet mulieri nuda manu Eucharistiam sumere, It Is not lawful for a woman
to receive the Sacrament with a bare and naked hand; no, if she want her
Dominical, her linen Gloves, non communicet, let her not partake of the
Sacrament: that is their law. Alex. Arist, Synopsis Canonum. Symeon May Epitome
Canonum.
I remember also another Canon established by a Council assembled in
Constantinople, which runs thus, (...), The Communicant must frame his hands
into the figure of a Cross. And how that must be done too, there is a Jesuit
who thus instructs us; Corn. a Lap. in 1 Cor. 11. ult.
Dextera superposita sinistrae in modum Crucis, etc. Certainly these Canons are
so superstitious, that they savor of a Pope rather then an Apostle: but
however, they give sufficient evidence, that the Eucharist of old was received
by the Communinicants with their Hands, not their Mouths. The truth is, the
Roman Church has no more warrant from any Apostolical Tradition for these and
some other Ceremonies used therein about the Eucharist, then they have for
their half-Communion, whereby, against the Institution of Christ, the Discourse
of St. Paul, and the Evidence of Primitive Practice, the Laiety are unworthily
robbed of half the Sacrament, and are admitted only to a (...), a dry Feast
indeed.

It Is very evident, that these and many other Vsages and Doctrines, received in
the Roman Church, are not the Doctrines and Practices taught and required by
Christ or St. Paul; no, such they are as have no Countenance from any clear
Text of Prophets, Evangelists, or Apostles: and because it is so, because the
Scriptures will never justify those Practices and Assertions of theirs, they
are resolved, and indeed much obliged in point of honor, to seek out for other
Arguments to prove them: and what they are, we shall now consider.

II. The Champions of the Roman Church do endeavor to prove their Traditions
to be Apostolical by the Testimonies of their own Bishops, as if they were
Infallible.

Thus, that the yearly Renovation of their Chrism is an Apostolical Tradition,
does Bellarmine offer to prove by the Authority of Pope Fabian, who, in his
second Epistle to the Bishops of the Eastern Church, tells them thus, Ista a
Sanctis Apostolis and eorum Successoribus accepimus, Vobisque tenenda mandamus;
It Is that which we have received from the Apostles and their Successors, and
so we require from you its Observation. To this he adds the Testimony of
Innocent the First, who, in his first Epistle to Decentius, says, Si Instituta
Ecclesiastica ut sunt a beatis Apostolis tradita integra vellent servare Domini
sacerdotes, etc. If our Lord's Priests would entirely observe the Institutions
of the Church as they were delivered by the blessed Apostles, etc. Now to these
and the like Testimonies of the Roman Bishops, which are cited in the defense
of such and such Traditions, we have two things to answer.

1. The Roman Bishops that have pleaded for the unwritten Traditions of that
Church are not competent Witnesses; nor does their Testimony deserve to be
admitted in matters of this Concern.

It Is notoriously known, that there are several Traditions maintained by the
Roman Church that are very advantageous to their Bishop, and others of their
Clergy too, and that upon several accounts. That Doctrine which teaches the
Pope's Primacy and Supremacy over all other Bishops and Secular Princes makes
much for his Greatness, Splendor and Magnificence: that Doctrine which asserts
his Power to dispense with Vows, Oaths, and in several cases with Matrimonial
Contracts, either to allow or null them; that Doctrine which assigns him a
Power, more then ordinarily Ministerial, to pardon Sin, and deliver whom he
will from Purgatory, etc. makes for his Wealth, and fills his Bags apace.

And if so, if these and other Doctrines do bring in such a Revenue to the
Roman Bishop, and many more of his Church too; it is very likely that they will
be so kind to themselves, as to plead for those Traditions by which alone those
Doctrines can be maintained. That the Bishops of Rome have the usual
Infirmities of other men, and may perhaps fail now and then in matters of
Moral Concern, I think no man denies. It Is a bug word that Baronius speaks of
Pope Vigilius, Baron. tom. 7. Anno 538.
whom he calls a Thief, a Brigand, etc. and it is no great Commendation which
Bellarmine gives of John the Twenty third, when he does acknowledge him to have
been a man vitae dissolutae, of a loose and dissolute Conversation; so
dissolute, that fifty three several Articles that concerned his Manners (for
in Points of Faith the Pope, though an Heretic, must not be thought to err)
were exhibited against him in the Council of Constance, and proved by
sufficient Testimonies. These two Instances (not to name the Sorceries and
Treasons of Gregory the Seventh, nor the Concubine of Nicholas the Third; and
to pass by the late pretty stories of Donna Olympia, who governed the Roman
Chair, as Themistocles his little Son ruled Athens;) are more then enough to
evidence, that even his Holiness himself may err in point of Morality.

And since other Vices are incident to the Bishops of Rome, why should we think
it impossible for them to be a little tainted sometimes with those small
Infirmities of Covetousness, Pride, and Ambition? Bern. de Consid. ad Eugen. l.
2. c. 6.
Though St. Bernard indeed might tell his friend Pope Eugenius, Apostolis
interdicitur Dominatus, Christ forbad his Apostles to exercise any Despotick
Power, at least over one another; yet perhaps Boniface the Eighth might have in
him some little remainders of unmortified Pride, which might prevail with him
to accept the Title from others, Papyr. Mass. in vit. Bonif.
yea and to style himself too Mundi Dominum, the Lord of the World. And though
Alexander the Fifth, who professed himself a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, but
a mere beggarly Pope, might perhaps deserve that Character which St. Paul
requires in a Bishop, not greedy of filthy lucre: yet what may we think of John
the Twenty Third, who was so covetous of Money, and heaped up so much Treasure,
that he thought himself concerned to brand that man for an Heretic, who should
dare affirm, that Christ and his Apostles had no Possessions in the World?

Now then, if the Roman Bishops, as well as other men, may possibly so far
forget themselves, as to be guilty of Ambition and Avarice; it is not reasonable
that we should admit their Testimony for the Justification of those Traditions
wherein their own Advantage and Honor is so very much concerned: they are
Parties so mightily interessed in this Cause, that there is ground enough to
suspect their Evidence, and to imagine, that they will represent the matter,
not impartially, as it really stands; but with those favorable Constructions,
or false Glosses and Equivocations, which an ambitious or covetous heart may
probably suggest, and a bad Cause does certainly require. But,

2. Although the Testimony of the Roman Bishops should be admitted for the
justification of their own Traditions, should we be so kind as to accept their
Evidence in a Cause which so deeply concerns themselves, nay, should we pass a
candid interpretation upon it, and suppose it to be impartial; yet neither so
would it do their work, nor prove firm, sure, and cogent. See why, upon a
double ground.

1. The Testimonies of several Roman Bishops, especially those early ones, who
would indeed have been very credible Witnesses in any matter which concerns the
Church, have been counterfeited and notoriously forged.

Methinks we may use the same Consideration to invalidate the Testimony of any
Roman Bishop, which Bellarmine himself does to weaken and take off the Evidence
of a Roman Cardinal. We find what horrid Crimes (if Simony, Heresy, Sorcery
and Adultery be such indeed) are by several Authors laid to the Charge of Pope
Gregory the Seventh. And because these detestable Villainies do much reflect
upon the Honor of the Roman See, and do entrench too much upon that
Fundamental Point of the Pope's Infallibility; it is the great endeavor of
Bellarmine, by all ways and means to wipe off this Guilt, and to make the world
believe, that all these Vices, objected against (as he styles him) an innocent
Pope, were but unworthy Reproaches and base Calumnies, that were raised by
Tilmannus and the Centuriatours out of a forged Book, that was fathered indeed
upon Cardinal Benno, but was probably written (so Bellarmine would have it) by
some Lutheran or other.

This kind of Argumentation we may justly retort upon the Roman Church, who
justify their own Traditions, and unjustly charge us with Heresy, as having
departed from the true Faith of the Primitive and Catholic Church: and this
they would fain prove by Testimonies produced out of some Writings, which are
ascribed to several ancient Bishops of Rome: whereas it is very certain that
those Writings neither were, nor could be, theirs.

It Is the great Honor of the Roman See, that, in the three first Centuries,
the Bishops who governed that Church were very choice and excellent Persons: we
read that Thirty and one successive Bishops of theirs, even from Linus to
Sylvester, (if we except but Hyginus and Pius, who lived under the kinder
Empire of Antoninus Pius) were Martyrs, or Confessors at least. The memory of
these Champions and stout Assertours of the true Catholic Faith being
precious, and their Authority being venerable in the Church of Christ; some
well-wishers to the present Roman Church, that there might be some pretense of
great Antiquity for their superstitious Novelties, have written such and such
Epistles, Constitutions, and other Tracts, in the names of these Primitive
Roman Bishops, which they have published and sent abroad into the world with as
much confidence as if they were genuine and authentic indeed.

What Authority such Epistles have in the Roman Church, we learn from Gratian,
who equals them to the Definitions of General Councils; and is not ashamed to
make St. Austine say, that they are equal to the very written Word of God. But
St. Austine is so much wronged in being produced by Gratian as the Author of
such an intolerable Assertion, that Bellarmine, who for once has something
more of Modesty, does thus excuse it, Deceptus est Gratianus ex depravato
Codice quem ipse habuit beati Augustini, Gratian was deceived by a corrupted
Copy which he had of St. Austine's Works. But however, though Bellarmine dare
not equal these Decretall Epistles to the very written Oracles of God; yet it is
clear enough, that himself, Baronius, and others of the Roman Faith, do use the
Authority of these forged Epistles to countenance several Doctrines and
Practices wherein the Reformed Church and theirs differ.

And yet for all this, there are several learned Writers of the Roman Church,
who cannot but acknowledge that such and such Epistles, Constitution,
Recognitions, fathered upon their Primitive and Martyred Bishops, are shrewdly
suspected, yea and clearly proved too, to be false and counterfeit. Lor. in
Act. 20.35.
Thus Lorinus, Verborum Domini liber tam est Apocryphus, quam in quibus
memorantur Clementis Recognitiones; The Book of our Lord's Words is as
Apocryphal, as the Recognitions of Clemens, wherein that Book is mentioned. He
tells us indeed, Clementis Constitutiones paulo majoris sunt fidei, the
Constitutions of Clemens are of a little more Credit. But are these
unquestionable? Lor. Act. 1.13.
no; that he denies: Clementis libri Constitutionum non sunt usquequaque
indubitatae Authoritatis, The Constitutions of Clemens are not of an Authority
that is undoubted altogether. And what else can we think of those Decretal
Epistles that are ascribed to Zephyrinus, which contain things foolish,
ridiculous, and false: as, that the Consecration of the Holy Cup must be in a
vessel of Glass only; that a Bishop must be accused before twelve Judges, and
that Evidence against him must be made by seventy two Witnesses? How contrary
is this, not only to Scripture, but to those very Canons which are ascribed to
the Apostles? whereof this is one, (...). And to the same purpose the Council
of Nice too, (...). These Canons, according to the Rules of St. Paul, require
the Testimony two or three Witnesses only even against a Bishop; whereas the
pretended Decree of Zephyrinus demands seventy two, and that with an Appeal to
Rome, which is enough to prove it false and forged.

Such a counterfeit Epistle too was the second of those two fathered upon
Pontianus, which begins thus, Pontianus Sanctae and Vniversalis Ecclesiae
Episcopus, Pontianus the Bishop of the Holy and Universal Church. This Title,
in those early days unknown to the World, being as yet not claimed nor assumed
by any Roman Bishop, but afterward denied and decried by Gregory the Great,
gives us a fair and clear Evidence, that this Epistle is counterfeit and
written by some other hand, as well as those of Fabianus, Stephanus, and some
other succeeding Bishops, with a design to pretend something of Antiquity for
the defense of those unwarrantable Doctrines and Practices of the present Roman
Church, for which they can produce no fair and clear Evidence from the genuine
and acknowledged writings of the most ancient Fathers.

And as for the Decrees, Constitutions and Canons of the Bishops of Rome which
have sat in that Chair since the time of Sylvester; what security have we but
that these also may have been changed, corrupted, and falsified, according as
the exigence of the Roman Church has so required? Bellarmine tells us, Leo. in
Ep. 83. ad Paleast.
that Pope Leo complained, that whilst he himself was yet alive, the Graecians
had corrupted his Epistle to Flavianus: and why might not the Latins, for
their own ends, do as much? What reason have we to give credit to such and
such Papal Decretals, Bellar. de Pontif. R. l. 4. c. 12.
when Bellarmine himself, being pressed with a Canon of Zacharias that made
against him, had little to say but this, Zachariae Canon mihi valde suspectus
est, This Canon of Zacharias I do very much suspect? And the truth is, we are
so much of his mind, and have so much cause to be jealous, that many Canons and
Constitutions ascribed to such and such Bishops of Rome were indeed none of
theirs, but only forged and counterfeited, that we cannot upon their Authority
admit those Doctrines and Practices for which we can find no warrant in the
written Word of God. But,

2. The Testimony of Roman Bishops, in the Cause of Traditions, is not firm and
sure, because the Pope, at least in matters of this nature, notwithstanding
their Pretense of his being Infallible, may possibly be deceived himself; and,
if so, he may deceive us too.

It Is the free Concession of Bellarmine, and that, as he says, wherein all
Catholics do agree, Posse Pontificem, etiam ut Pontificem, and cum suo coetu
Consiliariorum, vel cum Generali Concilio, errare in Controversiis facti
particularibus, quae ex Informatione Testimoniisque hominum pendent; That the
Pope, considered as Pope, with his private or General Council, may err in
particular matters of Fact, which depend upon the Information and Testimonies
of other men. And that seems to be the Case in hand: the business of Traditions
is a matter of Fact, and the whole Controversy under our present Disquisition
is only this, Whether Christ delivered to his Apostles, the Apostles to the
Primitive Bishops, they to their immediate Successors, and so from Age to Age,
such and such particular Doctrines and Practices as are now contended for by
the Roman Church. So that the whole Question in hand being concerned about
matters of Fact, wherein they themselves acknowledge the Fallibility of the
Pope, we have little Reason to acquiesce in his Determinations, and to be so
well satisfied with his Testimony, as to think our selves obliged thereby to
believe and do those things which the Scriptures do neither assert nor command.

But what if the Pope may err in considerable Points of Faith too, and become
an Heretic? are we obliged to believe his Testimony even then too? Photius
tells us, that by the Canon Law, Phot. Tit. 12.
(...), Heretics might not in any Judicature be admitted to bear witness
against any Orthodox Christian within the Church. And certainly, if Heresy be
a Crime of that nature, as that it has been thought enough to exclude or
evacuate any man's Evidence in Civil Causes; we shall have but little reason to
admit any person, that is as liable to Heresy as other men, as an infallible
Witness in matters of Spiritual and Sacred Concern.

And that several Bishops of Rome have been, not only shrewdly suspected, but
publicly accused and condemned too, and that of the foulest Heresies, it is not
to be denied by any man whose brow is not made of Brass. It Is recorded by
several Authors, and those of good name and credit, that some Roman Bishops
have been Monothelites, some Montanists, some Eutychians, some Arrians, yea and
some downright Atheists too. But the Charge being heavy against them, and the
Honor of the Roman See lying at stake, and the Pope's Infallibility also being
herein somewhat concerned, we must enquire into the Witnesses, and see that
they are (...), such as deserve to be believed. For so justly tender is the
Christian Church of the reputation of her Bishops, that she will not admit all
persons whatsoever to bring in Evidence against them. No, the sixth Canon of
the Second General Council forbids it, (...) No man shall be admitted to accuse
a Bishop, till first his quality be duly examined; nor shall every fellow be
suffered to exhibit Articles against the Governors of the Church. And as every
man might not accuse a Bishop, so whosoever wrongfully did it, though it were
but a Bishop elect, and yet to be ordained, he was severely punished: (...),
Let his Penalty be a long Excommunication. So says the Canon Law.

So then, since there is an Indictment of no less Crimes then Atheism and
Heresy drawn up and exhibited against several Bishops, and those of the Roman
See too, who claim a Superiority over all Bishops besides, as being the only
Successors of the Prime Apostle, and the immediate Vicars of Christ; it is of a
considerable Concern, that what is thus alleged against them be well proved
too.

And here, that Pope Marcellinus offered Incense to Idols, might be proved with
ease and evidence enough: but because he did it barely for fear of Diocletian,
and afterward repented and became a Martyr, we pass him by. Rhenan. Annot. in
Tertul. lib. contra Praxeam.
Rhenanus says of Pope Zephyrinus, Episcopus Romanus Montanizat, The Bishop of
Rome embraces the Heresy of Montanus. So Tertullian, who was too much of the
same Opinion, witnesses too. That Pope Honorius the First was a Monothelite,
and denied the distinction of two Wills in Christ, we have the Testimonies of
Pope Agatho, Leo the Second, Adrian the Second, besides the Evidence of the
Sixth General Council, wherein he was publicly condemned for an Heretic. That
Pope Liberius, and his Antipope Felix, were Arrians, is testified by
Athanasius, and St. Hierom too. Nor need we be ashamed to produce the Testimony
of Calvin and Erasmus, who do both affirm that Pope John the Twenty second
denied the Immortality of the Soul. And what if we mention that Expression of
Picus Mirandula? Alium meminimus Pontificem, qui nullum Deum credens, etc. We
remember another Pope, who believing that there is no God, etc. But that of the
Council of Basil must not be forgot, which, having voted a General Council to
be above the Pope, could not possibly give a better Reason for it then this;
Multi Pontifices in Errores and Haereses lapsi esse leguntur, etc. It Is
recorded that many Popes have fell into Errors and Heresies, etc. And the
truth is, there is no Pope, who stiffly maintains those Doctrines which assert
the worshipping of Angels, Saints, Images, Relics, a Morsel of Bread, or a
Consecrated Wafer, but is a downright Heretic: and since he is so, we cannot
so far betray our own Reason, as to rest satisfied and be convinced, that such
and such Doctrines, which have no Countenance in Scripture, are Apostolical, by
the Testimony of any Roman Bishop, who, notwithstanding the Pretense of his
Infallibility, is proved to be obnoxious to gross Errors, even Heresy and
Atheism it self, as well as other men. But,

III. The Champions of the Roman Faith do endeavor to justify their unwritten
Traditions by the Testimonies of the Fathers; who are produced as Witnesses
which seem, in their account, to speak a great deal for them.

Thus Bellarmine cites Ignatius, who is an early and substantial Witness
indeed, as being (...), the Coetane, Colleague and Scholar of the very Apostles
themselves: and of him Eusebius thus records, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
(...) He exhorted the Christians to stick fast to the Traditions of the
Apostles; and, that they might be preserved incorrupt, not long before his
Martyrdom he judged it necessary that they should be written. This Testimony is
clear for traditions; and so is that of Dionysius the Areopagite too, Dionys.
Areop. Hier. Eccles. c. 1.
(...), etc. The first Founders of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy (the Apostles)
delivered to us Heavenly Mysteries by Instructions written and unwritten
according to the Sacred Laws. And thus great St. Basil too, Basil. Magn* de Sp.
S. c. 29.
(...). To persevere in unwritten Traditions, I think it is Apostolical. Tertul.
de Corona Mil.
And so Tertullian also mentions several particular Observations, quas, sine
ullo Scripturae Instrumento, solius Traditionis titulo, and exinde
Consuetudinis patrocinio, vindicamus, etc. which the Church practiced and
defended, without the Authority of any Scripture, upon the bare credit of
Tradition, and the Patronage of Custom, etc.

Now, this being Argumentum Achilleum, one of the strongest Arguments which the
Romish Church can possibly urge for their Traditions, we shall give an Answer
to it in some distinct Particulars.

1. Whatever Traditions are expressly and dogmatically delivered by the
Universality of the ancient Fathers, we do readily embrace, own, and defend.

That Expression of St. Basil the Great we do willingly close with, Basil. M.
de Sp. S. c. 29.
(...) Old Doctrines are to be reverenced; and for, as it were, their hoary
Antiquity, they deserve a Veneration. But withal those Doctrines that may
justly challenge a respect for their Age must be such as were generally
received, believed, and practiced; according to that Rule which Vincentius
Lyrinensis gives us, Id teneamus quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus
creditum est, Let us hold that which has been believed at all times, in all
places, and by all Christians. Aug. in Epist. ad Jan. 118.
And for this St. Austine gives this Reason, Illa quae non sunt scripta, sed
tradita, custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur, dantur
intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenariis Conciliis (quorum est in
Ecclesia saluberrima Authoritas) commendata atque statuta retineri: sicuti quod
Domini Passio, and Resurrectio, and Ascensio in Coelum, and adventus de Coelo
Spiritus Sancti, anniversaria Solennitate celebrantur; and siquid aliud tale
occurrerit, quod servatur ab universa quacunque se diffundit Ecclesia. This
Expression commends the belief and practice of those Traditions, supposing them
to be the Institutions either of the Apostles themselves, or ancient General
Councils, which were unanimously observed by the universal Church.

But now, that such and such traditional Doctrines and Vsages were indeed
generally received by the whole Christian Church, we must have clear Proofs
from credible Witnesses, that have given Testimony thereunto throughout all the
respective Centuries and Ages of the Church. This is no more then was urged
long since by Gregory Nyssene, Greg. Nyss. Orat. 3. contra Eunom.
for the Ratification and full Establishment of all such Vsages and Doctrines
as pretend to Antiquity. (...) For this (and nothing less) is sufficient for
the Proof of our Assertion, that we have a Tradition derived to us from the
Fathers, as it were a certain Inheritance descending by entail from the
Apostles by those Saints who were all along their Successors.

And this is the only thing which we demand from the Roman Church, being ready
to acknowledge the Truth of all Doctrines, and the Equity of all Practices,
which the Universality of the Fathers have left upon Record as things believed
and done in the first and purest Ages of the Church. And thus to do we have a
great Encouragement from that Expression of Tertullian, Tertullian. de
Praescript. Haeret. c. 21.
Constat omnem Doctrinam quae cum Ecclesiis Apostolicis, Matricibus and
Originalibus Fidei, conspiret, veritati deputandam; id sine dubio tenentem quod
Ecclesiae ad Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo accepit, etc. It Is
manifest that every Doctrine which agrees with the Apostolic Churches, which
were the Wombs and Originals of Faith, must be esteemed a Truth; as holding
that which those Churches received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ,
and Christ from God.

So that whatsoever Traditions the Church of Rome can prove to be Apostolical
by an unanimous Consent of all the ancient, learned and holy Bishops and
Doctors, who from Age to Age have governed and taught the Church, though such
Traditions are nowhere recorded in the written Word, yet being obliged by the
universal Testimony of all Antiquity to esteem them Apostolical Institutions,
and consequently no-way repugnant to Holy Writ, we shall most readily receive
and practice them upon the very first Conviction. For so great a respect has
the Church of England for all her pious Forefathers in Christ, that she does
most cheerfully follow their Example in every thing that is convenient and
laudable; and does pay to venerable Antiquity all that imaginable Reverence
which is consistent with that inviolable Rule she walks by, which is the
written Word of God. But,

2. Although we are thus ready to embrace all those Doctrines and Practices
which can be recommended to us by the general Consent and Approbation of
Antiquity; yet the Testimonies of such and such particular Fathers, which the
Romanists produce for the justification of their unwritten Traditions, we
cannot think our selves obliged to accept, nor is it safe to comply with them
in all Points whatsoever.

It Is the great Prerogative of the Scripture alone to deserve and require our
Assent to every thing that is there delivered by every particular Prophet,
Evangelist, and Apostle. When once we do but clearly understand the meaning of
Divine Revelations, and comprehend what such and such a Text does import, there
is no room for any farther Scrutiny or Examination; but all our business is to
believe and practice. Thus stands the case with the Word of God, every line
whereof is of unquestionable Authority: but as for the Writings of men, how
holy or learned soever, but not infallibly guided by God's unerring and holy
Spirit, we have ground enough, in all Points and matters of Controversy, which
the Scriptures do not clearly determine, to pause a while, suspend our faith,
and not immediately to give too quick an Assent to such and such Assertions,
till we have taken mature Advice, and deliberately considered what is the
matter of such and such Propositions that relate to the Worship of God, Points
of Faith, or other Concerns of the Church, as well as who it is that recommends
them. And for this we have several Reasons.

1. That the whole Church of God in after-Ages should, without all farther
Examination, give an immediate Assent to all Propositions, Principles,
Conclusions, Doctrines or Practices, which are laid down, recorded or
recommended in the Works of such and such ancient Fathers, is a thing which
those Fathers themselves did never do or expect. The truth is, to give a firm
and quick Credit to every thing which such or such a person has said, were an
instance of such a Respect as the best of men cannot deserve, nor did the best
of the Fathers ever require or show.

We are in this to imitate St. Austine, Aug. ad Hieron. Ep. 19.
who told St. Hierom thus, Alios* (Scriptores, praeter Canonicos) ita lego, ut
quantalibet Sanctitate Doctrinave praepolleant, non ideo verum putem quia Ipsi
ita senserunt, sed quia mihi vel per illos Authors Canonicos, vel probabili
ratione, quad a vero non abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt; When I read any
Authors that are not Canonical, how holy or learned soever, I do not
presently grant this or that to be a truth barely because those Authors
thought so, etc. And as he reserved to himself this liberty of dissent, when he
found just cause, from other men's Writings; so did he as willingly allow the
same liberty to all other persons who should become the Readers of his. Aug. ad
Fortunat. Ep. 111.
So he tells his friend Fortunatianus, Talis ego sum in Scriptis aliorum, tales
volo esse Intellectores meorum; Such am I in other men's Works, and such would I
have other men be in mine. But how is that? he tells us; Aug. de bono
Perseverantiae, c. 21.
Neminem velim sic amplecti omnia mea, ut me sequatur, nisi in iis quibus me
non errare perspexerit; I would have no man so to credit what I write, as
immediately to comply with my Judgment, except it be in those things only
wherein he perceives me to be in the right. It Is a Golden Rule which he
elsewhere gives us, Aug. ad Vincentium, Ep. 48.
Audi, dicit Dominus: non, dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Hilarious, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus; sed, dicit Dominus. Hear and believe,
not every thing which such and such a man says, but what God says.

So then, though perhaps we may dissent, in some particular matters not
determined in the written Word, from such and such particular Fathers; though
we have entered our Dislike and do solemnly protest against some Expressions
that have unwarily dropped from some of their Pens: yet since these good men
have declared themselves to be no-way injured or affronted thereby; we do not
need (or, if we did, we should not matter) a Pardon from his Holiness, who
wants indeed some better Evidences to confirm the Validity of his Indulgencies,
and make them saleable in English Markets. But,

2. To comply with every thing that such and such a Father has asserted, and
to receive all their Testimonies indifferently as undoubted Truths, is a thing
so gross and irrational, that even our Adversaries of Rome themselves will not
do it.

It Is indeed very usual with them to exclaim against us as persons that have no
Reverence for Antiquity, but reject the Fathers, and tread them under foot: but
the truth is, if it be a fault to dissent from ancient Writers in any thing
whatever, if our refusal to subscribe to their Opinions in all matters of
Controversy may be interpreted as a Contempt done to those excellent Persons,
from whom in some things we disagree; then do we retort this Argument upon our
Adversaries, and, having a just ground of Recrimination, we do tell and can
easily prove to the world, that if this be indeed our Crime, it is certainly
theirs too.

That the Church of Rome does give an universal Assent to whatsoever all the
Fathers have written, will not be imagined by any person who considers what the
Jesuits and other Doctors, who well understood the Sense of that Church, and
durst not openly contradict it, have left upon Record. I remember that
expression of Bellarmine, Bellarmin. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 8.
who, being urged with a Sentence of Tertullian against Zephyrinus, who was
Bishop of Rome, had little else to reply but only this, Non esse omnino fidem
habendam Tertulliano in hac part, Tertullian in this matter (because
Bellarmine did not like it) is not at all to be believed. No, nor St.
Chrysostom neither, if he deliver any thing that contradicts the Romish Faith.
Mald. in Luc. 16.29.
Alium scopulum vitare Lector debet, ne Chrysostomum legens, etc. says
Maldonate; The Reader must avoid another Rock, lest perhaps, reading St.
Chrysostom, he run into an Error. And as for those two great Worthies of the
Christian Church, St. Ambrose and St. Austine, Lorinus Act. 1.12.
Lorinus did not think them infallible, when he ventured to say, Memoria lapsum
oportet Ambrostum, idemque statuendum de Augustino, etc. St. Ambrose forgot
himself, and so did St. Austine too.

Indeed, whatsoever is delivered by Tertullian, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Austine,
or any other ancient Father, how agreeable soever it be to the written Word of
God, yet if it be inconsistent with the present Traditions and Practices of the
Roman Church, they will not grant it to be a Truth. And if so, if the Romanists
themselves, whenever their Interest does so require, do make so bold with the
Fathers, as to suspect their Judgments, and deny their Authority; methinks they
should be so ingenuous, as to allow us the same liberty of Dissent, which they
take to themselves. If they dissent from Tertullian, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Austine, and other Fathers, and that in those very matters wherein those
Fathers have clearly, dogmatically and designedly delivered their Judgments;
why may not we dissent from Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, and some others,
especially in those things which they have only rhetorically and accidentally
mentioned, and yet are now violently drawn, forced and wrested to countenance
those Articles of the Trent Faith whereof those Fathers did never dream?

But however, what just ground we have to dissent from such and such particular
Fathers in such and such particular cases, especially in those Points now in
Controversy betwixt the Reformed and Roman Church, we shall show in two
Particulars.

1. The first Reason (and that which indeed our Adversaries may justly plead as
well as we) why we cannot think our selves obliged to comply with every
particular Father, in every particular thing which they have delivered, is,
Because they were but Men, and so might err; and indeed often did, and some of
them foully too.

It Is very usual with the Champions of the Roman Church, to produce the
Testimonies of several persons who are men of great Name and Authority in the
Church of God, to justify several of those Traditions with which we can by no
means comply. I remember Bellarmine produces and cites Ignatius, Dionysius,
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origin, Clemens, and others, for whom we have that
signal Respect and Veneration which is justly due to their Piety, Learning and
Antiquity: but withal we cannot forget, that the very best of the Fathers were
subject to Mistakes and Errors, whereby they showed themselves to be but men.
And the truth is, we have so many and so sad Examples of Learned and Pious
persons before us, who have been miserably deceived by mere Pretensions of
Antiquity, that we shall not easily suffer our selves to be seduced by the same
Delusions into the Belief and Practice of any Traditions, except we can find in
them what Irenaeus found in those mentioned by Polycarp, (...), Eusebius. Hist. l.
5. c. 2^.
an Agreeableness to the written Word of God.

We cannot forget what great Mischiefs to the Church of God the Authority of
Papias, Origin, and some others, did in Primitive times. That this Papias was
(...), the Disciple of the Apostles, the Auditour of St. John, the Companion of
Polycarp, is, I think, universally granted; and that he received such and such
Traditions from the Daughters of Philip the Evangelist at Hierapolis, Eusebius.
Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
was, as Eusebius tells us, his own Assertion: and yet, for all that, the same
Historian informs us, that this very man, relying too much upon Tradition, was
so far surprised as to vent (...), strange Doctrines. And if so, shall we think
our selves so far obliged to espouse and own all his Opinions, because they are
old ones, as to become Chiliasts, and to be imposed upon, as Irenaeus himself
and many more then were, (...), from that Respect and Veneration which they had
for his Antiquity?

And as for Origin, whose Testimony the Church of Rome makes exceeding much of,
as a great Patron of some Traditions which are advantageous to them; we do give
him all that Respect which becomes him to receive, and us to show: his learned
Disputations against Celsus, his Confutations of the Psycho-Pannuchists, his
Conviction and Conversion of Beryllus, that Arrian Heretic, his readiness to
Martyrdom, his labors in Preaching, Catechizing, and Writing, have made his
Name famous and his Memory venerable in the Church of God. But withal, had
this excellent Person nothing of Error to allay and stain his Glory? Does the
Church of Rome indeed think us, or themselves either, obliged to embrace every
Opinion as an undoubted Truth, that has the Patronage of Origen's Name? What
if Origin seem, as our Adversaries contend, to countenance their Doctrine of
Purgatory, which was doubtless the golden Dream and Invention of Plato? must we
therefore acknowledge it to be as certain a Truth, as that there is an Heaven
for Saints and an Hell for Sinners? Why does not Bellarmine give the same
Credit to Origin, when he discourses of the Creation of many Worlds, as when
he discourses of Purgatory? I remember, Photius de Synod. Council. 5.
Photius mentions some Doctrines broached by Origin, and afterward promoted by
Didymus and Evagrius, that were his Followers, which, I hope, the greatest
Sticklers for the Roman Religion will not allow. (...) They determined that
there should be an end of Hell's endless Torments; they taught that the very
Devils themselves should one day be restored to their former Dignity. These
Opinions, being so welcome to the worst of men, grew apace: but withal, being
so destructive to the Christian Religion, Justinian the Emperor, in the year
551. called the fifth Oecumenicall Council at Constantinople, where this Error
of Origin and his Followers, by the joint Suffrages of one hundred and sixty
five Bishops, was exploded, condemned, and anathematized, as being, what
Photius rightly calls it, (...), an Encouragement to all manner of Villainy;
even the chief of those (...), wicked Opinions, which were broached (...),
Nilus de Synod. Council. 5.
by Origin when he was out of his wits, as Nilus does inform us.

And, certainly, that Doctrine of Purgatory, for which the Testimony of Origin
is so much urged by the Roman Church, deserves the same Censure too; as being a
considerable Provocation to the Commission of those pleasing Sins, the
Punishment whereof, how long or how short it shall be, is, according to their
Doctrine, at the Pleasure of the Pope's Mercy and the Offender's Purse. And
methinks it is strange, that such a Tradition as this, which can never be
delivered from the just imputation of encouraging Vice, should, because
mentioned by Origin and his Followers, be declared Apostolical, and equalled
to that written and sure Word of Christ, from which it receives sufficient
Confutations, but nothing of Countenance, whatever the Romish Church may
pretend.

But, alas! Origin is but one of many that are cited as Patrons and Abettours
of the Romish Traditions: there is another Person as well as Origin, who lived,
Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 13.
as Eusebius words it, (...), in the very next Age to the Apostles, whose
Testimony is often urged in this matter too; I mean, Clemens Alexandrinus, who
flourished in the reign of Commodus, and was the Scholar of Pantenus: which two
were the first that I meet with who delivered the Principles of Christian
Religion in a Catecheticall way in public Schools, and for that deserve an
Honor.

What Eusebius reports concerning this Clemens cannot be denied; (...), This
man's Books are full of much excellent Learning: so excellent, that Chemnitius
says expressly of him, In tota Antiquitate habitus fuit vir celeberrimus, In
all Antiquity there was not a man so famous as he. But yet for all that, he
fell into many strange and heterodox Opinions; such, I suppose, as our
Adversaries themselves will by no means allow. He tells us, that our Blessed
Savior preached but one year only: that the Apostles, being departed from the
World, preached to the Dead; and converting some of them, raised them to life
again. He countenanced the Tenets of Anabaptists, that Christians ought not to
swear, nor implead one another before any Tribunal whatsoever. He affirmed,
that if men who were once Baptized and enlightened fell into Sin, God perhaps
might grant them (...), place of Repentance for once or twice, but no more for
ever: and yet notwithstanding, as if he had forgot himself, and were not
constant to his own Opinion, he says elsewhere, that if men repent, (...),
there is no place, either in this world or in the next, void of the Goodness of
God.

And methinks, if this excellent and learned Person were betrayed into such
gross and absurd Opinions as are directly contrary to the written Word, through
those Traditions which had even thus early crept into the Church, and were
fathered upon St. Paul, St. Peter, and other Apostles; we must beg, and may
justly expect, our very Adversaries pardon, if we still suspect that such and
such Traditions, mentioned by this Clemens, are very far from being, as
Bellarmine contends, Apostolical.

But although Clemens Alexandrinus fell into such erroneous and fond Opinions,
that they have given the Church just occasion, in doubtful matters, to like
his Testimony so much the worse; yet what has Tertullian done to forfeit his
Credit, and so far to blemish his Reputation, that the large Testimony which he
also gives in the case of Traditions should be questioned too? Tertullian was
indeed a learned Preacher of the African Church; a man that confuted Marcion,
and wrote excellent Apologies for the persecuted Saints of God; Eusebius. Hist. l.
2. c. 2.
a man that is styled by Eusebius (...), the most famous of all the Latin
Writers: and yet notwithstanding, when he treats of Religious matters not
contained within our Bibles, we have too much ground in some things to suspect
his Judgment too; and for so doing, Bellarmine himself has given us his own
Example.

It Is notoriously known, that this Person of excellent Parts showed himself to
be but a son of Adam, when, not finding that Respect from the Roman Clergy
which he might have expected, through Discontent and Anger he miserably fell
off from the Orthodox Christians, and took up the detestable Opinions of that
Phrygian Heretic Montanus. What were the Opinions of this Montanus, Eusebius.
Hist. l. 5.
Apollonius in Eusebius tells us. (...), etc. This was he that taught the world
to dissolve that sacred bond of Wedlock; this is he that taught his Disciples
such and such Doctrines tanquam a Paracleto traditas, says Chemnitius, as if
he had received them from the Blessed Spirit of God; this is he whom his
Followers took to be the Paraclete, but whom sober persons looked upon, as
Eusebius tells us, (...), as a man possessed and acted by the Devil; who had
two women, Priscilla and Maximilla, to be his Prophetesses.

And certainly, if this Montanus were such a monstrous Villain, it is as well
sad as strange to think, that such a man as Tertullian was should ever be so
much transported with Passion upon such and such Neglects, or perhaps
Indignities, received from some Clergymen at Rome, as to make such a Defection
from the true Faith, as if, for some Affronts received from some particular
persons, he meant to revenge himself upon the whole Christian Church, by
patronizing the cursed Doctrines of so vile an Heretic. But however, since
it is clear that he did so, we are by no means bound to believe, what indeed he
himself does never affirm, that all those Traditions which we find recorded in
his Writings are of Divine Original; because we have ground enough to suspect,
that he might receive some of them at least from Montanus, or some other
unwarrantable hand, rather then from Apostles or Apostolical men.

But may not St. Cyprian pass for an unquestionable Witness, if Tertullian do
somewhat fail? Was not this Cyprian the renowned Bishop of Carthage, the stout
Champion of Christ's true Religion, yea and his faithful Martyr too? And does
not this eminent Person give Testimony to justify some of those Traditions,
and to prove them Apostolical, which are now received in the Roman Church, and
yet have not the least Countenance from the written Word of God?

What Great St. Basil once said of Dionysius Alexandrinus, may, Basil. M. ad.
Max. Philos. Ep. 41.
without any Affront or Injury to St. Cyprian's name, be affirmed of him too,
(...) We do not admire whatever that man said; but some things we condemn too.
Aug. contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 31.
We are of St. Austine's mind, who writes thus of Cyprian, Cypriani literas non
ut Canonicas habeo, sed ex Canonicis considero: Quod in eis Divinarum
Scripturarum Authoritati congruit, cum laud ejus accipio; quod autem non
congruit, cum pace ejus respuo. I do not take St. Cyprian's Epistles to be
Canonical, but I judge of them according to those which are such indeed:
Whatever therein agrees with the Authority of Divine Scriptures, to his honor
I do applaud; but whatever agrees not, with his leave I do reject.

It Is evident by this Expression, that although St. Cyprian were indeed, what
Nazianzene thought fit to style him, Gregor. Naz. in Orat. 18.
(...), the great Name of the whole world; though he were (...), the great
Champion of the Truth; yet it was St. Austine's Judgment, that sometimes he
dropped from his Pen some things that did not well consist with the written
Word of God.

The Scriptures tell us that there is One Baptism: accordingly the Council of
Carthage thus defined, Council. Carthag. Can.
(...) and again, (...), Baptism ought not to be administered the second time,
no not to Heretics; so Arsenius, Arsen. Synopsis Can. 38.
(...), Persons baptized by Heretics must not be baptized again. Such was the
Judgment of Fathers and Councils; and yet St. Cyprian was of his mind who said,
Gregor. Naz. in Orat. 24.
(...) If Baptism be at first administered by such Heretics as deny the great
Articles of the Christian Faith, as they in Nazianzene did the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost, then give me a second Washing. And although Bellarmine tell us,
Bellarm. de Conc. l. 2. c. 3.
that St. Austine excuses Cyprian from being an Heretic; yet sure we are he
did not excuse him from being in an Error: for thus he says, Aug. ad Vincent.
Ep. 48.
Cyprianum aliter sensisse de Baptismo quam Forma and Consuetudo habet
Ecclesiae, in suis and in Concilii literis invenitur, That Cyprian did not
think of Baptism as the Church does, it is clear both from the Council's Letters
and his own too.

And if St. Cyprian might err about Baptism, why not about the Eucharist too,
when he says, Debet Aqua Vino misceri, Water must be mingled with the
Sacramental Wine? If Cyprian were mistaken about the Government of the Church,
when he said, Cyprian. Ep. 68.
Ipsa plebs maxim habet potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel
indignos recusandi, The very common people have the chief Power to choose good
Bishops, or refuse bad ones; why might he not be mistaken about the Ceremonies
of Baptism, when he said, Cyprian. Ep. 12.
Vngi necesse est eum qui Baptizatus sit, etc. It Is necessary that every person
who is Baptized should be Anointed too? If St. Cyprian might be, and certainly
was, in an Error in one case; what security have we but that he may be
mistaken in some other matters too? We can never admit all the Doctrines and
Usages received in the Roman Church to be of Apostolical Authority, though
countenanced by St. Cyprian's Testimony, except we shall first forget, that
even Donatus and his Followers did shelter themselves and their erroneous
Opinions under the name and Patronage of the same St. Cyprian too.

And truly, we cannot wonder that Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Tertullian,
Cyprian, and other good men before and after them, were overseen in some
Particulars, since, out of that great Respect and deserved Veneration which
they had for the Apostles themselves and their immediate Successors, they
became too prone, without any strict Examination, to give credit to such
Traditions which were either delivered to them by word of mouth, or contained
in any such Writings as bore the Apostles names, or were pretended to be
derived from Apostolical men.

That there were such forged Writings sent abroad into the world, and that very
early too, several Authors have informed us. Aug. ad Vincent. Ep. 48.
Thus St. Austine, Non defuerunt qui sub Apostolorum nominibus multa
confingerent, etc. Some there were who forged many things in the Apostles
names: so he. And in that Edition of the Septuagint printed at Basil by John
Hervagius I find the Lives of the Evangelists and Apostles, written by
Sophronius, prefixed before their respective Gospels and Epistles; where, in
the Life of St. Peter, there is mention made of several Writings wherein St.
Peter was concerned, either as the Author, or at least as the Subject matter
of them; and thus they are named: (...). The first was inscribed The Acts of
St. Peter, the second was named The Gospel of St. Peter, etc. Of all these the
Writer of his Life passes this Judgment, (...), They are all rejected as
Apocryphal Writings. And yet in the Life of St. James there is mention of a
Book entitled (...), The Gospel according to the Hebrews; a Book, says the
Author, (...), which Origin often used. And certainly, if Origin and other
Fathers did read and believe such Apocryphal books, we cannot wonder that they
fell into some absurd Opinions, and have transmitted to posterity such fond
Traditions as are far from being Apostolical.

I remember St. Paul tells us, that Christ after his Resurrection was seen of
James; and upon what occasion Christ was pleased to appear singly to St. James
alone, that forenamed counterfeit Gospel thus informs us: (...) St. James had
sworn that he would not taste one morsel of Bread from that hour wherein Christ
died, till he should see him risen from the dead again. Upon this score, says
the Author of that Book, Christ appeared to him, (...) and taking bread, and
having given thanks, he brake it; and giving it to St. James the Just, said, My
brother, eat thy bread, for the Son of man is risen from the dead, etc.

So inconsistent is this Tradition, in its several Circumstances, with the
written Word, Est. in 1 Cor. 15.7.
that Estius himself styles it Narrationem fabulosam, a fabulous Narration; and
Lorinus confesses, Lor. in Act. 1.13.
Hanc Historiam non admittit Augustinus, St. Austine does not admit this Story:
and yet Estius observes, that St. Hierom does use some other Passages of that
false Gospel, wherein this Tale is recorded. And what need I mention those
other counterfeit Gospels of St. Thomas, St. Bartholomew, and Nicodemus? What
need I mention the forged Acts of St. Andrew? and that pretended Epistle of St.
Paul to the Laodiceans, the true one (if yet there were ever any such) being
acknowledged by Bellarmine to be lost? What should I mention that
Protevangelium fathered upon St. James, and yet full of such Traditions as are
no way reconcilable with Christ and his Apostles? St. Luke tells us, (...),
Many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things,
etc. Theophylact here puts the Question, (...); Who were these many that thus
undertook to write the Gospel? He answers, (...), they were false Apostles: and
he tells us farther, (...) Many, even then, (...), without the Grace and Spirit
of God, wrote several counterfeit Gospels; as the Gospel according to the
Egyptians, the Gospel of the Twelve, etc.

And certainly, albeit those good men, the Fathers of the Church, out of too
much Credulity and Veneration showed toward their Predecessors, were pleased
to give so much Credit to those spurious Writings, which deserved rather to be
expunged then believed, as to transcribe something of them into their own
Works, and thereby transmit them to Posterity: yet all such Passages, derived
from uncertain and deservedly-suspected Authors, can be no more authentic,
nor claim any greater Authority, then the Originals from which they were
borrowed.

And as for some other things which the Fathers wrote upon their own Judgments,
delivering the sense of their own Understandings, they have sufficiently
evidenced themselves to be too fallible, as our Adversaries themselves do
acknowledge. It is true, where the Fathers do but seem to countenance the fond
and superstitious Doctrines of the Roman Church, if there be found any Passage
in them that can possibly be pretended to favor that absurd and incredible
Assertion of Transubstantiation, or those advantageous Doctrines of Purgatory,
Indulgencies, auricular Confession, or the like; every such Passage, how
ambiguous soever, must pass for a certain Truth, as if it proceeded ex Tripode,
even from an Oracle. But in common cases, and especially in those Controversies
wherein the Fathers contradict the Opinions and Practices of that Church, they
are esteemed no more then other men; and, how clear and plain soever their
Expressions are, they are counted doubtful and fallible enough. Thus Lorinus,
Lorin. in. Act. 1 13.
Gentiles ignorantia Linguae Hebraeae lapsi sunt, ac nonnulli etiam Patres; The
Gentiles, being ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, did err, and so did some of the
Fathers too. And in the same place he speaks thus of Clemens Alexandrinus,
Long abest a vero quod arbitratur Clemens Alexandrinus, The Opinion of this
Clemens is far from being a Truth. And as for St. Basil, he gives us this
Caution too, Tanti Patris Doctrina cum Cautione intelligenda est, The Doctrine
of so great a Father must be understood with Caution. And why, pray, with so
much Caution? certainly, some nice and tender Point lies at stake; and that
was this, Ne justissimis Pontificum Decre^is adversetur, Lest St. Basil should
perhaps contradict the Pope. Well, since it is granted on all sides, that the
very best of the Fathers were subject to mistakes; we have reason to believe,
that they might more probably err in the case of Traditions sooner then in any
other Point whatever: and upon that score, such Traditions as have no
Countenance from the written Word, nor the general Testimony of Antiquity, we
cannot receive as Apostolical, though such and such a particular Father may
seem to recommend them. But,

2. The Second Reason why we cannot comply with every thing which we find
recorded in the Works of such and such ancient Fathers is, Because the Writings
of these Fathers have been miserably abused, corrupted, falsified, or forged.

Such Abuses have the most early Fathers met with. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
So Ignatius, who was, as Eusebius tells us, (...), amongst most men renowned,
the second Bishop of Antioch, being the immediate Successor of St. Peter. But
though this excellent Person were indeed so ancient, that his gray hairs might
justly challenge a Veneration; yet have they not secured him from several gross
and foul Affronts. We find some Bastards laid even at this old man's door;
(...), supposititious and spurious Epistles, (...), etc. ascribed to Ignatius,
though none of his. And as for those Epistles, collected by Polycarp, and
mentioned by Eusebius, which, notwithstanding all the Cavils of Blondel, Walo,
and other Antiepiscopal persons, our learned Pearson and Hammond ((...)) have
sufficiently vindicated and proved to be his; we find even these, as worthy
Isaac Vossius well expresses it, ita interpolatas, ut plurimum Ignatium in hoc
Ignatio frustra quaeras, so interlarded and stuffed with such numerous
Insertions, that in this new Ignatius the old one can scarce be found.

And as for Origin, though it is generally granted that his Writings, even as
they dropped from his own Quill, are many times to blame; yet it is easily
believed that some Corrupters and Falsifiers of his Works have made them worse.
Thus Daniel Huetius, Dan. Huet. in Ptol. l. 2. Origin. c. 2.
who has given the world a solemn account of Origen's Life and Opinions, does
assure us: Cum ab Haereticis violata esse constaret Origeniana volumina, etc.
Since it was evident that Origen's Books were abused by Heretics, etc. And
does not Valesius tell us, Vales. in Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 38.
Clementis Romani libros qui (...) inscribebantur ab Ebionaeis corruptos fuisse
atque falsatos, that the Books of Clemens Romanus named The Journals of Peter
were corrupted and falsified by the Ebionites?

And this our Adversaries of Rome do not deny, whenever it makes for their
Advantage to confess it. Cornelius a Lapide, a learned Jesuit, finding that St.
Hierom's Epistle to Damasus made against him, flies to this Refuge, Epistola
Hieronymi ad Damasum non videtur esse Hieronymi, sed conficta, The Epistle of
Hierom to Damasus seems not to be really his, but a mere counterfeit.

Well; sure we are, there are no persons to be named throughout the world that
have showed themselves, shall I say more ingenious, or more impudent? in
imitating their Forefathers Hands, and counterfeiting their Voices, and that to
very ill Purposes too, then the men that we have now to deal with. It Is the
great Shame of the Roman Church, and such a Blemish as is not to be wiped off
for ever, that they put unsavory words into their Fathers mouths, and cite the
Dead to bear Testimony to those Follies and Falsehoods which, when alive, they
would have abhorred with just Indignation and Zeal.

It Is well observed and unanswerably proved by an eminent Divine of our own
Church, that the Romanists have used several Tricks to corrupt the Fathers, and
make them speak even as they themselves would have them. For sometimes they
insert illegitimate and bastard Treatises into the Fathers Works, hoping that
these spurious Brats will pass for their lawful Children, because found within
their doors. Sometimes again they do falsify the known and undoubted Writings
of ancient Authors, by adding one thing, detracting a second, and changing a
third. Sometimes also they do cite and allege such and such Passages out of
such and such Fathers, so miserably wrested from the Sense of the Author, that
they offer Violence and commit a sacrilegious Rape even upon the Dead.

The Purging of the Fathers by suppressing, razing and blotting out such and
such Passages which do not please them, the Roman Church does own. Thus they
tell us concerning the Venetian Edition of St. Austine, In Praes. Ind. lib.
prohib.
Curavimus removeri illa omnia quae fidelium mentes Haeretica pravitate possent
inficere, aut a Catholica Orthodoxa fide deviare: We have taken care for the
removal out of St. Austine all those Passages of his which might infect the
minds of the faithful with Heretical Pravity, or make them turn aside from the
Catholic Orthodox Faith. We are also told in the Preface to the Paris Edition
of St. Austine, Ex sanctissimo Concilii Tridentini Decreto veterum Patrum
Codices expurgandi, By the most holy Decree of the Council of Trent the Books
of the ancient Fathers are to be purged. Sixth. Sen. Epist. ad Pium quintum.
And for so doing does Sixtus Senensis thus commend Pius the Fifth: Expurgari
and ema culari curasti omnium Catholicorum Scriptorum, praecipue veterum
Patrum, scripta; Thou have caused the Works of all Catholic Writers, but
chiefly those of the ancient Fathers, to be purged and made clean from blots
and stains of Errors; that is, from every thing that contradicts the
Superstitions of the Roman Church.

But if it were a thing indeed so commendable to purge the Fathers, yet is it a
thing praiseworthy to falsify and forge them too? St. Chrysostom left upon
record an Expression which the Roman Church does no way like, and that was
this; Chrysostom. Hom. 49. in Matt.
In times of Heresy there is no means to find out the Truth, save only the
reading of the Scriptures. Bellarmine confesses, Totus hic locus e quibusdam
codicibus nuper emendatis sublatus est; This whole Passage is left out of some
Editions newly set forth and corrected. But how comes St. Chrysostom thus to
deserve the Sponge? The Cardinal gives this Reason, Hoc Testimonium non est
Chrysostomi, This Testimony is not Chrysostom's: but whose then? Ab Arrianis
locus hic insertus, This place was inserted into St. Chrysostom's Works by the
Arrians, and therefore deserved rather to be expunged then believed.

We see what liberty the Romanists take to themselves to raze and blot out such
and such Passages of the Fathers which make against them, upon a groundless
pretense that those Passages were inserted by some Heretic or other: and can
they then justly complain of us, if we are not willing to credit some
Expressions of ancient Authors, upon which they ground those Doctrines and
Practices of theirs which we reject, since we have too much reason to believe
that those Expressions are corrupted, falsified, and forged, and that by some
of their own Church?

That the Roman Catholics have indeed miserably corrupted the ancient Writers
in their Editions, we are sufficiently convinced by the Testimony of our
learned Doctor Featly, Featly's defense of Via Tuta.
who has traced them through the several Ages of the Church, and discovered to
the world this unworthy dealing of theirs, by giving us particular Instances,
and naming the Treatises and Expressions of several Fathers, which their
Adversaries as well as ours have abused, perverted, and corrupted thus or thus.
Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
That of Ignatius is one, who bespeaks Virgins thus; (...) etc. In your Prayers
set Christ before your eyes and his Father, etc. To evacuate this great and
ancient Testimony against the Invocation of Saints and Angels, a late Popish
Edition printed at Lions reads it thus, (...), In your Souls set Christ before
your eyes, etc. Again, those words of our Blessed Savior, Tertul. de Resur. c.
37.
The flesh profits nothing, Tertullian thus expounds, Caro nihil prodest, ad
vivificandum scilicet, The flesh profits nothing, that is, to quicken; so
says the true Tertullian: but a former Edition of theirs, set forth at Paris,
(though mended since by Rigaltius) contrary to the meaning of Christ and
Tertullian too, reads it thus, Caro nihil prodest, sed ad vivificandum, The
flesh profits nothing, save only to quicken. Once more: our learned Author
mentions those words of St. Cyprian too, Post gustatam Eucharistiam, After the
eating of the Eucharist; which the Popish Edition at Paris, to countenance a
Ceremony of theirs, changes thus, Post gestatam Eucharistiam, After the
Circumgestation of the Eucharist. Nor can this Change be imputed to the mistake
of the Press, because their Authors own and endeavor to justify the
Alteration.

These and a great many more Corruptions, Forgeries and Falsifications of the
ancient Fathers are reckoned up in that learned Treatise, which give us fair
warning not to believe every Testimony which our Adversaries pretend to produce
out of such and such old Writers, set forth by themselves for the justification
of those Traditions for which they can bring no good warrant from the written
Word of God. For, since it is undeniable that they have notoriously abused the
Records of Antiquity by suppressing, changing, and inserting, what and where
they pleased; we have abundant cause to believe, that these Alterations are
made in those very places which they commonly cite in their own defense; they
being too wise to forge any counterfeit Deeds, and suborn any other false
Witnesses, then such as are designed to speak for their Advantage. But,

IV. The Champions of the Roman Church endeavor to justify their Traditions
by the Testimony and Authority of such and such Councils. To which we have two
things to reply.

1. We cannot imagine but that whole Councils may err in their Judgments, and
be mistaken in their Canons, Decrees and Constitutions.

That no mere man, save only the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, ever was
Infallible, is acknowledged by some learned persons even of the Roman Church.
If Cajetane were not perfectly of this mind, what means that Expression of his,
Solis Sacrae Scripturae Authoribus reservata est haec Authoritas, Cajetan. in
Praef. Pentat.
ut ideo sic credamus esse, quia Ipsi sic scripserunt? That we should certainly
believe things to be thus and thus, barely because it is so written by such and
such, is a Privilege peculiar to the Penmen of Holy Writ alone. Surely then
that Assertion of Gratian, mentioned by Bellarmine, seems somewhat saucy,
Bellar. de Council. l. 2. c. 12.
Epistolas Pontificum Decretales numerari debere inter Scripturas Canonicas,
The Pope's Decretal Epistles ought to be reckoned amongst the Canonical
Scriptures. And methinks the Cardinal himself seems somewhat confident, when he
speaks thus indifferently of Scriptures and Councils, Vtraque sunt infallibilis
Veritatis, and aeque certa, They are both of infallible Truth, and equally
certain. But if Cardinal Cajetane were in the right; if all those Bishops and
Doctors of whom Councils have consisted were but men, subject to Mistakes and
Errors in their own particular persons; how the whole collective Body of any
Synod should, in the result, prove infallible, the Church of Rome will never be
able to show by any such clear Evidence as may satisfy a sober and impartial
man.

We do not deny but that there is much of Truth in that Assertion of St.
Austine, Aug. ad Januar. Ep. 118.
Conoiliorum in Ecclesia saluberrima est Authoritas, The Authority of Councils
is of great Advantage to the Church of God: we do with all thankfulness to
Heaven acknowledge and own the Four first General Councils; that of Nice, which
vindicated the Divinity of Christ against Arrius; that of Constantinople, which
asserted the Divinity of the Holy Ghost against Macedonius; that of Ephesus,
which maintained the Unity of Christ's Person against Nestorius; and that of
Chalcedon, which asserted the double Nature of Christ against Eutyches. So
venerable is the Authority of these Four Councils, that we do not quarrel with
that high Expression of that good Emperor Justinian, Justinian. Nov. 131.
if rightly understood, (...) We receive the Doctrines of these Four holy
Councils even as (not in equality, but similitude) the Holy Scriptures, and
observe their Canons as so many Laws. Accordingly Evagrius tells us, (...), The
Emperor commanded that the Decrees of these Four Councils should be read
publicly in the Churches.

But although these Councils deserved this great Respect, as keeping close to
the Word of God; yet other Councils, which the Roman Church makes much of, did
not so. That Councils may possibly err, and recede from Scripture-Rules, St.
Hierom declared his Judgment in that Expression of his, cited by Chemnitius,
Chemnit. de Sac. Script. p. 3.
Spiritus Sancti Doctrina est, quae Canonicis literis prodita est; contra quam
siquid statuant Concilia, nefas duco: That is the sure Doctrine of the Holy
Ghost, which is delivered in the Canonical Writings; against which if Councils
determine this or that, I count it wicked. And did not their famous Council of
Constance (when three Popes were upon the stage at once; John set up by the
Italians, Gregory by the French, and Benedict by the Spaniards) define contrary
to the Word of God, (not to mention the case of John Husse and Jerome of Prague)
when they forbad all Priests, under the Penalty of Excommunication, to
administer the Eucharist in both Kinds to the Laiety? And was not this Canon so
contrary to the general Custom of Antiquity, that we must either grant the
Primitive Church to have been mistaken in their old universal Practices, or
else this Council to have been erroneous in this new Constitution?

Indeed, the Roman Church does very well approve the Council of Constance in
their Sacrilegious Decree which robs the People of half the Sacrament: but I
remember the Roman Church does also condemn the self-same Council for that
Definition of theirs whereby they robbed the Pope of more then half his
Authority. For when the Council of Constance had passed their Judgment, and
declared that the Authority of Councils is superior to that of Popes; and when
the Council of Basil had ratified and solemnly confirmed the same Assertion; in
opposition to these two Councils, (the last not then dissolved) Engenius the
Fourth calls a Council at Florence, which by a contrary Vote sets the Pope
above the Council.

So then, here is Council against Council, Canon against Canon, directly
contradicting one another in the self- same matter: and since it is so, we have
all reason to conclude, either that some of these Councils were in an Error;
or else that all Logicians are certainly so, who tell us, that two contrary
Propositions, though possibly both may be false, yet both can never be true
together.

But the truth is, it is observed that there was such Ambition, such Animosities
and Factions discovered in several Councils that were convened in several
Centuries, that Gregory Nazianzene, had he lived in later Ages, might have had
far more just occasion for those Complaints of his, Greg. Naz. ad Procop. Ep.
42.
(...) I never saw an happy Issue of any one Synod whatsoever, which did not
rather augment then remedy Evils. Upon which score he thus resolves, (...) If I
may but write the Truth, my purpose is to decline all Conventions of Bishops
whatsoever. But what is his Reason? It Is clear enough, that this excellent
Person did highly esteem the Council of Nice; for he does not only call it
(...), an Holy Council, but he also tells us that those three hundred and
eighteen Bishops were such (...), whom the Holy Ghost had brought together: and
as for the Council of Constantinople, the Argument of his Epistle to Procopius
tells us, that he himself was magna Concilii pars, a very great man in it: and
if so, what occasion had he to write such unkind things of Councils? Himself
informs us, (...), There was so much Dissension and such Ambition in them as
was beyond expression.

And certainly, if such an eminent Person as Gregory Nazianzene, who was
deservedly styled (...), the Great Theologue or Divine of that Age, found cause
enough to blame some early Councils of those Times; had he lived to see the
Decrees and Canons established by the several Factions of later Conventions, he
would never have thought them, as the Romanists contend, to be Infallible. Aug.
l. 2. de Bapt. c. 3.
True it is, St. Austine tells us, Concilia posteriora prioribus apud Posteros
praeponuntur, Men that live in later times are apt to prefer later Councils
before those that are more ancient: but what reason is there for it? Justellus
in praefat. Can. Ecclesiae Africanae.
That of Justellus is certainly true concerning these later Councils, Non sunt
ejusdem fidei and dignitatis cum prioribus illis Quatuor Oecumenicis, etc. They
are not of the same Credit, Faith and Honor with the Four first General
Councils. And if so, since there are some just grounds of Suspicions and
Jealousies concerning their Determinations, who shall persuade us that they are
Infallible? But,

2. What if it appear that Councils are not only fallible, but that they have
been most miserably corrupted and forged too? What sure warrant have we for
such and such Practices, not recommended in Sacred Writ, from the Authority of
Councils, when such and such Constitutions, Decrees and Canons have been
ascribed to such and such Councils, which indeed were never theirs?

We read that Zosimus, Bishop of Rome, sent his Legates to the sixth Council of
Carthage, with Instructions to maintain the Primacy of the Roman Bishop as the
only Judge in cases of Controversies and Appeals; and for that Prerogative of
his they pretended a Canon of the first Nicene Council: which was indeed a very
fair Plea, had it been true, because the Acts of that Council were not only
confirmed by the Emperor, but received by the universal Church. What
particular Canon of the Nicene Council was pleaded for the Primacy of the Roman
Bishop, Bellarmine tells us. Habemus Nicaenum Concilium, and illum ipsum sextum
Canonem, etc. We have on our side the Nicene Council, and that very sixth
Canon, etc. The Canon is this, (...). The Design of this Canon was only this,
that the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch and all other Metropolitans should
still govern the Churches within their respective Provinces, as the Bishop of
Rome was wont to govern those within his.

These being the express words and this being the undoubted Sense of the Canon,
the Council of Carthage answered Faustinus, Philippus and Asellus, who were the
Pope's Legates, that although they had strictly searched all Registers, and
examined the most authentic Copies of the Acts of the Nicene Council, which
they had received from Cyril Bishop of Alexandria and Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople, yet they could find nothing done by that Council to establish
or countenance the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, nor that the Bishops of Africa
were obliged by any Canon of the Nicene Council to appeal and be subject to the Sea of Rome.

But the Primacy of the Pope being a Point of great Concern to the Roman
Church, and there being nothing more likely to establish it then the Authority
of the Nicene Council, which is received by the universal Church; what greater
Service could any man do for the Bishop of Rome, then to prove his universal
Preeminence over all other Bishops and Churches by some Act of that famous
Council, which no Church gainsayeth? This is that which Bellarmine attempts:
and because he cannot do it convincingly by the Canon, as it is vulgarly read
and expressed in the usual and public Editions; he produces a private Copy,
and tells us, that the Canon, as it is commonly read, is imperfect, and ought
thus to begin, Ecclesia Romana semper habuit Primatum: Mos autem perduret, etc.
The Roman Church has always had the Primacy, etc.

One would think it strange that Bellarmine should adventure to make such an
Addition to the Canon of so known and famous a Council: but, to justify
himself, he tells us, that this Canon was anciently so read; and that about a
thousand years ago it was thus translated out of the Greek Copies into Latin
by a certain Abbot, named Dionysius; and that such a Copy was found in the
Roman Library; and that it was so read by Paschasianus, the Legate of Pope Leo,
in the Council of Chalcedon, and there approved.

But in desperate cases the old Rule must be observed, Scelere tutandum est
Scelus, One Lie must be justified by another. For it is not easy to believe,
that the only true Copy of the Acts of the Nicene Council, and that in a
Latin Translation too, should be preserved at Rome: nor is it easy to
imagine, that if there had been such an authentic Copy of that famous Council
lodged at Rome, it would have been permitted so long to have lain in the dark,
and never have been produced ti^ the Council of Chalcedon; especially since the
Interest of the Roman Bishop required the Production thereof to prove the same
Prerogative above fifty years sooner. For will any man believe that those Roman
Bishops, Zosimus and his Successor Boniface, who claimed this Primacy from the
sixth Council of Carthage, would have been so far wanting to themselves, as not
to have produced such an authentic Copy, which, if clearly made out, would
have satisfied the Council, ended the Controversy, and established the Primacy
of Rome by a Law?

True it is, Faustinus, the Pope's Legate, produced in that Council his
Commonitorium which he had from Rome, pretending the Authority of the Nicene
Fathers for the Primacy of the Pope, and particularly in matters of Appeal: but
how little these Pretenses were liked by the Council, we may easily guess by
that Answer which was returned by Alipius, who was a great man there, (...) It
troubles me, that though we have examined the Greek Copies of the Nicene
Council, yet (how it comes to pass I cannot tell) we can by no means find any
such thing as the Roman Bishop pretends and claims. And so much did they
certify Pope Boniface himself in their Synodical Letter, (...) (...) Having
many Greek Copies before us, we could not find what was intimated and demanded
from Rome, no not so much as in any one.

However, that they might satisfy themselves and the Bishop of Rome too so
much the better, they thought fit to dispatch away their Letters to Cyril
Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, desiring them to
send over what Copies and Registers they had of the Nicene Council: who
accordingly did so. For thus Cyril tells them, (...). And thus Atticus too,
(...). It Is evident, by these Expressions, that these two Bishops sent over to
the Council of Carthage the Acts, Decrees and Canons of the Nicene Fathers
entire, uncorrupted, and unquestionable. And what is the Issue? do any one of
these Copies agree with that of Rome? No; the Council having perused (...),
these true Copies, sent this Message to Caelestinus, who was now become Pope,
and had made the same Demands with Zosimus and Boniface, (...), We cannot find
any such Canon as is pretended, no not in the most authentic Copies that we
have perused.

But the truth is, that Copy of the Nicene Council mentioned by the Pope's
Legate to the Council of Carthage was, to the shame of the Roman See,
unworthily and basely corrupted; and those words mentioned by Bellarmine,
Ecclesia Romana semper habuit Primatum, were de novo, how politickly soever,
yet knavishly enough, added to the old Canon. For it is evident that the Council
of Carthage resolved to alter nothing that had been defined by the Nicene
Fathers. (...) and again, (...). Which Expressions are enough to convince all
reasonable men, that this Council of Carthage had no inclination to change any,
but confirm all, the Constitutions of the Nicene Fathers: but as to that Canon
which the Pope's Legate pretended, requiring or allowing the African Clergy to
appeal from their own Bishops to the Bishop of Rome, they were so far from
confirming this, that they established an express Canon against it; and thus it
runs, (...) Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferior Clergymen, in whatever
Causes they have, let them not appeal to any Tribunal beyond the Sea, i. e. as
the Council expressly words it in their Letter to the Pope, (...), let them not
appeal to the Bishop of Rome. This Canon did so nettle the Roman Bishops, that
upon this occasion Boniface the Second told Eulalius Bishop of Carthage, who
had now unworthily submitted his Chair to the Sea of Rome, that his
Predecessor Aurelius, St. Austine, and above two hundred more learned and
pious Bishops assembled in the Council of Carthage, had denied Subjection to
the Roman Bishop, because they were, as he impudently affirmed, inspired and
instigated by the Devil.

But as from this Determination of the Council of Carthage we may conclude that
pretended Canon of the Nicene Bishops, alleged by Faustinus in the Pope's
behalf, to be spurious and forged; so may we reasonably infer as much from the
consideration of its matter, which is altogether untrue and evidently false.
For, is it imaginable that so early a Council as that of Nice should
acknowledge and ratify the perpetual Primacy of the Roman Bishop, since it is
notoriously known, that the Primacy of the Roman Bishops was first derived from
that bloody Emperor Phocas, and procured by the crafty Insinuations of
Boniface the Third, who, magna cum contentione, as Platina writes, with much
ado procured, but most willingly assumed to himself, the Title of Universal
Bishop, and Head of all other Churches?

That it was not thus in former Ages, we have the Confession of Gregory the
Great, who tells us, Gregor. M. l. 4. Ep. 36.
Nullus unquam Praedecessorum meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti consuevit;
None of all my Predecessors would ever assume to himself this profane Title:
and as for himself, he was so far from owning it, that he was the very first
Bishop of Rome that styled himself Servus Servorum Dei, the Servant of the
Servants of God. To style himself by this humble Title he took occasion from
the Pride and Arrogance of John, called (...), Patriarch of Constantinople,
which being at that time the Imperial Seat, this John had took upon him the
Title of Universal Bishop; whereof Gregory thus complains: Greg. M. l. 4. Ep.
32.
O tempora! o mores! Ecce destructae urbes, eversa castra, etc. and tamen
Sacerdotes, qui in pavimento and cinere flentes jacere debuerunt, Vanitatis
sibi nomen expetunt, and novis and prophanis vocabulis gloriantur. With this
Expression of Gregory the Great agrees that of Vspergensis; Vsperg. in Phocam.
Rogatu Bonifacii Phocas constituit Sedem Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae
Caput esse omnium Ecclesiarum; nam antea Constantinopolitana Ecclesia se
scribebat primam Omnium: Phocas, at the Request of Boniface, ordained that the Sea of Rome should be Head of all Churches; for before that time the Church of
Constantinople did write herself the Prime of all Churches. And if so, how can
it be imagined that the Primacy of the Roman Bishop should be acknowledged and
granted, as Bellarmine contends, by the sixth Canon of the very first General
Council?

No; the certain truth is, this Canon was unworthily corrupted in favor of the
Roman Bishop: and although our Adversaries cannot for shame acknowledge their
own corrupting of Councils; yet they cannot deny but that it has been
familiarly done by other persons. Nay, doubtless, in some cases they themselves
pretend the Corruption of Councils, when in truth there was no such matter. For
if the Authority of such or such a Council be urged against the Roman Church,
and cannot otherwise be well escaped, they have no other Shift to save
themselves, but only to pretend that such and such a Canon, which they cannot
answer, is false and counterfeit. It Is a certain Truth, that their Pope
Honorius was condemned for a downright Heretic by the sixth General Council,
which consisted of an hundred and seventy Fathers assembled at Constantinople;
so it is recorded: Auctor Incertus de Synodis.
(...), says one; The Council condemned Honorius and some other Assertours of
the same Opinion as Heretics that fought against God. And that this Sentence
was just, Photius in sext. Synodo.
Photius thus assures us, (...), they brought them under a righteous
Condemnation.

But will the Roman Church contentedly suffer any Bishop of theirs to be
condemned, branded and recorded for an arrant Heretic, and plead nothing in
his behalf? What would then become of their dear Infallibility? what would then
become of Pope Agatho's Letter to the sixth General Council, wherein he
bragged, that the Bishops of Rome never erred in Points of Faith? Or will the
Roman Church acknowledge that a General Council may be mistaken, and that in a
matter of so great Concern to themselves as they take the Infallibility of
their Bishops to be? It Is a shrewd Dilemma that our Adversaries lie under in
this case. For, if Honorius were certainly an Heretic, their Infallibility
cease: but if Honorius were no Heretic, then may General Councils err,
which the Roman Church is loath to grant. Well; to secure the Credit of
Honorius, and the Authority of that General Council which condemned him too,
Bellarmine invents this trick, Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans l. 4. c. 11.
and tells us, Erat Consuetudo Graecorum fere ordinaria corrumpendi libros,
etc. It was even the familiar Custom of the Grecians to corrupt the Copies of
Councils. And that it was so indeed in the case of Honorius, he takes for
granted; Sine dubio Honorii nomen inter eos qui damnantur a sexta Synodo
insertum esse ab aemulis Romanae Ecclesiae, etc. Without doubt the name of
Honorius was inserted among those Heretics whom the sixth Council condemned by
some persons that bore no good will to the Roman Church. Thus would the
Cardinal make the world believe, that what Canon soever spoke any thing against
a Bishop of his Church, must certainly be corrupted and forged by the Grecians;
who, as he intimates, had no great Kindness for the Roman See.

And methinks, if Bellarmine be real in what he says; if he did verily suspect
that such and such Councils were indeed corrupted and forged by the Grecians,
as being disaffected to the Roman Church; we have greater cause to be jealous,
that such and such Councils have been miserably corrupted and forged by the
Latins, who are sworn enemies to every Church which differs from their own.
For, since it is evident that they have made so bold with that famous Council of
Nice, as to falsify a Canon of theirs; we cannot think that they have so great
a Veneration for any other Council besides, but that they will corrupt and
forge them, even as often as their Interest does so require.

And since it is thus; since, by the Confession of our Adversaries themselves,
such and such particular Fathers have strangely erred; since the most Learned
men of the Roman Church have acknowledged that even Popes and Councils have
been, if not mistaken in themselves, yet basely corrupted by others: we cannot
think our selves obliged to accept the Authority and Testimonies of such
Fathers, Popes and Councils, as sure and infallible Proofs of those Traditions
which are now received in and recommended by the Roman Church, though neither
attested by the Universal Church, nor warranted by the written Word of God.
And, upon this score, we can do no less then wonder at the strange Confidence
and unparalled Presumption of the Council of Trent and their Abettours, who
dare at least equal their own Traditions, which stand upon such uncertain and
slippery Grounds, even to those Holy Scriptures which are universally owned and
infallibly proved to be (...), the sure and undoubted Word of Christ.

(...). FINIS.

