TWO SERMONS The first Preached at Steeple-Aston in Oxfordshire at the Funeral
of Mr. Francis Croke of that Place Aug. 2. 1672. The other at the Funeral of
Alexander Croke of Studley Esquire Buried at Chilton in Buckinghamshire October. 24.
1672.

By DANIEL GREENWOOD M. A. and late Rector of Steeple-Aston in Oxfordshire.

OXFORD, Printed Anno Dom. 1680.

Isai. LVII. 1, 2. The Righteous perishes and no Man lays it to heart, and
merciful Men are taken away; none considering that the Righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. He shall enter into peace, they rest in their Beds each
one walking in his uprightness.
THE Prophet Isaiah (as all the Ministers of Christ) was set to be a Watchman,
to give warning of Judgment approaching; and also to be a Judge to Judge the
House of Israel and to show them all their abominations, the causes and
procurers of these Judgments. To be also the voice of a Crier or a Trumpet to
alarm and rouse them to a readiness, that being God would do this to them,
they should prepare to meet the Lord by a thorough humiliation, hearty
repentance, and effectual reformation and amendment of such things as are
amiss. In the dispatch and delivery of this his message and errand, he meets
with various effects, and his word different entertainment from two sorts of
Men. 1. some were stubborn and disobedient going on impenitently in their
rebellion, adding Sin to Sin, and securely promising themselves prosperity,
many happy days, with a plentiful and flourishing State; notwithstanding all
the menaces of the Prophet, like those Deuteronomy. 29. 19. That say they shall have
peace though they walk after the imagination of their own Heart adding
drunkenness to thirst, so these secure desperate Jews slighting the
threatenings of God by his Prophet cry in the verse before my Text, Come, I will
fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong Drink; and to morrow shall
be as this Day and much more abundant, like Babylon that said Is. 47. 7, 8.
etc. I shall be a Lady for ever so that they did not lay those things to Heart
nor consider the latter end of it, like those Amos. 6. 1. That are at ease, put
far from them the evil day, and regard not the afflictions of Joseph. But
secondly there was another sort whose Hearts like Josiahs were tender, trembled
at Gods word, were afraid of his Judgments, prepared their Hearts to seek the
Lord, and Mourned in secret for common abominations* who mended what they could
and mourned for what they could not Now so it came to pass that while God was
thus threatening these degenerate Jews by slow but secret paths making way for
his wrath, and bringing on the Judgments which he had denounced; many of those
Holy Men fore spoken of dropped away; some it may be cut off by a sudden and
violent stroke, who had their Lives threatened by the cruel usage of mercyless
persecutors; others called aside by the wife dispose of him* whose we are, and
whose our time and Life is. So that good Men seemed to be very thin strewed;
scant one of a family and two of a tribe; that he might complain as the
Psalmist. Ps. 12. 1. Help Lord, for the Godly man cease, the faithful fail;
or as Mich. 7. 1. Woe is me for I am as when they have gathered the Summer
fruits, as the Grape gleanings of the Vintage. All this was little regarded or
minded by wicked worldly, and voluptuous Men; but it could not choose but be an
hearts grief, a sore rock of offense, and occasion of trouble of mind to
serious and considerate persons. Therefore the Prophet amidst dreadful
denunciations of Judgment against the maine Body of State, inserts some words
of comfort to the sincere hearted who could not but lament to see but few good,
and those few made every day fewer by Death. And therefore in these two verses
God by his Prophet tells the People. 1. How greatly he resents that neglect
which his People met with, complaining that their Death was not regarded; nor
their loss valued as it ought. 2. Tells them what gracious end he had in
cutting the thread of their temporal Lives, which was to deliver them from the
evil to come. 3. What care God had of them after this life, and what amends he
made them for snatching them sooner then ordinary out of the World. They enter
into peace etc. These afford us sundry points of Instruction. 1. That God would
have the Death of his Servants minded and laid to Heart. 2. God sometimes in
much Mercy takes away his Children by Death from the evil to come. 3. That the
Death of the Righteous is the beginning and inlett of their happiness.

1. That God would have the Death of his Servants minded and laid to Heart. The
righteous perishes and no Man etc. by Righteous understand in a large sense,
the Holy, the good Man, that has respect to all Gods Commandments; that is
careful to order his Conversation aright, or, as the 2. verse expresses it,
He that walks in his uprightness. By the merciful Man, understand the same
good and holy man expressing his Piety to God by his Charity to his Brother:
and merciful is added to just, because it is not enough to give every one his
own, and do no body any wrong, unless he be a doing good likewise, showing
mercy, and extending bowels of compassion toward them that are in want. Ps.
37. 26. The Righteous is ever merciful and Lends. v. 21. he shows mercy
and gives. Ps. 112. v. 4. He is gracious, full of compassion and righteous. v.
5. A good man shows favor and lends. v. 9. He has dispersed, he has given
to the poor etc. In all which places we see Righteousness and mercifulness
are joined together, as in the Text, and a Man is not a righteous, except he be
a merciful Man. That Summum jus which some Men stand so much upon, and expect
so much to be justified by, whereby they give every one their own, and
accordingly, exact their own of every one without difference or distinction,
when it is weighed in Gods balance will be found Summa injuria, extreme wrong:
far from what he expects from a Christian, whose profession is Charity. You are
my Disciples if you Love one another. Jo. 15. 12. and who have these precepts
from the Apostle of their profession. Be merciful as your H^avenly Father is
merciful. Lu. 6. 36 and in a word, Piety, Justice and Mercy are so nearly
linkt together that where all are not, none is in truth. He that has this
worlds goods, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up the Bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? 1. Jo. 3. 17. He has
showed thee, O Man, what is good and what the Lord requires of thee, that thou
do Justice, Love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. Mic. 6. 8. Pure Religion
before God and the Father is this to visit the Fatherless and Widow in their
affliction etc. Ja. 1. 27.

This righteous, this merciful Man is said to perish, to be taken away: which
must not be understood of the perishing of his Soul, or his being finally lost;
for God gave his Son to the end that who so ever believes, should not perish.
Jo. 3. 16. and the Son has laid down his life to seek and save that which was
lost, and has past his word, that his sheep who hear his voice and follow him
shall not perish Jo. 10. 28. But the meaning is, they are took away by a
temporal Death, and the Prophet finds fault with the careless and obstinate
Jews for taking no notice of it.

The Death of all Men in general although it be a common thing, and meets us
every day yet o^ght not to be past over with a transient and regardlesse eye.
Eccl. 7. 2. It is better to go to the house of Mourning then to the House of
Rejoicing: for that is the end of all Men, and the Living will lay it to heart.
As if he should say, in the House of mourning (so the places are called where
funerals are celebrated, or friends are departed) a Man is minded of the
common lot, and end of all men. Man sees his own end in the end of others, and
is thereby admonished of his own frailty and Mortality* which it highly
concerns him to remember, and to be thoroughly affected with. Here we see the
greatness and power of God who takes away Man's Breath, He dies and returns to
his dust. Psa. 104 29. We see our own vileness and vanity: that dust we are and
to dust we return; and at our best estate altogether vanity. Ps. 9. 5 But it
much more concerns us to be deeply affected with the Death of good men. Ps.
116. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of all his Saints. And
surely what is precious in Gods eyes ought not to be common and contemptible in
ours.

The reasons why the death of good Men ought more especially to be laid to
heart, are

1. Because of the paucity and scantness of such. The Soldiers would not
permit David to hazard himself because he was worth ten thousand of them. 2 Samuel 18. 3. There were multitudes of common persons, few Kings, especially such
as David was. Wicked Men are as the common stones of the brook and of the
highway; but Righteous men are jewels Man: 3. 17. The loss of Jewels is the
more lamented because they are precious and rare. This made Ezekiel take on so
much for the Death of Pelatiah, because there were but few such as he; and a
few out of a remnant would be quickly mist. Ezekiel: 11. 13. It came to pass that
when I prophesied Pelatiah the Son of Benaiah dyed, and I cried with a loud
voice and said, O Lord God will thou make a full end of the Remnant of Israel:
The latter times are foretold to be perilous, because the generality of men
shall be lovers of their own selves etc. Christ's flock a little flock, and his
people a remnant, but then more especially too, when iniquity abounds, and love
and piety grow cold: When therefore God shall gleane out of this remnant and
take away at the head of this flock, it is time to bethink our selves what God
is doing and say with the Psalmist Ps: 12. 1. Help Lord for the godly Man
cease etc.

2. Because of that Heavenly relation that is between all Christians, and that
Spiritual sympathy and fellow-feeling that ought to be between them. Such as is
between the Members of the natural Body that when one Member suffers, all
suffer: and if one be cut of, the rest (not that which is cut off) retain the
sense and smart of the loss. It is true, death does not cut of a Christian
either from Christ the Head, or from his mystical Body, these relations hold
when all natural, and civil ones cease; Death which untwists all others, ties
this the faster* Yet it cutts off from the society of the Militant Church; the
rank is broken, his place is void, his presence missing and his service
wanting till God fill it up by a new supply. The visible Communion which we had
with such an one in joint prayers both public and private, in mutual
exhortations, encouragements, instructions, and consolations is interrupted,
and they to whom such Communion of Saints, such intercourse of Christian, and
brotherly love was pleasant and desierable cannot but lay to heart the want of
it. The cracking or failing of one string in an instrument disturbs the
harmony; so does the loss of one member abate the wonted pleasure and
solemnity of our Christian society and Communion.

3. When we lay to heart the Death of good Men we testify to the world what
love we bare to their Persons, and what value and esteem we have of their
Virtue and goodness. When Jesus wept at the grave of Lezarus then said the
Jews, behold how he Loved him. Jo. 11. 36. This made the Saints and Widows
to weep so vehemently at the Death of Tabitha, hereby testifing to Peter, the
Church and all the world how high an esteem they had of her goodness. For she
was full of good works and almesdeed, which she did. Acts. 9. 36. These and
the like reasons do especially persuade good Men to lay to heart the Death of
good Men. But the following ones will show cause to all Men, good and bad, to
regard and lament over the fall of a Righteous Person.

4. Because of the usefulness of such and the loss that all sustain by the
removal. (...). Good Men are a general, a common good. They are the props and
supports of a place. The Earth and the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I
bear up the pillars of it. Psa: 75. 3. A Building stands by the strength of
the pillars; so the World stands by the support of the godly, which else would
fall down upon the heads of wicked Men as the just punishment of their
iniquity. The frame of the world is kept up for the sake of the Church. It had
long ere this been Buried in 'its own Sins and ruins were it not that God
waited for the conversion and coming in of some, and the perfection and
consummation of the rest, that belong to the election of his grace. Particular
places had sunk under their own guilt and their confusion covered them, if
good Men did not support them. If the Lord had not left us a very small remnant
we had been as Sodom and made like unto Gomorrah. Is. 1. 9. and CHAPTER 6. 13. As
Oaks whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves, so the Holy seed
shall be the substance thereof. As if he should say; look, as in the winter the
sap and virtue that is in the root keeps the tree alive, so is the Holy seed
the substance of the remnant that preserves them from being wasted with a total
and utter destruction. Wicked and ungodly Men are called unprofitable Romans 3.
12. Matt: 25. 30. good Men profitable and useful. So Paul of Onesimus, sometime
unprofitable, that is, before his conversion; now profitable to thee and to me.
Now, good Men are sundry ways profitable; by example, by advice, by their
prayers, and their very presence. 1. By example, being Cittyes set on an Hill,
Candles on a Candlestick to direct and enlighten others. Their lights so
shining before Men that others seeing their good works both Glorify God and
edify and encourage one another in Holiness and obedience. Therefore Saint
Paul bids Christians walk as they had him for an example: and bid's Timothy be
an example to the Believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in
purity 1 Timothy: 4. 12. The forwardness of the Thessalonians being exemplary to
all the Believers in Macedonia and Achaia. 1 These. 1. 7. and their zeal of the
Corinthians provoked many 2 Cor. 9. 2. Paul's constancy made many bold to speak
the word of God without fear Phil. 1. 14. II. Profitable by the advice:
whether it be by directing Men in the way wherein they should go, comforting
them under afflictions and temtations by the consolations wherewith they have
been comforted of the Lord; by reducing those that wander from the right way or
restoring those that are fallen with the Spirit of meekness. Ointment and
perfume rejoice the heart so does the sweetness of a Man's Friend by hearty
counsel Prove. 27. 9. to this purpose sound those frequent Proverbs of the Wise
Man. Prove: 10. 21. The lips of the righteous ^eed many. Where a good Man by
reason of the readiness and ability that is in him to give good Counsel is
compard to a good Housekeeper that keeps free and open hospitality for all
comers: so is he ready to entertain every one with wholesome and savory
discourse to give them good admonition and advice, and send them away glad and
better from him. Prove: 15. 7. The lips of the wise scatter or disperse
knowledge. Where the good Man is compard to a Husbandman or a Sower scattering
his Seed upon the Land; from whence afterward comes an hopeful and a plentiful
crop. So they by wise and seasonable admonitions and instructions sow the Seeds
of grace and knowledge in the Heads and Hearts of those that are under them,
and about them, whereby rises up another generation taught and prepared to
fear, serve and glorify God, and to do good in their places, as a Crop comes up
after the Seeding, and supplies us at the next Harvest. 3. Profitable by their
prayers, in which respect they are said to stand in the gap and to stop the
process of Divine displeasure. Such an useful Man was Mases to the People of
Israel Ps. 106. 23. Therefore be said he would destroy them had not Moses his
chosen stood in the breach, to turn away his Wrath, least he should destroy
them. In which respect they are called the Chariots of Israel and the horsemen
thereof: prevailing more with God for the preservation and defense of his
People by their prayers, then arms and Armies can do by force to secure them.
The prayers of good Men have a kind of power, as it were to bind the Hands of
the Almighty and stop his vengeance when he has conceived just displeasure
against a place or People. Let me alone, says God to Moses that I may destroy
them. A power also to open the Hands of his bounty, and to shower down
blessings Temporal and Spiritual on the Heads of them for whom the Prayer is
made: the effectual fervent prayer of a Righteous Man avails much Ja* 5. 16.
Lastly in all these respects their very presence is a blessing to the Place,
Town, Family and Age wherein they are. God blessed the House of Obed Edom
because the Arc abode in it for a time 2 Sa. 6. 11. But where a true Child of
God is, behold a greater then the Arc is there. God was present in the Ark
typically, representatively, but he is in his Servants (spiritually indeed, but
yet) really, and he blesses the places where they dwell. Justly did Jacob
plead with Laban Genesis 30. 30. It was little that thou had before I came: its
now increased to a Multitude, and the Lord has blessed thee since my coming.
From the time that Potiphar made Jos^ph Overseer of his House Genesis 89. 5. The
Lord blessed the House of the Egyptian for Joseph's sake, and the blessing of
the Lord was upon all that he had in the House and the Field. Rahab was a
righteous Person, for she believed Heb. 11. 31. and a merciful person for she
saved the Spies from the fury of the Men of Jericho, and this Righteous, this
merciful Person preserved not her self only, but her Family and Kindred from
the common destruction Josh 6. 22. Even wicked men fare the better for the
Neighborhood and society of good Men. Cham was preserved from the general
deluge because he was of Noah's family. The rude Soldiers and Mariners were
saved in a Shipwreck because Paul was in the company the Lord (says the Angel)
has given thee all them that sail with thee; and not a hair of their Head
fell to the ground. Acts 27. 24, 34. Is it nothing then to loose the good
examples, the seasonable and cordial advices, the fervent and prevalent
Intercessions, and finally the presence of Gods Children, which God has such
respect to, that for their sak^s he blesses the places and communities wherein
they dwell? Surely this should make us lay to heart, if not their Death, yet
our own loss. Especially.

5. Considering that their removal is a sad presage of that future evil and
Calamity which God may bring on those that are left behind. When useful men of
any kind in Church or State are removed its like the breaking down of banks,
commonly followed with an inundation of trouble and miseries. Is. 3. 2. etc. I
will take away the mighty man, the Judge, the Prophet, the Prudent, the Ancient
etc. and the People shall be oppressed etc. Righteous men are in their spheres
and places such useful persons, as the corner Stones of the building that both
unite and strengthen it, whose removal shat^ers and endangers the whole frame.
The Death of good Josiah caused a grievous mourning in Judah: in so much as it
grew to a proverb, the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. Zech.
12. 11* Why because they foresaw that when he was gone, wickedness grew bold
and irresistible, and the Captivity so often threatened, so long deferred came
on amain, which at last swept them away like an universal flood. When God
withdraws his people out of a sinful place and generation he makes way for his
wrath. When the best stakes are took out of the hedge its not like to stand
long; the trash and offall is only fit for the fire. When God had shut up Noah
in his Arc he brings the Flood upon the world of the ungodly. When he had
secured his Lot in Zoar, Sodoms fair and Sunshine morning ends in a black and
dismal storm. If then we consider the paucity of good men, if we remember they
are our Brethren, our Fellow Members, if we owe any respect to the memory of
them, if we consider their usefulness while they are here, and the ill presages
that their removal carries in it: he must have an understanding of lead, and an
Heart of brass that lets the Righteous perish without regarding, or merciful
Men be took away without laying it to Heart.

All which I have spoken not to add affliction to the afflicted, or to mix
Vinegar with their Gall, nor to grieve the Hearts of those who are too much
overwhelmed with Sorrow already. I have another word to them before we part.
But to awaken the careless and secure world who regard not the Works of God,
nor consider the operation of his Hand, who take no notice what desolations God
makes on the Earth, what breachcs in particular places and families, that
regard not the afflictions of Joseph, nor the Death of him that Dies. Where
are your natural affections, where are your Bowels of Spiritual Love and
compassion sympathetically feeling a common loss and bearing one another
burdens? Nay where are your eyes and understandings to enquire and discern the
reason hereof: and what God means by snatching his own out of the World? so
the Text.

None considering that the Righteous are took away from the evil to come. The
word [to come] is not in the Original. No more is there read but, [are took
away from the face of the evil.] Which may only note their freeing and
delivering from Sin and suffering, which are the evils they have felt in this
present life. Having from henceforth all Sin washed from their Souls, and all
tears wiped from their Eyes. So as for the time to come they shall neither
offend, nor be offended; shall neither commit evil, nor be capable of the
impression of any evil from without. But I shall take the words as we
Translate them, and as they are most commonly understood and applied. Hence
collect.

2. That God sometimes in much Mercy takes away his dearest Children from the
evil to come. When God is about to bring some public calamity or some common
scourage upon a People or place he removes his own that they shall not see
them, nor feel the smart or burden of them. Among the many ways of mercy that
God has to secure his People from general evils, this is one to call them
forth to himself, to hide them in the grave, where malice and wrong can do
them no further mischief. Is: 26. 20. Come my People, enter into thy Closet,
shut the door after thee. Hide thy self for a littel moment till the
Indignation be overpast, And what if one sort of these Chambers be the Chambers
of a natural Death and these doors be the sides of the pit, and the Leaves of
the Grave? As God made an Arc for Noah to save him from the Flood, so he can
make the Grave an Arc, wherein to secure his People till the indignation be
past. So says God to Josiah. 2 Kings. 22. 19. 20. Because thine heart was
tender, and thou humbledst thyselfe and weptst before me, I have heard thee:
behold I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be gatherd to thy
Grave in peace and thine Eyes shall not see all the evil that I will do unto
this Place. Thus it is observed that Methuselah and Lamech and probably many
more of the good Parriarchs were gathered 10 their Grave, the Year before the
Flood Luther Dyed a little before the commotion and sad desolations that were
made by the Boores in Germany; and Saint Austin Dyed while his City was
Besieged by the Barbarous and Pagan Vandals* and good Paraeus but a few Days
before the taking and sacking of Heidelberge, by the little less barbarous and
Bloody Spaniards and Imperialists.

This then should teach us yet more seriously to lay to heart the Death of good
Men, least perhaps it should portend any future evil to us that are left
behind. When a Prince calls forth his friends and allies out of a forrainers
Country it is an argument he has a controversy with that Country. When Saul
called the Kenites from among the Amalekites it was a forerunner of a War
with Amalck. 1 Samuel: 15. 16. When God calls his Servants and friends out of a
place, let them that are left consider their ways and amend their lives. If
these things be done to the green Tree, what shall be done to the dry? and if
God take away that which is the substance, the sap, and the juice, what is the
rest but dry Wood, fit only to be bundled up and burnt? Learn we then to
turn our natural passions into Christian affections; our bootlesse sorrow for
the Dead into useful and pious love for the Living. Weep for the Sins, for the
sufferings of the living: for what is present, for what may be future, what they
feel, what further they may fear. Jer 22. 10. Weep not for the Dead, neither
bemoane him, but weep sore for him that goes away. That is whose troubles are
but now a beginning, being to endure the miseryes of a sore and long Captivity:
which will make them of Solomon's Mind Eccl: 4. 2. Wherefore I Praised them
which are already Dead more then the Living which are yet alive; yea better is
he then both they who has not yet been, who has not seen the evil that is
under the Sun. When a great company of people followed our Savior to his
crucifixion, and the Women bewailed and Lamented him Luc. 23. 28. Jesus turned
to them and said; Oh Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but for your
selves and for your Children, for the Day is coming in which it shall be said,
Blessed are the barren, and the Womb that never bare etc. Convert your mourning
and tears into fervent prayers and supplications for the pardon of our Sins
who remain, and preventing the further progress of Gods Judgments When Moses
had took a full prospect of that grievous mortality that was in his time in the
Camp of Israel, and had had sad reflections upon it, he concludes-all with
prayers fi^t for our imitation in such a time as this, that the living might
lay it to heart, and learn to prepare for Death; that God would put a stop to
his displeasure and revive the hearts of his people with some tokens of favor
and mercy for the time to come. Ps. 90. 12. Teach us to number our days etc.
Return O Lord how long! and let it repent thee concerning thy servants: make
us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us etc. so David Ps.
39. Contemplating the shortness and uncertainty of humane life improves that
consideration into such petitions as these. v. 4. Lord make me to know mine end
etc. v. 8. Deliver me from my transgressions. v. 10. Remove thy stroke away
from me. v. 12. I am a stranger as all my fathers were. Oh spare me that I may
recover strength before I go hence etc. Go we and pray like wise.

3. The Death of the Righteous is the beginning and inlet of their happiness:
from henceforth they cease to be miserable and enter into bliss. This is
assured us by a double expression in the Text. 1. He shall enter into peace,
that is the Righteous Man departs here with inward peace in his Soul and
Conscience. Lu. 2. 29. Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, this peace
begins here being supported by that hope which at length will not make ashamed.
Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God, and rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God. Or, he departs hence into Rest and Peace: Glory,
Honor and Peace on every Soul that does well. Rom: 2. 10. This is that peace
which the world neither gives nor takes away. A Peace which the world is not
acquainted with: and therefore considers not that when the Righteous is taken
away he enters into peace. For a Christians spiritual Life is a riddle and
mystery to a worldly man, much more is eternal Life. Our life is hid with
Christ in God. Col: 3. 3. but shall be revealed, seen and confessed by all at the
general resurrection. v. 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall
appear with him in glory. This is a peace that passes our present
understanding. For Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it enterd into
the Heart of Man to conceive what God has laid up for those that Love him. We
are now (says the Apostle 1 John: 3: 2.) the Sons of God but it does not
appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. 2. They shall rest in their Beds. As
their souls pass to a place of rest and blessedness, so their Bodies are laid
down at rest in the Grave as in a Bed, or Bedchamber, there to sleep quietly
till the general Resurrection. Hence it is familiar with the Scripture to
express Death by sleep, the Grave by an House, a Chamber, a Bed, and the
Resurrection by waking and rising, as Men do in the Morning out of their Beds
after the sleep and repose of the Night. Both phrases put together import the
felicity both of Soul and Body, perfect peace and satisfaction of mind, with an
undisturbed rest and ease of Body, whereby the whole man being freed from Sin
and all the evil effects of it, Ghostly and Bodily, is admitted to see God,
and enjoy him in a fuller measure then ever he was seen or enjoyed in this
Life, or it can enter into the Heart of Man at present to conceive. Rev. 14 13.
I heard a voice from Heaven saying, Write; Blessed are the dead which dye in
the Lord, from henceforth. Yea says the Spirit that they may rest from their
labors, and their works follow them.

1. This should Stanch our sorrow, and stop all immoderate grief for good and
Holy Men departed this life. For, besides the unprofitableness of this grief,
neither benefiting, nor recalling those that are deceased; (which consideration
put a stop to David's mourning for his Child 2 Samuel: 12. 22. for he said, while
the Child was yet alive, I fasted and Wept, for I said who can tell whether God
will be gracious unto me that the chid may live. But now he is Dead wherefore
should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not
return to me.) Besides the unpleasingness of it to God, who as he has taught
us to Pray that his will may be done, so he requires us to be contented and
satisfied when we see it done, so is it unreasonable in it self; the day of a
good Man's Death being better then the day of his Birth Eccl: 4. 2. He is borne
to toil and labor, to misery and trouble. But at Death he enters into peace,
he rests in his Bed. Who ever grieved to see his friend take his natural rest
quietly? Who was ever discontented with an happy peace after a troublesome and
a tedious War; or a safe harbor after a dangerous and a Stormy passage; or an
easy Bed after an hard Days labor? Nay it savours of some unkindnes to our
deceased friends to be immoderately sorrowful for their departure; as if we
more valued the comfort and benefit we receive by their bodily presence, then
their seeing the face of god and enjoying the pleasures that run at his right
hand for ever more. Do but recollect concerning our friends departed, how many
cares and troubles they were encumbred with in this World; what fears within,
what terrors without, what anxious and sollicitous cares for Souls, for
Bodies, for themselves, their familyes, their friends and relations, and for
ihe Church of God, how deep their sighs, how many their tears, how fervent
their prayers and wrestlings with God, both alone and with others, in private
and in public, and then consider again, can we be sorry that these troubles
are at an end, that these cares are off, that these tears are wiped from their
eyes, that their prayers are heard, and their petitions, longings, and hopes
are swallowed up in fruition and Enjoyment: that their fight is fought, their
warfare accomplished, and that they have received at the Hands of the Lord, not
double, but a thousand fold, reparation and recompense for all their service of
Faith, and labor of Love, and patience of hope which they have expressed in this
day of their pilgrimage. To me says the Apostle Phil. 1. 21. To Dye is gain.
Oppose we not our loss to their gain, our temporal to their Eternal. Non
moeremus etc. says Hierome. We grieve not that we have lost such an one, but
we give God thanks that we had him: nay we have him, for to God all are alive,
and who ever is returned to the Lord, is yet accounted of the Family, that is,
still a member of the Body of Christ, and therefore not lost but shall come
again when he shall be revealed from Heaven with all his Saints. 1. These. 4.
13. I would not have you ignorant Brethren concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not as others which have no hope, for if you believe that Jesus
Dyed and Rose again, even so them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
2. This should reach us to give all diligence to be of the number of these
Blessed ones, that when we Dye we may enter into peace, we may rest in our
Beds: that our Souls may be admitted to the beatifical vision of God and
Christ, and our Bodies may rest in hope, even such hope as Job professes. Job.
19. 25. I know that my redeemer Lives and shall stand at the latter day on the
Earth and though after my skin worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh I
shall see God, whom I shall see my self and mine eyes shall behold and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me. And if you ask me how we
shall attain to this happiness and hope, I answer, The way is prescribed us in
the Text, and a pattern given us in the present occasion. The way prescribed
in the Text is this, Every one walking in his uprightnes. The distributive
particle (every one) seems to mind us that we must not trust to others merits,
but each one express the truth of his faith by the goodness of his own
personal conversation. For though God here may visit the sins of the Fathers
upon the Children, and shows mercy unto after-generations for their
forefathers sake, yet at the day of Account we must all appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ 2 Cor: 5. 10. And every one of us shall give Account of
himself to God Rom: 14. 12. Every one must stand on his own bottom and be
judged by what he has personally done in the flesh, good or evil. Now this
uprightness is opposed 1st. to wickedness, ungodliness, and a trade of sin.
2dly. to dissimulation and hypocrisy He then walks uprightly that leads his
Life not according to the course of the world, nor according to the lusts of
his ignorance, but by the guidance of the Spirit of God and the prescript of
his Commandments. He also that does not only take up a form and make a show
of godliness, but has the power of it in an honest heart, and expresses it in
a blameless conversation; that is a true Israelite in whom is no guile. Joh. 1.
47.

But because there is more force in examples than there is in rules and
precepts, and that you may see that what is commanded is practicable, the
occasion gives you a pattern of an upright Man. I mean the example of our dear
Brother departed. You perfectly knew his conversation and manner of Life almost
from his Youth upward; and though he be Dead his good name Lives, and his
example speaks. It is (you know) beside my custom to turn the Pulpit into a
Desk, and Sermons to the Living into commendations of the Dead, yet I should
displease my self, and injure you if I should not at least point you to so
fair a Copy for your imitation; and herein I will not walk without my line, or
commend him to you for things before my knowledge or beside my profession. He
was one of these righteous ones in the Text, one that walked in his uprightnes.
He was like Timothy, well acquainted with the Scriptures from a Child, and
having in his youth been trained up by his pious Ancestors in the way wherein
he should go, when he was Old he departed not from it. He was neither a
blazing, nor a wandering, nor a falling Star, but one that shone in his own
orb, and gave a constant and a steady light.

A constant attender on the public ordinances and worship of God, a Sincere
lover of the Ministers of Christ and all that fear God. A diligent performer
of all family worship and that brought up his Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. One fearful of offending God: or giveing Just occasion
of offense to any Man, merciful and compassionate to all; Liberal to his
ability, yea above his ability to those that wanted: especially to the household
of Faith. One that minded the one thing necessary, sought the Kingdom of God,
and his righteousnisse in the first place and slighted all things in comparison
of these. That would often profess to have [Vitam in patientia, mortem in
desiderio,] To be one that could live, but that would rather Dye, and be with
Christ which is best of all. This I have said (much more I could say, but
forbear) not with any design to Paint the Sepulcher of the Dead, or to flatter
any liveing; but to restify my due respects for the memory of so good and
worthy a person. With my just resentments of our great loss, and to provoke my
self and you to the imitation of his virtues: that walking every one in his
uprightness, when we dye we may enter into peace and rest in our Beds, and
then when the Lord the Righteous Judge shall come he will give us a Crown of
Glory, and not unto us only, but to all that love and look for his appearing.

FINIS.
II Cor. 6, 7, 8. Therefore we are allwaies confident, knowing that whilst we
are at home in the Body we are absent from the Lord (for we walk by faith not
by sight) We are confident I say and willing rather to be absent from the Body,
and to be present with the Lord.
THAT there neither is nor ever was in the World a person so every way
blameless and circumspect in his way and Carriage, whom envy and ill will will
not bite and traduce; No action so sincerely meant, so heartily performed but
was liable to the calumnies and ill constructions of open Enemies or false
Brethren, appears by the example of the great Apostle St. Paul. Who during his
Judaism was as to the Righteousness that is in the Law blameless; and when he
became a Christian and was called to be an Apostle he walked with a right foot
according to the truth of the Gospel, herein exercising himself to keep a
Conscience void of offense toward God and all Men; yet could he not escape the
malicious Calumneys of the false Apostles, who, what ever he said or did, were
ready to carpe and reprehend, to take by the wrong handle, and to put an ill
construction upon. Which the Apostle perceiving is forced by way of apology in
this Epistle to defend himself, to magnify his Ministry and Apostleship, and
to declare the arguments by which he armed himself against all reproaches,
persecutions, and the worst that man could do against him. In his former
Epistle he had told the Corinthians that he would come shortly to them. chapter 14.
19. But being hindered by labors and sufferings he came not. This occasion the
false Apostles took to accuse him of Levity, Inconstancy, and Falseness to his
word. This the Apostle wipes off in this Epistle Chapter 1. 8. He had in the same
former Epistle given order to the Church to deliver up the obstinate,
Incestuous person to Satan. Chapter 5. 4. 5. whereby he became almost overwhelmed
with sorrow. Upon this the false Apostles censure him of too much rigor and
austerity, too much imperiousnes, and affecting domination over the Church. Of
this he clears himself. Ch 4 etc. After this he falls into a large
commendation of his Ministry, and repeats the arguments that carried him
through all the difficulties of it, and by which he was encouraged against all
persecutions and sufferings, yea though it should be to martyrdom it self for
Christ's and the Gospells sake: and they were the same that had supported Moses
in a like case. Heb. 11. 27. He saw him that was invisible, he had respect to
the recompense of reward So our Apostle. Chapter 4. 16. 18. For which cause we
faint not etc. while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen etc. Upon this he professes the full assurance of
his hope concerning the future happy estate of himself and all good men. Chapter 5.
1. We know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
building of God etc. And upon the certainty of this Faith and Hope professes
his earnest desire to enjoy what he so assuredly looked for. v. 2. In this we
groan earnestly desiring to he clothed upon. And finally upon a full and a
deliberate debate he chooses Death rather than Life: the condition of good men
after this Life, which he calls being absent from the Body and present with the
Lord before their condition here on Earth, which he calls being present with
the Body and absent from the Lord. There is an elegant Paronomasia in the
Original, which our translation can scarce reach, and more matter in the words
then the time will give us leave to discursse. These 4. propositions will
swallow up the substance of them. 1. That the best of Men here on Earth Live by
Faith, not by sight. 2. To be here at home in the Body is to be absent from the
Lord. 3. To be absent from the Body is to be present with the Lord. 4 Holy men
have attained, and may attain to this high and Heavenly pitch, to desire
rather to be absent from the Body and present with the Lord. A little of each.

1. The best of Men Live here by faith, not by sight. This liveing by Faith is
mentioned elsewhere partly as a duty, partly as a privilege and promise. Heb:
2: 4. and Heb: 10. 38. It seems brought in in this place as an allay to a
Christians present condition. Understanding by sight, enioyment, it is as if he
had said; we enjoy not, but we believe, and that supports us. We have but the
least part of our inheritance and happiness in our possession, more in
expectation, reversion and hope; but that also, as sure as if we had it. For
true Faith is an evidence. Heb: 11: 1. And Christian Hope makes not ashamed.
Rom: 5. 5. But look as all men had rather be in a condition of having then
hoping, of enjoying then desiring, so had we. Now this life of Faith and Sense
differ especially in two respects. 1. Sight reaches only to visible things,
Faith to invisible: the Eye of sense sees only gross and material things
placed in a due distance, through a fit medium etc. but faith is the evidence
of things not seen. Heb. 11. 1. If you run through the whole Life of a
Christian you shall find it a kind of invisible and mysterious Life. The
actions of it are managed and carried on by Motives unknown to other Men. The
food that maintains it, is such as the world knows not off. The joys that
cheer and quicken it are such as a stranger intermeddles not with. The
promises which maintain and support it are of things beyond the kenne of
carnal reason and sense. Eternal Life is promised, but it is hid with Christ in
God. We are justified, but not by a righteousness that is in us, but in Christ,
who suffered at Jerusalem out of our view long before our time, and is removed
into Heaven far from our sight; and yet we look for eternal Life in him as
assuredly as if we enjoyed it. Whom having not seen yet we love: in whom though
we see him not, yet believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
Glory. 1 Pet: 1. 8.

2. Sight extends only to present things, faith to future: therefore faith is
said to be the substance of things hoped for. Now hope that is seen is not
hope, for that which a Man sees why does he yet hope for. Rom: 8. 24.
Christians live not by present things, or things that perish with the using;
but such as will come hereafter, and will last for ever. While we look not at
those things which are seen but at those which are not seen. For those things
which are seen are temporal, but those which are not seen are eternal. 2 Cor:
4. 18. If then a Christians life be a life of hope, not of enjoyment, of faith
not of sense, it confutes on the one hand the fond imagination of conceited
Perfectionists, on the other the brutish sensuality of worldlings and Epicures.
The first pretends to live above the life of faith: would make us believe they
are already in possession and enjoyment of what ever a Christian can wish or
hope for: and despise those that press hard after God in the use of his
Ordinances, that go groaning under the burden of their corruptions, and sighing
after the enjoyment of a future happiness, as persons of a lower form, and
meaner attainements: for their parts they are perfect, they are sinlesse, they
need no stairs nor ladder, they are already at the top: no ordinances, no
means of grace, they are full, they have attained, they are in Heaven already
etc. what shall we say to these Men but what the Apostle says to the
Galatians. CH: 3. 1. Oh foolish Galatians who has bewitched you? and
certainly if there were not a certain witchcraft and sorcery in heresy and
fond opinions: and if there were not a Spiritual as well as bodily frenzy we
might justly wonder at the wild conceits of such Opinionists. Have ye seen Men
in Bedlam strangely enjoying themselves in their imaginary felicityes? just
such are these, Confuted by the whole tenor of Scripture, and by the constant
experience of the best of Gods Children who have always confessed, they knew but
in part and were but Sanctified in part. Now we see through a glass darkely 1
Cor: 17. 12. for v. 9, 10. we know but in part, and we Prophecy in part, etc.
The Apostle Paul himself thought not himself perfect, nor to have already
attaind. Phil. 3* 13.

2. Others live a life as much below, as these pretend to live above the Life
of faith. It were to be wished that all were arrived so far, as to follow the
dictate of natural and common Reason. But alas! Men are degenerated into brutes
live not the lives of rational beings. homines in ventrem proni and libidinum
mancipia as the Historian speaks, or as the Apostle better. Their belly is
their God; they glory in their shame; they mind earthly things. Phil: 3. 19.
These must learn to be Men before they can hope to be Christians. And must bid
adieu to the dreggy desires of the world and the flesh, and become pure in
heart, before they can see God. For without Holiness none shall see the Lord.
Heb: 12. 14.

3. Proposition. They that are at home in the body are absent from the Lord.
For understanding thereof, we must distinguish of a 4. fold presence of God. 1.
His essential presence. Or the presence of his being. In which respect God is
boundless and infinite, excluded out of no place: included in none. This is
called Gods immensity, ubiquity, and omni presence. which the scripture often
asserts Jer: 22, 23, 24. Am I a God at hand says the Lord, and not a God
afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places that I cannot see him, says
the Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? so Ps. 139. 6. etc. Whether shall I
fly from thy presence? If I ascend into Heaven thou art there: If I make my
Bed in Hell, be hold thou art there etc. Act. 17. 27. He is not far from any of
us etc. 2 His providential presence, whereby he is in every business, and
nothing comes to pass without him. This follows from the former. For the
essence of God being every where, and that essence being a pure Act, is no
where idle; but always operative in all Creatures and in all their actions Now
thus nothing, no person is ever absent from the Lord. All are subject to his
eye and government. He sees all his Creatures, he manageth and overrules all
their ways and actions. 3. There is a Spiritual or gracious presence of God.
Whereby he is said to be in and with his Church, and every faithful Member
thereof. He Is said to be the God of his People, and to dwell in the midst of
them. Psa: 46. 7. The Lord of Hoasts is with us etc. So every Child of God has
God graciously present with him in this life, and every one of them have him so
much the nearer to them as they have more special need of his assisting,
helping and encouraging presence. Job: 5. 29. He is with you in six troubles
and in seven. Matthew: 28. last. I am with you to the end of the World. Of all
these several sorts of divine presence the Apostle speaks. Ephesians: 4. 6. There is
one God and Father of all who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
Above all by his power and Sovereignty. through all, by his common providence,
and in all his Children by the presence of his grace and Spirit. The life of
faith then excludes none of these Divine presences, but supposes them all, and
every Christian even in this life is in all these respects present with the
Lord. But 4ly there is a Celestial or a glorious presence, which the Scripture
calls a beholding God face to face, and seeing him as he is. God vouchsafes to
Moses to see his back parts, but (says he Exodus 33. 20.) no Man can see my
face and Live, as if be should say, this sinful and frail State of Mortality
is not capable of, nor can be admitted to the full and ^mmediate vision of the
Divine glory and Excellency. While we are in the Body we are absent from the
beatificall vision and fruition of him. That State of complete bliss and
happiness is reserved for hereafter. Toward this the Apostle having not yet
attained, did breath and strive Phil. 3. 12. I follow after if I may apprehend
that for which I am apprehended of Christ. I reach forward to the things that
are before, I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus. Now as to these Glorious seize of perfect blessedness
which the Apostle elsewhere calls seeing God as we are seen, and seeing him
clearly as he is, the best of Men in this State of Mortality are absent from
the Lord; nay we are not only as yet unpossest of, but in a great measure
strangers to, and unacquainted with that fullness of joy that is in this
Glorious presence of God. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that
Love him. 1 Cor: 2. 9. Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not appear what
we shall be, but we know that when be shall appear, we shall be like him for we
shall see him as he is. 1 John: 3. 2.

1. Then if this be the state of the Godly in this Life, to be absent from the
Lord, what is the condition of wick^d Men? and where shall the ungodly and
Sinners appear? they are at a much greater distance, from God: said to be
without God in the World, Strangers and Enemies to him by evil works: of whom
the Scripture has pronounced. Ps 73. 27. Lo all they that are far from thee
shall perish, thou will destroy all those that go a Whoring from thee. They say
to the Almighty Depart from us. Job: 21. 14. and he to them, depart from me.
Out of the presence of his grace here: and hereafter shall be punished with
everlasting perdition from his presence and glory of his power. 2 These: 1. 9.

2. See what little reason good Men have to be fond of this State of mortality
wherein they are absent from the Lord. It Is true, Life, and Death are in the
power of the Lord, and both of them are to be thankfully accepted at his Hands,
and meekly submitted to his pleasure. Man may not quitt his centinell till he
be orderly discharged: he may not break out of Life, though he account it a
prison but must expect a legal delivery. Yet has no reason to be fond of his
imprisonment, or be unwilling to be delivered. While he is in this Life, he is
present with the Body, he is absent from the Lord: utraque justa mora est,
neither consideration gives ground of 100 passionate a Love of this Life, or an
immoderate desire of a long abode therein* He Is at home in the Body: and what
is the Body but a lump of refined Clay, a case not valuable were it not for the
jewel that is therein? It is of the Earth, Earthly: a Body of the same Mold
and Metal with those of the Beasts that perish: a frail and weak carcass
subject to a thousand casualties and infirmities, and which is worst of all,
inseperably linked to a Body of Sin and Death, which made the Apostle cry our,
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me etc. Rom: 7. 24. Again as he is
present with the Body, so he is absent from the Lord. He sees not the face of
his Redeemer, he see's not God save as in a Glass darkly. In the state of
Mortality we are absent from our Head, from our Husband; from our Masters, nay
from our Fathers House: from our Life, our Happiness, and that fullness of joy
that remains for us in his Celestial presence. This makes holy and Heavenly
Souls cry with David. Ps: 42. 1, 2. As the Heart pants etc. my Soul thirsts
for God, for the Living God, when shall I come and appear before God. and
conclude with St. Paul, I desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is
far better. Phil. 1. 23.

3. Proposition. To be absent from the Body is to be present with the Lord. I
do not mean that all men so soon as they are Dead are in a State of Happiness
and Bliss: no, this is the portion of the heirs of salvation and of them only.
Nor do I mean that good Men so soon as they Dye, are possessed of all the
Happiness that ever they shall be: no, the utmost consummation of their Bliss
both in Body and Soul is reserved to the general Resurrection. But I mean,
that the Souls of good Men are no sooner separated from the Body by natural
Death, but they are presented before Christ, and admitted to the beginnings of
glory and happiness. The Apostle makes nothing to intervene between these two:
being absent from the Body, and present with the Lord. No third region wherein
to lodge and purge departed Souls before they come to the presence of their
Redeemer. No middle State betwixt the Death of the Godly and their Reception
into the Arms of Christ, and the mansions that he has prepared for them. This
grounded the Prayer of Stephen when he was about to Dye, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit. Act: 7. 59. and the promise of our Savior to the penitent Thief. Lu:
23. 43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In the parable of the Rich
Man and Lazarus. Lu: 16. the poor Man is immediately carried into Abraham's
Bosom where he enjoys his good things, as the other is Tormented, and says
St. John Revel: 14. 13. I heard a voice from Heaven saying, Write; Blessed are
the Dead that dye in the Lord: from henceforth, ((...)) from the moment of
their Death and dissolution they rest from their labors etc. The sense and
substance of all which places I can not give you better then in the very words
of our Church in her office for the Burial of the Dead. viz. The souls of the
faithful being delivered from the Burden of the flesh are with Christ in joy
and felicity.

4. Proposition* Holy Men have attaind, and may attain to this high and
excellent pitch to be willing rather to be absent from the body and to be
present with the Lord. The Apostle speaks here of more then his single self.
We in the plural Number: and he says it not once, and in a passion but
deliberately, once and again. Phil: 1. 23 Having a desire to depart and to be
with Christ, which is far better. Observe here 1. The desirable estate of a
Christian, namely to be with Christ, together with the Apostles willingness to
it. I desire it, I long for it. And the sooner the better. 2. The way to come
to this happy State: that's by departing hence, by putting off this Earthly
Tabernacle, by being absent from the Body. 3. The judgment he passes upon a
comparison of the two estates of Life and Death: this later is (...), much,
very much, far, and exceeding better, and more desirable. So that he is not
only willing to submit to the common necessity of dying, but is desirous to
Dye. Not willing only to depart hereafter, but to weigh anchor and away
presently. He stood indifferent to any kind of Death, Violent or natural, so he
might Dye he had his wish. Nor was he of this mind only upon some sudden pang,
or some extaticall passion, or upon a sullen and discontented fi^, being rather
weary of life then desirous of Death, or by reason of the hard pressure of some
present affliction, as Jonah, and Job, and Elias, wished for Death: but out of a
more deliberate choice, a sincere affection to Christ and a pious and earnest
desire of a fuller enjoyment of him, and out of strong and invincible
apprehensions of the blessedness of a Future state after Death, And if you ask
by what means and degrees he attained, and consequently we may attain to this
willingness, the context will give you the grounds of his choice and will teach
us how we may arrive at the same pitch.

1. He had a strong apprehension and persuasion of the great Happiness of the
life to come compared with the condition of this Mortal Life. The vast
difference of which two states he setts forth by sundry metaphors. v. 1. the
Body is called an Earthly House; a Mud-wall easily crushed by a sudden casualty,
or battered with the shock of a more lingering disease; and though it be let
alone from external Violence, yet stoopes to Time and Age: moulders down of
its own accord. Again the body is called a tent or Tabernacle, suddenly clapped
up, and as easily took down again, a moveable habitation fit for a sojourners
and pilgrims state. But our estate hereafter is a building of God, an house not
made with hands. Say then that we are not weary of our Bodies, yet we may be
weary of the present state and condition of them; which is a state of
corruption and infirmity, not comparable to that of glory and immortality that
lies before us. Here we are in continual peril to have our Earthly house
dissolved, and our frail temporal lives swallowed up of Death. But here after
this mortal shall have put on immortality and Death shall be swallowed up in
victory.

2. He had a sure and certain hope of enjoying a share in that happiness
which by faith he foresaw. (...). We know it, we are confident of it, we are
satisfied and cheareful under the forethoughts and expectation of it. Without
this hope how shall any be ever brought to a willingness to depart, when he
knows not whither. I wonder not to see the Atheist and profane person shrink
and tremble at the approach of Death; to leave a certain and present enjoyment
of this Worlds good things upon the proposal of a future bliss, which the one
believes not that there is any such thing, the other cannot upon any
comfortable grounds conclude that he shall have any part in it. Who can be
willing to lanch into an Eternity, which he knows not whether it will be of
bliss or misery. This made the Emperor Adrians Heart ache, and his Soul loath
to leave its former habitation. Animul^ nudula, blandula etc. quae nunc
descendis in loca? ah sweet naked Soul into what dark uncouth and dismal
places art thou now a going? But on the contrary a Christians desire of
dissolution proceeds from an evidence of his interest in Christ, assurance of
the remission of Sins, and an undoubted title to those exceeding great and
precious promises made to godliness of the good things of this Life, and the
better which is to come.

3. Ground in his being in some measure fitted and prepared for the presence of
the Lord. He that has wrought us to this selfsame thing, is God. v. 5. which
some understand thus. It Is God that has brought us to this purpose, resolution
and choice, that we had rather be absent from the Body etc. the frame of Spirit
is beyond the attainment of nature, and proceeds from higher then humane
principles. Others understand it thus. He that has wrought us fitted and
framed us for this State of happiness (...). a Metaphor from Carpenters
squaring and plaining their Timber, or Masons hewing and polishing their
Stones, or Goldsmiths scouring and burnishing their Metal, for look as in the
building in the Temple at Jerusalem the Wood and Stones were framed and fitted
in the Mountains, that no Axe or Hammer might be heard in the Temple, so
Christians are fitted in this Life for glory: no scouring, purging or polishing
hereafter, the title to inheritance is set forth here, the possession is
delivered hereafter. Exercised, Educated, and trained up we are in these
inferior Schools of grace; the degrees, and dignities are conferred in the
general Convocation and Consistory of glory. Now, as no piece of Timber can
promise it self an honorable place in the building, save that which is fitted
and carved before it be laid, nor any hope for a Crown that has neither
breeding nor title to it. So, nor can any promise to themselves glory, whom God
has not polished and fitted by sanctification and Grace. The Apostle Col: 1.
12. thanks the Father that has made us fit, or meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, not that has put us into a condition to
merit Heaven, but has adopted us undeserving, and fitted us that were unfit.
This God does by making us partakers of the Divine nature, turning our hearts
from Sin to Holiness, so making us new Creatures. Which happy thing and
alteration who so ever finds truly, though but weakly, wrought in him, he longs
to be in possession of that which God of his mercy in Christ has in some
degree fitted and prepared him for.

4. The last ground is Gods having given to them the earnest of the spirit. v.
5. By which we may understand the fruits of the Spirit, namely, joy and peace
in believing, which are the fruits of the Spirit and the gifts of God not in a
way of duty only, as to believe, repent, Love the Father and the Brethren, and
the like are fruits of the Spirit, but in a way of reward or recompense of
Grace. These prediscoveries of Gods good will, and manifestation of his Love to
Men are the hansells and fore-tasts of Glory. This the Apostle calls Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory obtained here in a way of believing; the sure
earnests of better enjoyments in the time to come. 1 Pet: 1. 8. Now as the
sight of the glory of Christ in his transfiguration made the Disciples loath to
foregoe that pleasant rapture. Master, it is good for us to be here. Matt: 17.
4. so such fore-tasts of the Divine Love, and praesentiments of the happiness
of a future state as, no doubt, the Apostles and holy Men sometimes had, makes
them long for the full enjoyment, and desire to be with Christ which is best of
all. But least while I speak of the high attainements of strong Christians I
should discourage the Hearts of Babes in Christ, who are as dear to him, and he
as tender of them, as they that are of greater strongth and fuller growth
though from these he expects more service and greater obedience: take these
Cautions. 1. What has been said is not to be taken as if none were to be
accounted or might account themselves good Christians who find not in
themselves such a perfect and a constant willingness to Dye. This character is
for strong, grown, and experienc'^ Christians, and that not always, but at
some seasons, such as have strong apprehensions of the glory of the other
World, and the happiness of that eternal rest which remains for the People of
God; that have good assurance through grace of their interest therein, and can
rejoice in the hope of the glory of God: others may be weaker and yet true
Christians too* they are pronounced blessed that hunger after Righteousness, as
well as they that long and thirst for glory. 2. Nor must it be so taken as if
even strong Christians were without a natural abhorrence of Death, and a
declining from it, the Disciples in a Tempest, and Peter when he began to sink
city out upon the apprehension of approaching Death; and yet were Christ's
Disciples for all that The Apostle intimates that he and other Christians could
have been glad to have escaped Death, if Gods will were so, and if they could
have arrived at what they aimed at and looked for, without passing through the
jaws thereof, v. 4. not that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon etc.
Our blessed Savior did by this Testify the truth of his humane nature, in
that he was afraid of Death, Father if it be possible let this Cup pass from
me. yet withal sets a Copy and leaves us a pattern of most free resignation,
and patient submission to the Fathers will: yet not my will but thy will be
done. 3. As a Child of God is not without a natural abhornence of Death, so nor
without a due Care to preserve his Life, so long as God sees it fit, and a
willingness to bear those troubles and inconvenienoies of life which God sees
good to exercise him under. God has set his Children in this World as
soldiers on their guard, not to run away at their pleasure but to wait till
they are releast and called off. We may go out of Life when God opens a door,
but we may not break prison. We may depart asking Gods leave. Lord now let
thou thy Servant depart Lu: 2. 29. but must be willing to stay his leizure, and
expect his dismission. Thus notwithstanding the Apostle Paul was desirous to
depart, yet he sits down contented when he saw God would have him work, and
suffer longer. Phil. 1. 24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you, and having this confidence I know I shall abide etc. However
Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life or by Death for to
me to Live is Christ, to Dye is gain v. 20, 21. From what has been said,
gather we courage to encounter Death, and to look the King of terror in the
face which is so far from being now a terror to the Children of God, that
it is become the object of their desires and wishes. The frightfull Serpent
before which all Mankind fled is in the Hand of Moses become a Rod and a Staff
of support and comfort; I mean Death which is an enemy to nature, and the
wages of Sin is by the power of Christ, turned to a friend and a Servant of all
the heirs of salvation: an end of a Sinful, troublesome, and uncertain Life,
and a passage to a Blessed and Glorious immortality. Make then a virtue of
necessity, and being its appointed for us all to Dye. Heb: 9. 27. learn we to
dye daily 1 Cor: 15. 31. so setting our hearts and Houses in order that we may
rather meet Death, then fly from it: rather wish and welcome it, then be
afraid of it. And seeing all these things shall be dissolved what manner of
Persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and
hasting to the coming of the day of God? 2 Pet: 3. 11. 12.

And from the occasion and object before you be instructed to prepare to dye.
Nothing that is either great or good secures from Death. No Man living can
deliver himself from the power of the grave. A little time will return us to
our dust, and shut us up in the house prepared for all living. A few Months have
put a period to the Mortal lives of two good Brothers, not more united by the
bonds of nature then by those of Grace and brotherly affection. Of whom we may
say what David said of Saul and Jonathan 2 Samuel: 1. 23. They were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their Deaths they were not much divided. Such a
pair as for sincerity in Religion, for mutual correspondence of affection one
toward another, and for candor and integrity of conversation toward all Men
will scarce be paralleld in this, or, I doubt, in the succeeding age.

As for this worthy Gentleman whose funeral has brought us together I need say
little, being I speak to an auditory that have known him much longer and
better then my self. His extraction from Honorable and pious Ancestors was by
him honored with qualities and conversation worthy such a descent. In matters
of Religion he was serious and fixed, not eccentrick and uncertain in his
motions, but a fixed star in his own Orb, giving a steady and a constant
light. In matters of the world he was just, and equitable; tender of
dishonouring his God, or injuring his Neighbor, providing things honest in the
sight of all Men, studying to give no just cause of offense to great or small.
Of so well ballanc't a soul and a mind so prepared to all events, that scarce
any external accidents whether prosperous or adverse (of which his life wanted
not it is variety) were ever observed to resolve him into any unseemly
expressions or immoderate effusions of sorrow, joy, fear, anger, or any other
impotent and unruly passion. Of such a composed gravity that shameless
wickedness and open profaneness chose rather to hide it self from him then to
affront him. Yet of that courtesy and affability that attracted and obliged all
persons, so that seldom any of any rank went away from him ill satisfied or
displeased. Loving and faithful to his kindred and friends, and out of a fair
estate free and liberal to them, and also to the poor and needy. An eminent
example of wisdom and goodness in all estates of life, in all the employments
he managed, and all relations that he underwent. And all these Graces and
virtues set off with so much humility, modesty, and self denial, and seasond
with so much plainness and sincerity as made them all shine like apples of
Gold in Pictures of Silver. How well he deserved of all sorts, and how
generally he was and deservedly beloved I appeal to the frequency of this
solemnity, to the common vogue of the Country, and particularly to the sad
hearts and heavy looks of you his friends here present, and of others too that
are absent no less sensible, and passionate Mourners. In a word, it may be
said of him as St. John says of Demetrius* 3. John 12. He has a good report
of all Men and of the truth also. And having served his generation by the will
of God, having done his work and (...) his course he is come to his grave in a
full age, as a shock of corn comes in, in it is season: leaving to his friends
and posterity something to perpetuate his memory better then a Coat or a
Scucheon, even the fragrancy of a pious name, and the shining light of a good
example. Learn we that are his Survivors to transcribe his Copy, to Live after
his example, and to be followers of him who by Faith and patience inherits the
promises, so when we are absent from our Bodies shall we be present with the
Lord; we in the mean time laboring that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of God through Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost be honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

