Curia Comitatus Rediviva. OR, THE PRATIQUE PART Of the County Court revived,
Fully demonstrating its antiquity and proceedings from the Original to
Execution, and all manner of actions lying in it.

Also an easy and plain method for the keeping of the Court. Attachments and
Distresses at large explained, Returns of Writs which do remove suites out of
this Court, into superior Courts, Presidents of Precepts; both Original and
Judicial, to which is added some select Presidents of Declarations and
Pleadings. With an exact Table of all the particulars in the book.

By W. GREENWOOD (...).

Ipsae etiam leges cupiunt ut jure regantur. LONDON, Printed for John Place, at
Furnivalls Inn gate, and William Place at Grayes Inn gate Holborn, 1657.

To the Reader.
KIND READER,
Considering the utilitie and profit a piece of this nature would produce to
the Country, pressed me forwards (out of profound and authentic Authors) to
demonstrate the antiquity, justness, and Jurisdiction of this Court; for the
more the Country knows it, and the practice thereof, the more they will love
and affect it; ignoti nulla cupido. I cannot comprehend how any one part or
theme may be more useful, to and for the Country, and consequently more
generally expetible and wished for, than the practical knowledge of this
Court, for who almost is there within its jurisdiction, that is not, or may not
sue and be sued in it? so that here they may read and understand how their
causes do proceed, and what; and how far the power and force of every precept,
and warrant does extend, and what the fees are; and that they may, as with a
touchstone try and examine the actions and proceedings of their Atturneys. I
must confess my early experience (in this discourse) in comparison to some of
the more grave and ancient practicers, is but as a drop of water to an
overflowing bucket. Therefore if I have omitted any thing in the practice, or
committed any error in the method, I hope ( Juvenilis mea aetas considerata) I
shall without difficulty obtain pardon, and that they will ( mitissimo aspectu)
take it, with all its faults, in good part. And if this conduce to the benefit
and advantage of the Country, it is all that is hoped for, and expected by

Your assured friend, W. G.

Curia Comitatus. OR The Practique part of the County Court, etc.
Of the original of Shires, Shiriffs, and the institution of this Court.
BEfore I anotomise the practice of this Court, I thought it conven^ent to
produce it from its original or prototype, quia origo rerum attendenda. And
first, what the word Shire signifies.

Shire, is a Saxon word seyra, and comes of shiran (id est) partiri to divide,
as says Master Lambert in his explication of Saxon words, verb. centur. And
Master Cambden in his Britania reports, that Alfred (a Saxon) King of
England, was the first that divided this Commonwealth into Shires, those Shires
into Ridings, and those again into Wapentacks or Hundreds, etc.

The Republique being thus disunited or dissected into Shires, every Shire is
entirely governed by one Officer called a Sheriff, or Shireeve, Vice-comes;
being compounded of these two Saxon words, scyr, viz. Satrapia, a Shire, and
reave, viz. Praefectus a Governor of the Shire. Master Cambden thus describes
his Office: Singulis vero annis, nobilis aliquis ex incolis proficitur, quem
vice-comitem quasi vicarium comitis and nostra lingua Shireffe, viz. comitatus
praepositum vocamus.

Vicount unde.
And he is called Vicount, a Vice-comite, which comes from our Conquerours the
Normans, as Sheriff from our Ancestors the Saxons.

The aforesaid King, at the division of the Kingdom into Shires or Counties,
County Court when instituted.
instituted this Court called the County Court, and established Jurisdiction in
it; Lambert.
granting power and authority to the Sheriff to hear and decide such matters as
by just cause of appelation (either for Law or Equity) should be brought unto
him. This Court of the whole Shire (then called Scirezmove, that is to say, the
assembly of the Shire, was then (as also now) holden once every month, upon a
day certain, the month being computed according to 28. days in the month, and
not according to the Calendar. Of its antiquity and jurisdiction, you may read
more recorded in the Statute of Magna Charta. cap. 35. Likewise, it may be
searched further in the Laws of Edgar, the Saxon King, Lam. arch.
viz. Let no man seek to the King in matter of variance, unless he cannot find
right at home: But if it be too heavy for him, then let him seek to the King to
have it lightened. The very like whereof in effect is to be seen in the Laws of
Canutus the Dane, sometimes King of this Realm; out of which Laws may be
gathered four things: First, that every man had means, and was authorized to
sue in this Court, in their own Shire or County; that no man ought to sue out
of the County, or to draw his Plea from thence without good cause: both which
things do plainly appear in the Letter of this Law. Thirdly, that the King
himself had a high Court of Justice, wherein it seems that he sat in person:
as these words do demonstrate, Let him not seek to the King, etc. And lastly,
that the same Court of the Kings did judge, not only according to mere right,
and Law, but also after equity and good conscience. And after this order, and
in these two Courts, was all Justice administered. This Court continuing (until
the time of William the Conqueror, and ever since during the times and raigns
of the ancient Kings) and does yet continue (in manner) the same form, and
substance that it then was, (and will do in despite of those sycophants, that
have had their primum mobile from it, and now endeavor its subversion, that
viporous brood of Birds, that have so much defiled their own Nest, that the
whole Country laughs at their folly, and that the Pleas ought no more to be
taken from it, now in our days (without cause) than they ought then to have
been; which may evidently be proved by those ancient Writs of Pone, Recordare,
Writ of false judgment, and accedeas ad curiam, which are yet in use to this
day, and to this only end to remove suits (upon cause) out of this Court into
Superior Courts. But because this requires great search of Records to make any
further progression (whereunto I have no access) I must leave it to such whose
abilities are more able, and can better travail in that so intricate a path.

This Court is no Court of Record, This Court no Court of Record.
but only a Court Baron, therefore Pleas holden in this Court by Plaint, nor
Pleas holden by Writ of Justices, are not taken as matters of Record, for those
Pleas are holden by reason of the Court, which the Sheriff holds by reason of
his Office.

Why instituted.
This Court (as Dalton reports in his Office of Sheriffs) was ordained for the
Sheriff to hold Plea, there for particular or private matters (under forty
shillings) between party and party.

Coo. inst. 3. par. cap. 5 5.
It holds no Plea of Debt or damages to the value of forty shillings or
above, because a Fine is due thereby to the Lord Protector, yet if the Debt be
forty shillings or above, and the Plaintiff will acknowledge in his
Declaration the receipt of so much, as to bring it within forty shillings, in
this Case the Plaint is good.

And of Debt, Detinue, Trespass, and other Actions personal above fort
shillings, the Sheriff may hold Plea by force of a Writ of Justices to him
directed, for that is in nature of a Commission to him, and is not returnable.
Neither does this Writ alter the nature of the Court, for therein the Sheriff
is not Judge, Suitors Judges.
but the Suitors, yet all judgments shall be pronounced by the Sheriff.

This Court may be kept at any place within the County, at the pleasure of the
Sheriff, but not out of it.

To this Court, all persons dwelling within the County, owe suit by reason of
their resiance.

No fine can be imposed in this Court upon any offender, No Fine.
because it is no Court of Record.

But a man may be amerced for a contempt, Amercement.
or a disturbance of the Court, in the presence of the Court.

This Court will entertain no Suits for Charters of Land, What actions w^ll not
ly in this Court.
or for inheritance, or for Freehold of Land, or for any titles to Land, or to
make several plaints upon one entire debt by bond, or trespass, vi and armis,
or actions touching life, nor actions to cause one to render an account.

The Office of the County Clarke.
THe Sheriff being elected (before the next County day after his election) he
ought to be very diligent in deputing and constituting a County Clark, such a
one as is sufficient and able to keep the Court, that no corrupt dealing be in
it, as he will answer the contrary: and that he be very skillful in entering the
proceedings in it.

He ought to enter no plaints (except in case of Replevins) out of Court, but
in full County, sedente curia, yet the course is otherwise at this day, and (as
it seems) good enough, verifying the diverb, communis error facit jus.

He cannot execute the Office of a County Clarke, and practice as an Attorney
both at one time, it being prohibited by the Statute of. 1 H. 5.4. He cannot
act any thing without the assent of the Suitors; if he do, an action of
trespass lies against the Sheriff.

He must be careful in deputing honest able and sufficient men, as Bailiffs,
for the executing of the Precepts issuing ou^ of the Court.

He must make sufficient Precepts after the plaints entered (but not before)
against the Defendants, directed to his Bailiffs, to attach or warn the
Defendants to appear at the next County Court, and answer the Plantiff; and if
there be any default in the said Bailiffs in the execution of their Office
according to the tenor of their Precept, then they are to forfeit 40 shillings,
and to be convicted thereof by the examinations of the Justices of Peace, or
any of them.

The County Clarke and Plantiff, upon complaint of the party grieved, may be
examined by one Justice of Peace, concerning the taking or entering of plaints
in the County Court, and book against the Statute: If thereby the Justice find
any fault or offense committed, that shall stand for a sufficient conviction
and attainder without any further inquiry or examination. And the said justice
must certify the examination within a quarter of a year into the Exchequer, by
the Statute of 11. H. 7. cap. 15.

At the adjourning of every Court he must appoint a day certain for the next
Court, to the intent the Country may know at what time they may resort thither
to hear the Lord-Protectors writs of Exigent and Proclamations read.

The Office of a Coroner in this Court.
A Coroner is one of the Principal Officers of this Court, being chosen in it
(by a writ de Coronatore elegendo, directed to the Sheriff) by the Freeholders
or Suitors in open and full Court, and is published there, and after the
Sheriff is to return and certify into the Chancery the election of every such
Coroner and their names; likewise the County Clarke must there administer to
the Coroner his oath for the due execution of his Office.

The Coroner being thus chosen and sworn, he is to sit there with the Sheriff
at every County Court to give judgment upon Outlawries, which judgment shall be
given and pronounced by him in the 5th County, and there the Sheriff is to
return the Outlawrie with the Exigent: But by this judgment no Goods are for
^^^d before the Outlawrie appear of Record: neither shall such an Outlawrie
disable the party.

Exigents and Proclamations are to be proclaimed 5. County days one after
another, Exigent and Proclam. to be proclaimed 5. County days, etc.
and once in the open Sessions, and once at the Parish-Church-dore, where he
does or did lately dwell, that he appear, or else that he shall be Outlawed.
And if Proclamation be made 5. County days, and at the 5th County day the
Defendant appear not, then the Coroner shall give judgment that he shall be out
of the protection of the Lord Protector, and out of the aid of the Law. F.N.B.
163. But before I conclude this Chapter, let me give you in brief, why a man is
said to be Outlawed, and a woman wained; viz. A man is said to be Outlawed,
F.N.B. fo. 395.
because he was sworn to the Law: and now for his contumacy he is put from the
Law, and said Outlawed, as it were, extra legem possitus; but a woman is not
so, but she is wained, and not Outlawed, because she was never sworn to the Law.

If a writ of discharge of the ancient Sheriff be delivered to the County
Clarke, sitting in the County Court, the authority of the said Sheriff
(although absent) shall presently cease.

Of Atturneys in this Court.
IT was objected to me, that no Attorney could legally practice in this Court,
and that every man ought to prosecute his own cause himself: but I shall give
him a compendious answer with an Epitomy of the Statute of West. 2. cap. 10.
that every man which owes Suit to the County Court, may make a general
Attorney to prosecute and follow his Suits in all Pleas: and an Attorney may do
every thing in the name, and as the act of him which gave him the authority, as
if he did it himself: qui per alium facit per seipsum faecere videtur: likewise
these Statutes following institute Atturneys in the County Court, viz. 6. E. 1.
cap. 8.20. H. 3. cap. 10. F.N.B. 156. I could instance many more, but I hope
this is sufficient to stop the black mouth of a scurrilous antagonist.

What Actions may be brought in this Court.
Having precipated my self thus far, before I enter upon the proceedings of the
Court; I will demonstrate the grounds and cause of proceedings, and that is,
actions, which is the form of a Suit, given by Law to recover a man's right:
therefore what actions will hold in this Court, take as follow.

All actions of Debt, either upon an account made by the parties for wages
after a hire, sums of money owing or due from one man to another, whether by
writings or otherwise, it is grounded sometimes by writing, as an obligation,
bill, covenant, or other especialitie: sometimes without writing as an
arbitrament, receipt money lent, parol, contracts or the like.

All actions of detinue, Trover, and Conversion, deceit upon a warranty, a
delivery, nuisance, case for scandalous words, case upon Assumpsit^, and other
actions of the case, as for a dog killing Cattle, abusing a distress, spoiling
my goods, etc. Actions of trespass, assault and battery, etc.

All these actions would afford very much matter to treat of at large, (but
least it should swell beyond its limits) I will referr you to the reading of
the Law (in one Volume) learn'dly epitomized by Mr. Shepherd.

Within what time Actions must be brought.
31. Eliz. cap. 5.
ALL Actions of Debt grounded upon any lending or contract, as book-debt,
without especialty, and for rents in arrear: all actions of trespass, quare
clausum fregit, actions of Trespass, Trover, Detinue, and Replevin for taking
away Goods and Chattells, actions of account, all actions of the case (except
actions for slander, which shall be sued, must be commenced and brought within
six years after the cause of such action or suit acrewed, if the Plantiffe be
then of full age, discovert, Compos mentis, at Liberty, out of prison and in
England; otherwise within such time after he becomes so, and not after.

All actions of Trespass, for Assault, Menace, Battery, wounding and
imprisonment, within four years after the cause of action, and not after.

All actions of the Case for words, within two years next after the words
spoken, and not after.

Who may bring actions, and who not.
IDiots, mad men, S. Mar. ca. 6. fo. 3.
or such as have lucida intervalla, such as are deaf and dumb, or any other
man, woman or child (except persons disabled by Law) being wronged, nay bring
the proper action appointed for remedy in that case; and all, or any of these
wronging others may be sued. And if an Idiot sue or be sued, he must do it in
person.

An Infant must sue by Proahein amy, and being sued, must defend by Guardian.

A Feme Covert cannot sue but with her Husband.

An Outlawed person is disabled to sue any action against any man in any Court
of Law or Equity, (yet as Executor he may sue, beeause it is not in his own
right, but in trust for another) but any man may sue him, by Coo. sup. Lit.
128. A man that is attainted in a Praemunire, may not sue in any action, idem.
129. And a man that is a convict Reculant is disabled, so long as he so
continues.

But note, all these disabilities remain during the continuation of the same
impediment.

No Barretor can maintain any action in this Court, nor have judgment, unless
it be required by all the Suitors. Westminster. 1 Cap. 3.

Of Pledges in this Court.
PLedges are obsolete, except it be for such as live out of the County, or out
of the Jurisdiction of the Court, or such as are unmarried, that have no Goods
distrainable, and it is if these be Plantiffs: and if the Defendant should
Nonsuit the Plantiff, and have judgment against the Plantiff and his Pledge. I
never yet saw the form of that judicial precept, that ever issued out to levy
the costs upon the pledges goods.

Of the proceedings in the Court.
BEcause I would not have the Country and young practisers ignorant of the
proceedings in the Court, which is the life of practice; I thought it necessary
to make an abridgment of the terms of Law, now used in the proceedings. And
first of Appearance, because it is the first thing done after Goods attached.

The first thing the Defendant in any Action or Suit is to do, Appearance.
is to appear, and show himself in person, or by an Attorney in the Court to
answer the Action and defend the Suit.

Essoyne.
He may also appear by an Essoyne which does delay the cause a Court day longer;
(The common Essoyne is de male vener) and if he do not appear the next Court,
then it passes by default, Judgment entered, and Execution issues out against
his Goods and Chattels. But after the Defendant has once appeared in the Court
by an Attorney, there shall be no Essoyn allowed.

Duces tecum.
But if he appear neither by an Attorney, nor by essoyn, then further process
issues out against his Goods and Chattels, viz. the Precept of Duc. Tec.) and
Attachment, and Distress upon Attachment infinite, until he do appear.

Declaration.
After the Process executed, the Plantiff is to appear and file his Declaration,
to show his cause of Action, or matter of complaint, in which must be shown who
complains, and against whom, for what matter, how, and in what manner the
action grew between the parties, and at what time and place the wrong was done;
and in conclusion he must averr and proffer to prove his Suit, Modo and forma.
and show the damage he has sustained by wrong done unto him. Special care
ought to be had that it be drawn in manner and form, yet by the Statute of 36.
E. 3. cap. 15. a Declaration shall be good, if it have matter of substance,
though the terms be not apt; however to avoid doubts, and that the Atturneys
may not altogether depend upon uncertainties, let them be diligent in taking
right and due instructions from their Clyents, and inform themselves of every
punctilio which may be materially incident to the case, that so they may know
what manner of action is most proper to be brought on the behalf of their
Clyents. Nota.


In some cases manner and form is chiefly to be looked at, but in other some
not altogether so material. As if an action of Debt be brought of the sale of
a horse for 5 l. 21. E. 4. fo. 12.
(where the bargain was for two horses) the Defendant pleads that he owes him
nothing in manner and form: the Jury ought to find for the Defendant, Modo and
forma.
for that, that the bargain was for two horses for 5 l. so manner and form
there is material, and parcel of their charge, Modo and forma.
and so it is in every case, where the action varies from the bargain or
special matter.

But if an action of the Case be brought by the husband alone, upon an
Assumpsit to him by R. the Defendant says, 27. H. 8. fo. 29.
he did not assume in manner and form, and the Plaintiff gives in evidence of
an Assumpsit made to his wife, and his agreement to it afterward, this is
good, and manner, and form is not material.

Or if a Trespass were done the 4th. day of May, and the Plaintiff declares
the same to be done the 5th. or the 1. day of May, when no trespass was
committed, yet if upon Evidence it falls out that the trespass was done
before the action brought, it suffices, 19. H. 6.47. 5. E. 4.5. 21. E. 4 66.
And Litt, says, that the Jury may find the Defendant guilty at another day
then the Plantiff supposes, for the Law of England respects more the effect
and substance of the matter, than every nicitie of form and circumstance:
apices juris non sunt jura.

Note that in actions of Debt upon Emisset for wares, for money or other things
lent, upon an in simul computassent, actions of Trespass, Battery, or upon the
Case, etc. you are not tied to lay the certain day; but you may lay it any time
after the cause of action accrewed.

A declaraton is sometimes called a Count, Count.
as Count in Debt. Kitch. 281. Count in trespass, Brit. cap. 26. Count in an
action of trespass upon the case for a slander, Kitch. 251. But a Count it is
more properly used in Real than Personal actions: And a Declaration more
applied to Personal than Real. F. N. B. 18. a. 60. D. N. 71. a. 191.6. 217. a.

If after Process executed the Plaintiff do not appear and file his
Declaration, Non-snit.
and the Defendant do appear upon such default, the Plantiff is nonsuited, and
the Defendant may enter Judgment, and have an Execution for his costs.

In every case where the Plaintiff may have costs against the Defendant there,
if the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or a verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall
have his costs, as in trespass, debt, covenant by specialty, or upon contract,
detinue, accounts, actions upon the Case, or upon the Statute for personal
wrongs, 23. H. 8. cap. 15.

Emparlanc.
After the Plaintiff has appeared and Declaration filed, upon the appearance of
the Defendant, Emparlance is to be entered: Emparlance is, when the Defendant,
being to answer the Suit or Action of the Plaintiff, desires some time of
respite to advise himself the better what he shall answer, being nothing else
but a continuance of a Cause till a further day.

Continuance.
I had forgot to lay open unto you this word Continuance, had not the foregoing
piece put me in mind of it, and it is this; After a Suit is begun and the
Plaintiff has declared, he must continue his suit from Court day to Court day,
or else the adverse party may take advantage of it, and this is called a
Continuance, being but only a prorogueing of a suit from time to time, to keep
it in being; And this is by the Act, or Order of the Court, and sometimes by
the agreement of the Atturneys of both parties.

This Rule, Rule.
or dies datus is when further day is given to the Plantiff to put in his
Declaration, or to the Defendant, to put in his answer: the time given is
usually 14. days, or more of less according to the order of the Court, Answer.
and the agreement of their Atturneys.

The next Court after the filing of the Declaration, the Defendant is to put in
his Answer, which he pleads and says in Bar, to avoid the Action of the
Plaintiff, either by confession and avoidage, Replication.
or denying the material parts thereof.

If issue be not joined upon the answer, then the Plantiff is to file his
Replication to the answer of the Defendant, which must affirm and pursue his
Declaration.

Then the Defendant must put in his Rejoinder to the Plaintiffes Replication,
Rejoinder.
which must pursue and confirm his answer; for every Replication ought to have
these two properties specially, that is, it ought to be a sufficient answer to
the Replication, and also to follow and enforce the matter of the bar.

Surrejoynder.
If the parties be not at issue by reason of some new matter disclosed in the
Defendants Rejoinder that requires answer; then may the Plantiff Surrejoyn to
the said Rejoinder, if there be cause, but it falls out very seldom. This
Surrejoynder is a second defense of the Plantiffes Declaration opposite to the
Defendants rejoinder.

Nota.
When the Declaration, Answer, Replication etc. are defective in respect of some
circumstance of time or place etc. it may be remedied by consent of the Court,
or parties, or by a motion to the steward.

Not informed.
Non sum informatus, is a formal answer of course made by an Atturny, whereby
he is deemed to leave his Clyent undefended, and Judgment passes for the
adverse party.

Nil dicit.
It is a failing to put in an answer to the Declaration of the Plantiff, (in any
action) by the day assigned, which if a man do, Judgment shall pass against
him, because he says nothing to the contrary. To an action of Debt upon
specialty. Not his Deed. General issue.
To an action of Debt for money lent, etc. He ows nothing by the Country. To a
Bond for performance of Covenants upon an Indenture, or an Arbitrament. Not his
Deed or not guilty. To an action of the Case upon an Assumpsit. He did not
assume. To an action of Trespass. Not guilty. To an action of Assault, and
Battery, and Slander. Not guilty. To a Contract without Deed, Pleas specialy to
be pleaded.
the Plea is payment, or an Obligation made for the Debt, etc. To an
Obligation, the Plea is payment, Obligation.
or a new Obligation taken for the Debt, etc. But to plead payment to an
Obligation is no Plea without an acquittance: For an Obligation, or other
matter in writing may not be discharged by an agreement by word but by writing:
unumquodque dissoluitur, eo modo quo colligatur.

Debt.
To an action of Debt he owes nothing by the Country, or by the Law, or paid.

Against Executors or Administrators.
If the action be brought against an Executor or Administrator, the ordinary
Plea is, that he never was Executor, or has fully Administered etc.

Non ag^.
If the suit be upon a Deed, or contract without Deed, that he was within age
when he made the Deed or contract.

Woman covert.
If it be against a woman, that she was covert: that is to say, had a husband
when she made the Deed or contract.

Arbitrament.
If upon an Arbitrament, that there was no Arbitrament legally made, or that he
has performed the award.

Trespass damage feasant.
If upon an action of Trespass, Damage Feasant, that the beasts came in by the
default of the enclosure of the Plantiff, or that he has little of common
there etc.

Rent.
If upon an action brought for Rent, that there is no Rent in arrear, etc.

To an action of Detinue, Detinue.
that he does not detain the thing sued for: A release, or a gift to him by the
Plantiff, or that he did tender the thing sued for before action brought, that
the Defendant did deliver it to him as pledge for ten shillings, which he has
not paid, etc.

To an action of the Case for Slander: not guilty, or justify the words.
Slander.


Case upon a warranty, Warantie.
that he did not warrant, etc.

Upon a specialty, Debt.
Plead, conditions performed, by Threats, Duress, Imprisonment.

Upon a Demise, not demised. Warantie.


Upon an Account, as receiver, Account.
never receiver: he ought not to render an Account, etc.

To trespass, not guilty, Trespass.
an Arbitrament, tender of amends before the Action brought, etc.

If diverse men do a trespass, Nota.
and one makes a good accord, this will discharge, and be a bar to all the
rest. Cook. 9.79.

Freehold.
If Freehold be pleaded, the Court in that cause can proceed no further. There
are diverse p'eas to an action of trespass, some of one nature, and some of
another, as justification etc. If the Defendant have matter of justification or
excuse to plead, he must be sure to plead it specially, for if he plead the
general issue, viz. not guilty, it will be found against him; But now by the
late Act, made the 23. of October. 1650. the Defendant may plead the general
issue of not guilty, or such like general plea, and give the special matter
in Evidence.

Nota. Et hoc paratus est verificare.
Every plea must be offered to be proved true, by saying in the plea; And this
is he ready to verify, and this is termed an averment.

Et de hoc ponit se ^uper partiam.
If tender of issue come on the Defendants part, the form is, And of this he
puts himself upon the Country.

Et hoc petit, quod inquiratur per patriam
If on the part of the Plantiff it is And this he prays may be inquired of by
the Country.

If issue be taken upon these Pleas, and a Jury thereupon warned to appear to
try them, the Jury appearing, the parties may have their Chalenges.

Challenge of Jurors.
Challenge is said to be where there is evident favor, as kindred, 21. E. 4 fo.
11. and 63.20. Ass. 11. 2. H. 4. f. 16. 4. E. 4. f. 1. 2. H. 4. f. 14.

13. H. 4. f. 14.22. E. 2. Charl. 177.8. E. 3. f. 69. 3. H. 6. fo. 24.

9. E. 4. fo. 49.

Britton fo. 134.

11. H. 4. fo. 40.

33. H. 6. fo. 55.

18. H. 8. f. 2.

8. H. 6. f. 60.


etc. the Juror of Aliance servant bears malice, and has some Action against
chalenger; Juror a gossipe of the Plantiff; Juror master to the Plantiff: the
Juror eat at the Plantiffes cost, or take money for his charges. If the Juror
was chosen arbitrator for one party, but otherwise where he was chosen
indifferent for them; The Sheriff or Bailiff which make the pannell, is of the
Plant^ffes kindred: those who have been attaint of false Oath. or were seen on
the Pillory, or against whom there was Judgment of life or member; Those who
pretend to have some right in the thing demanded: the Juror Outlawed, if the
Record be shown: Juror attaint of conspiracy: the Sheriff being Plantiff, etc.

Having now brought the Jury to the Bar, and that they prove all honest men,
being sworn let them stand to the Bar, and hear their Evidence.

Nota.
If a full Jury do not appear, as many as make default, may be amerced: If the
verdict find matter incertainly, or ambiguously, it is insufficient, and no
Judgment ought to be given thereupon: as if an Executor plead plene
Administravit, viz. fully Administered of all the Goods and Chat^els which were
of the Testator: and issue is joined thereupon, and the Jury find that the
Defendant has Goods within his hands to be Administered, but find not of what
value, this is uncertain, and there insufficient.

17. E. 3.47. 18. E. 3.48. 22. E. 3.2. 18. E. 3.56. 15. E. 3. judge. 58. etc.

Hill. 25. Eliz Mic. 28. and 29. Eliz. inter Gomersall and Gomersall etc.


A Verdict that finds part of the issue, and finding nothing for the residue,
this is insufficient for the whole, because they have not tried the whole issue
wherewith they were charged; But if the Jury give a Verdict of the whole issue,
and of more etc. That which is more is surplusage, and shall not stay
Judgement^ for utile per inutile non vitiatur, but necessary incidents required
by the Law, the Jury may find.

The manner of keeping the Court.
THe Sheriff at the first County Court, which shall be after his election and
discharge of the old Sheriff, must read his patent and writ of assistance, and
nominate his Undersheriff* the County Clarke, and 4. Deputies (at the least)
of Replevins for the ease of the County

Then enter the style of the Court, in this manner, viz.

Y. ss. The style of the Court. The first County Court of I. B. Esquire Sheriff of
the County aforesaid, held at the Castle of Y. on Monday Court. the 7 th. day
of July, 1656.

Then command the Bailiff to make Proclamation 3. times O. yes etc. Procl.


All manner of Persons that have any thing to do at the County Court holden
here this day, before I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County of Y. come forth and give
your attendance. Procl.


Command the Bailiff to make Proclamation again, O yes, etc.

All manner of Persons keep silent, and hear the Lord Protectors writs of
Exigent and Proclamation read.

A Coroner is to be there then present, to pronounce Judgment of Outlawrie,
against those that do not appear upon the Exigent and Proclamation at the 5 th.
County.

Procl.
Command the Bailiff the 3 d. time to make an O yes etc.

Essoyns and proffers (before the Court 3. times) for this day. And then say;
If any man will be essoyned, or enter any Plaints, let them come forth, and
they shall be heard.

Plaint.
Then enter your plaint in this manner.

A. B. against C. D. of a plea of Debt.

Then call the Plantiff thus,

A. B. app^ar, or thou loses thy plaint; 3. times.

If he appear by an Attorney, then enter his warrant of Attorney, viz. the 2.
first letters of his name, over the name of the Plantiff, and then file his
Declaration. Decl.


Then call the Defendant.

C. D. appear and answer A. B. in an action of Debt, (or as the case is) or
thou forfeits thy Goods distrain'd, and further process will be awarded against
thee. If he appear, then enter his appearance, and an Imparlance, to put in his
answer (to the Plantiffes Declaration) the next Court.

When the Defendant has put in his answer, If the Plantiff join issue, Answer.
they may proceed to try all the next Court day (except they proceed further by
Replication, Rejoinder, etc.)

If it be at issue, Ve. fa.
send out a venire facias, to summon the Jury, and the Habeas Corp.

Then enter on the head of the pannell thus.

Jury betwixt A. B. Plantiff and C. D. Defendant, in a Plea of Debt.

When they are brought to the Bar, command the Bailiff to make Proclamation
etc.

You good men that be impannel'd to try the issue between A. B. Plantiff, and
C. D. Defendant, answer to your names, every man upon the first call, upon pain
and peril that shall fall thereon.

If 12. appear, then swear them one by one, in this manner.

Oath.
You shall well and truly try this issue, between party and party, according
to your Evidence, so help you God.

And as they are sworn, enter by every man's name Jur. that is to say juratus
est, he is sworn.

Being all sworn bid them stand together to hear their Evidence.

Then swear the Witness^s.

Oath.
The Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest, shall be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God.

Then let the Jury depart from the Bar, to agree upon their Verdict.

At their return, command the Bailiff to call every one by their names, and
count them.

Then ask them if they be all agreed on their Verdict:

Jur. Y^a. Who shall say for you?


Jur. The Foreman.


Then call the Plantiff, A, B. appear or thou loses thy plaint, 3. times ask
the Jury if they will stand to their Verdict: Jur. Yea.


Whether do you find for the Plantiff, or for the Defendant?


Jur. For the Plantiff.


What damages?


Jur. 2 d. What costs of Suit?


Jur. 2 d. Hearken to your Verdict, this you say, you find for the Plantiff,
and assesse, damages, 2 d. and costs of Suit 2 d. so say you all?


Jur. Yea.


Then bid the Plantiff pay the Jury.

The Court being ended, adjourn the Court to another day to be kept, commanding
the Bailiff to make Proclamation, O yes, etc.

All manner of Persons, Adjornment.
which have any more to do at this Court, let them come forth, and they shall
be heard, otherwise they and every one else, may depart for this time, and keep
their hour here on Monday the 4 th. day of August next by 9. a clock in the
morning, etc.

Now the Court being done, and the Defendant condemned by Verdict, then
(Judgment being entered) a fieri facias shall be awarded to make levy of his
Goods, and thereupon the Defendants Goods shall be taken, praised and sold, to
satisfy the party Plantiff, and if the Defendant have no Goods, whereupon
levy may be made, then the Plantiff rests without remedy in this Court.

Of Distress.
COnsidering the many lacrymable wrongs the Country has sustained by these
Locusts, that litigious generation of men, a clamorous company, qui ex injuria
vivunt, seminaries of discord, worse than any poler by the high way side,
monstra hominum, rabulas forenses, irreligious harpies, scraping griping
Catchpoles, monopolizing Bailiffs and corrupt Practisers, and how much the
ignorant people are abused and deceived, yea, many times (as the experience of
many will inform us) ruined and utterly undone by them, they being the sole
causes of those ignominious aspersions cast upon the Court. Really, the
advantage that it would produce to the Commonwealth is inexplainable, if the
Statute of the 1. H. 5. cap. 4. were observed, that is, that Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, one year, not to be in that Office in 3. years after, because by
their continual being in that Office, they grow so cunning, that they are able
to deceive the Sheriff, and ruin the whole Country; Therefore, that the
Country be not altogether ignorant of their seeming authorized actions: I will
declare what, and when they may distrain, and what, and when they may not.

But first, to let you know what a distress is.

A distress is either said to be real (that is) when Land distrained upon a
Grande cape, or a petit cape* of which we have nothing to say here: or it is
said to be personal, where moveable things are distrained: and this is that we
are to speak unto, Broo. 146. Fieches and ley 135. Coo. sup. Litt. 97.
therefore a distress is where one does take and distrain the beasts cattle and
other things of another man in some ground or place for Debt, Rent, or other
duty behind, or for some wrong or damage done.

The Sheriff nor his Officers cannot break a man's house in the night time to
execute any process, or to do any ministerial act: for the Law gives no
color to break a man's house by night.

No distress can be made in the night, but for damage feasant.

The Bailiff may attach a man by his Goods, citing him to appear, and answer
such a day, at such a man's Suit, in such a Court, and for such a cause; Or he
may only give the Defendant warning (in the presence of 2. others) to appear
such a day, in such a Court, and at such a man's Suit, etc. it is good enough;
and if an Attachment be made, it must be of such Goods (of the Defendants own
proper Goods) as are movables, viz. by mere Chattels Personalls, which may be
forfeited by Outlawrie, and not immoveables.

A Bailiff cannot sever horses joynd to a Cart.

Sheep may not be distrained, if there be a sufficient distress besides: No man
shall drive a distress out of the County where it was taken.

A distress may not be impounded in several places upon pain of 5 l. and
treble damages.

A man cannot work Goods distrained, nor convert them to his own use.

The Goods of any man may be taken in any place within the County, in another
man's house and ground, as well as in his own.

If a Bailiff distrain or attach the horse of a master, where the plaint is
against the servant, Trespass lies for the master against the Bailiff, for the
Bailiff ought to take notice at his peril whose goods he distrains or attaches,
13. H. 4. fo. 2.14. H. 4.24.11. H. 4.90. and Doc. and Stud. 139.

After distress, or attachment made, if the Bailiff do not return his precept
the next Court: Trespass lies against the Bailiff for the Defendant, and an
action of the Case lies against him for the Plantiff, for not returning of the
precept, 10. E. 4. fo. 18.3. H. 7. fo. 3.

By Choke. If one take beasts in the name of a distress, he ought to put them
in an open pound, for that he which is distrained, may give to them sustenance:
but if he distrain dead Chattels, he may put them where he will, but if they
spoil in his default, he must answer for them 19. E. 4. fo. 2. b.

If Goods distrained be put in an open pound, and they dye, it is the loss of
the owner, but if they be put in another places, it is not so. 39. H. 8. ^i^l.
distress 6. He which distrains beasts may put them in a close house, if he will
give them meat, for the putting of them in open pound, is but to the intent,
that the owner may give them meat: 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 12. tit.
distress. That no distress shall be driven out of the Hundred, unless to the
open pound, nor above 3. miles.

Where a man distraineth Cattle for doing damage feasant, or for rent, or
service, and put them into the common pound, or into another pound or place,
and he who has property in the Cattle, or other person takes the Cattle out
of the said pound, and drives them where he pleases, he who distrained them,
may have a writ de parco fracto, F. N. B. 293. E.

A man may not distrain for any Rent or thing done for any Land, but upon the
same Land that is charged therewith; but in case where I come to distrain, and
the other seeing my purpose, chaseth the beasts, or bears the thing out, to
the intent that I shall not take it for a distress upon the ground, then I may
well pursue, and if I take it presently in the high way, or in another ground,
the taking is lawful as well there, as upon the same Land charged, to
whomsoever the properties of the Goods be.

If one distrain my Goods that are not distrainable by Law, I may have a
general action of Trespass, or an action of the Case against him at my chovce,
Coo. 4.94.

If one distrain my Kine great with calf, and by driving they lose their
calfes, I may have an action of the Cafe, F. N. B. 86.

If Goods be impounded in a close house, or secret place, so that the Defendant
cannot come to feed them, and the Goods do perish for want of sustenance, the
distrainer must pay for them, 33. H. 8. tit. Distress, 66.

If the distrainer give the Cattle meat in the pound, he cannot compel the
owner of the Cattle to pay for this, for the distrainer is not compelled by
Law to give them sustenance: and if they do agree after the distress upon a
sum, yet this is no excuse, but it is for their deliverance, if they do agree
at the time of the distress taken that he should give them meat, and that he
should have xx s. (or a certain propounded sum) for the same, this is a good
bargain, 21. E. 4. fo. 53.

An action of Trespass was brought upon the Statute, that none shall be
distrained by his Cattle in the Plough, as long as any other reasonable
distress may be had: and the Plantiff declared the taking to be against the
Statute, and did not specially show that he had other Cattle to be distrained,
yet it was adjudged good for the Defendant to allege this, 4. E. 3. and 18. E.
2.

Stuff sent unto a Tailor, Weaver, Fuller, Sheareman, Miller, etc. shall not
be distrained, for these Officers are necessary for the Commonwealth, and the
like Law is of and in a common Inn.

A horse that a man rides upon cannot be distrained, Fitzherb. in rescous, 11.
quod nota.

If a man come into a common Inn, his Goods and Beasts shall not be distrained
there, because then it would be prejudicial to the Commonwealth.

Also goods and chattels brought into a fair or market to be sold, shall not
be distrained, per cur. Mich. 7. H. 7. fo. 15.10. H. 7. fo. 21.

Windows, Doors, Tables fixed on a Post, a Furnace, Pales, Timber, Boards,
fixed on the ground, Glass, etc. cannot be distrained, nor forfeited by an
Outlawrie: but if these are not used in a house, but standers by, then they may
be distrained, Mich. 21. H. 7. fo. 13. Pas. 14. fol. 25. H. 8. fo. 25. Trin.
21. H. 7. fo. 27.

If a Bailiff come to a house to distrain, the doors being fast shut and bared,
and with his hand through a crevice, or hole, did shove the bar, and open the
door, and did take out of the house 2. Cowes, in the name of a distress, and
because he did take a distress in this manner, it was adjudged the distress to
be wrongful, Abridgment Fizherb, fo. 296.

No goods shall be distrained but the proper goods of the party, and not
pledges, nor yet borrowed goods, 35. H. 6. fo. 25. per. Moyle Justice, And it
is not of chattels real, as a lease for years, nor of apparel, 7. H. 6.9.

A distress made by the servant of the Bailiff is good, 27. Ass. 6.7.

If a man distrain cattle, and they of their own accord come home again to the
owner, he which distrained them cannot take them again, by reason of the first
distress, except he does freshly follow them, per Danby Justice, because of the
negligence of the distrainer, 9. E. 4. fo. 2.

A horse cannot be distrained while the owner thereof is riding upon him, or
leading of him, nor if he be tied at a Mill, and came thither with grist, nor a
horse tied at a man's door, the owner being gone into the house on some
business, Pas. 39. Eliz. Coo. B. adjudged.

If a beast be unruly in the pound, and is like to leap over the pound, it
seems the distrainer cannot justify the tying of him to the pound, nor the
fettering of him. Broo. trespass 250.27. Ass. pl. 64.

None shall distrain wrongfully upon the penalties provided upon the Statute of
Marlb. Westminster. 1.16.3. E. 1.

None shall procure any to distrain another, to make him appear at the County
Court, or any other inferior Court, on purpose to vex him, and put him to
charge and trouble, on pain, to make Fine to the Lord Protector, and to pay the
party grieved treble damages, Westminster. 1.36.13. E. 1.

An ax that is in a man's hand cutting of wood, nor goods that are impounded,
and in the custody of the Law, cannot be distrained, being distrained already,
damage feasant.

If one distrain my cattle or goods without any cause or color, that is not
good and just: or if a man having distrained my goods, will not tell me
requiring it, and offering to give satisfaction for what cause he distrained
them, or if having cause to distrain, he do distrain beasts not distrainable,
as beasts of the Plough, or sheep, or if having distrain'd beasts
distrainable, he after abuse them, as if being a horse or an ox he work it, or
being unruly he fetter it, or lay it so as it be thereby hurt, or if he put the
distress in an unknown place, that I cannot tell how to come to it, to feed
it: or if he take them out of the County, and put them in a pound in another
County, or if he distrain them in a place not distrainable: In all these Cases,
I may have an action of Trespass against him, Coo. 8.147. Doct. and St. 112. F.
N. B. 47.

What goods may be taken upon an Execution etc.
THe Bailiff after Judgment may distrain the Defendants goods, and detain the
distress in his hands, in safeguard till the Defendant has satisfied the
Plantiff of the condemnation, 22. Ass. 72. Statham, 11. Eliz. fo. 93. F. N. B.
165. and 4. H. 6. fo. 17. action.

Goods taken in Execution must be praised, and Execution made of them, 27. Ass.
72.

Where erroneous Judgment is given, the Officer which does the Execution is
excused, 22. Ass. 64. Plowden, 194.

But the contrary, if Judgment be given, that is void or voidable: for where
Judgment and Execution is there of a thing whereof they have no jurisdiction*
there Trespass lies against the Officer, for executing it: but if Judgment be
there but erroneous, and so not void, false Judgment lies, and no Trespass
against the Officers, Plowsdens Com. 394.

If after Judgment a man does sell his goods, to defraude me of my Execution,
and nevertheless takes the profits of them: if it be so found, I may have
Execution of the goods sold by fraud, 43. E. 3. fo. 2.22. Ass. 72.50. E. 3.

If the Sheriff open or breaks any house to do Execution at the Suit of a
common person, the Execution is good, but the party, whose house is broken,
may have an action of Trespass against him for the breaking of the house, Coo.
5.93.3.

If the Sheriff levy money upon an Execution, and give it to the Plantiff,
though he never make any return to the Court, it is good enough, Cook
5.90.4.67.11.40.20 H. 6.24.4.

If a man has a Judgment in this Court against the Plaintiff, or the
defendant, and the execution is deferred in favor of him, the party grieved
may have a Writ de executione Judicii from above, to hasten it. F. N. B. 120.

Goods pawned shall not be taken upon Execution, for the debt of him which
pawned them, during the time they are pawned, 24 H. 8. Pledge 28. and 4 E. 6.
distress. 75.

By Fieri facias (or Levari facias) the Bailiff cannot break the door or chest
to take goods in Execution, for if he do, trespass lies against him for the
breaking only, and not for taking the goods in Execution, 18 E. 4. fo. 4. and
13 E. 4. fo. 9. by Choke, notwithstanding, 8 E. 2. tit. Executors 152. contrary.

If a man lets to farm by the year Oxen, and cattle, and after the lessee
for years is condemned in an action of debt, these cattle and Oxen demised,
during the term, cannot, nor shall not be taken in Execution for this debt. 22
E. 4. fo. 10.

A Bailiff cannot pull the latch to open the door, if it be shut to make a
distress, Coo. 5.91.93. Dyer, 67.224. But if the out-door of the house be
open, the Sheriff may go into the house and take any thing there liable to the
Execution, and being come in at the open door, it seems he may break open any
of the inner doors, 18 E. 4.4. Coo. 5.90. Cook 4.74.

Of the Replevin.
Cattle being-distrained for Rent, etc. the owner must go to the County Clerk
(or some one of the Deputies appointed in the County: for the granting out of
Replevins) to have a Replevin directed to the Bailiffs to Replevie them, and
the party must be bound in an obligation to the Sheriff, to prosecute his
action against him, or them that did take the cattle, and to make return of
the same cattle to the distrainer, if he by justification or avowrie do
recover. And if he pursue it not, or if it be found or judged against him, then
he that took the distress, shall have again the distress, and that is called
the return of the beasts, and he shall have in such case a Writ from above de
Returno habendo.

This Replevin may be removed out of the County into the Common Pleas by a Writ
of Recordare.

If the goods cannot be taken by the first Replevin, then issues forth an
alias, then a plures, then a toties quoties, and if none of these will do, then
a Withernam.

The sueing out of a Withernam is after this manner.

If the Bailiff return at the next County, upon the toties quoties, that he
cannot Replevie the cattle, because they are esloyned, or that he cannot have
view of the cattle, then the Sheriff ought to make inquiry if it be true
which is returned, and if it be so found out, he shall make a precept to the
Bailiff in the nature of a Withernam to take as many cattle of the other
party. And if the Bailiffs upon the Withernam thus awarded, return that the
other party has nor any thing, etc. he shall have an al. and pl. and so ad
infinitum, and has no other remedy in this Court.

But now to return again to the Replevin, if the thing distrained, be put by
the distraynor in a place where the Sheriff cannot come at them to make a
replevie, he may take posse Comitatus, viz. the power of the County, and after
demand, beat down the door or place, where they are, to take them, and the
owner of the goods shall recover double for his loss what ever it be.

He that has the Replevin must have either a general or a special property
in the thing; as of goods pledged or the like, and it must be in him at the
time of the taking, or otherwise he cannot have or maintain the Replevin for
them.

Diverse men's cattle being taken, they may not join in one Replevin, but must
have several Replevins.

If a man takes and impoundeth goods, a Replevin may be of more cattle than
were impounded, for if a man distrain Cowes or Ewes, etc. they have in the
pound Calves or Lambs, the Plaintiff shall have a Replevin for them all, and
by Littleton it was adjudged, Mich. 8 E. 3. That if a man distraineth and
impoundeth a Sow great with Piggs in the pound, the owner shall have a Replevin
for the Sow and the piggs.

If cattle be distrained and a Replevin is sued, the defendant does avow for
taking of them damage feasant, or for rents, customs and services, and are at
issue, and after the plaintiff is non-suite, or otherwise barred, he shall
loose his costs and damages, by the Stat. of 7 H. 6. cap. 5. but by the Stat.
21 H. 8. it is clear, Pasc. 14. Mar. Dyer. 141.

Of the nature, and return of those Writs that do remove actions out of this
Court into superior Courts.
WRits removing suites out of this Court, may be without showing cause in the
Writ, ^^ the remove be by the Plaintiff: but not without showing good cause, if
it be by the defendant.

And first of a Recordare.

Recordare facias loquelam.
A Recordare is a writ issuing out of the upper Bench or Common pleas, directed
to the Sheriff, Its nature.
commanding him to send a plaint that is before him in his County Court,
without writ of Justicies into the Court from whence the Recordare came, to the
end that the cause may be there determined. And the Sheriff is hereupon to
summon the other party to be in that Court, into which the plaint is to be
sent at a day certain; And of all this, he is to make a certificate under his
own seal, The Return.
and the seals of four suitors of the same Court.

By virtue of this writ to me directed, at my County of Y. held at the Castle
of Y. within written (such a day, and year) to be Recorded, I caused the the
Plea, of which within is made mention, which appears in a Scedule to this writ
annexed, and that Record I have before the Justices within written, at the day
and place within contained, under my seal, and the seals of W. H. E. R. etc.
four good and legal Knights of the same County, of them who at the Record
present were, and to the parties within written that day I have prefixed, that
then they be there in that Plea, as just it may be to prosecute, as within to
me is commanded.

The Residue of the Execution of this writ, appears in a certain Scedule to
this writ annexed.

At my County Court held at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid, The
Scedule.
such day and year, before J R. M L. J. S. and S D. four suitors of the Court
aforesaid amongst other matters is contained.

Yo. ss. R S. complains again B. The Plea.
W. of a Plea of Debt* (or as the case requires.) J B. Esquire Sheriff Pledge.
of Prosec. J S. J D. in testimony of etc.

Orthus.
By venue of this writ to be Recorded, I have caused the Plea which is in my
County without writ of Oliver Lord Protector, etc. betwixt A B. and C D.
concerning the beasts of him the said A B. taken, and unjustly detained, as it
is said, and that Record I have before the Justices within written, at the day
and place within contained, under my seal, and the seals of E B. S D. R B. and
J L. four legal Knights of my County, of those who at that Record present
were, as it appears in a certain Schedule to this writ annexed, according to
the Exigencie of this writ.

At my County held, etc. as before. By virtue of this writ in form within
written, I came to the Court within written, and in that full Court to be
Recorded caused the Plea within written; and that Record, as it appears in a
Schedule to this writ annexed, I have before the Justices within written, at
the day and place within contained, and to the parties within written that day
have prefixed, that then they be there, in that Plea, as just it may be to
proceed as within to me is commanded.

A B. complains of C D. in a Plea of taking, The Schedule.
and unjust detayning of the beasts of him the said A. B. in testimony of which
matter, E B. S D. J. W. and J R. four legal men of those who at the Record
present were in the full Court at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid, the
tenth day of A. the year, etc. to the same Record their seals severally have
put the day and year abovesaid.

The nature of a Pone.
A Pone does nothing differ from a Recordare, but that a Pone is always to
remove such suites as are before the Sheriff by writ of Justicies, and not by
plaint only; but the Recordare is to remove the suite that is by plaint only
without writ. F N. B. 70.11.

The Return.
By virtue of this writ to me directed, I have put before the Justices, etc. of
the Common Bench at Westminster, the Plea which is in my County by Writ of his
Highness the Lord Protector of Justicies, betwixt A B. and C D. of a Plea of
Debt, as it is said, as it appears in a certain Schedule to this writ
annexed, etc.

The Schedule.
At my County Court held at the Castle of Y. in the County aforesaid, on Monday
the twelfth of A. the year, etc. A B. complains against C D. of a Plea of
Debt, in testimony of which matter, R L. S R. J O. and S D. four legal men of
those who at the Record present were in full Court there seals severally have
put the day and year abovesaid.

The Plea by writ. Prohibitition.
A B. complains of C D. of a Plea of Debt. xx l.

A Writ of Prohibition is of the same nature of a Recordare; and a Pone, but
not now used.

Consultation, or Procedendo.
These two writs are both of one nature, though the Writ of Consultation, be
obsolete, and the writ of Procedendo stepped up in its place, it lies where a
cause has been formerly removed by Pone, or Recordare, from this Court to one
of the Courts at Westminster. and for want of sufficient cause of removeall is sent
back again, Fitz. old Natura. Brev. 50.

The nature of a Writ of false Judgment.
A Writ of false Judgment lies where an erroneous Judgment is given in this
Court, (being no Court of Record) then the party grieved by the Judgment, may
have this writ, and remove all process of the Suit into the common Bench, and
there it shall be examined, if it be found erroneous the Judgment, shall be
reversed, and the suitors of the Court, who gave the Judgment, amerced.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, to be Recorded, The return.
I have caused the Plea (which is in my County) together with the proceedings
and the Judgment, betwixt the parties beneath, and to the same parties day have
prefixed to be before the Justices within written, at the day and place within
contained, as that writ exacts and requires, which Plea with the proceedings
and judgment, appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ annexed.

The Schedule.
A plaint by writ in the County Court, holden at the Castle of Y. in the County
aforesaid, on Monday the 23 d. day of August, the year etc. before the suitors
of the same Court, in the tine of I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
according to the custom and privileges of the same Court, (time whereof the
memory of man is not to the contrary) have been used and approved of in the
same.

Writ of Justices.
At this Court came A. B. in his proper person, and brought here into Court a
writ of his Highness the Lord Protector of Justicies. Which said Writ follows
in these words; Oliver Lord Protector of etc. To the Sheriff of Y. greeting A.
B. has complained to us, that C. D. upon him the said A. B. at the Castle of
Y. have made an assault, and have beaten, wounded, and evil entreated him, so
that of his life it was despaired, and have done him other wrongs, to the great
damage and grieveance of the said A. B. and therefore we command you, that you
hear the said plaint, and after cause them to be therefore brought to Justice
for the same, that I hear no more complaint therein for want of Justice,
witness our selves at Westminster. the 10 th. day of August in the year etc. and
thereupon found pledges to prosecute the said plaint, that is to say, Jo. Do.
and Ric. Roo. and thereupon the said A. B. put in his place S. D. his Attorney
in the plaint aforesaid, and by his said Attorney required process to be made
to him upon the same: And it was commanded by the said I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the
said County to all, and singular his Bayliffes, Warrant upon the writ.
jointly and several, and their Deputies, that they or some of them should do
Justice to the said C. D. so that he should be and appear at the next County
Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday the 20 th. day of September,
then next in the year aforesaid, to answer the said A. B. in the plaint
aforesaid, at which day came the said A. B. by his Attorney aforesaid, and
offered himself against the said C. D. in the plaint aforesaid; and then and
there came I. P. one of the Bayliffes in the County aforesaid, of the said I.
B. Sheriff of the County aforesaid, and returned the said precept so directed
as aforesaid, Essoyn.
De male vener.
served and executed on him: and the said C. D. did Essoyn, because he could
not come until the next County Court, to be holden at the Castle aforesaid, at
which said next Court ( viz) on Monday the 18 th. day of October, then next
following in the year abovesaid came the aforesaid A. B. by his Attorney
aforesaid, and offered himself against the said C. D. in the plaint aforesaid,
and the said C. D. then and there came in his proper person to answer the
aforesaid A. B. in the plaint aforesaid, and put in his place I. R. his
Attorney against the said A. B. in the plaint aforesaid, and by his said
Attorney desired of the said Court, that the said A. B. should declare against
him upon his said plaint: and thereupon the said A. B. by his Attorney
aforesaid declared against the said C. D. upon the plaint aforesaid, in manner
and form following.

Y ss. A. B. by virtue of a Writ of Justicies by S. D. his Attorney complains
of C. D. of an action of Trespass and Assault, Declaration
for that the said C. D. the 10 th. day of October in the year etc. at the
Castle Y. etc. in and upon the aforesaid A. B. did make an assault and affray,
and him did beat, wound, and evil entreat, so that he did despair of his life,
and other harms did do unto him to the great damage of the said A. B. wherefore
the said A. B. says he is damnified to the value of xxl. and thereupon brings
this action, etc. Whereupon at the same Court, at the request of the Defendant,
day was given to the said parties in the plaint aforesaid, Emparlance.
till the next County Court, to be holden before the suitors aforesaid, on
Monday the 15 th. day of November then next following, saving to the Defendant
etc. at which day at the said Court before the suitors aforesaid, holden at the
Castle of, Y. aforesaid, came as well the said A. B. by his Attorney aforesaid,
as the said C. D. by his Attorney aforesaid, and then and there the said I. B.
Esquire was removed from the Office of Sheriff of the County aforesaid, and R. L.
Esquire was duly elected, and did enter into the said Office of Sheriff, of the
County of Y. aforesaid, whereupon at the same Court at the request of the
parties, further day was given to the said parties in the plaint aforesaid,
until the next County Court, on Monday the 13 th. day of December, then next
following in the year abovesaid, to be holden before the suitors aforesaid,
saving to the parties etc. at which day at the said Court before the suitors
aforesaid, holden at the Castle aforesaid, came as well the said A. B. by his
said Attorney, as the said C. D. by his Attorney, aforesaid, and the said C. D.
by his Attorney aforesaid, Non sum informatus.
came and defended the injury when etc. And the said Attorney said that he was
not informed by his said Clyent of any answer for him the said C. D. to the
said A. B. in the plaint aforesaid to be given, whereby the said A. B. did
remain against the said C. D. thereupon without defense, for which the said A.
B. ought to recover against the said C. D. his damages by occasion of the
trespass, and assault, and wounding aforesaid, but because it was not known to
the Court, what damages the said A. B. had sustained by reason of the
premises: therefore at the next County Court holden at the Castle of Y.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, before the suitors aforesaid, upon Monday
the 10 th. day of January then next following in the year aforesaid, Jury to
inquire of damages.
it was required by the Oaths of I W. RS. SG. ML. TP. etc. twelve good and
lawful men of the County aforesaid, being present in the Court, and in the
full County sworn to inquire what damages the said A. B. sustained by occasion
of the trespass, and assault, and wounding, say upon their Oaths, that the
said A. B. has sustained damages by occasion of the trespass, and assault, and
wounding to x l. and for his costs and charges by him in that behalf expended
to 2 d. therefore it was considered by the said Court that the said A. B.
should recover against the said C. D. his damages and costs aforesaid, by the
Jurors aforesaid in form aforesaid assessed, and also forty shillings by the
Court aforesaid, to the said A. B. by his assent for increase of costs to him
adjudged, which said damages and costs do amount to 12 l. and 2 d. and the said
C. D. in Mercy etc. In Testimony etc.

The nature of an Accedeas ad curiam.
This Writ issues out of the Upper Bench, or Common Pleas, directed to the
Sheriff, commanding him to go to such a Court of some Lord or Franchise, as
Court Basin or the like, (being no Court of Record) where a plaint is sued, or
a false Judgment is supposed to be given in some suit, which has been in the
Court; and by this the Sheriff is there to make record of the same suit, in the
presence of the suitors of the same Court, and four lawful men of the County:
and of this he is to make certificate into the Court above, at the day
appointed by the Writ: F. N. B. 71. Plowden. 74. Finch. 444.

This writ cannot be had without showing some cause for the removal of it: as
that a Freehold is in question there, or some foreign plea is pleaded not
triable in that Court, or such like, F. N. B. 70.119.

The County Clarke is to make a warrant upon the writ in this manner viz.

Yo. ss. # J B. Esquire, Precept upon an acced. ad cur.
Sheriff of the County of Y.
to the Steward and Bailiff of the Court of Honor of P. greeting.
I command you by virtue of a Writ to me directed, that you take with you four
discreet, and lawful freeholders of the County aforesaid, and that you go to
the Court aforesaid, and in full Court there cause the plaint to be recorded,
which is in the same Court without writ between R. S. and G M. of a certain
trespass upon the case brought by the said R S. against the said G M. as is
said. And that you certify the Record to me, so that I may have the same
before the Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster, from the day of the
Holy Trinity, in fifteen days under your seals, and the seals of four lawful
men of the said Court of those that shall be present at the Record, and that
you prefix the same day to the parties, that then they be there ready to
proceed in the said plaint as shall be just, and have you the names of the said
four men, and this warrant; fail not hereof, etc.

Given under the Seal of my Office this 2d. day of June in the year of our Lord
1656.# By the Sheriff.

Honor of P. The return.
ss. The Court Barron of G S. J K. etc. holden at P. for the Honor of P. the
12 th day of June in the year of our Lord 1656. Before J H. T H. J G. and R H.
suitors of the said Court.#
R S. complains against J N. in a Plea of trespass upon the case, The plain.
to the damage of xxx s.

By virtue of this writ to me directed at the Court aforesaid holden the day
and year abovesaid, in full Court there to be Recorded, I have caused the
plaint, of which within is made mention, which plaint does appear above
written; And that Record I have returned sealed with my Seal and the Seals of
the aforenamed four lawful men, being in the said Court present at the said
Record; And to the parties within written. I have prefixed the day, in the writ
specified, that then they be ready to proceed, as just it may be in the said
plaint, as within to me is commanded.

WOE. Steward. Suitors. J H. T H. J G. R H.



Record to be delivered in Court.
By virtue if this writ to me directed in form within written, I came to the
Court within written, and in that full Court to be Recorded I caused the Plea
within written; and the Record as it appears in a Schedule to this writ
annexed, I have before the Justices at the day and place within contained,
under my Seal, and the Seals of T R. etc. four legal men of my Shire of those
who at the Record present were, and to the parties, etc.

Or thus. If the Record be not returned.
By virtue of this writ to me directed, and in my proper person having taken
with me R S. etc. good and lawful Knights of my County, I came to the Court
Baron of G S. J K. etc. holden at P. for the Honor of P. to record the Plea
within written, at the day and place within contained, as within to me is
commanded; whereupon the suitors of the Court aforesaid at P. aforesaid, in
full Court, me the within written Sheriff the said writ there to execute, or as
to the said Plea in any manner to intermit, altogether denied; for which
execution of the writ aforesaid make I could not.

The Return of a Writ for the Election of a Coroner, after the death of another.
AT my County held such a day and year in full County aforesaid, by virtue of
this writ of the assent of the same County in the place of R O. within named,
who deceased is, I have chosen a Coroner, viz. J M. who (as the manner is) has
taken his oath corporal, that he will do and keep those things which to the
office of Coroner in the Country aforesaid, belong to be done, as within, etc.

The Return of the Writ of Exigent.
BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, at my County held at the Castle of Y.
in the County of Y. within written, on Monday, etc. the year, etc. within
written, J C. and the rest of the defendants within named (if there be above
two in the writ) first were exacted and appeared not at my County of Y. there
holden on Monday, etc. the year aforesaid; the aforesaid J C. and the rest of
the Defendants within named the second time were exacted and appeared not at my
County of Y. there holden on Monday, etc. the year aforesaid the aforesaid J C.
and the rest of the defendants within named the third time were exacted and
appeared not at my County of Y. there held on Monday, etc. in the year
aforesaid the aforesaid J C. and the rest of the Defendants within named, the
fourth time were exacted and appeared not at my County of Y. there held on
Monday, etc. in the year aforesaid the aforesaid J C. and the rest of the
Defendants within named the fifth time were exacted and appeared not, And
therefore J C. and the rest of the Defendants within named by Judgment of J W.
and W R. Gent. Coroners of the Commonwealth of the County aforesaid, according
to law and custom of the Common wealth of England outlawed are, and every of
them is Outlawed.

J B. Esquire, Sheriff.

Betwixt two Sher.
By virtue of this writ to me directed, at my County held at Y. in the County
of Y. within written on Monday, etc. the year, etc. within written, the said J
R. within named first exacted was and appeared not, this Writ, so above
Indorsed to me delivered was by J B. Esquire, late Sheriff of the County within
written, my next predecessor, in his going out from his office, as above upon
the back of this writ; And at my County, etc. as before.

This writ so above Indorsed, Or thus.
together with the writ of Oliver, Lord Protector of etc. of Supersedeas to it
annexed to me delivered was by J B. Esquire late Sheriff of the aforesaid
County, my next predecessor.

If it be against a woman, she cannot be said to be outlawed, (for the reasons
I showed before) but waived, so that the latter part of the return must be
thus, viz.

Therefore according to Law and custom aforesaid B D. waived is.

By virtue, etc. at my County, Defect of the Coroner.
held on Monday, etc. the said year, etc. within written, the aforesaid T C.
the fifth time exacted was, and appeared not, and for defect of N B. and R C.
Coroners of the County aforesaid further thereupon to prosecute I could not.

Defect of the County.
By virtue, etc. and at my County, etc. and that there were not more Counties in
the County aforesaid held, from the day of the receipt of this writ, to the day
of the return of the same, wherefore nothing done is at present. Or thus,

And therefore in the Execution of this writ farther to be done, nothing acted
is.

Supersedeas.
By virtue, etc. at my County aforesaid held on Monday, etc. in the year etc.
within written, the aforesaid C D. the fourth time exacted was, and appeared,
and brought forth to me, the writ of his Highness the Lord Protector, etc. of
Supersedeas which to this writ annexed is: wherefore the Execution of this writ
farther to be done, I have superseded altogether.

Or thus.
As in the foresaid writ of his Highness the Lord Protector, etc. of
Supersedeas, to me is commanded.

As to exact, take Outlawed, Or thus.
or at all molest the within named J R. by virtue of this writ, to the
Justices, etc. within written; at the day and place within contained I
certify, that by virtue of a certain other writ of his Highness, etc. to me
directed to this annexed, I have superseded altogether, as by that writ to me
is commanded.

And besides J S. who has rendered himself to the prison of, Rendered himself.
etc. of the Castle of Y. whose body before the justices within written, at the
day and place within contained ready I have, as this writ exacteth and
requires. And besides J C. who dead is, Dead.
will not appear, therefore by Judgment, Waived.
etc. and the aforesaid T C. waived is in presence of T R. and F W. Coroners
of, etc. of the County aforesaid.

At the County, Languid.
etc. 1, 2, 3, 4. exacted he was, and has appeared, and rendered himself to the
prison of, etc. of the Castle of Y. where so sick he is, than for fear of Death
him before the Justices within written, at the day and place withing contained,
have I cannot.

The Return of the writ of Proclamation.
BY virtue of this writ to me directed at my County of Y. held at the Castle of
Y. within written on Monday, etc. the year, etc, within written, the first time
to be proclaimed I caused; and at my County of Y. held at the Castle of Y.
aforesaid, in the said County of Y. on Monday, etc. the year, etc. within
written, the second time to be proclaimed I caused; as also' at the General
Session of the Peace held at Skipton for the West Riding of the said County,
within written, Thursday, viz. the twelfth day of September aforesaid the year,
etc. within written, publicly to be proclaimed I caused, that J C. and all
other the Defendants within named, themselves, to render to the within Sheriffs
of L. so that the same Sheriffs have their bodies before the Justices within
written, at the day and place within contained; as this Writ exacteth and
requires.

Of Process in this Court.
PRocesses of this Court, are either Original issuing out before Judgment: Or
Judicial issuing out after Judgment. Original is a Distring as, or County
warrant, etc. Judicial process is only a fierifacias, or Execution, directed
to the Bailiff, to levy the debt or damages, and cost of suite recovered, of
the goods and chattells of the defendant, or of the plaintiff, if he be
Non-suite.

And first of the Original Process, viz. Distring as, or County warrant;
which is a precept issuing out for a debt under forty shillings. Its form is
as follows.

Yo. ss. J. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the said County,
to all and singular my Bailiffs within the said County, and their Deputies
greeting.
Commanding you, and every of you, that you distrain R B. by his goods and
chattells within the said County, so that he be and appeart at the next County
Court to be holden at the Castle of Y. upon Monday the tenth day of July, to
answer unto S D. in an action of debt. And that you then and there certify
your doings herein.

Sealed with the Seal of my office the sixteenth day of June in the year of our
Lord 1656.# By the Sheriff.

If the Defendant do not appear the next Court after the Distring as executed;
then farther process issues out against him viz. a Duces tecum to cause him
to appear. If not upon the first Duces tecum, he appear, you may have an al.
Duces tecum, and a plur. Duc. tec. ad infinitum, until he appear, and no other
remedy here. The form is thus.

Duc. tec.
Y. ss. J B. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
to all etc. greeting
I command you and every of you jointly and severally, that you bring with you,
and have at the Castle of Y. at my next County Court, all those goods and
chattells of R B. which late by virtue of another precept of mine to you first
directed, you distrain at the suit of S D. and that you farther distrain the
said R B. by his other goods and chattells in the said County, so that he be at
the Castle of Y. at my next County Court to be holden on Monday the, etc. to
answer to the said S D. in a Plea of debt. And have you then and there this
precept.

Given under the Seal of my Office the twentieth day of July in the year, etc.#
If you have your Distring as, or Duc. tec. special. Then thus,

J B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid, Special.
to all my Bailiffs and their deputies in and through the County aforesaid;
more especially to J B. and R S. my Bailiffs in this behalf, specially deputed,
greeting, etc. then proceed on as in the former.

Of the Writ of Justicies.
THIS Writ issues out of the Chancery, directed to the Sheriff, giving him
power to hold Plea in this Court, in actions for forty shillings or above. It
is called a Justicies, because it is a Commission to the Sheriff to do a man
Justice and right, and requires no return, unless the action be removed by
Recordare, and then the Writ must be returned together with the Record. The
form of the precept upon the Writ is as follows.

Yo. ss. G M. Esquire, Sheriff of the said County
to all and singular my Bailiffs within the said County, and to their Deputies
greeting.
By virtue of writ of Justicies of Oliver Lord Protector, etc. to me directed:
I command you and every one of you jointly and severally, that you or some of
you do Justice to J C. so that he be and appear at my next County Court to be
holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. to answer unto E L. in an action of
Debt, and that you or some of you certify your doings herein.

Sealed with the Seal of my Office the etc.#
A Replevin.
IF any goods be taken wrongfully, (as before I have more largely declared unto
you,) then the party grieved, may have a Replevin, which must be made after
this manner.

Yo. ss. G M. Esquire, Sheriff, etc.
to all and every my Bailiffs, etc. greeting.
Because G A. has comed before me, and given sufficient security to prosecute
his suite, and make return of his goods if return thereof shall be adjudged.
Therefore by virtue of my office, I command you, and every of you, that you or
some of you Replevie and deliver to the aforesaid G A. two kine, which H H.
has taken and unjustly detained against the said G A. and his pledges, and
also that you summon, and take safe pledges of the said H H. so that he be and
appear at the Castle or Y. at the next County Court, there to be holden upon
Monday etc. to answer the aforesaid G A. in an action for the taking, and
unjust detayning of his said goods: and that you or some of you then and there
make return of your doings, together with this precept.

Given under the Seal of my Office etc.#
And if the Cattle be not delivered by virtue of the said Replevin, then the
Plaintiff may have an Alias Replevin, with these words, vel causam mihi
signific. which Replevin must be made after this manner.

Alias Repl.
G M. Esquire, etc.
to all and singular my Bailiffs, etc. greeting,
because G A. has comed before me, and given sufficient security to prosecute
his suite, and make return of his goods, if return thereof shall be adjudged.
Therefore by virtue of my office I command you, and every of you, as formerly I
have commanded you, that you, or some of you Replevie, and deliver to the
aforesaid G A. two kine, (without delay you cause to be replevied, or the cause
to me you signify werefore my Mandates to you therefore directed execute you
would not, or might not,) which H H. has taken and unjustly detained, etc. as
before in the other Replevin.

And if the cattle be not delivered upon this Replevin, nor show sufficient
cause why he did not: then the party may have a Plures Repl. velcausam mihi
signif. which must be made verbatim as the alias repl. was made; and if return
be made upon any of these Replevins, quod averia olongat. sunt ad loca sibi
ognot. Ita quod averia ill' pref: G. A. non potuit deliberar. then the Plantiff
may have a Withernam, which must be made in this manner.

^ Withernam.
G. M. Esquire etc.
to all, etc. greeting*
because G. A. has comed before me etc. (as in the former) I command you and
every of you, as diverse times I have commanded you, that you or some of you,
replevie and deliver to the said G. A. two Kine which H. H. has taken and
unjustly detained, and does unjustly detain as it is said, and that you upon
diverse my precepts for replevie to be made to you directed, me has certified,
that the same two Kine elongated are to places to you unknown, so that view of
the same have you could not; therefore I charge, and also command, that you
take in Withernam chattels to the value of the said two Kine, of the chattels
of the said H. H. to be delivered to the foresaid G. A. for the two Kine
aforesaid elongated, and also that you summon and take safe pledges of the said
H. H. so that he be and appear, etc. as before in the Replevin.

Al' capias in Withernam.
G. M. Esquire etc.
to all, etc. greeting.
Because you have at my County Court held at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc.
the year etc. to me returned: that by virtue of my warrant to you many times
directed, you came to the pound of H. H. to the place where the two Kine
aforesaid impounded and detained were by the said H. H. and these two Kine
going and elongated were before your coming out of the pound aforesaid, to
places to you unknown, by the aforesaid, H. H. for which the two Kine
aforesaid, replevie you could not; Wherefore it is considered by the Court,
willing to meet with the mailce of him the said H. H. that the beasts of the
said H. H. be taken in Withernam to the value, etc. and these to the foresaid
G. A. be delivered safely and surely to be kept, until to the same G. A. his
beasts aforesaid, according to Law you can replevie, and according to the tenor
of my mandate aforesaid. Therefore you and every of you, jointly and severally
I command that you take or. etc. the beast of the aforesaid H. H. to the value,
etc. in Withernam, and those to the aforesaid G. A. to to be delivered you
cause, or, etc. safely and securely to be kept until, etc. and distrain you,
or, etc. the aforesaid H. H. so that he be at the Castle of Y, at the next
County Court to be held on etc. to answer the aforesaid G. A. the Plea
aforesaid, and the answer of this my precept known make you, etc. at the next
Court,

given under the seal of my Office, such day and year, etc.#
Note that when a Replevinis granted, Notae.
there must be a bond taken of him to whom it is granted, or of some other for
him, with one or two sureties, to appear at the next Court, and to prosecute
his suit with effect, or else it may be prejudicial both to the granter of the
Replevin, and to the executioner thereof: and the form of that bond, and
condition thoreof is this.

An Obligation upon a Replevin.
Know all men by these presents, that we G. A. of Skipton in the County of Y.
gent. and I. B. of the same Town and County yeoman, am held and firmly obliged
to G. M. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid, in the sum of 100 l. of lawful
money of England, to be paid to the said G. M. or his certain Attorney, his
Executors or Assigns, to which payment well and truly to be made, we bind us
our Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, firmly by these presents, with our
seals sealed,

Dated the 10 th. day of July in the year of our Lord 1656.#
The condition.
The condition of this Obligation is such that if G. A. do appear at my next
County Court to be holden for the County of Y. at the Castle of Y. on Monday
the, etc. next, and do prosecute there with effect his suit which he has
commenced against H. H. for the taking and unjust detaining of two Kine, of the
goods of him the said G. A. and do make return of the goods, if return of the
same shall be adjudged: that then this present Obligation shall be void and of
none effect, etc.

The condition, Or thus.
etc. that whereas G. A. has obtained from the abovenamed Sheriff, a Replevin
for the delivery of two Kine and other goods distrained, and detained by H. H.
and others, if therefore the said G. A. do prosecute his suit upon the said
Replevin with effect, and do make return of the goods, if return thereof shall
be adjudged; and also do save and keep harmeless the said Sheriff, by reason
of the said Replevin, to him granted as aforesaid, that then this etc.

A Tolt.
TOlt, comes from the Latin word tollo, viz. to take away: It is a precept by
which a cause depending in a Weapentack Court, or other inferior Court Barron,
may be from thence removed into this Court; The form is this.

Yo. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
to the Steward, and also to the Bailiff of the Hundred, of H. greeting;
Whereas I am informed that you are favorable, and not equal in a certain
plaint, depending before you in your Court, between W. A. Plaintiff and R. M.
Defendant: therefore on the behalf of his Highness the Lord Protector, and by
virtue of my Office, I command you, and either of you, that you take the plaint
so depending before you in your Court between the said parties, so that I may
have the same at my next County Court, to be held at the Castle of Y. on Monday
etc. next in the same state and condition, as it is now depending before you:
and that you give notice to the said parties of the same day, that they may be
there ready to prosecute the said plaint, as to justice and right shall
appertain, and that in further prosecution of the said plaint in your Court:
you altogether supersede, and no further proceed therein, and this, etc even
under the seal of my Office the, etc.

The. return
Hundred of H. ss. At the Court Barron, holden at W. within the Hundred of H.
upon Wednesday the last day of July the year, etc. in the time of I. B. Esquire
Sheriff of the County aforesaid.
W. A. Plantiff, complains of R. M. Defendant in a plea of Debt, The Plaint.
damages xx.

By virtue of this precept to us directed, to be recorded and taken, we have
caused the plaint depending before us in our Court, betwixt the parties above
named, and in the same state and condition, as it is now depending; and to the
same parties we have prefixed and given notice, that they be at the County
Court within written, at the day and place within mentioned, to prosecute the
said plaint, as to justice and right shall appertain, and as this precept
exacts and requires; In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands and
seals, etc.

I.S. Steward. T.L. Bailiff.


Judicial Process.
Judicial Process issues out after Judgment, either by default, or nihil dicit
against the Defendant; Nonsuit against the Plantiff: The form of Judicial
Process, or a fieri facia^ is this.

Yo. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
to all and singular my Bayliffes, etc. greeeting.
I command and you and every of you, jointly and severally, that of the goods
and chattels of T. B. you or some of you cause to be made, as well a certain
debt of 30 s. which H. S. in my County Court has recovered against him; as
also 13 s. and 10 d. which to the said H. S. in the same Court were adjudged
for his costs and charges about his suit in this behalf expended, and have you
the money at the Castle of Y. at my next County Court, there to be holden upon
Monday, etc. to render to the said H. S. of the debt and damages aforesaid:
whereof he is convict, and this given under the seal of my Office, etc.

I. B. Esquire Sheriff etc.
to all and singular my Bayliffes, etc. greeting. Fi. fa. against an Executor.

I command you and every of you, jointly and several, that you or some of you
levy of the goods and chattels which late were W. W. deceased at the time of
his death, and now remaining in the hands of I. W. Executor of the Testament of
the said W. W. and not administered of as well a certain debt of forty ponnds,
which T. L. in my County Court, by virtue of a writ of Justices recovered
against him: as also 20 s. which to the said T. L. in the same Court was
adjudged for his costs and damages, which he sustained by reason of the
detaining of the said debt; If the said I. W. Executor of the Testament of the
said W. W. have so much goods or chattels in his hands, which were the said W.
W. at the time of his death, sufficient to satisfy the debt and damages
aforesaid: If he have not so much goods or chattels in his hands which were the
said W. W. at the time of his death sufficient to satisfy the said T. L. of
the debt and damages aforesaid; That then you or some of you, levy of the
proper goods and chattels of the said I. W. the damages and costs aforesaid, so
that I may have the said moneys at my next County Court, to be holden at the
Castle of Y. etc. to render to the said T. L. the debt and damages aforesaid,
whereof he is convict* and this given under the seal, etc.

Fi fa. for costs upon a nonsuit.
I. B. Esquire etc.
to all and singular my Bayliffes, etc. greeting.
I command you and every of you, that of the goods and chattels of T. O. you
levy 20 s. which S: D. in the County Court, (according to a Satute provided in
that case) were adjudged for his costs and damages, which he sustained in his
own defense, in a certain plea of debt, which the said S. D. against the said
T. O. of late brought, because the said T. O. did not prosecute his suit, but
was thereupon nonsuited and convicted: so that I may have the money at my next
County Court at the Castle of Y. holden on Monday etc. next to satisfy the
aforesaid S. D. of his costs and damages aforesaid; and this, etc. given under
the seal of my Office, etc.

I, B. Esquire etc.
to all, Fi. fa. upon a Verdict for the Defendant.
etc. greeting.
I command you, that you of the goods and chattels of T. C. you levy 40 s.
which to P. P. in my County Court, were adjudged for his damages which he
sustained in his own defense, in a Plea of debt, by the said T. C. against him
the said P. P. lately brought, whereof the said P. P. was quieted, and by
verdict of his Country, whereof the said T. C. was convict: and have you the
moneys at my next County Court, to be holden at the Castle of Y. on. Monday,
etc. to satisfy the said P. P. of his damages aforesaid, and this, etc.

given under the seal of my Office, etc.#
Of a Scire facias.
IF a Fieri facias do not issue our within a year and a day, after Judgment
entered; it cannot be had, till there be a Scire facias first sued out, to
summon the Defendant to show cause why execution should not be done, and if now
he neglect to answer, or cannot be found to be summoned, then a second Judgment
shall be given, that that Execution be done on the first Judgment.

If Judgment be given against a Testator, albeit it be within a year after the
Judgment had, yet there must first issue out a Scire facias, against the
Executor or Administator (before Execution) to show cause why it should not be
had.

Or if a man recover against a woman sole, and she become covert, viz. take a
husband within the year and the day: then he that shall recover must have a
Scire-facias against the husband.

Scire facias, post diem and annum.
Yo. ss. J. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
greeting.
Whereas W. F. of late in the Court of the aforesaid County, by Judgment in the
said Court, of the County aforesaid, held at the Castle of Y. on Monday the
tenth day of Febr. 1654, before the Suitors of the said Court, recovered
against G L. as well a certain debt of xxxij s. which the said W F. in the same
Court, recovered against him, as 13 s. and 10 d. which to the said W F. in the
same Court was adjudged for his damages which he sustained by the occasion of
the detaining of the debt, of which he is convicted. For as by the proceedings
from thence in the same Court residing, notwithstanding the manifest Execution
of the aforesaid Judgment remains to be done as by insinuation, the aforesaid
W F. has recovered. And because that I will that those things which were in
the said Court be rightly done to demand due of the said Judgment. Therefore I
command you, that by honest and lawful men of my Bayliwick, you give notice to
the aforesaid G L. that he be at the Castle of of Y. at my next County Court,
there to be holden upon Monday the third day of May next to show if he have any
thing to say, or no, why the said W F. ought not to have his levy or execution
against him according to the force, form and effect of the said recovery, if it
seem expedient to him, and have you then and there the names of them, by whom
you give him notice, and have this precept, etc.

Given under the Seal of my office the fourth day of April, in the year of our
Lord 1656.#
Scire facias against an Executor, after Judgment against the Testator.
Yo ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff etc
greeting.
Whereas N. N. late in the County Court of the said County held at the Castle
of Y. on Monday, etc. before the then Sheriff of the said County, by Judgment
of the said Court had recovered against N N. as well a debt of forty pounds,
as twenty two shillings and two pence costs, for his damages which he sustained
by reason of the detaining of the said debt; wherefore he is convict, as
appears by the procedings remaining in the said Court. And whereas the
execution of the said Judgment yet remains to be done, and the said N N.
since the giving of the Judgment aforesaid is dead, as by the intimation of the
said R. I am informed. And because I am willing that those things, which are
rightly done in the said Court, should be duly put in Execution; I command you
that by honest and lawful men of the said County, you make it known to F N.
Executrix of the Testament of the said N N. that she be at the next County
Court to be holden for the said County at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. to
show if she have any thing, or know what to say, why the said R. ought not to
have his Execution against her of the debt and damages aforesaid, to be levied
of the goods and chattells which were of the said N N. at the time of his
death, and further to do and receive etc.

Given under the Seal of my Office, etc.#
Venire facias.
Yo. ss. J. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the County aforesaid
to the Bailiff of the Hundred of O. or his Deputy greeting.
I command you, and every of you, that you cause to come before me, or my
lawful Steward, by me appointed for the County Court, to be holden at the
Castle of Y. on Monday, etc. All those several persons mentioned in the
pannell hereunto annexed, to try such several issues between party and party,
as shall then and there be given them in charge. And hereof you must not fail,
as each of you will answer the contrary at your perils, together with this
Precept.

Given under the Seal of my Office, etc.#
Or thus.
J. B. Esquire, etc.

These are to require you the said Bailiff, Yo. ss.
to cause to come twelve good and lawful men of your Bayliwick, that they be
and appear at the next County Court holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday, etc.
next ensuing to try an issue joined between A B. Plaintiff, and C D. Defendant,
concerning a Plea of debt. (or as the case is) And this given, etc.

Subpoena, al. dict. a Warrant ad testificand.
J. B. Esquire, Yo. ss.
Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
to J. B. J. G. etc. greeting,
to you, and every of you I command, that (all excuses and delays being set
appart) you and every of you be and personally appear at the next County Court
holden at the Castle of Y. on Monday the tenth day of June next to testify the
truth according to your knowledge in a certain action there depending, between
A B. Plaintiff, and C D. Defendant, on the part and behalf of the Plaintiff, in
an action of debt. And hereof fail you not, under the forfeiture of 100 l. each
of you.

And this given under the Seal of my office the, etc.#
A Precept upon a Proclamation.
Yo. ss. I. B. Esquire Sheriff, etc.
to the Bailiff of the hundred of B. and to his Deputies, greeting.
By virtue of a Proclamation upon Exigent to me directed, I command you and
every of you, that you or some of you make two several Proclamations. The one
to be made at the general quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the
North Riding of the County of Y. And the other to be made at the Parish Church
after Divine service* where the several persons underwritten live, and that
they and every one of them yield their bodies to me the Sheriff of the said
County, where the exigent lies, to answer the person, at whose suite the
Exigent is against them. And hereof fail not at your peril. Given under the
Seal of my Office the 22th. day of August in the year of our Lord 1656.

At the electing of the Coroner, he is to be sworn in Court, by the County
Clark, for the due Execution of his Office. In this manner.

YOu shall swear, that you well and truly shall serve his Highness the Lord
Protector and the Commonwealth in the Office of a Coroner: and as one of his
Highnesses Coroners of the County of Y. and therein you shall truly and
diligently do, and accomplish all and every thing and things appertaining to
your Office, after the best of your cunning, wit, and power, both for the
profit and good of the inhabitants within the said County, taking such fees; as
you ought to take by the Laws and Statutes of this Commonwealth, and no
otherwise; So help you God.

A Warrant of Attorney.
To S D. one of the Atturneys of the County Court, for the County of Y. etc.
I A B. do hereby desire you and do give you full power, license and authority,
to appear for me, and for, etc. in the said Court on Monday, etc. in an action
of debt, for etc. at the suite of E D. upon an Obligation conditioned for the
payment of, etc. in which said Obligation I stand bound as principal. And this
shall be your sufficient warrant in that behalf. In witness, etc.

A Deputation, for a Bailiff of an Hundred.
I. B. Esquire, Sheriff of the County of Y.
to all Christian people to whom these presents does or may concern, greeting.
Know ye that I the said Sheriff, have deputed, constituted, and appointed R.
D. of A. in etc my lawful Bailiff and Deputy within the Hundred of B. in the
North Riding of the County of Y. aforesaid, to have and execute the said Office
of Bailiff within the said Hundred, or elsewhere, within the said County of Y.
or as occasion shall require it, during my pleasure only and no longer: and to
receive and take to my use all fees as well for Distress, Attachment, and
Perquisites of Courts, and other profits due and accustomed whatsoever to the
said Bayliwick belonging, or in any wise appertayning; And whatsoever my said
Bailiff shall lawfully execute and do in his said Office, I do hereby warrant,
ratify and confirm, as my own act and deed.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set the Seal of my Office this seventh day
of July, in the year of our Lord 1656.# s. d. Distringas or County-warrant, 0
8. Bailiff fee for serving, 0 4. Duc. tec. 0 8. Fee to the Bailiffs for
serving, 0 4. Warrant of Attorney, 0 2. A special Distringas, 1 8. Duc. tec.
special, 1 8 Writ of Justicies, 2 6. Precept upon the Writ, 2 4. Fee to the
Bailiff for serving, 2 0. A special precept upon the Writ, 4 4. Warrant of
Attorney upon it, 0 4. A Replevin, 2 4. The Bond, 1 0. A special Replevin, 5
4. Bailiffs fee for serving, 2 0. Essoyne for every name, 0 4. Drawing
declaration. 1 0. Imparlance, 1 0. Copy of the Declaration, 1 0. Answer and
allowing, 2 0. Replication and allowing, 2 0. Rejoinder and allowing, etc. so
of the rest, 2 0. Rule, 0 4. Default, 0 4. Non-suite, 0 4. Dividing a plaint,
for every name that is divided, 0 4. Subpoena, or warrant ad testif. 0 8.
Venire facias, 2 0. If tried for the Habeas Corpora 2 0. Fee to the Bailiff, 2
0. Judgment, 2 0. Fieri facias, 2 0. Bailiffs fee for executing, 2 0. Al. fieri
facias. 2 0. Scire facias, 2 0. Fee to the Bailiff for executing, 2 0.
Transcript upon a plaint, 1 8. Transcript upon a Writ of Justic. 3 4. Tolt, 1
2. Precept upon an Acced. adcur. 2 4. Recordare allowing, 4 0. Pone allowing, 4
10. Writ of false Judgment allow. 6 8. Supersedeas, 2 4. Procedendo, 2 0.



The Order of Judges at the Assizes at york, 24 th. day of July, 1654.
concerning Essoynes illegally returned into this Court.
WHereas of late Judgments have been surreptitiously obtained in this Court by
reason of Essoynes unduely brought into the Court, by Bailiffs or their
Deputies, and others, after Attachment of goods for appearance, which pretended
Essoynes, being afterward disavowed by the Defendants, have occasioned sundry
complaints, and suites when the Defendants goods were taken in Execution, for
preventing whereof, it is ordered upon advice and consultation had with the
Judges of Assize at Y. this day, De male vener.
that henceforth no common Essoyne shall be entered and allowed by the Court to
save a default, unless it be warranted in writing, under the proper
handwriting, or under the hand, Seal, or mark, of the Defendant, thereby
specially authorized, the party being the Essoyner to cast such Essoyne for
him, and in his name; for the truth of which subscription, or sealing, the same
Essoyne is to be sworn in open Court, and no Essoyne is to be admitted, or
received from henceforth being not affirmed and sworn unto, and so entered upon
the back of the Warrant of Attachment, which is to remain upon the file amongst
the rolls or proceedings of the Court, and if any other person (not being a
Bailiff) shall be the Essoyner, he is to bring the like Warrant from the
Defendant in writing as is aforesaid, and be sworn for the truth thereof, which
is to remayn in Court as aforesaid; And no Judgment shall be given where there
is no other appearance but an Essoyn: Unless the Essoine shall appear to be
warranted as aforesaid.

Some select Presidents of Declaratins and Pleadings incident and belonging to
this Court. Debt.
Executor against an Executor a bill.
County Court ss.#
E. F. Executor of the last Will and Testament of J F. deceased, by virtue of a
Writ of Justicies to the Sheriff of the County aforesaid directed, by J S. his
Attorney complains of M W. Executor of the last Will and Testament of R W. late
of T. in the County of Y. husbandman deceased, otherwise called R W. late of T.
of Y. Husbandman deceased, of a Plea, that he render unto him 7. of, etc. which
he unjustly detaines from him, etc. for that whereas the said R W. in his life
time, that is to say, the xx th day of, etc. year, etc. at the Castle of Y. in
the County of Y. and within the liberty and Jurisdiction of this Court, by his
bill obligatory, sealed with his Seal, and here in Court produced, bearing date
the day and year abovesaid, acknowledged himself to be indebted to the said J
F. in his life time, the whole and just sum of 7 l. of etc. to be paid to to
the said J F. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, upon the third
day of May next ensuing the date of the said bill; And for the payment thereof,
the said R W. then and there bound himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns. Nevertheless the said R W. in his life time, though often thereunto
required the said 7 l. to the said J F. whilst he was living, has not paid,
neither has the said M W. Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said
R W. after his death, paid the same to the said E F. Executor of the last Will
and Testament of the said J F. to which said M W.'s hands, came all and
singular the goods and chattells which were the said R W.'s in his life time,
sufficient to satisfy all the debts which the said R W. at the time of his
death owed to any person or persons whatsoever, as also to satisfy the said E.
F.'s debt; but the said R. W* whilst he lived refused to pay the same to the
said I. F. in his life time, and the said M. W. likewise after the said R. W.'s
death refused to pay the same to the said E. F. after the death of the said I.
F. and still refuses so to do, and unjustly detains the same, by reason
whereof the said E. F. says he is damnified to 10 l. and thereupon produces
this suit, etc.

And the said E. F. produces here in Court, the said letters testamentary, by
which it appears the said E. F. to be Executor of the last Will and Testament
of the said I. F. deceased etc.

Upon a Bill to be paid at the day of marriage, and issue upon it.
Yo. ss.#
T. N. and E. his wife, Administratrix of the goods and chattels which were of
I. B. deceased, complains by S. D. his Attorney of I. H. of C. in the said
County gent. of a Plea that the render unto them 5 l. which he unjustly
detains, etc. for that whereas the said I. H. (such a day year and place) by
his certain bill Obligatory, with his seal sealed, and here in Court produced,
the date whereof is the same day and year; For and in consideration of one
Gold-ring, with a certain Stone called a Diamond, in the same Ring fixed of the
aforesaid. T. B. in his life time received the day of the making of the
aforesaid bill, did acknowledge and grant, to and with the aforesaid T. B. in
his life time, that he the said I. H. his Executors or Assigns, would pay or
cause to be paid to the aforesaid T. B. his Executors or Assigns, for the same
Ring (at such a day and time as he the said I. H. should be wedded or married:
or at any other time after his marriage, whenever he should be required by
the aforesaid T. B. his Executors, or Assigns, or by him that should bring the
said bill, the said sum of 5 l. to his or their use, the aforesaid time to be
paid: And the same T. N. and E. in fact say, that the aforesaid I. H. after the
making of the said bill, (to wit, such a day, year, and place) within the
Parish Church of H. did take to wife one I. D. by which the action did accrue
unto the said T. R. in his life, and to the said E. after the death of the said
T. B. whilst she was sole, and to the said T. N. and E. after espousalls
between them celebrated: to require and have of the aforesaid I. H. the same 5
l. yet the aforesaid I. H. although often required the aforesaid 5 l. to the
aforesaid T B. in his life time, or to the aforesaid E. whilst she was sole, to
whom the administration of all the goods and chattels which were of the
aforesaid T B. the time of his death (such a day, year* and place,) was
committed, or to the aforesaid T. N. and E. after espousalls between them
celebrated, has not rendered, but the same to render to them has denied, and
the same to them the said T. N. and E. as yet to render does deny, and
unjustly detain, whereupon they say they are damnified, and have damage to the
value of 10 l. and thereupon they bring their action, etc. And they bring into
Court here the letters of Administration, etc.

The Defendant pleads that he was within age at the time of the making of the
Bill.
ANd the aforesaid I. F. by R. B. his Attorney, Yo s^.
comes and defends the force and jnjury when etc. and saves that the aforesaid
N. and E. ought not to have their action aforesaid against him, because he
says that he at the time of the making of the Bill aforesaid, was within the
age of one and twenty years, and this he is ready to aver, whereupon he demands
Judgment, whether the aforesaid T N. and E. ought to have their action
aforesaid against him, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the aforesaid T N. and E. say, that they by any thing before alleged,
ought not to be debarred from having their action aforesaid against the said J
H. because they say, that the aforesaid J H. at the time of the making of the
bill aforesaid, was of the full age of one and twenty years, and not within
age, as the aforesaid J H. has above alleged, and this they pray may be
inquired of by the Country; And the aforesaid J H. in like manner: Therefore,
etc.

Upon retainder for shooing of horses, etc.
Yo. ss.#
A. B. by S D. his Attorney complains of C D. of a Plea etc. for whereas the
aforesaid C D. (such a day and year) at S. etc. retained the said A B. to set
on upon horse feet, of the aforesaid C D. forty new Horse-shoes, and to remove
forty Horse-shoes, and to mend one pair of plow-Irons, and to make one
fire-shovell, to take of the said C D. for the setting on of the aforesaid
forty new Horse-shoes, and forty romoves, xxi s. and so of the other parcel
to contract to be paid to the said A B. when he should be thereunto required,
by virtue of which retayner, the said A B. the said forty new Horse-shoes, and
forty removes upon the Horse-feet of him the said C D. did set on, etc. by
which action acrewed, etc. Hill. 37 Eliz. Rot. 517.

Upon an account.
County Court ss.#
E B. complains of T A. of a Plea, that he should render unto him 12 l. of
etc. which she owes, and unjustly detaines from him, for that, whereas the
third day of May, 1651. at, etc. the said E B. and the said T A. accounted
together, for and concerning diverse smms of money, then and before that time
due, and owing, by the said T A. unto the said E B. And upon that account, the
said T A. then and there did acknowledge himself to be in arreare and owing
unto the said E B. the sum of 12 l. to be paid unto the said E B. when he the
said T A. should be thereunto requested. Yet notwithstanding, etc.

Money lent by joint partners for a certain time, and to be paid to the
Survivour.
Yo. ss.#
R. K. by, etc. complains of W A. Upon a Plea that he render unto him xx s.
of lawful English money, which he owes unto him, and unjustly detayneth, etc.
For that whereas the last day of February 1651. at the Castle, etc the said R
K. and one R W. now deceased, being joint partners of moneys and other
commodities; did lend unto the said W A. 3 l. of lawful, etc. to be paid to
them or the Survivour of them on Easter Monday then next following; of which
said 3 l. the said W A. paid to the said R K. and R W. in his life time the sum
of forty shillings, and there then remained unpayd the sum of xx s. since
which, and about the Nativity of Christ 1652. the said R W. dyed, and the said
R K. him survived, whereby action does a crew to the said R K. alone to have
and demand of the said W A. the said xx s. Notwithstanding the said W. A.
though often thereunto requested the said xx s. to the said R K. hitherto has
not rendered, but the same to render hitherto has refused, and yet does refuse,
whereupon the said R K. says, that he is worse, and has damage to the value
of xxxix s. and xi i, And thereupon produces this suite. etc.

For Rent in arreare.
Yo. ss.#
R. M. by, etc. complains of H D. of a Plea that he render unto him xxx s. of,
etc. which he owes unto him, and unjustly detaines from him. For that the said
R. M. the tenth day of Apr. year, etc. at the Castle, etc. demised, granted,
and to farm let unto the said H D. one Cottage or dwelling house, one garth,
and four acres of arable land, Meadow or Pasture, with the appurtenances be
they more or less lying and being at W. in the County aforesaid, to have and
to hold the said Cottage or dwelling house, garth, and arable land, Meadow or
Pasture with the appurtenances, unto the said H. D. and his Assigns, from the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary commonly called Lady day, then last
past, for and during the term of three years then next following, fully to be
complete, finished and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly rent, for
the said promises to the said R M. for the first year of the said three years,
the rent of 3 l. present money, and in Land to be paid to the said R M. and 3
l. 10 s. of etc. yearly to be paid to the said R M. for the other two years
residue of the said term, at the feast of St. Michael the Archangell, and the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions. By virtue
of which demise, the said H D. entered into the said Cottage or dwelling house,
and was and still is possessed of the same: and because xxxv s. for the half
year rent ended at the feast of St. Michael the Archangell, in the year, etc.
is in arreare and unpayd unto the said R M. therefore an action does accrue to
the said R M. to have and demand of the said H D. the said xxxv s.
Nevertheless the said H D. although he has been often required the said xxxv
s. the same to the said R M. he has hitherty denied to restore and pay, and as
yet does deny to restore and pay; to the damage of the said R M. of xxxix s.
And therefore he brings this suite, etc.

For Servants wages.
County Court. ss.#
A W. by, etc. complains of R S. of a Plea that he render unto him xxiiii s.
of etc. which he owes unto him and unjustly deteyns from him. For that whereas
the said J D. that is to say, the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. retained
the said A W. to serve the said J S. in the place of a manservant, till the
feast day of St. Martin the Bishop in Winter, then next to do and execute the
lawful occations, and commands of the said J S. by the time aforesaid, paying
therefore the said A W. xiid. of, etc. which the said J S. then and there paid
to the said A W. and also xxiiii s. more of, etc. for his sallary, during the
said time, at the said feast of St. Martin in the year, etc. aforesaid. And the
said A W. in fact says, that he according to the said retainder, did serve the
said J S. in the place of a manservant, and did, and executed the lawful
commands, and occasions, of the said J S. by the time aforesaid, and that
xxiiii s. for his salary for his said service by the time aforesaid, due at the
feast of St. Martin the Bishop, in Winter, (...) the year etc. above mentioned,
is yet arreare and unpayd by the said J S. to the said A W. by which an action
accrews to the said A W. to have and require of the said J S. the ^^^d xxiv s.
Nevertheless the said J S. though often required, etc.

For not setting forth of Tithes.
Yo. ss.#
R. H. Farmer of all and singular, the tithes of hay growing within the parish
of F. in the County of Y. by virtue of a Writ of Justicies, by R N. his
Attorney) complains of T W. upon a Plea that he render to him 6l. of, etc.
which he owes to him and unjustly detaines. For that whereas the said T L. the
day, year, etc. at F. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, etc. was possessed
and occupied of and in four acres of Meadow in F. aforesaid, and Parish
aforesaid, and being so possessed, he the said T W. did then and there cut down
the grass growing in and upon the said four acres of Meadow, and two loads of
hay there, coming to the value of 40 s. then and there did take and carry away,
before he the said T W. had set out, and severed the tithes, or tenth part
thereof from nine parts of the same, or agreed for the said tithes, or tenth
part thereof which the said R. against the form of the Statute in the fifth
year of E. 6. in such like case made and provided. Whereupon action does acrew
to the said R H. to have and demand of the said T W. the said 6 l. (that is to
say) the treble value of the said hay so carried away. Yet Notwithstanding the
said T W. though often requested, etc.

Upon an award.
R. H. by virtue, etc. by E B. his Attorney does complain of H S. of a Plea
that he render to him 10 l. of, etc. which he owes him, and unjustly
detayneth, etc. For that whereas as the xxvth day of A. in the year, etc. at
the Castle, etc. it was concluded and agreed betwixt the said H S. on the one
party, and the said R F. on the other party, that they and both of them
should stand and abide, the order, dome and Judgment of J D. and M L. of all
and every the suites, troubles, differences, debts, trespass or whatsoever has
formerly been in any kind of dealing betwixt them two from the beginning of
the world, to the day of the date of the said writing, being the said 25. day
of A. or else one or either party not standing thereto, to forfeit to the
other parties the sum of 10 l. of, etc. And for confirmation thereof, they did
both of them set to their hands and seals the day and year first above
written, at the Castle aforesaid, etc. as by the writing thereof, (ready to be
shown to this Court) may appear. And whereas afterward, that is to say, the
day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. the said J D. and M L. taking upon them the
charge of the premises, by their order in writing, bearing date the same day
and year, last above mentioned, and here in Court to be shown, did arbitrate,
order and award, that the said R F. should deliver to the said H S. one parcel
of starch then into the hands of the said R F. and the bag wherein the starch
is put affirmed to be the goods of the said H S. upon the sight of the said
Order. And further, they did thereby order and award, that the said H S. should
pay or cause to be paid to the said R F. upon the sight of this order the sum
of fifty shillings of, etc. And that all those suites, debts, trespasses, or
debates whatsoever from the beginning of the world until the said 25th day of
A. the year, etc. should utterly cease, and have an end; or else the party not
standing to the same to forfeit as in the said Order is expressed, the sum of
10 l. as by the said award sealed the said day, year, etc. by the said
Arbitrators, and here in Court ready to be shown, may appear. And the said R F.
in fact says, that though he has performed all things in the said award, on
his part to be performed: yet the said H S. has not performed any thing in the
said award on his part to be performed. And namely for that the said H S. has
not paid to the said R F. upon the sight of the said Order, being the day,
year, etc. at the Castle, etc. the sum of 50 s. of, etc. whereby action does
accrue to the said R F. to have, and demand of the said H S. the said 10 l. The
said H S. notwithstanding, though often thereunto requested the said 50 s. to
the said R F. has not yet paid, but the same to pay sc.

For Atturney's Fees.
Yo. ss.#
R A. Gentleman, etc. by T S. his Attorney does complain of W P. of a Plea,
that he do render unto him 1 l. 17 s. 2 d. of, etc. which he does owe unto him,
and unjustly detaines from him; For that whereas the said W P. the day, year,
etc. at the Castle of Y. etc. did retayn him the said R A. to be the Attorney
of him the said W P. in the County Court holden at the Castle of Y. in the
County of Y. before the suitors of the same Court to prosecute as the Attorney
of him the said W P. for him the said W P. in a certain action, in the name of
him the said W P. against one T C. of a Plea of Debt, from the said day and
year, etc. so long as should please both parties, taking for his fees and
pains in that behalf sustained every Court day, in which he the said R A.
should be the Attorney of him the said W P. in the said cause 2 s. of lawful,
etc. besides his other reasonable charges* and expenses by him the said R A. in
and about the prosecution of the said action to be laid out. By virtue of which
said retainer the said R A. was the Attorney of him the said W P. for eight
Court days then next following; and that he did lay out to the Clark and other
offices of the said Court, in and about the prosecution of the said suite 1 l.
1 s. 2d. of, etc. which together with the 16 s. for his fees for the said Court
days, does in all amount to 1 l. 17 s. 2 d. of etc. By reason whereof an
action does accrue to the said R A. to have and recover of him the said W P.
the said 1 l. 17 s. 2 d. yet the said W P. although often requested the said,
etc. to the said R A. he has not rendered; but to render the same to him he
has altogether hitherto refused, and does yet refuse: to the great damage of
him the said R A. Whereupon he says, that he is damnified, and has damage to
the value of xxxv s. And thereupon he brings this suite, etc.

For Coals promising to pay so much as they should reasonably be worth.
I I. by etc. complains of R R. of a Plea of trespars upon the case, etc. for
that whereas the said R R. the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In
Consideration that the said J J. at the request of the said R. R. had bargained
and sold unto the said R R. eleven wains loads of coals; he did assume upon
himself, and to the said J J. then and there faithfully promise, that he the
said R R. so much as the said eleven wain loads of coals should be reasonably
worth unto the said J J. when he should be thereunto requested would well and
faithfully pay and content. And the said J J. in fact says, that the said
eleven wain loads of coals was reasonably worth xxxiii s. of etc. Yet
notwithstanding the said R R. not regarding his promise, and assumption
aforesaid, but subtly and craftily intending to defraud and deceived the said
J J. in the premises, although he has been often requested the aforesaid
xxxiii s. unto the said J J. he has not paid, but the same unto him to pay
altogether hitherto he has refused, and as yet does refuse, contrary to his
promise and assumption aforesaid; to the great damage of the said J J.
wherefore he says, he is worse, and has damage to the value of xxxix s. And
thereupon produces suite, etc.

For a Horse sold warranted to be sound.
Yo. ss.#
W. M. by R B. his Attorney, complains of R K. of a Plea of trespass upon the
case. That whereas the said W M. the day, and year, etc. at the Castle, etc.
did buy of the said R K. one black gelding for 5 l. of, etc. he the said R K.
then and there did warrant the said Gelding to be whole, sound, and not
infected with any disease or infirmity: And the said W M. in fact says, that
the said Gelding was then so infected with the glaunders, and diverse other
diseases and infirmities, as the said Gelding was nothing worth to the said W
M. to the damage of the said W M. of xxxix s. And thereupon he brings this
action, etc.

For a Horse lent promising to redeliver him, etc.
Yo. ss.#
J. R. complains of J A. of a Plea of trespass upon the Case, etc. That whereas
the said J A. the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In consideration that the
said J R. then and there at the instance and request of the said J A. had lent
and delivered unto the said J A. one Bay Nag of the price of 6 l. to be
redelivered to the said J R. when after that he should be thereunto requested,
the said J A. assumed upon himself, and to the said J R. then and there
faithfully promised, that he the said J A. the said Bay Nag unto the said J R.
when after he should be thereunto requested, would faithfully restore and
deliver, and also xiid. of, etc. for every day wherein the said J A. should
labor or ride the said Nag, to the said J R. when after that he should be
thereunto requested, well and faithfully would pay and content. And the said J
R. in fact says, that he the said J A. forty days did labor or ride the
said Nag. Nevertheless the said J A. his promise and assumption aforesaid not
regarding, but craftily and subtly intending, to defraude and deceive the
said J R. in the premises, although the day, year, etc. abovesaid, as also at
diverse days and times after that, and before the Commencement of this suite,
at the Castle, etc. he has often been requested to deliver the said Nag, to
the said J R. But the said Nag to restore or deliver, to the said J R. he has
not delivered, and the same to restore or deliver he has altogether refused,
and yet does refuse, no nor forty shillings for the labor or hire of the
said Nag, the said forty days, to the said J R. has not paid, but the same
to pay he likewise has refused, and still does refuse, contrary to his promise
and assumption aforesaid, to the great damage of him the said J R. of, etc.

For Adgysting of beasts.
County Court. ss.#
T. B. complains of J S. upon a Plea of trespass upon the Case; For that
whereas the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In Consideration that the said
T B. at the special instance and request of J D. in his life time, would
depasture and feed two Oxen of the said J D. in the ground of the said T B. in
A. within the said County, etc. From the said day, year, etc. unto the end of
one month next following, he the said J D. in his life time, did assume upon
himself, and to the said T B. then and there faithfully promised, that the said
J D. as much as the said depasturing, and feeding, should be reasonably worth
to the said T B. when he the said J D. should be thereunto requested well and
truly would content and pay. And the said T B. in fact says, that he from the
said day, year, etc. unto the end of one month then next following did
depasture, and feed the said two Oxen of the said J D. in the said ground of
the said T B. in A. aforesaid, and that the said depasturing and feeding was
reasonably worth xii s. of etc. Yet notwithstanding the said J D. in his life
time, and the said J S. after the death of the said J D. the promises and
assumptions of the said J D. not regarding, but endeavoring, and fraudulently
intending, the said T B. in this behalf craftily and subtly to deceive and
defraud; the said xii s. or any penny thereof, to the said T B. as yet has not
paid, not for the same any way contented, but the same to pay the said J D. in
his life time, and the said J S. after his death has refused, and as yet does
refuse: although the said J D. in his life time, afterward, that is to say,
the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. was thereunto requested; whereupon the
said T B. says, he is worse, and has damage to the value of xxx s. and
thereupon produces suit, etc.

For curing a wound.
Yo. ss.#
A. S. complains of W. H. in etc. for that whereas the said W. H. the day,
year, etc. at the Castle etc. being then and therefore wounded in his throat
and back, with the stab of a knife; In consideration that the said A. S. at the
special instance and request of the said W. H. would to the best of his art
and skill of a Surgeon, endeavor to cure the wound of the said W. H. and
take pains and labor therein, he the said W. H. did assume upon himself, and
to the said A. S. then and there faithfully promised, that he the said W. H. so
much as the said endeavor, labor and pains of him the said A. S. to cure the
said wounds of the said W. H. and his charges and pains there in should be
reasonable worth, unto the said A. S. when he should be thereunto required.
would well and faithfully pay and content. And the said A. S. in fact says,
that his endeavor, labor and pains to cure the said wounds of the said W. H.
and his charges therein, was reasonably worth 30 s. of etc. Nothwithstanding
the said W. H. not caring for his promise and assumption aforesaid, but
endeavoring and fraudulently intending him the said A. S. in this behalf,
craftily and subtily to deceive and defraud, etc.

For a Laborours hire.
Yo. ss.#
M R. complains of G N. in an etc. for that whereas the said G. N. the day,
year, etc. at etc. In consideration that the said M. R. then and there at the
request of the said G. N. would cut down certain whins of the said G. N. then
growing and being in a close called the O. lying in the Town-ship of H. in the
County aforesaid, and make the same whins into whin-kids or faggots, the said
G. N. assumed upon himself, and to the said M. R. then and there faithfully
promised, that he the said G. N. as much as would please or content him the
said M. R. for his work and labor, in cutting down and kidding the said whins
in the close aforesaid, as long as the said M. R. should so work and labor for
the said G. N. when afterward that he should be thereunto requested would well
and faithfully pay and content. And the aforesaid M. R. does aver and say, that
accordingly, he did cut down and kid whins for the said G. N. in the close
aforesaid by the space of one whole day then next after, and that he well
deserved 12 d. of etc. for his wages, for his day-work, and labor, and that 12
d. is a reasonable sum to please and content him for his said day-work and
labor, in cutting down and kidding of the said whins as aforesaid; yet
notwithstanding the aforesaid G. N. his promise and assumption aforesaid,
little minding or regarding, but craftily and subtlely intending to deceive
and defraud the said M R. in the premises, although etc.

In consideration that the Plantiff would deliver unto one E. L. certain
mercerie wares, if he did not pay for them, the Defendant would.
Yo. ss.#
P. B. Esquire by virtue of a Writ, etc. does complain of H.S. of an action, etc.
for that whereas, the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. In consideration that
the said P. B. (being then and yet a Mercer of the City of Y. would deliver
unto E. L. for the use of the said E. L. such parcells of Mercery wares, as he
the said E. L. should take up and receive of the said P. B. he the said H. S.
did assume upon himself, and to the said P. B. then and there did faithfully
promise, that if the said E.L. should not pay and satisfy the said P.B. for
the said wares at such rates and prizes, as the said E. L. and the said P. B.
should agree upon, that he the said H. S. would well and truly pay and
satisfy unto the said P. B. all such moneys as the said E.L. and P.B. should
agree upon for the rates and prizes of the said wares, betwixt the said day,
year, etc. and May Day then next after; And the said P. B. in fact says, that
afterward, that is to say, the day, etc. and year aforesaid, at the Castle
etc. aforesaid, the said E. L. did take up and receive of the said P. B.
Mercerie wares, hereafter following (that is to say) 7. yards of black
Flanders-searge, for 38 s. and five yards of Italiana, for 26 s. of lawful,
etc. both which rates and prizes were then and there agreed upon, between the
said E. L. and the said P. B. and did amount to the sum of 3 l. and 4 s. of
etc. which said sum of etc. or any penny thereof the said E. L. has not yet
paid, or satisfied to the said P. B. Notwithstanding the said H. S. his promise
and assumption aforesaid, not regarding, but endeavoring, etc.

Slander for calling the Plantiff Thief, etc.
Yo. ss.#
E.R. complains of ^.S. of a Plea, etc. whereas the said E.R. is a good, true,
faithful, and honest member of this Commonwealth of England, and of a good
name, report credit, conversation, condition, reputation and esteem, as well
amongst his neighbors (and faithful members of this Commonwealth) as also
other honest persons to whom the said E. R. has been known from the time of
his birth, and has been noted, esteemed, and reported, and without any stain,
blemish, or suspicion of theft, falsehood, deceit, fraud or of any other
notorious crime, he has carried and behaved himself, all his life time free,
untouched, and not in the least wise suspected. Nevertheless the aforesaid G.
S. not being ignorant of the Premises, but out of his mere malice, evilly
intending, not only the good name, report, opinion, credit, esteem and
reputation, of the said E.R. to hurt, wound, detract, and utterly to destroy,
but also to bring the said E. R. into trouble, vexation and infamy, the day,
year, and place, etc. in the County aforesaid, false, feigned, mallicious and
scandolous words, to the said E R. and of the said E R. in the presence and
hearing of many honest and credible men, openly and publicly, did speak and
publish in these words following. Thou (meaning the said E R. art a thief,)
and I (meaning the aforesaid GS.) will prove thee (meaning the said E R.) a
thief, and a horse-stealing thief from thy cradle. By reason and means of
which false, feigned, scandalous, and malicious words declared and published as
aforesaid, the aforesaid E R. is much hurt, wounded and damnified in his good
name, report, credit and reputation aforesaid; in which before that time with
very many honest and faithful members of this Commonwealth he was reputed, and
also the said E R. into great discredit, suspion and infamy, with many
faithful and honest persons is thereby induced and brought, so that diverse
persons, who before that time did accompany, respect, and much esteem the
aforesaid E R. themselves from the company, and society of the said E R. do now
withdraw, and absent themselves, and further with the aforesaid E R. to
intermeddle, buy, sell, or commerce have altogether refused, and still do
refuse, to the great damage of the said E R. of xxx s. And therefore he has
brought this suite, etc.

For slanderously calling the Plaintiff Banckrupt.
Yo. ss.#
E B. complains of E M. in a Plea of trespass upon the Case; For that, whereas
the said E B. a good, true faithful, and honest member of this Commonwealth,
and like a good, honest, and faithful member of the said Commonwealth, now and
from the time of his nativity hitherto, without any spot or suspicion of
deceit, corruption, bankrupt, or fraud, or any one of them, has carried,
behaved, and governed himself, and of good name, fame, credit and estimation,
trust, and carryage, of great substance of riches, always hitherto has been
reported, and held, and honestly, justly, and faithfully, in all his
intermissions, and businesses with whomsoever had and made throughout the whole
time aforesaid, himself has carried and behaved. And whereas, he the said E B.
the day, year, etc. and by the space of ten years last, and continually
afterward hitherto the art mystery or faculty of an Apothecary of the City of
Y. exercised and used; his living and maintenance of himself and his family, by
exercising and using the art, mystery or faculty through the whole time
aforesaid, well plentifully and sufficiently had gotten and gained, and also
diverse great sums of money, by lawfully buying and selling, merchandising and
bargaining, upon his credit of diverse wares, and other things belonging to the
art, mystery, or faculty of him the said E B. to the better maintenace of him
and his family, and to the great increase of his riches, justly and honestly
through the whole time aforesaid had obtained, and all and singular sums for
what things or merchandises whatsoever by him or of any other persons
throughout the said time, upon credit had bought or received, or by any way
due, he the said E B. to any such person to him the said E B. so giving credit
according to the contract and agreement betwixt them concorded and made,
without fraud or delay had paid by the parcel; of which said premises, and
also by reason of his honest carriage, toward all persons, he the said E B.
the chief credit, and good opinion amongst all his neighbors, and amongst very
many honorable persons, and other people of the said commonwealth to whom he
was known he deservedly had and gained to himself. The said E N.
notwithstanding not ignorant of the premises, but the hap and condition
aforesaid, of the said E B. maliciously devising, imagining, and fraudulently
intending the said state, name, fame, credit, trust and estimation of the said
E B. to hurt, deprive and to cause him, the said E B. to fall into want,
discredit and poverty, and to be accepted and reputed of such an evil
carriage, and also for a Banckrupt, and a man of no credit amongst all the
faithful members of this Commonwealth, that they all from the company of him
the said E B. as from the consort of a Banckrupt person, or man worthy of no
credit, might altogether withdraw themselves, and forbear with the said E B. to
bargain, sell or deal they might altogether give over, afterward (to wit) on
the day year* etc. aforesaid at Y. aforesaid these false, scandalous and
opprobrious English words following of him the said E B. in the presence and
hearing of diverse faithful members of this Commonwealth then and there
present and hearing, falsely, maliciously and scandalously with a loud voice
said, proclaimed, pronounced and published (to wit E B. meaning the said E B.
plaintiff) is a rogue and a Banckrupt, and I (meaning himself the said E N. now
defendant) will prove him one. By reason of the speaking and proclaiming of
which said false scandalous and opprobrious words, he the said E B. not only
in his good name, fame, credit, trust and estimation aforesaid, is greatly hurt
and scandalized, but also hereby does stand deprived, and utterly spoiled, that
his said neighbors and other faithful members of this Commonwealth with him
the said E B. to buy, merchandise, bargain, or any way to meddle, or deal, do
altogether distrust and refuse him the said C D. for a consumer, waster and
detayner of other men's riches and estates, they repute and suppose him to be by
the said E N. not only in exercising and maintayning of his art, mystery or
faculty is very much hindered, and his estate and substance is very much
weakened and consumed, but also has been constrained and compelled to lay out
and spend d^verse great sums of money in clearing himself, of the premises
aforesaid laid upon him, for the recovering of his good name, fame, credit,
trust and estimation aforesaid, whereupon the said E B. says, that he is made
worse, and has damage to the value of 200 l. And thereupon produces this
suite, etc.

In consideration that the Plaintiff would marry E R. the Defendant promised to
make him worth 200 l.
Yo ss.#
W. P. etc. complains of P. W. of a Plea, etc. 14 E. 4. fo. 6. 15 E. 4. fo.
32. 17 E. 4. fo. 5.
That whereas the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. there was a communication
between the said W. P. and the said P. W. of and concerning the said W. P.
taking to wife one E R. the daughter of one S R. of etc. County, etc. the said
B W. in consideration that the said W P. at the special instance and request
of the said P W. according to the laws and customs of England by the consent
of the said S R. would marry and take to wife the said E R. upon himself did
assume and to the said W P. then and there did faithfully promise, that he the
said P W. would make him the said P W. worth 200 l. of, etc. and better,
immediately after the solemnization of the marriage of the said W P. and the
said E R. And the said W P. indeed says, that in hopes of the performance of
the promise and assumption of the said P W. and at the special instance and
request of the said P W. afterward (that is to say,) the day, year, etc. at,
etc. aforesaid the said W P. according to the laws and customs of England by
the consent of S R. did marry and take to wife the said E R. Nevertheless the
said P W. little regarding his promise and assumption aforesaid, but contriving
and fraudulently intending craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud the
said W P. in this behalf, has not made the said W P. wor^^ 200 l. and better,
albeit afterward (that is to say,) the day, year, etc. a tetc. aforesaid by
the said W P. he has been thereunto required, but has refused hitherto to do
the same, and still does refuse, to his damage of, etc.

Trover and Conversion,
Yo. ss.#
J. B. by Writ etc. complains of J C. in an action or trespass upon the Case.
For that whereas the said J B. the day, year, etc. at the Castle of etc. was
possessed of one gray mare, of the price of ten pounds, as of his own, and
being thereof so possessed, the said J R. the day, year, etc. aforesaid, the
said mare out of his hands and possession was casually lost, which said mare
afterward (that is to say,) the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. came to
the hands and possession of the said J C. sufficiently knowing the said mare to
be the mare of the said J B. and to him of right to belong; and devising to
deceive the said J B. of the said mare; though often thereto required, the said
mare to the said J B. has not restored; but the said J C. afterward (that is
to say) the day, year, etc. the said mare to his own use and profit converted
and disposed, to the great loss of the said J B. By reason whereof he says,
he is damnified xx l. Aed therefore commeceth this suite, etc.

Detinue.
Yo. ss.#
T. V. by virtue of a Writ, etc. by E B. his Attorney complains of R M. upon a
plea, that he render unto him goods and chattells to the value of xx l. of,
etc. which he unjustly detaineth from him, etc. For that whereas the said T V.
the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. did deliver to the said R M. one Cow,
color black, of the value of 5 l. one gray Nag of the value of x l. and 14.
yards of French green broad cloth of the value of 5 l. to be safely kept, and
to the said T V. where he the said R M. should be thereunto requested, to be
delivered. Yet notwithstanding the said R M. although thereunto requested, the
goods and chattells aforesaid to the T V. as yet has not redelivered, but the
same to redeliver, hitherto has contradicted, and as yet does contradict, and
unjustly deteines, whereupon the said TV. says, he is worse and has damage to
the value of xxxl. And thereupon produces suite, etc.

Trespass.
For breaking down the Plaintiffs stall, being set up in the market.
County Court ss.#
A. O. complains of W C. of a Plea of trespass. That the aforesaid W C. the day,
year, etc. at S. in the County aforesaid, and within the liberty and
Jurisdiction of this Court, made an assault upon him the said A O. and his
close and house, that is to say) one stall there in the market set up, broke
and entered, and his wares (that is to say) dressed leather, to the value of 5 l.
put upon his stall aforesaid, displaced, cut down, and spoiled, and other
enormous things to him did, to the great damage of the said A O. whereupon he
says, that he is the worse, and has damage to the value of ten pound. And
thereupon he brings his suite, etc.

For breaking the Plaintiff's close, etc.
Yo ss.#
J. A. complains of T S. of a Plea of trespass, etc. for that the said T S.
the day, year, etc. a close of the said. J A. called C. at S. in the County,
etc. broke and entered, and the grass of the said J A. then and there, being of
the value of ten shillings, with certain goods and chattells (that is to say)
with Kine, Oxen Steeres, Horses, Naggs, Mares, Hoggs, and Sheep, did depasture,
eat up, tread under-foot, consume and spoil, continuing the said trespass from
the said day, year, etc. aforesaid, during the time of one whole month then
next following, at diverse days and times, and other harms to him did to the
great loss of the said J A. by reason whereof he says he is damnified, xxix
s. And therefore commenceth this suite, etc.

For a dog-biting a mare so that she dyed.
Yo. ss.#
H. S. complains of W P. in an action of trespass, for that whereas the said W
P. the day, year, etc. at, etc. one Mare of the said H S. of the price of ten
pound then and there being found did beat, wound and chase, and also with a dog
did bite; so that by reason of the beating, chasing, wounding, bruising and
biting of the said Mare, the said Mare then and there dyed. And other harms to
him did to the great damage of, etc.

For chasing of hoggs with dogs, etc.
Yo ss.#
A. B. complains of C D. of a Plea of trespass, wherefore he did chase two
hoggs of him the said A B. at M. found with certain dogs, insomuch by setting
on those dogs, to bite the hoggs aforesaid: That by that chasing and biting of
the dogs aforesaid, the aforesaid hoggs of the price of forty shilling dyed;
And other enormities, etc.

For pasturing of sheep in a rotten pasture, by reason whereof they dyed.
Yo. ss.#
A B. complains of C D. of a Plea of trespass. Wherefore the close of him the
said A B. at L. did break, and his 260. sheep of the price of 40 l. there
lately found did take, and did chase them into a certain corrupt pasture within
the village aforesaid, out of malice, detayning those sheep so long upon the
pasture aforesaid, that those sheep by corruptness of that pasture, becoming
rotten and infected, dyed; and other enormities, etc.

For digging and plowing the Plaintiffs ground, and taking away his corn.
Yo. ss.#
T S. complains of G G. in an action of trespass. For that whereas the said G
G. the day, year, etc. at, etc. the close of the said T S. being one acre of
arable land lying in B. broke and entered, and the soil of the said close with
his plow did dig and rip up. And afterward, that is to say, the day, year,
etc. aforesaid at B. aforesaid, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid for that
the said G G. the aforesaid, close of the said T S. broke and entered, and his
corn, (that is to say) two wain loads of oats, there lately cut down of the
value of xxx s. of his the said T S. took and carried away. And other enormious
things to him did do, etc.

For taking away a Post.
Yo. ss.#
A. B. complains of C D. of a Plea of trespass, etc. wherefore he did break the
close of the said A B. at F. and did take and carry away a certain new Post of
him the said A B. there in the foil put and fastened to the value of xxx s. And
other enormities, etc.

Trespass and Assault.
Yo. ss.#
J. H. complains of J S. in an action of trespass and assault, etc. for that
the said J S. the day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. made an assault and a
fray upon the said J H. and did then and there beat, wound, and evil entreat
him, so that he was despaired of his life, and other harms to him did to the
great loss of the said J H. By reason of which he says, he is damnified xxx
s. And therefore commenceth this suite.

Assault, upon one at under-age.
Yo. ss.#
W. E. by A S. his guardian, and next friend, by favor of this Court, is
admitted to prosecute for the said W E. because he is within the age of one and
twenty years, by virtue of a Writ of Justicies by T W. his Attorney complains
of T C. in an action of trespass and assault, etc. For that the said T C. the
day, year, etc. at the Castle, etc. in and upon the said W E. an Assault and
affray did make, etc. as in the other.

Upon a Replevin.
County Court. ss.#
A. B. complains of T L. in a Plea wherefore he took the goods of the said A
B. and them did unjustly detain, contrary to sureties and safe pledges, etc.
For that whereas the aforesaid T L. the day, year, etc. at S. in a place there
called R. in the County etc. took of the goods of the said A B. that is to say
seven Kine of the price of xxx l. And the same did unjustly detain against the
sureties and safe pledges, etc. whereupon the said A B. says, he is worse, and
has damage to the value xxxix s. And therefore he has brought this suite, etc.

Pleadings.
He owes him nothing.
County Court ss.#
ANd the said J A. comes and defends the force and injure when, etc. and says
that the said J G. ought not to have his said action against him, because he
says, that he the said I. A. owes nothing to the said I. G. in manner and
form, as the said I. G. has declared against the said I. A. and for that he
puts himself upon the Country, etc.

He made no such promise.
ANd the said H. B. comes and defends the force and wrong when, etc. and says
that he did not assume and promise to the aforesaid T. R. in manner, and for me
as the aforesaid T. R. against him complains: and of this he puts himself
upon the Country.

Replication.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said T. R. says that he by any thing before alleged from his action
aforesaid, ought not to be debarred: for that he says that the aforesaid H. B.
did assume upon himself, and promise in manner and form, as by the Declaration
aforesaid is alleged and set forth: and this he prays may be inquired by the
Country: and the said W. B. likewise, therefore etc.

He made no such promise within six years.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said W. B. comes and defendes the jnjury when, etc. and says that the
said W. B. did not within the space of six years before the commencement of
this suit assume upon himself, or promise to pay to the said T. B. the sum of
30. s. in manner and form, as the said T. B. above against him the said W. B.
does complain, and upon this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Never Executor.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the aforesaid E. H. comes and defendes the force and jnjurie when etc. and
says that the aforesaid T. C. ought not to have his action against him,
because he says that he ^^ver was the Executor of the last Will and Testament
of the aforesaid R. H. neither did administer of any ^f the goods or chattels
which were ^f the said R. H. at the time of his ^eath: as Executor of the last
Will and Testament, of the aforesaid R. H. after the death of the said R. H.
and this the said E. H. is ready to verify, whereupon he demands Judgment,
whether the said T. C, ought to have or maintain the said action against him,
etc.

Fully Administered.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the aforesaid M. A. comes and defends the injury and wrong when, etc. and
says that the aforesaid A. B. his action afore^aid ought not to have against
him, because he says he has fully administered of the goods and chattels of
the aforesaid T. A. at the time of his death, and he no other goods nor
chattels has of the aforesaid T. A. at the time of his death to be
administered, nor had at the time of the entrey of this plaint of the said A. B.
nor at any time after: and this he is ready to aver, wherefore he prays
Judgment; whether the aforesaid A. B. his action aforesaid against him ought to
have, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said A. B. says, that he by any thing before alleged from his
action aforesaid, ought not to be debarred, because he says that the aforesaid
M. A. the day of the commencement of this suit, (to wit) the day, year, etc. at
the Castle aforesaid: and within the jurisdiction aforesaid, had diverse goods
and chattels which were the aforesaid T. A. at the time of his death, and
afterward in his hands to be administered to the value of the debt aforesaid,
wherefore the debt aforesaid to the said A. B. ought to be satisfied; and this
he requires may be inquired of by the Country, etc. and the said M. A.
likewise, etc.

Not guilty.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said G. W. comes and defends the wrong and injury when, etc. and
says, that he is not guilty of the trespass aforesaid, as the said I. C. has
complained against him: and of this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Bar by within-age.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said H. C comes and defends the injury when, etc. and says that the
said W. B. his action aforesaid against, him ought not to have: for he says
that he at the time of the making of the said writing Obligatory, was within
the age of one and twenty years; And this he is ready to verify, whereupon he
demands Judgment, if the said W. B his action aforesaid against him ought to
have etc.

Paymemt upon a bill, and a release produced.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said I. S. comes and defends the injury when, etc. and says that the
said I. W. ought not to have his action aforesaid against him the said I.S. for
he says that the said I. W. after the making of the said bill, and the
commencement of this suit (that is to say the day, year, etc. at the Castle,
etc. the said I. W. did acknowledge and confess himself to be fully satisfied
and content of the said sum of 5 l. in the said bill mentioned, and thereupon
did acquit and release him the said I. S. of and from all actions, which the
said I. W. might have against him the aforesaid I. S. by reason of the making
of the aforesaid bill, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays
Judgment, if the said I. W. ought to have his action aforesaid against him, etc.

Freehold.
ANd the said H. S. comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. and
says that the said W.B. his action aforesaid against him ought not to have or
maintain, because he says that the close aforesaid called T. at F. in the
Declaration above mentioned, in which the trespass aforesaid is supposed to be
done, is, and at the time of the said trespass supposed to be done is, and was
the only sole free tenement or free hold of the said H. S. by reason whereof
the said H. S. did break, and enter into the said close called T. and the corn
and grass there growing and being, with his feet did tred down and consume,
and other corn grass and hay being in the said close, with his horses, mares,
oxen and kine, did eat, tread down and consume, continuing the said trespass
as in the Declaration is above specified, as was lawful and well pleased him
so to do: and this he is ready to verify and prove: whereupon he requires
Judgment; if the said W. B. his action aforesaid against him ought to have, etc.

No action to cause one to render an account, will lie in this Court.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said G.F. in proper person comes and says, that the said C. B. his
said action against the said G. F. in this Court ought not to have or maintain:
for that the said C. B. in an action to render an acaccount, etc. wherefore the
said G.F. demands Judgment, whether this Court will take Cognizance of the
said action, etc.

In arrest of Judgment.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the aforesaid R. M. says, that the verdict aforesaid given against him,
of the part of the said M.S. ought not to stand or proceed, because he says
that the Declaration aforesaid, and the matter therein contained, is not
sufficient in Law to give and maintain the aforesaid action against him, by
which he requires Judgment: and that the aforesaid plaint and verdict to be
quashed and accounted nothing, And that the aforesaid Plantiff may receive
nothing by his plaint and verdict aforesaid, etc.

Conditions performed.
ANd the said W.G. comes and defends the force and wrong when, Yo. ss
etc. and desires to hear the said writings, and it is read to him etc. he
desires also to hear the Condition of the said writing, and it is read to him
in these words, (that is to say) the Condition of this Obligation, etc. (recite
the Condition) which being read and heard, the said W. G. says that the said
C.G. his action aforesaid against him ought not to have, because he says, that
the Articles in the Condition aforesaid abovementioned, were made at Y.
aforesaid, in etc. day, year, etc. aforesaid, between the said C. G. by the
name of C. G. of A. in the said County gent. on the one party, and the said W.
G. by the name of W. G. of the same Town and County yeoman, on the other
party, whose other part signed with the seal of the said C. G. the said W. G.
does bring here in Court, whose date is the same day and year, first, etc.
(recite all the Articles throughout) and the said W. G. does say, that he has
performed and kept all and singular the covenants, grants, articles, clauses.
sentences and agreements whatsoever in the said Articles specified, on his part
to be observed, performed, fullfilled and kept, according to the form and
effect of those Articles: and this he is ready to maintain, whereupon he prays
Judgments; If the said C.G. his action aforesaid against him ought to have, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said C. G. says that he, by any thing before alleged, ought not to
be debarred from having his said action against the said W.G. because
protesting that the said W. G. has not performed or kept any covenants,
grants, articles, clauses, sentences, or agreements in ^he said articles
specified on his part ^o be performed or kept, as the said W. G. above by
pleading has al^^adged; for plea the said C.G. says, ^^at the said W. G. did
not, etc. (re^^te the breach) according to the ^^rm and effect of the same
Articles: ^^d this he is ready to verify, where^^on he prays Judgment, and
his debt aforesaid, together with his damages, by occasion of detaining that
debt, to him to be adjudged, etc.

Rejoinder.
Yo. ss.#
AND the said W. G. says, that he did (recite here that he did perform the
breach the Plaintiff assigned) according to the form and effect of the said
Articles: and of this he puts himself upon the Country, and the said C. G.
likewise, etc.

Detain he does not.
ANd the said R. S. comes and defends the force and wrong when etc. and says
he does not detain from the said R. L. the chattel^ aforesaid, nor any parcel
thereon in manner as the said R. L. ha^ above declared against him: and o^ this
he puts himself upon the Country, etc.

Bar by a general acquittance.
Yo. ss.#
WHen, etc. his action ought not to have, etc. because he says, that after the
making of the writing aforesaid (that is to say) the day, year, etc. the
Plantiff by his certain bill of acquittance, which the said Defendant signed
with the seal of the said Plaintiff, here in Court produces, the date whereof
is the same day and year he acquitted and discharged him the said Defendant, by
name of, etc. of all actions, plaints, demands, debts, accounts and debates for
plaint: and in his executed and assigned, from the beginning of the World
until the day of the date of the said Bill: and this etc. if Judgment, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.#
THe Plaintiff says that he ought not to be barred, etc. because he says that
the aforesaid Bill of acquittance is not his deed: and this he prays etc.

Justification of scandalous words.
ANd, etc. when, etc. and says that the said G. L. his action aforesaid
against him ought not to have, for that he says, that before the speaking of
the pretended scandalous words in the said Declaration mentioned, (that is to
say) the day, year, etc. at, etc. the said G. L. one weather-sheep to the value
of 10 s. of etc. of the goods and chattels of the said H. A. in the said
Declaration mentioned, then and there being found, feloniously did steal, take
and carry away, contrary to the public peace; By reason whereof the said F.G.
afterward, (that is to say) the said day, year, etc. at, etc. the pretended
scandalous words in the said Declaration mentioned, did say, affirm and declare
to the said G. L. (that is to say) thou (meaning the said G. L.) art a Thief
and stole H. A. Sheep: and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he demands
Judgment; if the said G.L. his action aforesaid against him ought to have, etc.

Tender of amends in Replevin.
County Court ss.#
ANd the said H. says, etc. the just taking of, etc. ought not to avow,
because he says, that after the aforesaid time of the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid in the aforesaid place, in which, etc. and before the day of the
issuing forth of the precept of Replevin, of him the said H. (that is to say
the day, year, etc. aforesaid, at W. aforesaid, he the said H. offered xii d.
to pay the said W. and I. to the use of the said W. for the damage of the said
W. which he sustained by occasion of the trespass aforesaid, which the cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid two acres of Land made, which said xii d. were
sufficient amends for the trespass aforesaid, which the catle aforesaid in the
said two acres of Land made: which said xii d. the aforesaid W and I. then and
there wholly refused to receive of said H. and this, etc.

Part of the debt paid, The residue tendered before Suit, and refused.
Yo. ss.#
ANd, etc. when, etc. and says that the aforesaid I. G. ought not to have or
maintain his said action against him: because he says, that the said I. A. the
day, year, etc. before the beginning of this action, well and faithfully paid
to the said I. G. xx s. part of the above mentioned debt, in the said
Declaration specified (that is to say) at B. aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction of this Court; And as to the 5 s. 6 d. the residue of the debt, in
the said Declaration specified, he said I. A. further says, that he
afterward, that is to say, the day, year, etc. abovesaid before the
commencement of this action, at B. aforesaid tendered to the said I.G. the said
5 s. 6 d. which said 5 s. 6 d. the said I.G. then and there refused to accept
of: and this the said I. A. is ready to prove, and demands Judgment of the
Court; if the said I. A. ought to have his said action against him, etc.

Replication.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said I.G. as to the plea of the said I.A. as to the said 20 s. parcel
of the debt aforesaid says that he by any thing before alleged, 1. pact. non
sol.
ought not to be barred from having his said action against him, for he says
that the said I. A. did not pay the said xx s. to the said I. G. as the said I.
A. above has alleged: and this he prays may be inquired of by the Country,
and the said I. A. likewise, etc.

And as to the said plea of the said I. A. as to the said 5 s. 6 d. residue of
the said debt, 2. Morat in lege.
and the said I.G. says that the same plea of the said I. A. in manner and
form aforesaid pleaded, and the matter therein contained is insufficient in the
law, to bar the said I. G. from having his said action against the said I. A.
and that he to the plea aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid pleaded,
needs not, nor is bound by the Law, of the land to answer: whereupon for want
of a sufficient plea in this behalf, the said I. G. prays Judgment, and the
said 5 s. 6 d. residue of his debt aforesaid together with his damages, by
reason of the detaining of that debt to him to be adjudged. etc.

Not his Deed.
ANd, etc when, etc. And says that he ought not to be charge with the said
debt, by virtue of the writing aforesaid; because he says that the said
writing is not his deed. And of this he puts himself upon the Country, And
the said A. likewise, etc.

By threats.
ANd, etc. when, etc. And says that the said A. ought not to have his said
action against him, because he says, that the said A. at the time of the
making of the said writing, at N. aforesaid did impose upon the said B. such
and so great threats of his life, and may heming of his body to be inflicted on
him, unless he would make and seal unto the said A. the said writing; that he
the said B. did then and there make unto the said A. the said writing for fear
of those threats, And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he prays Judgment,
if the said A. ought to have his said action against him etc.

Replic.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said A. says he by any thing before alleged, ought not to be barred
from having his said action, because he says that the said B. at the time of
the making of the said writing aforesaid, was of his own power at large; And
did make to the said A. the said writing of his mere and voluntary will; And
not for fear of threats, as the said B. has above alleged. And he prays,
that this may be inquired by the Country, And the said B. likewise, etc.

By hardness of imprisonment.
Yo. ss.#
ANd etc. when, etc. And says, etc. because he says that at the time of
making of the said writing he was imprisoned by the said A. and other of his
Covin, that is to say at N. aforesaid, and there in prison detained until the
same B. by force and hardness of that imprisonment, had then and there made to
the said A. the said writing. And this he it ready to aver, whereupon he
prays Judgment, etc.

Replic.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the said A. says, that he, etc. because he says, that the said B. at the
time of making of the said writing, was of his own right at large, and out of
prison, and did of his mere and voluntary will make to the said A. the said
writing, and not by force and hardness of imprisonment, as the said B. above
has alleged. And this he prays may be inquired of by the Country; And the
said B. likewise, etc.

The Assault made by the Plaintiff, etc.
Yo. ss.#
ANd, etc. when, etc. And as to the trespass and assault aforesaid above
supposed to be done, Son. assault de measn.
the said J R. says that the said R W. his action aforesaid against him ought
not to have, because he says, that the aforesaid R W. the day, year, etc.
aforesaid upon him the said J R. at the Castle, etc. did make an Assault, and
him would have beaten, wounded, and evil entreated, by which the said J R.
himself against the aforesaid R W. did then and there defend; And says, that
if any evil to the said R W. then and there happened, was of the proper
assault of him the said R W. And in defense of him the said J R. And this he is
ready to verify, whereupon he prays Judgment, if the aforesaid R W. his
action aforesaid, against him ought to have, etc.

Replic.
Yo. ss.#
ANd the foresaid R W. says, that he by any thing before alleged, from having
his action aforesaid, ought not to be debarred, because he says, that the
aforesaid J R. the day, year, etc. abovesaid, at, etc. in his declaration
aforesaid above specified, of his own proper injury, and without such cause by
the said R W. above alleged upon him the said R W. did make an assault, and
him did beat, wound, and evil entreat, so that of his life he did despair,
against the peace of the Lord Protector that now is; As the said R W. above
against him has complained; And this he prays may be inquired of by the
Country, And the said J R. likewise, Therefore, etc.

The Defendant pleads, the Plaintiff within age, to bring his action: And
should have brought it by Guardian, and not by Attorney.
ANd, etc. when, etc. And says, that the aforesaid J R. ought not to have his
action aforesaid against him, because he says, that the aforesaid J R. the day
and year in the Declaration aforesaid specified (to wit) the day, year, etc.
the day of, the issuing forth of the Writ of Justicies of him the said J R.
that is to say, the day, year, etc. was within the age of one and twenty years,
And that the aforesaid J R. declared against him the said P C. in the plaint
aforesaid by his Attorney, whereas by the due form of Law, he ought to have
declared by his Guardian; And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he prays
Judgment, whether the aforesaid J R. ought to have his action aforesaid against
him, etc.

THE TABLE.
A
ACcount. 27 Accedeas ad Car. 66 What Actions may be brought in the County
Court. 13 What Actions will not lie in this Court. 7 Within what time Actions
must be brought. 14 Who may bring Actions, and who not. 15 Adjournement. 35
Amerciament. 7 Answer what. 23 Appearance. 17 Arbitrament. 26 Atturneys. 12
B.
Bailiffs how punishable for misdemeanors. 39 Bailiffs what they are. 36
C.
COunty Court when instituted. 3 Why instituted. 6 No Court of record. 5 Court
how to be kept. 31 County Clarks office. 7 Court, what, 21 Continuance what. 21
Challenge of Jurors. 29 Consultation, a writ. 58 Coroners office in this Court.
10
D.
DEbt. 26, 27 Debt against Executors or Administrators. 26 Declaration what,
etc. 18 Demise. 27 Detinue. 27 Deputation for a Bailiff of an hundred. 102
Distress, etc. 36 Duc. tec. 18
E.
ESsoyne what. 18 Exigent and Proclamation how to be proclaimed. 11 Execution,
and what Goods may be take upon it. 47
F.
FIne. 7 Freehold. 28 Fieri facias. 90 Fieri fac. against an Executor. 91 Fi.
fac. for costs, upon a Non-suite. 92 Fi.fac-upon a Verdict for the Defendant.
93 The Table of Fees. 104
G.
General issues upon several actions. 25
I.
IMparlance. 22 Issue. 25 Jurors, who may be challenged. 29 Justicies, a Writ.
80 Judicial process. 90
M.
MOdo and forma, in a Declaration, where necessary and where not. 19
N.
NOn suite. 21 Non sum informatus. 24 Nonage. 26 Nil dicit. 24
O.
OBligation, etc. 25 Obligation upon a Replevin. 86 Office of the County Clerk.
7 Office of a Coroner in this Court. 10 Oath of the Coroner. 101 Order of the
Judges concerning Essoynes illegally returned. 106
P.
PLeas specially to be pleaded. 25 Nota Pleas. 28 Pledges. 17 Proceedings of
the Court. 17 Proclam. and Exig. how to be proclaimed. 11 Prohibition, a Writ.
58 Procedendo, a Writ. 58 Process in the Court. 77 Precept upon an acced. ad
cur. 67 Precept upon a Proclamation. 100 Precept upon a Writ of Justic. 80
R.
Rejoinder what. 23 Rent. 26 Replevin, etc. 50, 81 Rule, what. 23 Return of
Exig. 71 Return of Proclam. 76 Return of a Recordare. 54 Return of a Pone. 54
Return of the Writ for the election of a Coroner. 71 Return of a Writ of false
Judgment. 59
S.
SHire, the original, etc. 1 Sheriffs, etc. idem Slander. 27 Suitors Judges. 6
Surrejoynder what. 24 Scir. fac. 94 Scir. fac. post diem and annum. 95 Scir.
fac. against an Executor, after Judgment against the Testator. 97 Subpoena ad
Testif. 99
T.
TRespass. 27 Trespass damage feasant. 27 Tolt, a precept. 88
V.
VIcount unde. 2 Verdict, etc. 30 Venire fac. 98
W.
WArrant of Attorney. 102 Warrantie. 27 Withernam a precept. 83 Woman covert.
26
Declarations.
In Debt.
EXecutor against an Executor. 108 Upon a bill to be paid at the day of
Marriage, and issue upon it. 110 Upon retainer for shoeing a horse, etc. 114
Upon an account. 115 Money lent by joint partners for a certain time, and to be
paid to the Survivor. 116 For rent in arreare. 117 For servants wages. 119 For
Tithes. 121 Upon an award. 122 For Atturneys Fees. 125
Case.
FOR Coals, promising to pay so much as they should be reasonably worth. 127
For a horse sold, warranted to be sound. 128 For a horse lent, promising to
redeliver him, etc. 129 For adgisting of beasts. 131 For a Surgeon for
curing a wound. 133 For a laborors hire. 134 In consideration that the
Plaintiff would deliver unto one E L. certain mercery wares, if he did not pay
for them, the defendant would. 136 Slander for calling the Plaintiff thief. 137
For slanderously calling the Plaintiff Bankrupt. 140 In consideration that the
Plaintiff would marry E. R. the Defendant Promised to make him worth two
hundred pounds 145 Trover and Conversion. 147 Detinue. 148
Trespass
For breaking down the Plaintiffs shall being set up in the market. 149 For
breaking the Plaintiff's close etc. 150 For a dog biting a mare, so that she
dyed. 151 For Chasing of Hoggs with Dogs etc. 151 For pasturing Sheep in a
rotten pasture, by reason whereof they dyed. 152 For digging and plowing the
Plaintiffs ground, and taking away his Corn. 152 For taking away a Post. 153
Trespass and assault. 154 Assault upon one at under-age. 154 Assault upon a
Replevin. 155
Pleadings. Answers, Replications, Rejoynders etc.
HE owes him nothing 155 He made no such Promise and Replication. 156 He made
no such promise within six years. 157 Never Executor. 157 Fully Administered,
and Rep. 158, 159 Not guilty. 159 Bar, by within age 160 Payment upon a Bill,
and a Release produced 160 Freehold 161 No action to cause one to render an
Account willly in this Court. 162 In arrest of judgment 163 Conditions
performed, and Repl. and Rejoinder 165 Detayn he does not 166 Bar by a general
Accquittance and Repl. 167 Justification of scandalous words 168 Tender of
amends in Replevin, 159 Part of the debt paid, the residue tendered before
suit, and refused, and Repl. 169, 170, 171. Not his Deed 172 By Threats and
Repl. 172 By hardness of imprisonment and Repl. 173, 174 The Assaul made by the
Plaintiff and Repl 174, 175 The Defendant pleads the Plaintiff within age to
bring his Action, and should have brought it by Guardian, and not by Attorney
176
Courteous Reader, these Books following are to be sold by John Place, at
Furnivals June Gate in Holborn.
THe History of the World, by Sir Walter Raleigh, in Folio.

New Cases of the years and time of Hen. 8. Edw. 6. and Queen Mary, by John
March of Grayes Inn, Barrister, in 8o.

Transactions of the High Court of Chancery, collected by William Tothel,
Esquire, and since Revised by Sir Robert Holborn.

Witchcraft condemned, or Doctor Lamb revived, in the unheard of Practices of
Ann Bodinham, arraigned at Sarum Assizes, 1653.

Vade Mecum: whereunto is added an Abridgment of Stamfords Pleas.

An Abridgment of the Lord Dyers Reports* by Sir Tho. Ireland.

The great mystery of Godliness, by Jos. Hall, B. Norwich.

Declarations and Pleadings, by W. S. in the time of Eliz. Jam. and Cha.

Clarestella, together with Elegies, Epigrams, Satyrs, by Reb. Heath Esquire.

The Imposition of Hands, by Jos. Hall B. of Norwich.

The Office of a Lord Chancellor, by the Lord Ellesmore.

The Peacemaker, by Will. Page B. D.

The Doctrine of the Saints Infirmities, by Dr. Preston.

A Treatise of the Sabbath day, by Fra. White, B. of Ely in 4o.

A short Catechism, by Will. How, Minister of the Gospel.

The Laymans Lawyer: or the second part of the practick part of the Law, in 8o.

The Faithful Councellor: or the Marrow of the Law in English, the second part
by W. Sheppard, Esquire. in 4o.

Declarations, Counts, and Pleadings, in English, the second part, collected by
Richard Brownlow Esquire, late Prothonothary of the Common Pleas, Mr. Walbank a
partner, in 4o.

The Scriveners Guide, or the Complete Clerk, showing all manner of Presidents
for Conveyances. etc. collected and perfected, with the advice and judgment of
several able Judges and Sages in the Law, in 4o.

Commentary of Caius Caesar, of all his Wars in Gallia, with the Observations
of Sir Clement Edmunds, as also our modern Training, with addition of his
Medalls and Life, in folio.

Poems by Matthew Stevenson.

The floating Island: an excellent play, by Dr. Strode.

The Lord Pophams Reports, in folio.

A Catechism, according to the Common Payers and Liturgy of the Church of
England, for all young Children to learn before their admittance to the
Sacrament. One sheet of paper, by the able hand of Alan Smallwood B. D.

The jurisdiction of all Court-Leets and Court Baron, by Kitchen late of
Bernards Inn, sold by J. Place and Partners.

Reports and Cases, collected by the learned Judge Owen, Esquire, one of the
Judges of the Common pleas, wherein are many Cases thoroughly argued and
compared with the yearbooks.

Nomotomia, in two parts, the first being a collection and Survey of the
Gcnerall Titles of the Common Law, with the Cases thereof, drawn out of the old
Books of the Law, and later reports, and reduced into several Chapters for the
benefit of Students in the Law. Together with an Abridgment of all Acts and
Ordinances of King and Parliament since 1651. by W. Hugles of Grayes Inn
Esquire.

The Arraignment and Conviction of Anabaptisme, or a Reply to M^ Tombs his
Plea for Antipedobaptists, by Jo. Cragge M. A. Preacher of the Gospel at
Lantillio Pertholy in Monmouthshire.

Books sold by William Place, at Grayes Inn gate in Holborne.
SIr Walter Raleighs History of the World.

An exact Collection of Ordinances, Orders, Declarations, Petitions, Messages
and Answers, with other remarkable passages which passed between the late King
and Parliament at the beginning of our late troubles.

Actions for slander, showing what words are actionable in Law, and what not,
by Jo. March of Grayes Inn Barrister.

Considerations on the 12. signs of Predestination, illustrated with Emblemes,
written in Latin by H. Drexelius, Translated by R. B. of Trinity College in
Cambridge.

Transactions in the High-Court of Chancery, by W. Tothill Esquire Revised by Sir
Rob. Holburn.

The Office of Executors, by Tho. Wentmouth, late Boucher of Lincolns Inn.

The Queens Closet opened, containing incomparable secrets in Physic,
Surgery, Conserving and Cookery.

Fancies Theater, five poems, by J. Tatham Gent.

Considerations concerning the Exchequer, by C. Vernon the Kings Secretary.

FINIS

