DAVID'S Return FROM HIS BANISHMENT.

Set forth in a Thanksgiving SERMON for the Return of his Sacred MAJESTY
CHARLES the II.

And Preached at St Mary's in OXON. May 27. 1660.

By FRANCIS GREGORY Master of Arts, and Schoolmaster at Woodstock in the County
of OXON.

OXFORD.

Printed by Henry Hall, Printer to the UNIVERSITY 1660.

To the Right Worshipful Sr THOMAS SPENCER Knight and Baronet; And EDWARD
ATKINS Esquire, Counselor at Law, Being Burgesses in Parliament for the
Borough of Woodstock in the County of OXFORD.
GENTLEMEN,
HIs Sacred MAJESTY's long Absence, being the fruit of our sins, was also, and
that deservedly, the subject of our Sorrow: His MAJESTY's late return, being,
as we hope, the Answer of our Prayers, is now, and that deservedly too, the
Matter of our Joy. The Argument of this Sermon, is, the return of David, King
of Israel, to Jerusalem; and to whom can I then present it, but to You, who
have been Instruments, of our Choice, but in Gods hand, to bring back our
David, King of England, to his Jerusalem too.

I dare not expect your Patronage for this poor Discourse; I humbly beg your
Acceptance: in my own and our Corporation's name, I offer you this Mite of
Thanks, instead of a Talent of Debt. I do, and ever shall want, Ability to make
a Payment; but, I hope, I shall never want Ingenuity to make an Acknowledgment.
I can do no more, but beg a blessing upon your Persons, Families, and
consultations for the establishment of this Church and Nation upon the sure
foundation of Truth and Peace.

Your Worships most Engaged

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Have formerly published several Sermons from the Pulpit, but none from the
Press, till now. Empty Discourses may be heard, though naked Discourses would
not be seen. Some Sermons, like Travellours, dare pass along, where yet they
dare not dwell. My Sermons crowd among those, that dare venture one Hearing, but
not abide a Trial. However, I am now resolved to venture my Credit among the
People, lest I should seem, to have forgot my Loyalty to my Prince. I have sent
this Sermon abroad to mind the Nation, what God himself has done, and what he
requires us to do, for our KING. I confess, this Sermon has in it little, but
Truth, to encourage me to Print, or Thee to read it; the subject indeed is high
and Royal; but the Style too low and mean; The matter of it is the Glory of
our Nation, but the Form, I fear, will render it the Readers Toedium and the
writers blush; however, as I do not at all expect thy Applause, so do not I
much fear thy Censure; sure I am, this Discourse deserves neither; not thine
Applause, because it is Plain; not thy Censure, because it is honest. It was not
penned altogether ex Tempore, yet much of it without due deliberation. It was
put into the Oven, but had not time to be thoroughly baked; I made all possible
have, that I might be among those that fetched back David. Thou will find more
of the Authors affection, then Judgment; more of his Heart then his Head
therein. Such as it is, the Printer puts it into thy Hands, with this Request:
for the Occasion of this Sermon, bless our God; for its failings, excuse the
Author. Farewell

The Lords and thine

2 SAMUEL 19. 30. And Mephibosheth said unto the King, yea, let him take all, for
as much as my Lord the King is come again in peace to his own house.
THe Text contains that submissive answer, which Mephibosheth, a loyal
Subject, returned to David, his lawful Sovereign. It was lately David's lot to
be banished from his Throne; in the time of David's exile, poor lame
Mephibosheth through the treachery of Ziba is forc^d to continue at Jerusalem;
Ziba, his servant, becomes his accuser; to gain his estate, he slanders his
person; to make him a beggar, he represents him as a Traitor; by a false
impeachment of Treason Ziba gains those lands for himself, which he had
lately managed for his Master: Well, David returns, Mephibosheth cleares his
innoc^nce, yet not his estate: David still leaves one half in the hand of
Ziba: Thou and Ziba divide the land: well, but how does Mephibosheth bear it?
verse. 29.
David had now recovered his own right, and is Mephibosheth content, that
David should give away his? Surely, Mephibosheth being the Grandchild of a
King, the Son of a Prince, and the sole Heir of both, his estate must needs be
somewhat considerable: now, to lose hut on^ half of a fair estate were a loss
that every man would not bear, and how does he? Why, to manifest his l^ve to
David's person, to testify his joy for David's return to his Throne, he is
wil^ing, upon that account, not only to part with half, but all: so runs the
Text: And Mephibosheth said unto the King, etc.

The Text contains two General parts.

1. A Preface; and therein the Persons concerned as the Subjects of this
Discourse, and those are two: Mephibosheth, and David; a Subject and a King;
Persons indeed of different degrees, yet joined in the Text: And Mephibosheth
said unto the King.

2. The Substance of Mephibosheth's answer to King David: and therein are four
things considerable:

1. The title, which he gives him: My Lord the King: it is not, David a tyrant:
David thou man of blood; O no, it is for a railing Shimei thus to blasph^me the
Lords Anointed; Mephibosheth knows no such language as this is; David indeed
had done enough to provoke Mephibosheth against him, and yet Mephib^sheth knows
no title for David, but this: My Lord the King: the note from hence is this:

That th^re is a great r^spect, rev^r^nce, and honor due to the David's of God;
to the persons of Kings and Princes.

2. David's exile, David's banishment from his Court and Throne, My Lord the
King is come again: The expression implies, that David had been absent, David
had been driven from Jerusalem; David's Scepter was even now in another man's
hand: David's house was ere while in another man's possession: there was an
Absalom, that even now was got upon David's Throne: My Lord the King is come
again: if so, it is clear, that David had been forced to fly: the note from
hence is this,

That God sometimes is pleased to suffer his own David's, his Anointed ones,
even the choicest of Kings and Princes, to be banished from their Courts and
Kingdoms: David was none of the worst of Kings, and yet this David was driven
away.

3. David's return, David's restoration to his Throne: and therein are two
things considerable:

1. The manner of David's return: My Lord the King is come again in peace: It Is
mentioned as a singular mercy: my Lord the King is come again: there is much in
that, yea but, my Lord the King is come again in peace: O that, that is blessed
news indeed! David's absence had been Mephibosheth's sorrow, yea but David's
return in peace proves his joy: the note from hence is this:

That for God to restore his David's, his anointed ^n^s, to their crowns and
Kingdoms, but especially in peace, is a signal mercy, a singular ground of
joy.

2. The place, to which David was now returned, and whither's that? it is not
said, My Lord the King is come again to Jerusalem: it is not said, My Lord the
King is come to such or such a Noble man's house; but, to his own house: the
note from hence is this:

That the Lands and Houses, which belong to the Crowns of Princes, are such,
as they may justly call their own. That Palace, where David dwelt at
Jerusalem, in Scripture language, is here said to be, His own house.

4. Mephibosheths loyalty toward his Sovereign, David indeed is now returned,
but what is that to Mephib^sheth? why, alas! David still gives away half his
inheritance, and what says he? yea let him take all: as if he had said, is it
like to go well with David? why, then it is no matter how it goes with me; is
the Church and Nati^n like to become a gainer? what then, though Mephibosheth
prove a loser? here^s my joy, My Lord the King is come again in peace to his
own house; and if so, let him take all. The note from thence is this,

That the r^stitution of a Gracious Prince to his Throne, is a mercy to be
entertained with joy, even though it tend to a man's own^ personal loss and
disadvantage. Mephibosheth cannot but joy for David's return, though he
himself become a considerable loser.

1. Doctrine.
That there is a great resp^ct, reverence and honor due to the David's of God,
to the persons of Kings and Princes. See this in two particulars;

1. There is an humble deportment, a reverentiall behavior used by the Saints
of God toward Kings and Princes. Nathan bowed himself 1 Reg. 1. 23.
before the King. no posture of body more reverent then this; Saints bow to
God, Nathan bowed before the King; but how low did Nathan bow? Why? with his
face to the ground. Surely, Nathan himself was a person of Honor, not only as
a Saint, but as a Prophet too; Prophets were the Anointed ones of God as well
as Kings; but yet the Mitre falls before the Crown; if the Prince sit upon the
Throne, the Prophet must ly at his footstool: But why do I speak of Nathan?
Bathsheba bowed and did obeisance to the King: 1 Reg. 1. 16.
Bathsh^ba looks upon David, not only as her husband, but as her S^v^raigne
too; with David her husband she might be familiar; but with David her
Sovereign she dares not be irreverent: there was indeed a conjugall union,
and yet a civil distance between them: Bathsheba, as she was David's Spouse,
lay in his bosom; but, as she was David's Subject, she lies at his feet, but
why all this? Does Nathan only court his Prince? does Bathsh^ba but complement
with her husband? surely no; they both understood the Princes honor, and the
Subjects duty.

2. There are titles of honor bestowed upon Kings and Princes: see this in two
Particulars;

1. M^n, good and bad, Saints and sinners, bestow these titles upon them: when
Princes have been holy, even sinners have given them honor; and why so;
surely, not for their h^linesse, but for their Majesty. Again, when Princes
have been unholy, even the Saints of God have showed them respect; And why so?
Surely, not because they were sinners, but because they were Sovereigns. My
Lord the King, says David to Saul; Saul was none of the best of Princes, at
lest, he was not so to David; Saul does not the duty 1 Samuel 24 8.
of a King, and yet David will do the duty of a Subject still: Saul has not
one good word for David, and yet David has still a title of Honor for Saul,
My Lord the King: and why so? Surely, 'twas not courtship, but duty; it was not
slattery but loyalty; had David showed less respect to Saul his Prince, he had
showed himself, not only less a Subject, but less a Saint.

2. God himself bestows these titles upon them -- It Is true, Saints may bestow
respect where it is not due -- Yea, but where God bestows honor, he there makes
it due -- They are not afraid to speak evil of dignities -- Men may speak
evil of princes, but God 2 Pet. 2. 10.
calls them dignities still -- I have raised thee up -- Says God to Pharaoh;
if Pharaoh be a king, though but a bad one, yet God owneth him as a man raised
up by himself; well, but to what does Romans 9. 17.
God raise up Kings? Surely, not only to their thron^s, but to their titles
too, and what are they! -- My lord the King is as an 2 Sa. 19. 27.
angel of God -- That Is a title of honor indeed, but who bestows it? alas!
it is Mephibosheth a poor mortal man; yea but when once God comes to bestow
titles of honor upon Kings and Princes, He speaks at another rate, and how is
that? -- I have said, ye are Gods, -- Surely, there is no title so high as
this, that God, who Psalm. 82. 6.
numbers himself among Kings, is also pleased to number Kings among Gods --
Deus immortalis rex, rex mortalis Deus -- God is an immortal King, the King is
a mortal God; God is pleased to borrow their name, and to l^nd them his -- I
have said, ye^ are Gods -- it is observable, that this title is bestowed upon
wick^^ princes; Kings, that are as devils in practice, are mentioned as Gods
in place. Now, if Kings and Princes receive their titles of honor from God and
men, from Saints and Sinners, it is an argument, that there is a reverentiall
respect belonging to them. But, you will say, why so? I answer;

Reasons.
1. God commands it -- Fear God, Honor the King -- Quis-quis deum timet, etiam
regibus honorem habebit -- Says Calvin; 1 Pet. 2. 17.
never did man truly fear God, but he likewise honored the King. But what if
Kings prove Tyrants? Why, Etiam tyrannis, qui imperium obtinent, honor habendus
-- Says he; Princes, if tyrants, yet because Princes, must be honored still
-- God has made Kings and Princes, as the fountains, so the objects of honor
too; Men may receive honor from them, but men must give honor to them; if the
King honor us, that is his favor; but if we honor him, that is our duty, and
that because it is Gods command. I read of persons highly honored at the
command of men; Pharaoh commands to honor Joseph, and what follows? -- Genesis
41. 34.
The people cry before him, bow the knee -- A Prince honors a Subject, the
King makes him a knight, a Lord, an Earl, and what then? Why, we respect that
man as a Knight, a Lord, an Earl, -- Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the
King delights Est. 6. 6.
to honor -- Yea, but shall not much more be done to the man whom God delights
to honor? O Surely, if the Princes honor be the command of God, to deny that
honor, must needs be the Sin of man.

2. Kings and Princes are of Gods ordination -- The powers that Romans 13. 1.
be, are ordained of God -- It Is not said -- The powers, that are righteously
exercised, but the powers that be -- God ownes them all, By me Kings reign:
it is not said, Good Kings, righteous Kings, Prove. 8. 15.
but Kings in the general; Non fortuito ^vecti sunt magistratus ad honorem,
sed Dei provid ntia, says Calvin; it is not Chance, but Providence; it is not
Fortune, but God, that advances Kings and Princes: I have raised thee up,
says God to Pharaoh: if Pharaoh wear a Crown, it is God that sets it upon his
head; if Pharaoh manage the Sc^pter, it is God that puts it into his hand. Malis
dominand^ potestas non datur, nisi summ^ D^i providentia, says Austin, the
most unrighteous Kings receive their power from the most righteous God, Qui
imp^rium d^dit Augusto, them and N^r^ni* Qui Constantino Christian^, ipse
Apostatae Iuliano, says that Father^ That God, who set up Augustus, one of the
b^st of the Roman Emperors, did also set up N^ro, that monster of men, that
same God, that exalted Constantine a Christian, did also exalt Julian an
apostate. The Heathen confessed this truth, (...) -- Kings are from God; and if
so, if Princes bear the stamp, the image, the instituti^n of God, they must
needs be persons of Honor.

3. Kings and Princes are supr^me. Let every soul be subject to the high^r
powers. Surely, if every soul must be subject, it seems Romans 13. 1.
there is no soul equal: well, but who are Paul's higher powers? doubtless,
the higher powers at that time were the Roman Emperors, Kings and Princes: So
Peter seems to tell us, Submit your selves; to whom? whether to the King, as
supreme: there lies in the 1 Pet. 2. 13.
words an exhortation and an argument to press it, Submit your selves to the
King, there is the exhortation; to the King as supreme, there is the argument.
It Is not said, submit to the King, as holy, as righteous, but as supreme. I
know, it is a question, an dominium fundatur in gratia? but surely, dominion in
the King, obedience in the Subject, are both founded not in the Princes
holiness, but in his Supremacy. I shall not dispute, whether this text does
ponere or supponere, whether it barely supposes, or peremptorily affirms the
King to be supreme; only thus, the usual supremacy of Kings is that, which
another Scripture seems to assert, It shall bring him to the King of
terrors. Death is here styled the King of terrors, what is that? surely, that
which the Philosopher means (...), Ioh. 18. 14.
the suprem^, the highest, the greatest of terrors; if the King be not
supreme, there is little savor in that expression. I find, supremacy is that
which Kings challenge, and are loath to part with. Pharaoh indeed imparts much
of his honor to Joseph, but yet he tells Genesis 41. 40.
him, I will be greater in the throne then thou. Joseph was high, and yet still
but the Second man in the Kingdom. Nay more, supremacy 2 Samuel 12. 7.
is that, which God seems to ascribe to Kings and Princes, I anointed thee
King over Israel, if David be King, then is David over Israel; Rex omnibus
mayor, solo Deo minor, says Tertullian, these Gods on earth know no superior,
but that one God in heaven. Hence is that of Saint Austin: Rex semper
honorandus, si non propter se, at tamen propter cr^inem: Kings are for ever
persons of h^nour; if not for their Goodn^sse, yet for their Greatn^sse. There
is an honor due to inferior Magistrates, but surely to the Prince much more:
if there be a glory of Stars, there must needs be a glory of the Sun: If the
little hills be exalted, doubtless the mountains cannot ly low; if there be an
honor due to a Judge upon the bench, O then what honor is due to the Prince
upon the Throne! But,

4. Kings and Princes are Persons of value: caeteris paribus, none so
considerable as they: that, which makes things respected, is their value; and
who is so valuable as Kings? God valueth none so much as Kings and Saints. It Is
with men, as it is with a set of counters: it is true, if counters be shuffled
together in a Box, they are all alike: so here, if the Prince and the P^asant
be shuffled together into their graves, their dust is equal: but now, if you
cast an account, this counter stands for one, but that for ten; this counter
stands for hundreds, but that for Thousands: it is thus with men: in the world
God has the accounts of his Pr^vidence to be cast, the p^or man stands for
one, but the rich man stands for ten; the Noble man stands for hundreds, but
the Prince for Thousands: so did David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us: But
why so? Surely David, whilst a Shepherd, stood but for unities, yea but
David, when once 2 Samuel 18. 3.
a King, stands for thousands: David, considered as the Son of Iesse, stood but
for single tens at most: yea but David considered as the Lords anointed, stands
for ten thousand at least. Now, if things be respected for their value, why not
persons? None so considerable as Kings, and if so, who so honorable as They?

5. Kings and Princes have an honorable station here in the world: see this in
three particulars:

1. The trust, which God reposeth in Kings and Princes, is a trust of honor.
God counts himfelfe honored, when we trust him: if a friend dare trust us with
his silver and gold, it is our honor. In the Courts of earthly Princes, places
of great trust are places of honor too; it is a man's glory to be entrusted with
the Prince's Seal, with the Prince's treasure; now Kings, under Christ, are the
great trustees of God, they are the Lord-keepers of heaven, Cust^d^s utriusque
tabulae; they are the Lord-tr^asurers of heaven: God trusts them with his
treasure, his Jewels, his Saints; God trusts them with our estates, our
liberties, our lives, our religion, our souls, and what trust like this?

2. The relations of Kings and Princes are relations of honor. The Kings of
Israel are styled the heads of the tribes of Israel: and surely, no memb^r so
honorable as the head; Princes wear their crown^s not in their hands, but upon
their heads; it is the head that deserves this honor. Kings shall be thy
nursing fathers: Kings are Fath^rs, there is their Relation; they are Nursing
fathers, Esa. 49. 23.
there is their Trust. It Is an honor to be the father of a child, but what is it
to be the father of a country? such a father can never want an heir, and such a
father should never want an honor.

3. The employment of Kings and Princes is an employment of honor. Men are
honorable, not always for what they are, but for what they do; it is not so
much the man, as the man's employment, that challenges our respect. Not Joseph
a prisoner, but Joseph Pharaoh's Lord high steward, is the man that is
honored. Men ignobly born, wrapped in rags, if called to some high
employment, may wear their scarlet robes, as persons of h^nour: well, but what
employment so high as that of Kings and princes? It Is an employment of honor to
be the governor of a town or a castle, but what is it to be the governor of a
Nation? Kings are the vice-royes of heaven, Gods vicegerents upon earth, he is
the minister of God: God owns Romans 13. 4. Psalm. 18. 50.
Kings as Deputies o^ his, great deliverance gives he to his King: and why
his? surely, his by patent, his by delegation. Our ministers are the
ambassadors of Christ, our Princes the deputies of God. The Minister entreats,
the Prince commands, and both in the st^ad of God, Ye^jud^e not f^r man, but
for the Lord, what is that? surely, 2 Chr. 19. 6.
as for the glory, so in the room of God. Now is there not a respect due to
Kings and Princes for this? we give a respect to the Major of a Corporation,
and why so? possibly the man's but a beggar, possibly the man's but a
scandal^us sinner; yea but he is the King's Psalm. 49. 20.
Lieuetenant, he represents the Prince, and for that we respect him: so here,
should Kings and Princes be naught, yet they are God's vice-ger^nts still;
consider them as men, so they may be vile; consider them as Magistrates, so
they must be h^nourable. Man being Psalm. 49. 20.
in honor, and having no understanding, is like the beasts that perish. The
text implies, that a man may be without understanding, without Grace, and yet
be a man in Hon^ur still. It Is true, the Prince's sin may degra^^ him, in Gods
account, even below the Condition of beasts; yea but the Prince's Place and
Employment exalt him above the common Condition of Men.

Uses.
1. Of Information.
Is there indeed a great respect, reverence, and honor due to Kings and
Princes? then surely this Doctrine informs us how much those persons are too
blam^, that deny this reverentiall respect, that justly belongs to the Lord's
anointed. See who they are in three particulars.

1. Men are too blame, that entertain dishonorable thoughts of, and disloyal
wishes to their Kings and Princes, Curse not the King, Eccl. 10. 20.
no not in thy thought. God lays a restraint, not only upon our words and
actions, but even upon our thoughts. Its true, high treason consists in words
and actions, but yet there is a p^tty Treason even in thoughts, How long will
ye imagine mischief against a man? What man does David mean? surely, himself
the king. It Is a sin Psalm. 62. 4.
not only to do, but to imagine mischief against the Prince. Indeed there is
little danger in thoughts alone, but yet in thoughts alone there is much of
sin. Treason only in thoughts hurts not the Prince its Object, but still it
does hurt the soul its subject; Bl^sse them that Mat. 5. 44.
curse you, yea that is Christian; yea but to curse them in thoughts, whom we
stand bound to bl^sse, that is devilish.

2. Men are too blame, that speak unadvised words concerning Kings and Princes.
They are not afraid to sp^ak evil of digniti^s; They are not afraid, but the
expression implies, they should be 2 Pet. 2. 10.
afraid. That God who holds our hands, does also stop our mouths, Who may say
to a King, what do thou? It Is not, who dares say? but who may say! who ought
to say? So Elihu interprets it, Is it fit Eccl. 8. 4.
to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly? It Is not
said, is it safe to say? but, is it fit to say? It implies that in Job. 34. 18.
saying so, there is not only danger but sin, Thou shall not revile the Exodus
22. 28.
Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people; to speak against the King, is to sin
against the Lord. God himself has tied our tongues, and yet alas! how do
tongues break out in this particular? Come out, come out, thou bloody man, thou
man of Belial: that is Shimei's language 2 Samuel 16. 7.
to David King of Israel; well, and what has been our language to David King
of England? Its true, David King of Israel had his sins, and David King of
England had his miscarriages too; but yet remember, the spots of Princes are
magnified by the person that wears them. That which looks but like an
Infirmity in the Subject, in the King would look like a crimes a freckle in the
face is more visible then a scar in the foot. I am persuaded, that day, that
England lost the latest of her Kings, that day the world lost the best of its
Kings. It Is not easy to say, whether he were more patient in his sufferings or
innocent in his doings; It Is not easy to say, whether he were the better King,
or the better Christian. Well, what language found our England's David from
amongst us? Come out, come out, thou oppressor, a way with a Tyrant; Yea, but
why a Tyrant? why an Oppressor? surely, since his death England has stoutly
born more heavy burdens then ever; and that looks like an argument, that the
King of England had not cracked our should^rs and broke our back, Oh no, (...)
The Dogs bark at the M^on, and why so? the moon indeed has some spots, but yet
the Dogs do not bark at the Moon upon that account, it may be her light offends
them; surely, it was not the spots, but the Glory, the honor, the dignity of
his late Majesty, that made the dogs so bark at England's Sun. Alas! alas! such
bitter language was intended as his reproach, but it proves our shame; we
fought against his authority with swords in our hands, there is our rebellion;
we fought against his name and honor with swords in our mouths, there is our
Blasphemy.

3. Men are highly too blame that act against their Kings and Princes. If it be
a sin to think, what is it then to speak? if it be a sin to speak, what is it
then to act? and yet alas, such men have been amongst us! Submit your selves to
the King, says God, rise up against the King, say men; Honor the King, says
God, reproach the King, say men; Pray for the King, says God, pray against the
King, say men. Surely, men do not well remember that o^ the Apostle, whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: it is true, men make the
crown, it is God that makes the King; to melt the Romans 13. 2.
crown, is to destory but the workmanship of man, to make away the King, is to
destroy the workmanship of God; it is that which we have done both ways, we
have made away both King and crown. I read, how tender David was in this
particular, God f^rbid, that I should stretch forth mine hand against the Lords
anointed. David had 1 Samuel 24. 6.
now King Saul in his power, but yet he spares him, and why so? alas! if David
had killed Saul, being his enemy, it had been cruelty, and yet that David
spar^d him, being the King, it was not mercy, but Loyalty and Justice. The text
tells us, that when David cut off the skirt of his Soveraigne's garment, his
heart smote him; you will say, why then did he do it? Surely, to evidence, that
although King Saul was a persecutour indeed, yet Subject David would be no
Trayt^ur; sure it is, when David cut off Readiness skirt, he might as easily have
cut off his head, as we have done; but the Lord forbid, says David: if David
took up arms, he used them not to destroy the life of his Prince, but to
defend his own. David well understood, that for him to murder Saul, would be a
Treason against his Sovereign, a sin against his God, a wound to his own soul!

2. Use of Exhortation.
Is there indeed a great respect, reverence and honor due to Kings and
Princes? is it that which God himself requires? O then be exhorted

1. To mourn over and beg pardon for the sad miscarriages of England toward
the Lords anointed ones. We are bound to honor our Kings and Princes; well,
and how have we done it? Murder the Father! banish the Son! is this the honor
we owe them? are our solemn oaths and covenants come to this? we swear to
preserve his Majesty's Sacred person, and yet we have killed him; when we swear
to make him a Glorious Prince, did we intend to make him a Glorious Martyr too?
surely, Martyrd^m it was upon his account, though murder upon Ours. Alas! to
bring a Prince from a Palace to a scaffold, from a Throne to a block, is this
the duty that God requires from Subjects? shall I show you the foulness of
that act in 4 Particulars?

1. It Was an act of high Injustice. You will say, against whom? I answer,
against God and Man.

1. Against God. Kings are Gods Deputies, and is it just with man to remove
them? Kings are God's Vice-ger^nts, and is it just for man to pull them down? O
surely, Kings are accountable to none but God, who gives them their commission;
Reges in ipsos Imperium est Iovis, says H^race, that God alone, who exalts the
Prince, has power to degrade him; for men to depose and execute Princes, is
boldly to invade the right of God, the Prerogative of Heaven.

2. Against man: I mean both King and Subject.

1. It Was an act of high Injustice against the King himself. Alas! our King
lost his precious blood, as no Subject can ordinarily lose a penny: what a
subject loses, he loses by law, he must lose by the judgment of his Peers;
well, and by what law did our King lose his life? not by the law of heaven,
that commands an honor; not by the law of England, that requires obedience;
well, but was he judged by his Peers? surely, Kings have no Peers at all; but
however, was he judged by his Nobles? surely no, of all the Nobles, Barons,
Earls, Marquesses, Dukes of England, I think, there was not so much as one
among the Judges of the King: O no, those stars hid their faces, and would not
see their Sun eclypsed. It was the Shrub that pulled our C^dar down; they were
but whelps that tore out our Lions throat; it was the dirty foot that kicked off
England's royal head; Our Gracious Prince, that died without a law, without a
Legal Jury, died with as much injustice as innocence.

2. It Was an act of high injustice against the Subject: when England lost her
King, subjects as children lost their father; we have smarted under the lash
of step fathers ever since: when England lost her Prince, subjects as sheep
lost their shepherd, and have not the wolves devoured us ever since? when
England lost her Sovereign, subjects as members lost their head well, suppose
England deserved this loss, yet what have our n^ighbour-nations done? had it
been just for English men to kill the King of England, yet was it just for us
to kill the King of Ireland, the King of Scotland too? if we must needs behead
our selves, yet must we behead our neighb^urs too? O dismal stroke! O act of
injustice! an act that renders three nations fatherless at one blow. But

2. It Was an act of the greatest cruelty imaginable. Had the death of the King
been just, yet it had been cruel too; indeed, Judges must be just, but still
Judges must not be cruel; as to the act it self, Justice was but pretended,
but as to the circumstances of the act, the Cruelty was Real: it is resolved,
the King must die, but when and where?

1. When must he die? why, the third day after his sentence: A short time, you
will say, for a King to set his house in order, to dispose of three Kingdoms;
but as to that, his enemies resolve to do it for him, he needs no longer time
on that account; well, but the King must die the third day, alas! a short time
of repentance for so notori^us a sinner as his enemies made him; had not the
Kings innocence been greater then the mercy of Rebels, they took the speediest
course to turn his body into the Grave, and his soul into Hell, the same
moment: tell me, what though Justice must be done ^^ the body, yet is there no
charity to be showed the soul? if the King be unfit for earth, yet let him have
a little longer time to prepare for Heaven: O no, there is no reprieve, no not
for a day, though the Saints of God begged it with Tears. But blessed be God,
our King was fit to die, and upon that account, had no more need to desire,
then his enemies had will to grant, the least delay.

2. Where must he dye? alas! at his own door. When he was dead, he might not be
buried in his own proper grave; but when he is to die, that is to be done at his
own gate. Poor Prince! the place of his Royalty must be the place of his
Execution. Well, and was there no place could serve but this! Surely, it is that
which must needs imbitt^r his death the more; at one view he is forced to
behold his f^rmer Glory, and his present Calamity; did not the very place
minister an occasion to the King of such thoughts as these? alas! I was once a
King, there stands my Palace! I am now a condemned prisoner, lo, here is my
Scaffold! I ^nce lived as a Prince, yonder is my Throne! I must now die as a
Malefact^ur, lo, here is my bl^ck! I once lived as Englands lawful Sov^raigne,
yonder my N^bles were then about me! I must now dye like a Tyrant, behold my
Executi^ner! Alas! Poor Prince! but O cruel Subjects! before he shall die, he
must be minded in what P^mp ^e had lived: at ^nce he must see the axe and the
Scepter; to make him a complete, not only man, but Princ^ of sorrows; he must
not lose his head, till he once more view his crown, that adorned it.

3. It Was an act of scandal to the Church of God amongst us. That blow, that
struck off our Princes head, did even strik^ ^ut our religi^n's breath; when
our King lost his life, our religion lost her Glory too. The deposing,
assassinati^n, murder of Kings is a doctrine which we condemn but practice;
it is a doctrine that Protestants father upon Rome, but now have found in
England. The Primitive Christians never owned it, Rogamus, Auguste, non
pugnamus, that is their language, O Augustus, we do not fight with swords, but
beg with tears; and why so? surely, not for want of power, but for want of
will, so Tertullian, Vis nobis non deest vel numerorum, vel nummorum, we want
neither money nor men, we might rebel, but out of conscience dare not. Had our
Gracious Soverai^n been a real Tyrant indeed, yet he was a Protestant still;
we should have spared him, if not upon his own, yet upon Gods account; for
doubtless, it had been more honorable to our Religion, for us to have
suffered under him, then for him to suffer under us.

4. 'Twas an act, that brought a further Guilt of Bl^ud upon the Nation: alas!
there had been too much blood spilt on English ground already; Subjects had
lost their blood, the Kings might well have been spared; we had opened veins
enough, That V^na Basilica might have been let alone: surely, the guilt of
blood is guilt in Grain; it is no easy thing to wash it off: Deliver me from
bloudguiltin^sse, O God, says David: David was guilty of Adult^ry, as Psalm.
51. 14.
well as Murder; yea but it is this Murder, this Blood, which he had shed, that
dogs him, and sticks upon his conscience: well, and whose blood was it? why,
the blood of Vriah, the blood of a Subject: now, if the blood of Vriah did so
torment King David, O how would the blood of David have tormented some poor
Vriah? if comm^n blood be precious, how precious is blood Royal? surely,
England can give but a sad account for the blood of Martyrs in former ages, for
the blood of Saints in latter times, and how then shall we account for the
blood of the Lord's Anointed? but O that every eye, that saw this horrid act,
could bleed! that every ear, that hears it, could tingle! that every heart,
that does but think of it, could mourn before the Lord! But

2. Be exhorted to give respect, reverence, and honor to our Sovereign Lord
the King: and that upon a threefold account.

1. Consider, it is that we owe Him, Suum cuique tribuere, To give every man
his own, is but common justice, Render to Caesar Mar. 12. 17.
the things that be Caesar's: You will say, what are Caesar's things? Surely, if
the Apostle be a competent Judge, Honor is one: Render Honor to whom Honor
is due: well, and whose due is it? Romans 13 7. Pet. 2. 17.
Honor the King: Honor is the Kings due, and the Subjects debt. We can make
some conscience of other debts, why then not of this? Money we pay where Money
is due; Rent we pay where Rent is due: why then should we not pay Honor
where Honor is due? Sure I am, if we owe any debt in the world, this is one:
it is a debt which we have promised to pay; nay more, we have entered into bond
to pay it: tell me, are sacred* Covenants bonds or no? are sacred Oaths
obligations or no? if these things be obliging, is not England bound to pay
this debt of Honor? We stood bound to pay this debt to our former Prince, and
doubtless, what we left unpaid to the Father, we are concerned in justice to
pay to the Son and Heir: if we formerly missed our day, and for want of
payment forfeited our bonds, we are now concerned to pay both Principal and
interest.

2. Consider, our Sovereign Lord the King is a fit object of Honor, I mean
not only as a Prince, but as a Saint; not only as a King, but as a Christian;
not only as a Christian, but as a Protestant: it is said of all hands, and
believed, that a person he is of Choice endowments; that God, who now has made
him Great, we trust, long since has made him Good; God has given him, as a
Crown, so an Head fit to wear it; as a Scepter, so an Hand fit to manage it;
Heaven crowns His Head with Gold, but his Heart with Grace: His Honor, His
Life, His Soul seems dear to God; it is little less then a miracle, that in
England, I mean, at Worcester, God preserved His Life: it is little less then a
miracle, that in France and Spain God preserved his Religion: you will say, our
Prince in England could not want for dangers, who aimed at so much as He?
again, our Prince in France and Spain could not want for temptations to Popery:
O no, He had enough and strong ones too: now may we not say in truth, the
preservation of his life, in the midst of so great dangers, argues a strange
providence of God about Him? but, the preservation of his Faith, in the midst
of such temptations, argues the special Grace of God within Him? Tell me,
does He not seem settled in the Protestant religion, that could not be shaken
either by the temptations of Papists abroad, or the discouragements of
Protestants at home? Had our King turned Papist, it is probable, that the Pope
had brought him in through a S^a of Blood. but through mercy, our Prince
continues a Protestant still, and as a reward of his Faith and Constancy, God
brings him in, in peace; Now, can we doubt our Princes Religion still? Surely,
if the regaining of three Kingdoms could not remove him, there is nothing else
that can: nay more, if the strongest temptations could not shak his faith;
doubtless they have confirmed it: if storms and tempests cannot blow d^wn nor
break the tree, they are wont to root it faster. Consider our Prince as a King,
as a Christian, as the great Confessor of the Prot stant Faith, you will find
him every way an Object fit for Honor.

3. God himself seems in an high degree to advance our Gracious Princes
Honor. Surely, where God honors, there man must honor too: it is our
Soveraign^s present case; that God, who requires an honor for him in his
Precepts, does now seem to cast much honor upon him, in his Providence. Do you
ask me, how? I answer,

1. God has now wonderfully wiped off that reproach, which some unadvised
persons had cast upon His Royal Name and Family. It was said by some,
doubtless, God disowned His Maj^stie's Person: Surely, God had laid aside his
Maj^sties Family: and why so? Why, his Armies were still beaten, his designs
prevented, his Friends worsted and undone, his cause overthrown, himself
banished from Nation to Nation: nay some observed, that wh^re ^re he went, the
judgments of God followed him close at heels: nay, it was made an observation
in Print, that the King of Spain never prospered, after he had once been civil
to the King of England.

But consider, are not poor worms somewhat bold, that dare adventure thus
dogmatically to interpret the mysterious providence of God? Surely, the
particular dispensations of Providence are Texts so hard, that scarce one of a
thousand can certainly tell what comment to put upon them: Particular
Providence are not plain rules, but obscure riddles: It Is more safe to adore
the wisdom, then interpret the will of the great God in his various acts of
Providence. Yet notwithstanding, it has been strongly asserted by some, and
believed by others, that God had utterly cast off the King of England, and the
Royal Family, and that upon this account, God suffered them to be still
overthrown, and at length banished, and driven away. I answer.

1. In General, the defeats of Armies, overthrows, banishment, are all but
outward crosses; and so no argument that God disowneth any person whatsoever.
No man knows love or hatred by all that is before him. Outward mercies do not
always argue love; nor do afflictions Ecc. 9. 1.
always argue wrath. God may severely punish, when yet he has no intent to
destroy: God may thunder aloud over that man's head, whom yet he does not mean
to strike dead in the place, God's Judgments are not always swords to kill, but
rods to correct, and that in mercy too. Ipsa Dei indignatio non aliunde est,
quam de misericordia, Says Bernard: God would not sometimes look as if he were
angry did not his very mercy move him: There is sometimes as much love in a
frown, as in a smile from Heaven; there may be as much friendship in God's
harder blows, as there is in his gentler strokes: Surely, the viper upon Paul's
hand did not argue him to be a Murderer: No more does God's lash upon any man's
back argue that man to be a cast away. And as it is with persons, so it is with
causes too; want of present success is no convincing argument that God
disowneth a cause: Israel flies before Ai, and yet the cause was Gods. The
Turks have prevailed often against poor Christians, and yet their cause is the
Devils. No man can truly judge of causes barely by their success or
miscarriage. There are several reasons, why God may suffer the better cause
for sometime to be worsted, as

1. God, it may be, does not like the instruments; the work is good, but the
tools are naught; the work shall lie, 'till God provide some better instruments
to effect it. Or

2. God's time possibly is not yet come. The cause indeed at present is Gods,
yea but the present time is not his. It was God's purpose, that Jericho should
be taken, yet not till the seventh day be come: It is Gods purpose, that such
and such a cause shall prosper, yea but it shall not prosper yet. The Jews
have a proverb, Was n^ comede ante tempus, eat not Grapes before their season.
Indeed, Grapes will appear to be sweet and ^uscious, yet not before the time of
Grapes is come. It shall appear that God owneth such and such a cause, as holy
and righteous, but not till the appointed time be come. It Is true, Israel must
come out of bondage, but Israel must not come out yet; now shall we say, that
Israel was ever the less the Israel of God, because so long in Egypt?

2. In particular; the banishment of a King from his Throne is no sure
argument, that God disowneth him. Indeed, it may argue some present
displeasure, but not an implacable anger, to be in God. If God banish a Prince,
it is a likely sign that God intends to scourge him at present, but it is no
sure sign, that God intends to cast him off. I read of persons dear to God,
and yet for a while banished too, Get thee out of thy country, Abraham the
friend of God, Genesis 12. 1.
and yet commanded from his country. Flee into Egypt, Christ Jesus the son of
God, and yet scarce sooner born then banished. Mat. 2. 13.
David was, not only a man, but a King after Gods own heart, and yet this David
is forced to fly; you will say, why so? surely when God turned David out of his
Kingdom, he did not turn him out of his favor too; when David had lost the
hearts of his Subjects, he had not lost the heart of his God too; O no, there
are other reasons why God is pleased sometimes to suffer his David's, the
choicest of Kings and Princes to be banished from their Courts and Kingdoms:
see why in 3 particulars.

1. God does this to correct them for sin. This was David's case, David had
highly sinned; upon that account, David is thus severely punished. David enters
upon Vriahs bed, there is his sin; well, Absalom must enter upon David's throne,
there is his punishment. At David's command, Vriah must lose his blood at God's
command, David must lose his crown, yet still God does this in mercy; he
corrects indeed, but does not reject; David is banished, but yet restored.

2. God does this to punish the sins of subjects. Indeed it is said, I gave them
a King in my wrath: but surely, God does not Hos. 13. 11.
always give, but sometimes takes away Kings in his wrath. Kings, if evil, are
sore judgments, Princes if good, are signal mercies. It Is an argument of wrath,
when God is pleased, either to s^nd the one, or remove the othen. It Is as great
a judgment to have a David banished, as to have a Saul sitting upon the throne.

3. God does this in mercy to his banished ones; the banishment of a Prince may
look like a loss, and yet may prove his signal advantage; see why in 2
particulars.

1. The banishment of a Prince does sometimes tend to secure his person. David
is banished into the wilderness, and why so? alas! there was no fafety for him
at Jerusalem: when David could not be safe among men, God secures him even
among beasts; it is more then probable, that David had lost his life, had he not
left his Throne. And has it not been thus with our David too? Had not our
Gracious Sovereign been ^ut of England, doubtless he had long since been our
of the world; had not he left his crown, surely he had lost his head; when God
was pleased to banish his person, he did then but secure his life; the place of
his exile was the place of his safety too; God indeed commanded him into Egypt,
yea but he kept him there, only till Herod was dead.

2. The banishment of Princes makes them more fit to govern. You Will say, it is
good for men to be fit for their own employment: things, though good, yet if
not fit, do scarce content us* robes of scarlet, if not rightly proportioned,
do rather trouble then adorn; a straight shoe, though made of Gold, does
rather pinch the foot, then grace it; surely, the crowns of Princes are
mercies only then* when God sits their head to wear them. Government is not an
honor, but a burden, that is too heavy, except the shoulder be first prepared
to bear it; well, and what is it that fits a Prince to rule* surely, nothing
better then affliction, and no affliction better then banishment* Tools are
not fit for their work, till they have been put in the fire; the axe is not
fit to cut, till it has been upon the Grind-ston^: a Prince is then most fit
to rule, when he has first learnt what it means to suffer. It is good for me,
that I have been afflicted: good for David a Saint, good for David a King;
you will Ps. 11^ 71.
say, why so? I answer,

1. Banished Princes, when once restored, will likely prove religious Princes:
the more religious our Princes are, the more fit they are to rule; if we
discern Grace in the Princes heart, we need not fear the power that is in his
hand. Blessed will be the government of that nation, where God rules not only
over, but in the King. Well, but what Princes more likely to be religious then
Banished ones? No King more afflicted, no King more holy, then David. Manasseh,
when banished into Babylon, went a notorious sinner, but Manasseh, when restored
to Jerusalem, returned a Saint. No School for young Princes like affliction, it
is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth; surely, if it be good for a
man, it is much more good for a Prince; Kings, that have greater temptations to
Lam. 3. 27.
sin, do the more need Antidotes against it. And surely, no Antidote like
Affliction, it expels the poison already drunk, and prevents the future
draught. It is not only the holiness, but will be the prudence of Kings to
banish those sins from their Courts, which have already banished them from their
Kingdoms; we trust, it is thus with our Gracious Prince this day: God has
thrown his crown into the fire, not to be consumed, but purisied; to refine
the Gold, and purge away the dross; God has showed him David's troubles, that
he might give him David's heart, and David's mercies.

2. Banished Princes, when once restored, will likely prove righteous Princes.
Surely, it is hard for Princes to keep exactly within the bounds of justice,
it is natural for mountain^s to crush, for milstones to grind to powder. When
power is exercised without control, it is too apt to degenerate into
oppression. He, that meets with no interruption in his Government, is a rare
man, if* being a King, he proves not, in some degree, a Tyrant too. David, one
of the best of princes, becomes an oppressor, as well as Ahab, one of the
worst. Well, God, for David's injustice, drives* him from his throne, and what
then? why, David, who, before his banishment, durst murder an innocent Vriah,
at his return, refuses to execute a blaspheming Shimei, Discite justitiam
moni^i. If a Prince once lose his power, upon a recovery, his interest as well
as his conscience bids him take heed how he use it. A King, once banished, sees
by sad experience, that there is a King of Kings above him. It is true, God
sets the crown upon the Princes head, but he does not nail it there: Crowns
are not on so fast, but God for sin can take them off at pleasure; now, if God
shall wrest the sword cut of a Princes hand, and yet restore it back; me
thinks such a Prince will hardly draw the sword to kill, where it should but
defend; O no, The Kings throne shall be established in righteousness: we
trust, that is Prove. 25. 18.
our case this day we trust, that God, who at length restored our banished
Sovereign, does now intend to establish his throne in righteousness for ever.

3. Banished Princes, when once restored, will likely prove merciful Princes.
Mercy is one of the choicest Jewels in a Princes crown; No prince like him,
that has power in his hand, and pity in his heart. It Is said of Caesar, Dando,
sublevando, ignoscendo, gloriam adeptus est, Caesar got his glory by giving
rewards, by for giving injuries. The Princes power makes us fear him, but his
compassion makes us love him. Now, the more a man's sufferings are, usually the
more is his mercy too; who pitieth the hungry more, then he that has been
ready to starve himself? It Is said, the Kings of Israel are merciful kings,
and how so? alas, their afflictions were sore ones, Non 1 Reg. 20. 31.
ignara mali miseris succurrere disco, it is natural for men to pity that in
others, which they have groaned under in themselves. Surely, afflicted Princes
cannot but pity afflicted subjects; if the head have aked it self, it will
find an eye to weep, for the aching of every member. David returns from his
banishment; his life, and his crown were saved; well, what follows? why,
here is his mercy, if David has escaped, Sh^mei shall not die: well, is not this
our case this day? We have a Prince of affliction, and we hope, a Prince of
Mercy too; 2 Samuel 19. 23.
that God, who now puts a Scepter into his hand, has laid the rod upon his
back, and why so? why surely, as God now puts the sword into his hand to
execute justice, so he has laid the rod upon his back to teach him mercy; God
will not enable him with power to punish, till he first teaches him pity to
spare; sure I am, it is a King of Mercy, that England needs; and we trust, it
is a King of mercy; that England does now enjoy; doubtless, it is an Argument
of mercy, that a Prince, so highly injured, should so freely offer a Pardon,
even before the Offenders ask it, we taste of his Goodness, before we see his
Person: our King Proclaims his Mercy, before we Proclaim his Sovereignty;
our Prince confirms an Act of Oblivion, before our Parliament can prepare it*
we are not yet upon our knees; and yet, behold, our Pardon is in our hands!
It Is a Gracious Prince, that pardons even at a distance, that sends his mercy
before him, as if he were more ready to spare then rule* more ready for a Seat
of Mercy them a Throne of Majesty* it is not easy to say, whether is greater,
the King's mercy; or the Subjects guilt.

4. Banished Princes, when once restored, will likely prove Humble Princes.
Manasseh humbled himself greatly where not in Jerusalem, but in Babylon; not
in his Palace, but in his prison. It Is not easy 2 Chronicles. 35. 12.
for a King, that sits upon his own Throne to lie low at God's footstool; for
Mountains to become as Valleys! for men rich in purse, to be poor in Spirit!
for a King that wears a Crown, not to lift up that head that wears it!
Surely, it is almost as easy for a King to part with a Kingdom, as not to pride
himself in it: It not this great Babylon? Dan. 4. 30.
It Is infinite mercy, if the thoughts of Princes be not as high as their
Condition: they have need of something to keep them humble, (...), remember
that thou art a Man* Philip a King, is yet but Philip a Man; if Philip the King
be proud, yet let Philip the man be humble. Agathocles, once a Potter, becomes
a King; upon his cup-board he has his vessels of Silver, and vessels of Earth:
the vessels of Silver speak a King, the vessels of Earth speak a Potter; his
vessels of Silver mind him, that Agathocles, now a King, must be noble; his
vessels of Earth mind him, that Agathocles, once a Potter, must not be proud.
Doubtless, Kings and Princes need some Memento or other; the finest of Metal
stands most in need of some allay to temper it. God sees fit, that in the
Diadems of Princes there should be Thorns as well as Jewels; Thorns to prick
their veins, as well as Jewels to make them swell; God sees fit, that in the
Crowns of Kings there should be a weight, as well as a Luster; the head must
ache as well as shine. But now, if lesser afflictions will not Humble, greater
shall; if rods will not serve, Sc^rpions shall, when God will humble a King, if
the cross of his Crown will not do it, the l^sse of it shall; that Prince must
part with his kingdom, rather then keep his sin; and may not this be our case
this day? God has dealt severely with our Gracious Prince, and why so? we
trust, to make him Humble.

5 Banished Princes, if once restored, may likewise prove Great and Glorious
Princes: you know, if men build high, they lay their foundation low: it is thus
with God; Joseph must be made the Second man in Pharaoh's Kingdom, yea but
Joseph must first ly a Prisoner in the Gaol: Daniel must be made Ruler over all
the province of Babylon, yea but Daniel must be made a Captive first; Christ
Jesus ascends into the highest heavens, yea but first he must down into the
lowest hell: It Is said, He, that humbles himself, shall be exalted: we may
also say, he, whom God humbles, shall be exalted: Mat. 23. 12.
it is God's usual Method, whom he intends to advance, he first degrades: as
for sinners, that of the Poet is true -- tolluntur in altum

Vt lapsu graviore ruant. -- God mounts them upon high, that their fall may be
the greater; but as for Saints, God lays them low, that their rise may be the
higher. Well, and who can tell, but this may be God's design this day in
England? who knows, but God has kept our Gracious Sovereign low, on
purpose, to mount him higher? It Is true, it may be our Prince, till now, was
not fit for his Throne; yea and it may be, till now, his Throne was not fit for
him. Some persons, in their Minority, grow but little* yet afterward they
shoot up apace; our King, in his Minority, has been at a stand; but now, who
can tell, but God intends to add many cubits to his stature? Diam^nds, soundly
rubbed, shine the brighter: Spices, soundly bruised and pounded, smell the
sweeter: never does the Sun seem more glorious then after an Eclypse: and who
can tell, but God has kept England's Sun under clouds of obscurity, that at
length his beams may break out with greater luster? what Israel's David says
of himself, we trust, may be said of Englands David too: Great is his glory
in thy salvation! The greater his sufferings were once, the greater his Honor
now: the heavier his Ps. 21. ^.
cross, the brighter his Crown.

6. Banished Princes, when once restored, will likely prove beloved Princes:
Never did David see more of his peoples affection, then at his return from his
banishment: David was now the more in the heart of his Subjects, because he had
been out of their eye. That of the Roman Orator is usually true: carendo
magis, quam fruendo, bona intelligimus: we see and prize the goodness of
things rather in their want, then in their Enjoyment: never did that woman so
highly rejoice over her little piece of Silver, till it came to this, I have
sound the piece, which I had lost. Never did that Luke 15. 9
Father so much rejoice over his Prodigal son, as when it came to this: This
my son was lost, and is found things of any value, if once Luke 15. 24.
lost, are valued higher, upon a recovery; to want their possession is the best
way to raise their Price.

Well, and has not God raised the Price of Kings this day in England? I am
persuaded, our Gracious Prince is not more welcome to the house of the King,
then to the hearts of his Subjects; do not ours souls stand as wide open to
receive him as his own Gates possibly can do? God has given him the command,
not of our purses only, but of our affections too; tell me, who can, whether
England has shed more Tears of sorrow for the loss of the Father, or Tears
of joy for the restitution of the Son? Surely, never did any King of England
die more lamented then the father; never did any King of England come in more
desired then the Son; and why so? alas! England has sorely wanted her King!
Sometimes Anarchy has been our Grievance, and what wonder then, if Monarchy
prove our joy? we have sometimes groaned under the Tyranny of a Commonwealth,
and what wonder then, if we rejoice under the Government of a King? I am
persuaded, if God had not removed our King, we had prized and loved him less,
the Advantage is his as well as ours; what, by his Banishment, he has l^st in
his Revenu^s; by his return, he has gain^d in the affections of his people.
Now, the result of all is this; when God banisheth a King, he may intend him
mercy; and consequently, a Kings banishment can be no Argument that God
disowneth him.

2. God has remarkably owned our Gracious King in the dispensations of his
Providence: indeed, it is no easy matter to understand the voice of God
speaking by his Providence; yet so far as man can rationally become Gods
interpreter, this voice of his Providence seems to whisper this language,
Namely, that the King of England is a King in favor with God* see how God
seems to own him in two Particulars;

1. God seems remarkably to own our Gracious King in the preservation of his
lif^* Surely, when God is pleased wonderfully to interpose for the preservation
of a Person, it looks like an an Argument, that God has something more then
Ordinary to do for and with that Man. Now, that this is our Kings case, I
shall evidence by these two Particulars;

1. God did Wonderfully preserve the life of our King in the day of battle.
But, you will say, for a person to escape in a battle, is that a Won^er? I
answer, our Kings escape that day was more then Ordinary; for

1. The Army that pursue^ and sought the King, I mean, at Worcester, was much
more numerous and stronger then his own. His own Army, though consisting of
some thousands, yet compared with the Rebels army, looked but as an handful of
men. Poor Prince! he is encompassed round with men and malice, with strength
and hatred, and yet behold, he scapes!

2. Our Kings own army was quite broken to pieces, his men generally routed and
taken. Alas! what humane help had our King that day but his Army? under God,
his defense lay only in his men about him; but alas! his strength is quickly
gone, his Army scattered; the King left, as a lamb in the midst of W^lv^s, and
yet secure!

3. Multitudes of men were slain round about the King. It is said, many
hundreds of subjects fell that day; and yet the King, who ventured himself in
the battle as well as others, must surely escape: doubtless, God who is the
Lord of Hoasts, had given the sword a charge concerning his Sacred person; the
bullets had no Commission to touch him, who was the Lords anointed.

4. There were but a few persons of Quality escaped that day besides the King.
When others are slain, the King is alive: when others are taken the King
escapes; God preserves his Person from the violence of men, his life from the
stroke of Death; his Majesty becomes a Prisoner neither to a Gaol nor to a
grave.

5. It was the Kings person that was chiefly aimed at. Subjects slain and
taken were but a petty booty, the great prey desired, was the King; to
overthrow his whole Army, and to miss of his own Person, was not counted half
a victory. His great Enemy aimed at the Kingdom, and consequently, at the
King; but surely, the Kings Personal escape was a great Allay to the overthrow
of his Army; it was but a cold conquest to get the day, and miss their prey;
to win the field and lose the King, but however, as the Kings escape did lessen
the joy of his enemies, so it does magnify the mercy and providence of his
God; it is next to a wonder, that he, almost alone, should escape, who almost
alone was struck at; doubtless, had the King that day been a conqueror, God
had been less seen in his victory, then in his escape; less seen in the field
then in the wood; It was a more wonderful Providence for God to secure him in
a defeat, then to save him by a Conquest.

2. God did wonderfully preserve the life of our King after that fatal day of
battle. Indeed, through mercy, the King quickly escaped from Worcester; yea, but
he could not so quickly escape from England; he had escaped the sword of open
enemies, yea but he might easily have fell into the hand of treacherous friends;
one man might have done him that mischief, which an whole army could not do:
an army could not kill him, and yet a single Person might have betrayed him.
Poor prince! go whether he will, dangers attend him still; but now, here is the
Providence of God; he, that saved him upon the Mount, faved him in the valley
too; that God, who preserved him in the field, preserved him in the city too;
and surely, the Providence of God was seen as much in preserving the King in
the day of his retirement, as in the day of batt^ls

See why in four Particulars,

1. Consider how hard a thing it is for a King to be concealed. Alas! Kings and
Princes are Public Persons, more Generally known, especially in a time of
war, then other men. It Is an easy matter for the low shrub to lie hid, but
the tall Oak will be visible; you may pull off the l^aves of a Cedar, yet its
own height will discover what tree it is; so here, there is that Grandour, that
Majesty in a Prince, that is apt to betray him, even under a disguise. If a
Gentleman may be known by his face, much more may a Prince be known by his
Majesty.

2. Consider how strict a search was made after the King, when he had escaped.
It is true, the prey was now got out of sight, yea, but how many packs of
bloud-hounds were immediately sent to pursue? there is no safety for the King
in England, but alas, how shall he get beyond the Seas? it seems a thing
almost impossible, and why so? why surely, because there is a search in the
City, a search in the Country; not a porttown in England, but a trap is set to
catch him! tell me then how can that Prince escape, for whom it seems as
Impossible to be safe upon the land, as to get to Sea? surely, our resolve must
needs be this, it was digitus Dei, the finger of God was in it. But

3. Consider how dangerous it was for any m^n to entertain and conceal the
King. It is true, to entertain the King in his low estate was every man's duty,
yea but it was every man's danger too; to conceal the King was then an high
act of Loyalty, and yet not to betray him was proclaimed an high act of
Treason; a subject could not do his duty without the Imputation of sin; we
could not endeavor the Preservation of the King without the hazard of running
upon our own ruin; and yet notwithstanding all this, Persons there are of Gods
Provision, who to save the Kings life, resolve to v^nture their own, now, here
is the Providence of God, God saves both King and them; both are in danger, yet
both escape.

4. Consider what a reward was promised to him, who should Discover the King.
Surely, considerable sums of money are strong temptations, especially, to
persons, whose spirits are as base, as their estates are low; Judas betrayeth
the son of God for thirty pieces of Silver, and might not the blood of our
Gracious Sovereign have been sold for a thousand pounds? surely, men that
would not refuse to conceal him for fear, might yet have been tempted to
betray him for gain: by undoing the King, a man might have made himself: and
yet behold, the King is saved! and if so, wonderful is the Providence of God
in his preservation, the King shall not dye by the sword of enemies, nor
miscarry through the Treachery of friends. But

2. God has now wonderfully owned our King in his restitution. Surely, that
Argument, which some men lately pleaded against the King, may now, upon better
grounds, be pleaded for him. If the cr^sse Providence of God, which once
befell our King, might be looked upon as so many Frowns from heaven, why may
not the successful Providence of God, that now attend him, be looked upon as
smiles? it was lately said, surely, God disowneth the King, because he is
banished, and why then may it not now be said, surely, God owneth the King,
because he is restored? if former overthrowes were an Argument o^ wrath, why
then should not present success be an argument of love? and the rather,
because the present restitution of our King has in it much of wonder, whereas
his former defeats and banishment had none at all: surely, that the weaker army
(and such was our Kings) should be beaten by the stronger, that a Prince,
driven out of his strong h^lds by a more potent Army then his own, should also
be driven out of his Kingdom, has nothing of wonder in it; but now, that a
Prince thus driven away, should be thus restored, is next to a miracle; the
restitution of our King, as it is a great mercy in it self, so it is a mercy
wonderful in its Circumstances. Consider it in 3 particulars.

1. The restitution of our King was a mercy long desired, and often attempted,
but still all in vain. Surely, the longing desires, the frequent attempts of
the Nation to bring back the King, seem to argue, that his return is looked
upon as a choice mercy indeed, but the constant frustration as well of our
attempts, as our desires, seems to argue, that the return of the King was a
mercy not easily to be obtained.

2. The restitution of our King was a mercy at this time little expected: our
desires for our King were great, yet our hopes but little; the nation had more
reason to wish, then to expect a King. When we looked upon the greatness of
the mercy, we could not but beg it; when we looked upon the difficulty of the
mercy, we could not but despair it. Had some Prophet, a few months since,
foretold us, that by this day our King should be upon his Throne, Cassandra
like, he had spoke truth indeed, but such a truth, as few in England would have
believed. To have given Credit to such a Prediction, would have been judged a
rash and foolish Presumption, rather then a Rational Act of faith. For

3. The restitution of our King was a mercy at this time more opposed then
ever. You know, the King was formerly opposed by the sword, yea but now he must
be opposed by an Oath; men, that formerly had engaged but their life's, must n^w
engage their souls against him* it is not now enough for men to act with an
armed hand, but they must act with an armed Conscience too; that men may
forget, that it is Treason to exclude the King, it must be made a sin, a breach
of Oath, so much as to own him. Thus, thus did men fortify against the King
their Interest with str^ngth, their Treason with Religion.

But alas, what strange transactions are these! that men, who desired to look
like Saints, should act like Devils! that men, who once swear to defend the
King, should now abjure him! well, is this a time to expect our King? the door
seems not only locked, but barred, and walled up against him, and how then shall
our King come in? why now, behold, here is the wonderful Providence of God!
God opens a back door to let in our Sovereign; an inconsiderable number of men
from Scotland must defeat Englands victorious Army, and that without one Blow.
Sure, admirable is the mercy and wisdom of God in this Providence of his; to
prevent the invasion of a foreign Army, God brings home our King by his own
subjects; to prevent the effusion of blood amongst our selves, God brings home
our King in peace. May we not say, O Lord, how wonderful are thy works in
England this day? that God should bring in his anointed one, when they, that
opposed it, had least cause to f^ar it! when they that desired it, had least
cause to hope it! that God should bring him in without the suspicion of his
enemies, without the expectation of his friends! O surely, it is the Lord's own
doing, it is mavelous in our eyes! Sure I am, if the Guilt of high
offenders, if the interest of rich Purchasers, if the power of a puissant
army, if the fear, malice, and policy of a pret^nded Parliament could have kept
him out, England had never enjoyed him. But, God sees not as man sees; God
turns the army out of London, the Grandees themselves out of the Parliament
House, and so, not a man openly opposing, to his own Glory and our comfort,
brings home our King: we can say in the words of the Text, blessed be God, Our
Lord the King is come again in peace to his own house.

And here I should have put a Period to the tediousness of this Discourse, and
the trouble of the Reader; only I thought fit yet to add a few words 1. to his
Maiestie's friends, and 2. to his Majesty himself.

1. To you who are, or at least pretend to be His Majesty's best Friends, and
most Loyal Subjects, a word of advice in two Particulars,

1. Be advised, that you do not Idolize Instruments. God has now wrought a
signal deliverance for this Nation of England in the restitution of his King
and ours; God has given in this Mercy by miraculous ways and means; Surely,
the work is Gods, and if so, let the glory be his too. Not but that there is a
great respect and honor due to our renowned General, who is indeed a Glorious
Instrument, but still in the hand of God; God has highly honored him in that
work and we should be very unthankful, if, in his place, we do not honor him
for it; but still though we may look upon the instrument, yet we must look
above it; let us be thankful to instruments, but withal, let us be sober too;
let us give man what is man's; but God what is God's, pay the one, rob not the
other.

2. Be advised, that you do not abuse this signal Mercy of God to us and
ours; it is sad to consider, that many Gentlemen and others, who pretend to be
the most Loyal Subjects of England, do, upon that account, grow most profane.
Some men's Allegiance is little evidenced, but only in drinking his Majesty's
health; men, never valiant, but when half drunk; never more for the King, then
when they are not for themselves. Sure I am, such persons are like to do the
King more injury in the Tavern, then service in the field; instead of drinking
the Kings health, I fear, they have drunk one Kings death already; they
mingled the Kings Blood with their own wine. Certain it is, that many of our
late Gracious Kings Friends proved the worst of his Enemies; they were the men,
that shamed the Cause which they owned, and destroy-the King, pretending to
d^fend him.

Gentlemen, if you look upon our present Sovereign as a Prince likely to
encourage prophanes, I must tell you, that you do the King more wrong, then
they, which lately looked upon him, as the Common Enemy. It is not easy to
say, whether the King suffers more by the pretendly pious Rebel, or by the
profane pretended Loyalist; the sins of a profane Loyalist draw that sword,
which the hands of Rebels fight with; the rebel kills with a Threatening, the
profane Loyalist wounds with a Complement.

But how ever, if by the restitution of our King, men expect a restitution
either of prophanes, on the one hand; or superstition on the other: I do not
doubt, but as God has disappointed the sad fears of his Saints: so also our
King himself will disappoint the wicked hopes of sinners; God has given us a
King; a mercy, we hope, that will prevent the ruin of our Nation: yea but God
has given us, we trust, a pious King; a Mercy, that will prevent the ruin of
our Religion; Gentlemen; if you are for the King, be also for God; O remember
to Render unto C^sar, the things that are Cesars: but, O forget not that which
follows, Render to God the things that are God's: Be Loyal, but, be not
profane: Honor the King: but withal, Fear God: Why should man part asunder
what God himself has joined together? But,

2. To His Gracious Majesty himself, a word, 1. of Apology. 2. of Request.

1. A word of Apology for my self: Who am I that I should speak unto the King!
but, O my Dread Sov^raigne, I am one, though the meanest of those, that love
your Majesty's Sacred Person, and shall, to death, obey Your Sacred commands:
I have a soul, as well as a Sermon, to welcome You to Your Throne: nay I can
yet, with modesty, say a little more: I ever owned Your Majesty, as my King and
Father, even then, when your Majesty seemed far enough from recovering your
Kingdom. Indeed, I had not an hand able to fight for your Majesty, nor an
estate able to contribute: yet I had an heart to pray, a Tongue to Speak, and a
Pen to write; that, which was then my hazard, is now my comfort; and, I hope, a
sure Testimony of my Loyalty too; Sure^y, Respect to a Prince, when attended
with danger, needs no witness^ to prove it self to be right Allegiance.
Indeed, duty, when done with safety, may seem to lose it is Nature and Name:
but duty, when done in danger, seems to be done out of Duty indeed. Allegiance
to a King, when it is surely safe, and possibly may be ad^antag^ous too, may be
interpreted as a bare compliance only: but Allegiance, void of hope and full
of fear, looks like it self, and deserves it is own name. That we, who
ev^r continued your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, did not do our whole duty,
argues the weakness of our courage: yet, that we did do a little, argues the
sincerity of our Obedience: and if so, if our former Respects to your Majesty,
in your sufferings, must be acknowledged to flow from Conscience, I hope, our
present respect can not reasonably be judged to proceed from flattery. I dare
not think, that the Allegiance of Loyal Subjects shall lose it is name,
because our King has recovered His Crown. But, I should not at all have
mentioned what we have done, were it not my only argument to prevail for your
Majesty's Pardon for what I have now to say, and that in two words of Request.

1. A word of request for my self and my fellow subjects; Dread Sovereign, we
have all, more or less, had our miscarriages toward your Majesty; I am Bold,
in the name of all, to beg your Majesty's Pardon; to press your Majesty with
Arguments, were to distrust your forwardness to mercy; were not your mercy
easily obtained, I should entreat some better Orator to beg it. I cannot more
highly magnify the mercy of our King, then by saying, that it seems as great
as the miscarriages of his subjects; surely, England stands guilty of a
thousand miscarriages; and yet, I understand, there is with our King, as with
our God, But one sin unpardonable: and why that one? Surely, there is mercy
enough in our God, and in our King, to pardon even this sin also; but there is
not a Capacity in the sin it self to be pardoned; it might be pardoned, but
cannot.

Dread Sir,

As to the Death of your Royal Father, (now with God) I think, this discourse
does sufficiently evidence, that my soul abhorres the act, as abominable; and
the Grand Contrivers of it, as Notorious; I do not become their Advocate, nor
plead for them, who, I hope, have nothing but repentance and shame to plead for
themselves: But, Sir, there are some petty Traitors, some Vnder-Rebels, who,
as they now need, so, I hope, in time, by tears and obedience, may deserve
your Majesty's mercy. There are some persons amongst us, I dare not say, men of
more religion then L^yalty; but I am persuaded, men of more Conscience then
Knowledge; persons, whose blame lies more in their heads, then in their hearts,
persons indeed, who have acted against your Majesty, yet what they have done,
they have rather done by other men's heads, then their own hands. It is far
from me to excuse the sin, yet would I fain interpose for the Person; when I
consider, what these men have done, indeed they look like objects of justice,
but when I consider, what they have been and are, persons indeed drawn away,
but easily reducible to their Obedience, I would fain recommend them to your
Majesty, as objects of mercy. But why do I beat the air? Why do I plead for
that which seems already granted? I should rather thankfully acknowledge, then
humbly beg your Majesty's mercy, only thus, we beg a Pardon, an act of
Oblivion, that may be passed, not only in a Parliament House, but in your
Majesty's bosom.

2. A word of Request for God and his Church.

Dread Sovereign,

I have often pleaded with God for your Majesty's Interest; pardon me, if I now
plead with your Majesty for the Interest of God. I need not mind your Majesty
of that, which, I know, you can never forget; Only thus; God has now done
great and Glorious things for your Majesty: and surely, God does now expect,
that your Majesty, in the sense of his Mercy, your kingdoms necessity, and
your own duty, should do great things for God and his Church.

God has now, we trust, established your Majesty upon your Throne; And O may
your Majesty exalt Christ upon His: God has made your Majesty the Protector
of your own subjects, and O may your Majesty be the Protector of his Saints
and Servants! the Church of England has now too much need of a Prince, (and
therefore of your Majesty) that may not only be styled, but be, a Def^nder of
the Faith. God has now restored your Majesty to the Government of Our State;
And O may your Majesty restore and settle a righteous Government in Gods
Church! the want of a Government has bred Confusions in our State, and
distractions in our Church: for want of a fence, the boar and the fox have got
into the Vineyard of Christ: the Bore strikes at the Vine, the Fox eats up the
Grapes. For want of hirdles, the poor sheep of Christ have wandered, and fell
among devouring Wolves. Now, the Lord make your Majesty more and more sensible
of his Merci^s and his Church's Miseries! the Lord make you a Nursing Father to
Sion, but a Step-Father to Babylon! As your Majesty has been a King of
Prayers, so may you be a King of Praises too! The Lord increase the honor of
your Temporal Crown on Earth! but above all, the Good Lord prepare your
Majesty for the Weight of an immortal Crown in Heaven! In the mean time, O may
your Majesty be, the love of Saints, the fear of Sinners!

FINIS.

