Imprimatur,

Antho. Sanders, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri and Domino Domino Gilberto
Archi-Episc. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Julii 2. Ex Aedibus Lambethanis.
The Right Way to VICTORY: Discovered in a SERMON, Preached at Guild Hall
Chapel before the Lord Mayor of London, June 22. 1673.

By Francis Gregory D. D. Rector of Hambleton in the County of Bucks, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Sacred Majesty.

Printed at the Request of the Lord Mayor.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most
Sacred Majesty. MDCLXXIII.

TO The Right Honorable Sr. ROBERT HANSON, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON.
My Lord,
IT IS from the undeserved Mercy of our God, and the tender care of our
Sovereign and his anointed, that we now see, to the great satisfaction of our
Friends and the terror of our Enemies, the great City of England, lately
consumed with flames and entombed in its own Ashes; not only raised again, but
advanced to that high degree of Splendour and Magnificence, that now it much
exceeds its Self, and perhaps all other Cities of the World besides. It Is well
known, as well to our Adversaries as to our Allies, that London is, not only
the Metropolis of England, but its strength, treasury, and glory too. Such is
the number of its Inhabitants; such is the stateliness of its structures; such
is the wealth of its Merchants, Companies, and Chamber; that we may easily
conclude, that, One London is more concerned in the success of the present War,
than all our Cities besides.

The quarrel, betwixt us and our neighbors beyond the Sea, is of grand
importance; the Dispute is, Whether the New States of Holland shall brave it
over the Ancient Kings of England? whether Rebels shall Lord it over
Sovereigns? whether the Texel shall rule the Ocean? or, that which is all one,
whether Amsterdam shall give check to London, and Law to the World? My Lord,
the matter now referred to the decision of the sword, being of so great Moment;
every Englishman, every Magistrate, every Corporation, but especially that of
London, stands obliged to do, whatever may be done, for the just honor of our
Prince, the security of our Trade, and the establishment of our Church and
Nation.

I do not doubt, but your Lordships Mace, when occasion is offered, will be
employed to defend his Majesty's Crown; I do not question, but your Lordships
Sword, when matters so require, will be readily drawn to protect his Majesty's
Scepter; there is no good Christian, but is a good subject too; and there is no
good subject, but will sacrifice his Honor, his Power, his Estate, his Blood,
his Life, in the just vindication of his Sovereign. But yet, there is something
more than all this, that must be done; our holy God, that is so justly
displeased with our Nation, must be reconciled; Religion, that is so much
decayed, must be repaired; sin, that is grown so bold and daring, must be
suppressed; and amongst the many detestable vices of this age, there is none,
that ruins us more, than drunkenness and whoredom; the abuse of good wine,
and the use of bad women. And could we but once see a restraint laid on sin;
could we but once see every accursed thing removed from our Cities, our Camp,
and our Court, we might then hope, that our God would either bless us with
peace, or prosper us in war.

And this is the only design of this discourse; a design, which your Lordship
was pleased so far to approve, as to invite me to make it Public. And since,
through your Lordships encouragement, the Press has sent that abroad into the
world, which was designed for the Pulpit only, as I humbly beg your Lordships
kind Patronage, so do I earnestly crave the Readers serious consideration; with
this assurance, that if the matter of this seasonable discourse be duly
weighed, and the Rules delivered therein be conscientiously practiced, this
poor Paper-Pellet will conduce more toward the gaining of a glorious Victory,
than all our Musket and Canon shot. With my Prayer to Almighty God, that he
would so bless your Lordships Government, that the Inhabitants of your City may
be preserved from Sword and Pestilence, and its sumptuous Buildings from
further Flames, I am

Your Lordships Friend and Servant, Francis Gregory.

The Right way to VICTORY.
DEUTERONOMY. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.
THat a constant and uniform obedience is due to the great God of heaven, at
all times and in all conditions whatsoever, it is beyond dispute; and that man
is universally obliged at all seasons, and in all cases imaginable, to abstain
from sin, there is none can doubt, except it be some stupid soul, that is
insensible what Hell does mean, or Heaven is worth. But although such an
uninterrupted course of obedience be indeed a thing, which God does ever
require, and man must always yield, yet there are such and such conjunctions and
nicks of time, wherein we are engaged, not only by Gods Perpetual and general
laws, but by his particular Providence and our own private concerns, to
practice Holiness, and cease from sin.

In serene and Halcyon days, when God smiles upon our Nation, methinks were
there not command to require it, yet our own ingenuity, gratitude, and the
great Gentleness of Christianity should constrain us, when we abound with
mercies, to love and serve that good God, which gives them. And when our
Nation groans under the just displeasure of Heaven, when the great God thunders
just over our heads in black and dreadful clouds, had we no Engagement besides,
yet methinks our present fears and apprehensions of imminent dangers should
oblige us, in the midst of judgments, to avoid and detest those sins which
bring them.

That Is our case and our great Concern this day; there is a war commenced, and
the sword is drawn: and that this war may prove successful; that this sword may
enter where it should; that our armies and navies may prove victorious; what
must be done, that great Moses, who had the conduct of Gods own armies, and was
a warrior as well as a Prophet, does thus inform us -- when the Host goes
forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing.

The words are familiar and easy, and so need no exposition: there are two
things considerable in them;

1. Gods severe and strict Command -- Keep thee from every wicked thing --
that's our duty -- (...) says the Hebrew -- -(...) -- -says the LXX -- Caveto
-- says the -- Arabic -- take heed -- beware, and that (...) of every wicked
thing.

2. Man's Particular season, wherein this great Command must, in an especial
manner, be obeyed; and when is that -- when the Host goes forth against thine
enemies: then, keep thee from every wicked thing; if ever ye will do it, do it
then.

The substance of the text, and the sum of our discourse will lie in this short
conclusion; namely, That a Nation, engaged in War, is, upon that very account,
the more obliged to abstain from every sin, but much more from foul ones. Most
certain it is, there is nothing to be named in all the world, that does render
a people so unfit for War, as sin; see why in seven particulars.

1. Sin does much impoverish that Nation, where it reigns: Doubtless, the
poorer a Nation is, it is the more unfit to prepare for War; a good bank, a rich
treasure is well styled (...), the nerves of War. It Is an old rule '(...),
fight with silver as well as steel; there must be supplies of money as well as
men.

But as for sin and vice, like a Thief, it picks the subjects purse, and who
shall fill the Kings Exchequer then? That any person or Nation should be highly
debauched, and yet grow rich, it is seldom seen: See what Moses tells such a
sinner, Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store; Certainly, where the moth
Deuteronomy. 28. 17.
frets, the garment must decay; If there be a worm at the root, the Prophets
gourd must wither: So here; if the curse of God attend the sinners estate, it is
not strange, that it melt away.

But the truth is, there needs no curse to make the sinner poor; he does it
fast enough himself. So the adulterer -- by means of a whorish woman is a man
Pro. 6. 2^.
brought to a morsel of bread. Thus drunkards and gluttons too, the glutton and
the drunkard shall come Pro. 23. 21.
to poverty; but what wonder's that? -- Vna comedunt Patrimonia mensa -- says
Juvenal, they devour an estate at a meal; They empty their bags into bottles,
their Coffers into Hogsheads; they exchange estates with the Vintner, they buy
his wine, and he their land. Thus do men, like Cleopatra, drink down Pearls and
Jewels; they swallow down their Camels; nay, they throw down Lordships and
Mannours, and so become drunkards first, and beggars next.

2. Sin does much destrow the strength of that Nation wherein it reigns; it
impairs the health, and takes away the lives of men. Thus St. Paul, For this
cause many are sick and weak, and many also sleep. 1 Cor. 11. 30.


Certainly, the more populous and strong a Nation is,, the more fit it is to
fight, Pugnare Thracum est, says Horace; the Thracians, that sturdy Nation,
are fit for War. It Is good Counsel -- Be strong for 2 Cor. 2. 5. 8.
battle -- where numbers are great, where soldiers are vigorous, the victory,
in ordinary Providence, seems so much the surer. God indeed can fight and
conquer with the weakest Armies; God could fight and beat Proud Pharaoh with
squadrons of lice, but man must fight with Lions; God could conquer with
soldiers too weak for Domitians bodkin, even pitiful flies; yea, but the
Romans could not do it without their Eagles. Methinks, that General should
despair of conquest, that should lead an Army of such impotent and crazy
Persons, that were more sit for a crutch, than a sword, for a couch, than a
field.

And this is that sorry plight, into which Debauchery brings a Nation; it is but
sad to consider, what numbers of persons are this day under the Physician and
Chyrurgion, that might have been under the General; Men, that have made
themselves fit only for an Hospital, that might have been fit for a Navy. Tell
me, Sirs, are the wounds of Venus become more Honorable than those of Mars? is
it more gentile to linger or die of the Frenchmans disease, than run the hazard
of the Dutchman's sword; is it indeed more noble, by debauchery and vice
Cowardly, to retire into our own graves, than by virtue and Courage to force
our enemies into theirs?

Sure I am, if we would beat our open adversaries, how strong soever, we must
first subdue our Private lusts, which make us weak. Thus Moses, Keep my Deuteronomy.
11. 8.
Commandments, that ye may be strong; our strength lies in our Religion,
Chastity, and Sobriety. I dare affirm, to spare the Dutchmans Brandee is the
surest Course to spill his blood; but if not, if we beat them, at their sin, we
shall scarce beat them at their weapon too; if we beat them at the wine, we
shall find it the harder to beat them on the water too. It Is an everlasting
truth, where vice and debauchery reigns, it lays such vast multitudes in
their Beds, and such numbers in their graves, that the poor Nation, as with the
loss of so many limbs, so much blood and spirits grows faint and weak, and so
becomes less fit for War.

3. Sin does much abate and sink the courage of that Nation, where it reigns.
There is no Accomplishment, that does more adorn a soldier, and promise
victory, than an undaunted courage, Prowess, and Gallantry of soul. This was
the main thing required by God himself in the General of his own Army -- Only
be thou strong and very courageous; but who is Josh. 1. 7.
this man of metal? Solomon tells us -- The righteous Pro. 28. 1.
is bold as a Lion -- but what is the sinner then? the same verse informs us --
the wicked fly, when no man pursues -- stout soldiers indeed! Persons
exceeding fit for War! but who can blame them? is it strange, that that person
should be a coward, who all along has been a sinner! is it a wonder, that any
considering Person dares not fight, who knows himself in a condition unfit to
die? alas! Conscience tells him, if he be slain this moment, he is like to be
damned the next; if the sword send him into his grave, it is like to send him
into Hell too --.

Certain it is, there is none so fit to war with man, as he, that is at peace
with God. I read, that when Pope Vrbane the second sent an Army to the Holy
land, that he might raise their spirits by excluding all fear of death and
Hell, he promised every man of them a full Pardon of all their sins, the guilt
whereof might otherwise have dogged them, and justly made them cowards. Such a
Politician was the crafty Pope; and so is the Turk too, who encourages his
soldiers to the most dangerous attempts, not so much with present pay, as with
certain promises of future happiness in another world.

And doubtless, there is nothing in all the world, that can raise a man's courage
like to this; pardon of sin, assurance of glory, removes all jealousies and
quickens the spirit; innocence of life, freedom from guilt, like silver and
polished armor it adorns and secures too. Methinks, that Person who has
foiled the Devil, need fear no man: he that is sure of Heaven, need fear no
danger, that earth can threaten; if the enemy kill him, he does but so much the
sooner crown him; if he die a soldier, he shall the quicker live a Saint.

But alas! such encouragements as these, which may justly prevent all fears
and create a valor, the sinner wants; and if so, there is a necessity that he
remain a coward, except perhaps he prove a desperate Atheist; except perhaps he
can arrive to that high pitch of modern Gallantry, that he dares, in the
service of his Country, as well as in the quarrels of a Mistress, not only die,
but be damned too. Sure we are, the guilt of sin, the fear of death, the dread
of Hell, cannot choose, in all considering Persons, but abate and cool that
courage, which is required to make a Nation fit for War.

4. Sin does sadly deseat all the Policy and wisest Counsels of that Nation,
where it reigns.

Tacitus, that great Statesman, tells us Inconsulti Impetus languescunt --
force without counsel comes to nothing. Another thus, Plura Consiliis quam
telis geruntur. There Is more done by a Politic head, than an armed hand. That
provision, mentioned, by the Prophet, is but necessary -- I have counsel Isa.
36. ^.
and strength for War -- counsel to advise, strength to execute; what more can
be desired? What less can serve?

That Is our case; we have the Buff coat and the Gown; the sword-man and the
statesman; an Army abroad and Councils at home, the great Council of the the
Nation, the Privy Council of the King, the common Council of the City, yea and
Councils of War too. But were every member of these Councils another Solon,
another Achitophel, another Solomon, an Oracle, yet what would all their
contrivances come too, if the alwise-God be provoked by sin to blast them? It Is
that severe judgment, which God has threatened over and and over against a
wicked Nation -- I will destroy the Counsel thereof -- and so again -- Isa. 19.
3.
I will make void the Counsel of Judah -- and what is the issue? the very next
words tell us -- I will cause Jer. 19. 7.
them to fall before their enemy -- I remember what Horace has long since told
us -- Quos vult perdere Jupiter, dementat prius -- if God infatuate, it is a sad
sign, he intends to ruin; when once the brains be out, the life quickly
follows.

5. Sin does strangely obstruct and frustrate the Prayers of that Nation, where
it reigns.

So useful is prayer in a time of War, that even Julian the Apostate, and other
heathens, would never fight till they had first invoked their Gods. It Is
observed of Judas Macchabaeus, that, till he had prayed, he never fought any
battle but one, and in that one he was slain. What blessed effects prayer has
produced in War, Historians do inform us. Eusebius tells us, that in Aurelius
his Army there was one legion styled by the Emperor himself -- (...), the
Thundering legion -- a Legion of Christans, who in a great want of water,
obtained by their Prayer a sudden shower of rain to refresh the Roman army, and
a storm of Thunder to confound their enemies.

The Scriptures tell us -- when Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed -- the
hand of Moses had no Exodus 17. 11.
weapon, yet it conquered. I remember that expression of a learned man -- plus
ad victoriam valent piorum preces, quam Militum arma -- A Religious person, who
strikes no blow, who lays no siege, except it be to Heaven, may gain the
Conquest in his Closet; and although the Christian soldier must sometimes use
his hands; yet best he fights, and does most good upon his knees.

Doubtless, to fast and pray, in a time of War, does well; but if we pray now,
and blaspheme anon; if we fast one day, and surfeit the next; if we seem
religious in the Church, and then prove wanton in the Chamber? what then? When
ye make many prayers, I will not hear; no, our sweetest Incense will be
unsavory; and the very best of our breath will but stink with God. Isa. 1. 15.


I find, that when vice grows bold and daring; when a Nation grows highly
wicked, God does sometimes forbid his servants to interpose on their behalf --
Pray not thou for this people -- It Is a dreadful command, but there is reason
for it; the Incorrigible sinner is a declared enemy to God; and if so, is it
fit to Jer. 7. 16.
pray, that God should prosper his designs? Our foul offenders are known to be
Traitors against the Majesty of Heaven; and if so, is it handsome to pray, that
God should crown and bless them? no, it is our great concern this day to lament
with tears, and cast off with detestation, our grievous crimes, and reform our
debauched lives; for if not, it is ten to one but our prayers for success and
Victory may be thought too bold, and prove too vain.

6. Sin does infallibly rob that Nation, where it reigns, of its strongest
allies and best assistants.

That great allies and powerful assistants are of singular use in War,
experience shows us; for, why else do all nations use them? And that their
are no allies like God and his Angels, there is none, but an Atheist, doubts;
but here is the misery, a vicious nation can neither gain nor keep them.

I remember what God himself told Joshua, his own commander in chief -- as I
was with Moses, so will I be Josh. 1. ^.
with thee -- what an encouraging Promise is here; but is it absolute, or
conditional? does God oblige himself to be with Joshua's Army, however they
live, and whatever they do? no; see how quickly the language of God is altered
-- I will not be with you any more -- no? what is the matter? -- I will not be
with you any more, Josh. 7. 12.
except ye destroy the accursed thing -- That Is our business; here is our
interest; if there be such and such accursed things amongst us, they must be
removed, they must be quite destroyed; or else we cannot reasonably expect,
that God should help us.

It Is true, we have already such and such allies, and great ones too; and that
we have such and assistances; such and such Men of War besides our own, we must
bless our God and thank our King. But yet notwithstanding, how numerous soever
our Auiliaries and Navies are, there is one Man of War yet more, that must be
engaged too; and who that is Moses tells us -- The Lord is a Man of War --
let us but secure to Exodus 15. 3.
our selves this Man of War, and we secure the conquest too.

Sure we are, our other allies, how strong soever, are nothing to this; what is
an earthly Monarch to the great God of Heaven? What Is the Commander of some few
Squadrons to the great Lord of Hosts? What Is a Prince, that can lend us but an
handful of men, to that God, who can lend us thousands of mighty Angels? What Is
a Neighbor, that can lend us Ships and Canons, to that God who can lend us
Thunder and Lightning, Storms and Tempests? if once this God become one of our
Auxilliaries, well may the Motto of Venice become the Motto of England too --
Nec flatu, nec fluctu Moveor -- neither winds nor waves can shake us; There Is
nothing can wrong us, but our selves; nothing can beat us, but our vice;
nothing can fire our Ships, but our burning lust; nothing can rob us of our
Gods assistance, but that, which robs us of his Image too, and that is our sin.
Yet once more,

7. Sin, debauchery, and vice, will infallibly make the great God, and with him
his holy Angels, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, even the whole creation, to
become enemies to that unhappy Nation, where it reigns.

Thus the Prophet -- behold, I am against you, says Isa. 13. 8.
the Lord -- O dreadful word! if God be against us, who can be for us? The Lord
was an enemy -- who Lam. 2. 5.
then can or dares be a friend? If once it come to this: that God proves an
enemy, the whole universe will be so too. Thus Claudian-Militat ether and
conjurati veniunt in classica venti -- and thus a better author too -- the
stars Judge. 5. 20.
in their courses fought against Sisera. For, if we believe, that God certainly
is, what Luther terms him, Rector mundi -- the Governor of the World -- we must
believe, that all creatures whatsoever are, as Pineda words it -- sub Dei
vexillo -- under Gods own banner, and do us good or harm, according as he
commands them.

I will not say, what some are apt to fear, that God is become an enemy to
England; no, although vice does strangely reign, yet God has still amongst us
a considerable number of Religious and Pious servants, whom he dearly loves,
and for whose sake the Church and Kingdom stands. But as to the Nation in
general, God has given us very shrewd signs to suspect, that he does not like
our doings. When we consider the crimes, the many, the brutish, the devilish
crimes, that are committed without control and that not by the rascality of
ill bred people, but the better sort of men, whose actions do become examples
and rules to inferior persons; we must acknowledge, that our holy God might
justly cast us off for ever. And when we consider the sore, the many, the
tremendious Judgments, judgments almost beyond example, that we have felt,
and yet grow worse and worse, we have cause enough to be jealous, that God is
at least still displeased and angry with us. The late mercies, which this
Nation has received, were beyond, not our deserts alone, but our very
expectations too; tell me; was it not beyond our hopes, that, in spite of all
opposers, God should, in a miraculous manner, restore the King to his Throne,
the Bishop to his Chair, the Nobleman to his Honor, the Parliament to its
Privileges, and every English man to his right, without one blow, without one
drop of blood?

But consider, what grateful acknowledgements has this Nation made to God for
this; and the consequences of this, many other signal mercies? Alas! Such an
unkind return have we made to Heaven, that we may now say -- Quantum mutatus: O
how is Gods countenance changed! how strangely is it altered; his gracious
smiles are now turned into such dreadful frowns, as if he meant to bury us in
the wrinkles of his brow; we, that, through his favor, were lately surprised
with mercies beyond our hopes, have now, through his wrath and our own follies,
been surprised with Judgments, even beyond our fears.

For, tell me, what man could have imagined, that our late Plague, begun in one
single family, should in a few weeks time, so spread it self, as to make so
vast a City to become but one greater Pesthouse? that there should be such a
strange Mortality, so many Deaths and Burials in every corner, that every
Church might have changed it is old name, and every Parish been justly styled a
St. Sepulchers.

Again, what man could have dreamed, that -- casus in urbe frequens -- an
ordinary fire, begun in one little corner, should in four days time, in
dispight of all that man could do, have reached and consumed so many thousand
buildings, the houses of men, and the Temples of God too. But to come nearer
the business of the Text:

What man could have thought, that our near neighbors beyond the Sea, who were
once the Poor destressed States, should ever have grown to that height, either
of impudence to affront, or strength to withstand the King of England? who
would have thought, that our old Petitioners should have ever become our new
Controllers? that they, who were not able to secure to themselves a small spot
of Land, should now claim the vast dominion of the Seas, and the main trade of
the world? Sure I am, as it was the kindness or perhaps the imprudence of
England, that once made them great, so it is the sin of England, that now makes
them troublesome. When they were but in the egg, it was our kind warmth that
hatched them; and although they are now grown up to be vipers, yet if our own
sins created it not, they will never find a sting to wound us.

If it be true, as some affirm, that our enemies wickedness is full as great as
our own, yet that consideration will not much relieve us; Their Vices are not
our Virtues; nor will their Poison prove our Cordial. What if God should use
the Dutchman as he does the Turk, who is -- flagellum Dei -- the scourge of
God; that Rod, which the dews of Heaven keep fresh and green and flourishing,
that it may last the longer, and lash the sorer too? What if God make England
and Holland, being Nations which mercies cannot win, nor judgments scare, so to
weaken one another, that a third shall overrun them both? This is that, which
we have some cause to fear, and many obligations to prevent; and surely, the
way, the only ready way to do it, is, to obey this great command in my Text --
When thine Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every
wicked thing -- Methinks, in a time of War, men, and men deeply concerned in
the success too, should not so highly sin, and so provoke the great Lord of
Hosts; Methinks, if we consider, that War is a solemn and serious thing, we
should forbear even our innocent sports, much more our Hellish Crimes. It Is not
for prudent Christians to act like the silly fish, that are observed to play
most and grow even wanton, when the storm is rising.

I am confident, it would even break our Hearts, and well it might, to see our
Armies miscarry; to see our Ships burned with fire, or drowned in water; to see
a few broken Vessels return laden with nothing else but poor wounded men,
clothed with shame and rolled in blood; if such a spectacle would not please
you, prevent it by your prayers, your tears, your virtuous lives, which are
things, more likely then guns and swords, to gain the Conquest.

I need not mind you, that the matters in dispute and danger are of huge
concern! we do not sight for toys and trifles! no; the things contended for
are the King and the Subject, the State and the Church; the Crown and the
Mitre; Whatever it is that three kingdoms are worth, does now lie at stake.
Tell me then, shall we be such desperate fools, as to hazard all this for such
or such a beloved sin? Shall we be such brutes, as to lose all this, and our
souls to boot, for such or such a cursed lust? O remember what the Great God
commands us, and that in order to success and Victory -- Keep thy self from
every wicked thing -- Certainly, it is a wicked thing to be drunk; it is a wicked
thing to blaspheme the name of God; it is a wicked thing to be unclean and
wanton; it is a wicked thing to scoff at Religion, and to droll at any man or
any thing, that is Holy; all this, and whatever else is wicked, we must resolve
either to quit, or else to hazard all.

If the Pope think it his concern to send into the field, as the Roman
Pontifical words it -- Vexillum sanctificatum, Ensem benedictum -- an hallowed
banner, a consecrated sword -- Methinks we should think our selves obliged to
provide against our enemies, though not superstitious weapons; yet not Profane
warriors neither; for, it is not the strong, but the clean hand, that best
wields the sword; nor is it the stout, but the Pure Heart, that is most like to
get the victory. It Is Religion, that engages Heaven and defends earth; It Is
this, that establishes Thrones and Scepters; it is this, that does advance the
Noblemans honor, and makes his star shine so much the brighter; it is this,
that makes a Nation beloved of God, and feared of men (...). It Is Religion and
Virtue, that must beat our enemies and get us Triumphs; it is this, and nothing
but this, that will give us, through the assistance and mercy of our God, a
victorious and happy kingdom here on earth, and an eternal one in Heaven.

(...).

