AGAP, OR THE Feast of Love, A SERMON AT THE OXFORDSHIRE FEAST, Kept on
Thursday Nov. 25. 1675. at Drapers-Hall in LONDON. PREACHED At St Michael's
Church in Cornhill.

By FRANCIS GREGORY, D. D. Rector of Hambleton in the County of Bucks. and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His SACRED MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His Sacred
Majesty, 1675.

Imprimatur,

Antonius Saunders.
Ex Aedibus Lambeth, December. 16, 1675.
To my Dear Countrymen, and Worthy Citizens of LONDON; Richard Wise. Peter
Nash. Richard Bourne. John Sea. Thomas Whiteing. Charles Pinfold. Robert Biggs.
George Clisby. Abraham Story. William Whitehill. Robert Applegate. William
Goodwin. Benjamin Barnes.
Stewards of the Oxfordshire Feast.
Gentlemen,
HAving so far condescended to Your first desires, as to Compose and Preach
this Sermon, I thought fit to Gratify your second Request in Printing it too.
The Penning of this Discourse (such as it is) was the work of several days; the
Preaching of this Sermon cost me a Journey of several miles, but the Printing
thereof will stand me in no more than an easy compliance with Your desires:
Wherefore since you are pleased to esteem your selves somewhat gratified by my
readiness to do the harder part of this service, I thought it imprudence to
disoblige any Person amongst You, by refusing to do that other part, which will
be done with so much facility.

But the truth is, I have another design, and that a Charitable one too, in the
Publication of this Discourse: I need not tell you, that many of our
Countrymen, who are Persons of fair Estates, and in a Capacity of being more
bountiful to the Poor, than most of us who met together, were detained from our
Feast by the importunity of their other Affairs. The absence of such Persons,
as it rendered our Meeting the less conspicuous, so did it make our Collection
the less Magnificent.

Peradventure the putting of this Discourse into these Men's hands, may at once
open their hearts and purses too; and excite their Charity to such a degree,
that they may Contribute toward our Poor somewhat more in private, than they
would have done in public. For although Public Acts of Charity, especially if
considerable and great, do become exemplary; yet through that hypocrisy, which
lies deep in the heart of Man, they are attended with this great
inconvenience, that they alone are exposed to the danger of ostentation, which
every good Man fears, lest it corrupt the beauty, and alter the nature of his
Charity, and render it a Sacrifice rather to himself than to his Maker.

However, if you please to convey one of these Discourses into the hands of
such Gentlemen, who had an Invitation to our Feast, and would have come but
could not: the very Title Page at first view will mind them of their Country
and Duty too. And probably they will not think their Charity so far excused by
their absence from our Feast, as to contribute nothing to the Poor Man's Basin,
nor pay some few mites at least for the laying of their Trenchers.

And although such a presenting of small Books to Persons of Quality, has ever
been esteemed a kind of begging; yet it is the most Gentile and Ingenuous way of
doing so, and if it be but tolerable in any other case, it is highly commendable
in this. Remember who they are for whom we beg; the Poor Orphan, who perhaps,
if we do it not for him now, must beg for himself for ever. And if there be any
imputation and dishonor in this begging of Ours, being only designed to
prevent that of other persons, and perhaps whole Families too, let it all be
Charged, and Rest upon

Your Friend and Servant (...), FRANCIS GREGORY.

JUDE 12. These are spots in your Feasts of Charity --
THE Persons Censured in the Text were the Gnostics; those cursed Disciples,
and Viperous Brood of that Early and Infamous Heretic Carpocrates; A Man,
says Tertullian, Tertul. de anima, c. 32.
that was, pariter Magus, pariter Fornicarius, both a Conjurer and a
Fornicator; he had not so much brains as to set off and credit his Heresy with
so much as a disguise and pretense of Sanctimony. Eusebius styles him, (...)
Eus. Hist. 1.
(...), the Father of the Gnostics; and Irenaeus Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 24.
tells us, that his Children were very like him. So Heterodox and Erroneous in
their Opinions, so Vicious and Vile in their Practices, that their Converse was
a great disparagement to every Christian, that was Regular in his Life, and
sound in his Faith.

Such Monsters of Men they were, that even the Spirit of God Himself, though he
be like a Dove that has no Gall, does notwithstanding fix upon them several
brands of dishonor: By the guidance of this Blessed Spirit, St. Peter calls
them (...), blemishes; and St. Jude in 2 Pet. 2. 13.
the Text (...), spots; what is that? Christianismi dedecora, says Grotius, the
common Reproaches Grot. in 2 Pet. 2 13.
of the Christian Faith, which had now gained much Credit in the World. And as
their Society was such a disparagement to the Servants of Christ at all times
and in all places; so more especially in their Public Meetings and Solemn
Assemblies; and particularly, (...), in their Feasts of Charity, where they fed
like Beasts, and talked like Pagans.

Concerning which Feasts of Charity, Three things may be considered, 1. Their
Antiquity. 2. The circumstances of their Celebration. 3. Their Design and End.

1. Consider we the Antiquity of these Feasts, and that must needs be great:
Blastaris styles them (...), an old Usage; and Zonaras tells Blast. Synt. p. 18.
us, (...), the Christians kept up these Feasts from an Ancient Custom: They
Council. Gang. Aug. adv. Faust. l. 20. c. 20.
are mentioned by St. Austine, In Agapibus nostris, etc. They are mentioned by
St. Chrysostom, (...), etc. They spread a Common Table, etc. So that Father,
and long Chry. 1 Cor. 11. Hom. 27. p. 417.
before him Tertullian, Coena nostra vocatur (...), Our Supper is called a
Feast of Love. But to prove the great Antiquity of these Christian Feasts, we
need not Humane Testimonies, Tert. Apol. c. 39.
because we have Divine Ones: We find them mentioned by St. Paul, who reproves
their abuse in that Early Church of Corinth; but, had we no more, the Text is a
sufficient proof that these Christian Feasts were Celebrated even in our
Apostles time, and so may justly pretend to great Antiquity.

2. Consider we the Circumstances of their Celebration; and they are Three, 1.
the Time when, 2. the Place where, 3. the Manner how.

1. Consider we the Time of their Celebration -- And as to this, that Account,
which Pliny Plin lib. 10. Epist. 97
gave the Emperor Trajan, does afford us some general Information, Soliti sunt
stato die convenire, etc. The Christians are wont to Meet and Feast on a
certain set and appointed day; St. Chrysostom confirms it, (...), etc. They
spread their Table upon Solemn Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 11. Hom. 27. p. 417.
and wonted days; such days, in which the Eucharist was Celebrated; so
Grotius, Ea Grot. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
Convivia claudi solebant sacramento Dominicae Passionis, etc. These Feasts of
Love were wont to conclude and end with another more Sacred Feast, that of the
Sacrament.

Thus probably might it be at first; but because several disorders did
afterward happen, which St. Paul complains of in the Church of Corinth; such
disorders, as did render the guilty persons unfit for the Holy Communion; it
was Decreed in process of Time, that the Communion should be received fasting,
and these Feasts of Charity adjourned till the Sacrament was over: So St.
Chrysostom tell us, (...) Chrysostom. 1. Cor. 11. Hom. 27. p. 417.
(...), all the Congregation, which received the Sacrament, did afterward go
and eat together.

And so constant was this Custom for several Ages, that Justellus makes this
Feast of Charity Justel in Cod. Can. Eccl. v. p. 80.
an Appendix, or part of the Eucharist; for so he tells us, Caenae Dominicae
tres olim erant Parts; The Lords Supper did of old consist of three parts;

1. (...), the breaking of bread; 2. (...), the Cup of blessing: And then 3.
(...), the Feast of Charity.
2. Consider we the place of their Celebration: I remember that Pliny, in his
forenamed Plin. l. 10. Ep. 97.
Account to the Roman Emperor, tells him thus, Quibus peractis, morem sibi
discedendi fuisse, rurfusque coeundi ad capiendum Cibum; When the whole service
of God was over, the Christians were wont to part asunder, and within a short
space they met together again to eat; but in what place they met, he does not
there inform us.

But that these Feasts of Charity were of Old Celebrated in the Church, may
well be guessed from that expression of St. Paul, What, have 1. Cor. 11. 22.
ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God? There were
some amongst them so disorderly at this Feast, that although it were called a
Feast of Charity, yet since it was no better managed, he sharply reproves them
for keeping it in the House of God.

And that they kept it there indeed, we have not only a probable conjecture
from this Text, but the express Testimony of Creditable Authors; Epulas in
Ecclefia faciebant, says St. Hierom, they made a Banquet in the Church:
Hieron. 1 Cor. 11.
So much is intimated by the Canons of several Councils, which afterward
forbad this Practice; so did the Council of Laodicea, (...) Conc. Laod. Can. 28.
(...), etc. And so the sixth General Council, Conc. Trid. Can. 74.
(...), etc. It Is not fit, nor shall it hereafter be lawful to Celebrate these
Feasts of Charity in the House of God, as if that were a place but Common.
Certainly these Canons, which do expressly forbid this Feasting in the Church,
do necessarily suppose it; because these Laws were established, not to prevent
an inconvenience, that hereafter might be, but to remove a profanation, which
already was.

3. Consider we the Manner of their Celebration; and that comprehends in it
these Three Particulars:

1. The nature and kind of their Provision; and that was but ordinary, not
delicate in its Quality, nor overmuch in its Quantity.

So have some observed from that of the Evangelist, They continuing daily in
the Temple, and breaking Bread; which expression some Acts 2. 46.
understand of the Sacrament, but others of this Feast of Charity, which is
here styled, a breaking of bread; to intimate, as Oecumenius words Oecum. in
loc.
it, (...), or, as St. Chrysostom phraseth it, (...), the frugality Chrysostom. in.
loc.
of their meal, and the means of their Provision.

But whether this Text does prove it such or not, the Testimony of several
Authors does; Tertullian calls these Feasts, Coenulas nostras, our mean or
little Suppers; so mean, that he Tert. Apol. c. 39.
styles them again, frugalitatis exempla, examples of frugality. Cappellus
calls them, Coenas Cappel. in 1 Cor. 11.
frugales and parcissimas; Thrifty and slender Suppers; and Calvin testifies
for them thus, Calv. 1 Cor. 11.
Erat illic summa frugalitas and moderatio; there was used the greatest
frugality and moderation that could be. And what were the usual Messes at these
Feasts? Balsamon tells us, (...) Bals. Conc. Gang. c. 11.
(...), a little bread and fruits; To which St. Austin adds yet another Dish,
Pauperibus etiam Aug. cont. Faustum l. 20. c. 20.
carnes erogantur; there was some flesh also provided for the Poor.

2. Their Temperance and Sobriety in the use of Meats and Drinks; and perhaps
it might be their Piety and Prudence to provide for themselves such fare, as
was but mean and course, with this very design, That no Man amongst them might
have so much as a temptation to the least excess. But whatever their Provision
was, it is sure, there was but here and there an untoward person, that did abuse
it; it is not probable, that any Man in his Wits, that was just now preparing
for, or newly returned from the Holy Sacrament would so quickly forget himself
and his Vows, as that he should immediately degenerate from a serious
Christian into a luxurious and wanton Epicure. No, St. Chrysostom and
Oecumenius Chrysostom. and Oecum. in Act. 2. 46, 47.
give us this Testimony of them, (...), They eat, but did not Gluttonize:
Editur quantum esurientes capiunt; bibitur quantum pudicis utile, says
Tertullian; Tert. Apol. c. 39.
They eat no more than hunger required; and they drunk no more than Chastity
would well permit. But,

3. The nature of their Discourse and Table-talk; and what that was Tertullian
tells us, Tertul. ib.
Ita fabulantur, ut qui sciant Dominum audire, etc. Their language was such, as
became those Persons, who believed that God did hear them; as their teeth were
sparing, so were their tongues chaste too: Nihil vilitatis, nihil immodestiae,
Not an immodest word, not one wanton syllable; no drolling at Sacred Things, or
Holy Persons: No, that is the dirty language of this Age, wherein some beastly
persons, who invite us to their Tables, do entertain their Guests with such
unsavory Discourse, as does not only grate and foul the ear, but even turn
the stomach too.

3. Consider we the Design and End of their Celebration; and what that was, we
may see distinctly in these Three Particulars:

1. The First and Principal design of these Feasts in the Text, was the Glory
of God, that bountiful God, who furnished their Table for them.

It Is St. Paul's Command, Whether ye eat or 1 Cor. 10. 51.
drink, do all to the Glory of God: the Primitive Christians did so; thus the
Evangelist, Acts 2. 46, 47.
They continuing in the Temple, breaking bread, and praising God, etc. Thus it
continued in Tertullian's time, who tells us, Non prius discumbitur, Tert.
Apol. c. 39.
quam Oration ad Deum praegustetur; We sit not down, till first we have prayed:
and when their Meal was over, Oration convivium dirimit, says the same
Tertullian, They prayed again, and so departed; a practice, which condemns the
Atheists of these Times, who fall to their meat, as the Hog does to his Acorns,
without the least respect to the kind Oak from which they fall.

2. The second design of these Feasts was to beget, betwixt Christian and
Christian, a mutual correspondence, acquaintance and friendship, where as yet
it was not; and to confirm and increase it, where it already was.

The very name of these Feasts imports as much, Coena nostra de nomine rationem
sui ostendit, says Tertullian, Our Suppers give an Tertul. ubi supra.
account of their Institution by their name, and that is (...), Feasts of Love;
accordingly St. Austin renders the Text thus, These are spots, in dilectionibus
vestris, in your Loves; intimating that the end of these Feasts was, as
Blastaris Blast. Synt. p. 18.
words it, (...), to knit Christians in Love; upon which score Balsamon Bals.
Synt. Conc. Began. Can. 11. Cap. 1 Cor. 11.
calls these Suppers (...), Fraternities or Brotherhoods; and Cappellus
styles them, Mutuae charitatis contesserationes, the cements of mutual
kindness; as if their design of eating had been, not only to incorporate their
food into their bodies, but to assimilate and translate themselves into one
another souls too.

3. The design of these Feasts was to extend and express their Love toward
such Christians as were indigent and poor; the former being an act of common
friendship, but this of proper Charity.

The Provision of these Feasts, whatever it were, was prepared by the Rich
Men's Purses; who did it (...), says Balsamon; Bals. Synt. Conc. Began. C. 11.
from their Mercy and Compassion to the Poor: So speaks Tertullian, Inopes
refrigerio isto juvamus, Our Feast does refresh the Indigent: Tert. Apol. c. 39.
Nor did they suffer their poor Brethren to stand as Beggars at the door, but
they freely admitted them to their Table; (...), says Zonaras; the Poor were
not then esteemed as Intruders, but invited as proper Zon. Conc. Laod. Can. 27.
Guests. And hence St. Chrysostom calls their Board, (...), a Common Table; and
Chry. 1 Cor. 11. Hom. 27.
this Supper, (...), a Common Banquet; and so Pliny, Cibum promiscuum,
promiscuous Plin. Epist. ad Trajanum.
food; both Poor and Rich being intermingled at the same Table, and feeding on
the self-same Dishes too.

The Historical Account of these Feasts in the Text being thus dispatched, the
Practical Part, which is of present concern to this Assembly, does now succeed.
That there is a Feast this day intended, I need not tell you; Only my request
is, That the Feast of this time may prove like the Feast in this Text; an
(...), a Feast of Charity indeed. And that it may be really such, we are
obliged to imitate the laudable Example of the Primitive Christians, and to do
at our Feast, at least in some proportion, what they did at Theirs. And here
give me leave to recommend to your Practice these Three Particulars:

1. Let us, in this intended Feast of Ours, imitate, I will not say, the
Frugality, but the Sobriety and Temperance of Theirs.

True it is, we are not obliged to feed upon a little Bread or Fruits, as they
did; for, whether the coursness of their Provision did arise from necessity and
want of better, or else from their own Election and Choice, we cannot tell; but
this we know, so bountiful is our God, that he did never restrain either Them
or Us from the sober use of his choicest Creatures. But although our indulgent
Father do give us that Liberty, which our elder Brethren did either want, or
would not use, as to the Quality of our Food; yet we have no permission to be
Gluttons or Drunkards more than They.

We may sometimes, upon good occasions, please our Palates, and gratify our
Taste; God is pleased now and then to allow us, not only the bare nourishment,
but even the pleasure of His Creatures; but withal, we must never indulge our
flesh so far, nor pamper it so high, as to render that the Governess of our
Spirit, which should and must be under its command. St. Hierom says well in
this Case, That whosoever eats too little, Civem enecat, he starves a dear
Citizen, (i. e.) his own body; but whosoever eats and drinks too much, Hostem
nutrit, he nourishes an Enemy; the only Enemy, which Christ would not have us
feed, (i. e.) our sinful flesh.

There are indeed, in this debauched Age of ours, a Generation of Men, that
feed high, and drink deep, and that, as may well be guessed, with a design to
nourish, not themselves, but their Vices; their end is to excite and quicken
their lusts, and make themselves the more Gigantick, sturdy and able sinners:
the full Table is only designed to prepare them the better for the Adulterous
Bed. Poor silly Men! who deserve our just indignation, yet need our compassions
too; Men, who with their own teeth dig themselves a way, not only to the Grave,
but Hell; for, whereas other sinners do eat and drink damnation to themselves
at God's Table, these Men do it at their own.

And should there be any such Persons found in this Assembly, I must say as our
Apostle does, These are spots in your Feasts of Charity. Spots indeed, that
deserve to be quite wiped off with shame, scorn, and just abhorrence; persons,
that deserve to be excluded from all converse with men, and numbered amongst
those silly beasts, who do best love, and most devour that very food, which
fats them soonest, and prepares them quickest for the slaughter.

2. Let us, in this intended Feast of Ours, imitate the Primitive Christians in
those Feasts of Theirs, as to the innocence of our Discourse and Table-talk.

What our Elder Brethren did in this matter, we have already seen, and what St.
Paul commands in this Case, we cannot well be ignorant, Let no corrupt
communication proceed out Ephesians. 4. 20.
of your mouth; (...), Putrid, rotten language. Pray, tell me, what should any
thing, that is corrupt and rotten, do at a Feast? Linen, that is nasty;
Trenchers, that are foul; a Dish, that is dirty; and Meat, that stinks, no man
would away with: But alas, what is all this to the Guest of an unclean and
wanton Tongue? There is no man's breath, that stinks like his: What Tertullian
told the drunken Pagans, may we tell the scurrilous Christian, Ructibus Tert.
Apol. c. 39.
vestris Aer acescit; He poisons the Air wherein he breaths, and taints the
Room wherein he stands: So noysom is the stench of unsavory Discourses, that
the Grecians were wont, as Athenaeus observes, in the close of their Suppers,
(...), and (...), says Homer; to perfume and burn the Tongues of their
Sacrifices, thereby to expiate the extravagancies of their own. And to prevent,
not only the scurrility, but even the impertinency of Table-talk. Some Pagans,
whom Plutarch mentions, intending a solemn Invitation, gave their Friends a
whole years warning, that so the Guests might provide themselves with matter
for good Discourse, as well as the Entertainer prepare his Feast. And if the
poor Heathens were thus solicitous and jealous of their Language, methinks the
Christian stands more obliged to be considerate and chaste in His.

3. Let us, in this intended Feast of Ours, imitate the Primitive Christians in
those Feasts of Theirs, as to their Design and End; and that is double.

1. Let Our Feast be, as Theirs was, a Feast of Mutual Love, Amity and
Friendship. It Is St. Peter's Command, Love as Brethren; the 1 Pet. 3. 8.
Relation is Ours, and consequently the Duty is so too. We are Brethren by
Common blood, as Men; by our common Nation, as Englishmen; and by our common
Religion, as Christians: but if these General Considerations are not enough to
oblige and endear us to one another, there is yet a more particular Relation
that should engage us; We are Brethren as born in one and the same Shire; for,
Patria est communis Parens, says the Roman Orator, Our Country is our common
Mother; and that Country is Oxford too; for although we were not all born
within that Cities Walls, yet we were within its Precincts and Neighborhood.

And shall any Person, that ever breathed within or near to Oxford Air, prove
unfriendly and unkind? The University is usually styled, Alma Matter, the
Benign, Courteous, and Indulgent Mother; so loving and tenderhearted, that
methinks Her Example should reach, not her proper Children only, but even the
remotest of her Neighbors too: She does not allow the least Disputes, except
it be those friendly ones within Her Schools; She clothes all her Sons, and
many of her Citizens too, with the Gown, that Emblem of Peace; Her Pulpits
preach this Lesson; and that blessed Bible, which She bears in her Scutcheon,
does require us to be kind and friendly; not to bite like Dogs and Serpents,
not to push and gore like furious Bulls; but to bear one another burdens, like
that kinder Ox, from whose courtesy, I had almost said, from whose Humanity,
our Mother did at first receive, and still retains her Name.

2. Let Our Feast be as Theirs was, a Feast of Charity to the Poor. What the
Primitive Christians did, Grotius tells us, Divites and Pauperes pari victu
utebantur; there was the same Provision Grot. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
made for the Poor as for the Rich. But that is not all; as we should admit the
meanest of our Countrymen that are present this day, to our Table, so let us
feed some absent ones at their own; let us relieve the one from our Trenchers,
and the other from our Purses; and indeed amongst those many Dishes, that are
provided for our selves, methinks there should be at least one Basin for the
Poor; that so such as are at a distance from us, may feed upon our Bounty,
though they do not taste our Feast. And here three things must be showed; 1.
What must be the just measure of our Charity? 2. Who must be the objects of our
Charity? 3. What are the Motives to it?


1. What must be the just measure of our Charity? What must we give, and how
much? We answer, there is no certain Rule to be prescribed to every particular
person in this Case; but in General, we must proportion our Charity by this
double Measure:

1. The first Measure of our Charity must be our own Ability; true it is, we
should all be as Generous and Noble as they, whom St. Paul does thus commend;
They were willing beyond 2 Cor. 8. 3.
their Power. Our Soul should be larger than our Purse, our Charity should be
bigger than our Alms; our Will should be above our Ability, but our Deed
according to it: So it is required, Let every one lay by in store, as God 1 Cor.
16. 1.
has prospered him, etc. Such was the practice of the Primitive Christians.
The Disciples determined Acts 11. 29.
to send relief unto the Brethren: But how much was given by this and that
particular Person? the Text says, Every man according to his Ability: And thus
it was in Tertullians time, Vnusquisque stipem apponit, si modo possit, Tert.
Apol. c. 39.
etc. Every man gave more or less, as he was able. And the truth is, whosoever
gives less, than he is very well able, is uncharitable to his Neighbor; and
whosoever gives more is uncharitable to Himself and His.

2. The second Measure of our Charity must be our Brothers want: By this Rule
did the Saints of old proportion their Charity too; Distribution was made unto
every man according Act. 4. 35.
as he had need. And here we should consider, not only the degree of our
Neighbors want, but its occasion too: If a Man's Poverty do arise from his
Idleness, Debauchery, and Vicious Courses, though our Charity must not let him
starve in hopes of his Reformation; yet our Prudence, to make him Exemplary,
may justly let him smart and pinch; but where a man's wants are sore, and
occasioned either by the greatness of his charge, or any sad accidents that
were inevitable; the expressions of our Charity, and the measure of his Relief
must be proportionable to his need.

But why should I mention any Rules for the just Proportions of Charity in this
Assembly? it is observed to the just Honor of the Citizens of London, That
whatever good works they do, they do them Nobly. If a Citizen Found a School,
probably he makes it like a College: If a Citizen builds an Almshouse, he does
it with such Magnificence, as if it were designed rather for a Prince than
Beggars: If the City build a Church, with what splendor it is done, these very
Walls, and this very Pulpit would speak aloud, even without a Preacher.
Methinks the Old Churches of London, lately burnt, and newly Restored, are like
some Ancient Plate, melted down indeed, but so Artificially made up again, and
so neatly burnished, that they are become more Glorious through the fire, and
do only shine the brighter: So that whatever the City might lose by the late
Conflagration, the Church, through their Magnificence, has proved a Gainer.
Wherefore, if any man demand what should be the Rule and Standard of your
present Bounty, we answer, let it be your selves: What St. Paul once blamed in
other Men, will be no fault in you, Measuring themselves by themselves, etc. Do
2 Cor. 10. 12.
but you this day consult your selves, your own bowels, your own estates, your
own wonted generosity; do but give like Citizens of London, and then, with a
due respect to the difference of your Estates, give meanly if you can: But,

2. Who must be the Objects of our Charity? give we must, but to whom?
Doubtless we must not exclude from our Charity any Soul, that does either
deserve or need it; but since our Ability cannot reach to all the world, we may
pick and choose for our selves some such Objects, on whom our Charity will be
best bestowed. And who were the special Objects of the Christians Charity in
their Ancient Feasts, Tertullian tells us, Pueris and Puellis re and Parentibus
Tert. Apol. c. 39.
destitutis, etc. Boys, Girls, poor Orpans, that had neither Estates nor
Friends. And here, though I would by no means limit your Charity to such or
such, yet I would particularly recommend Two sorts of Children to your
Consideration.

1. Such poor Children deserve to be recommended to your Charity, as proper
Objects indeed, who are like to make good Men and good Scholars too.

Should we but enquire from the Public Schools of our own County, or from the
Colleges and Halls in our own University, we should quickly hear of such and
such Lads of slender Fortunes, but Virtuous Inclinations and Rich Endowments;
industrious Youths, that would be at Work, but have no Tools; Children, that
would be Scholars, but cannot, for want of a Tutour to instruct, Books to read,
and perhaps bread to live.

Doubtless, there is scarce any greater object of Charity than such a Child as
this; a Child, that is Pregnant and Promising; to train up such a Child as this
in a course of Religion and Learning is such a Service to God and his Church,
that it is scarce within the reach of any private Man's Charity to do a greater.
For, tell me, who knows what a rare Man such a poor Child may prove
hereafter? Were it fit, it were but easy, to name some Persons, that have been
choice Instruments of Honor to God, and Service to our Church, who in their
Minority lived on Alms.

And if our bounty this day shall be placed on some such lucky Object, who can
tell, but we may train up a Person of that Worth and Excellence, for whom the
whole Nation may be obliged to bless both God and Us? Perhaps a few Books, now
bestowed on such a Child, may render him hereafter a walking Library; a little
Money, given him now, may make him Rich hereafter; our Cap may be changed one
day into a Mitre; our Cloth may be turned into Satin, and our Linen may
become Lawnsleeves.

And methinks there is no sort of Men more obliged to this kind of Charity than
We; doubtless, we are more concerned to endeavor the promotion of Learning
than other men; this is the great Profession of that Famous University, which
is the Glory of that County, whereunto we owe our birth. For, whereas other
Counties Glory in such and such Commodities and Manufactures, it is Ours that
Glories in Liberal Arts and Nobler Sciences. It Is the Glory of some Counties,
that they can furnish the Chimnies of this vast City with constant fire, it is
the Glory of other Counties, that they can furnish your River and Cisterns with
constant Water; it is the Glory of some Shires, that they furnish your Shambles
with Meat, and your Shops with Cloth; Well, and what is the Glory of our Shire?
Has Oxford nothing to oblige London with? Yes, it is our Counties Happiness and
Honor, that it can furnish your Inns of Court with Learned Lawyers to secure
your Estates, your City with Learned Physicians to preserve your Lives; and,
above all, your Pulpits with Learned Preachers to save your Souls: And if so,
what Man amongst us, that has any Value for himself or his Native soil, will
not contribute something toward the Advancement of that Learning, wherein the
Honor of his Country, and the safety of his own Estate, Life and Religion are
so much concerned?

2. Such poor Children deserve to be recommended to your Charity this day, as
are like to make Virtuous Men, and good Citizens too; if you train up some
eminent Scholar, you will do an Honor to the place of your Birth; and if you
breed up some eminent Citizen, you will much oblige the Place of your
Habitation.

Past all peradventure, there is many a Child to be found, whose Natural Genius
does lead him rather to the Shop than to the Study; their Parts do very well
dispose them for Mechanical Trades, but not at all for Nobler Arts; your
Scarlet Gown may become that back, on which our black one would be ridiculous.
It Is certain, that many a Child may make a Golden Lord Mayor, who would have
made but a leaden Bishop.

And is it not a thousand pities to see such poor Children stand at the door
and beg, who might have done so bravely within the Shop? Were it not pity to
see such persons in Rags and Tatters, who, with a little help, might have worn
a Chain of Gold? Were it not pity to see such become the Nations shame and
burden, who, with a little encouragement, might have done a great deal toward
its support and credit? To prevent such a spectacle as this, give me leave this
day, in their stead, to become the Beggar, though I would not be the Receiver
of your Charity, yet for once give me leave to ask it.

Doubtless, amongst the many poor Children of our County, it is easy to pick
out some that are promising and hopeful, Lads of plodding heads and active
hands; Lads, that might do far better in the Shop, than at the Plow. To place
out such Lads as these, to find them Work and Wages; an honest Employment, a
Religious Master, and a fitting Maintenance, is that great Act of Charity,
which I would beg this day.

And for your Encouragement in this particular, do but remember, what brave
Citizens have already been made even of Alms-boys; to name Persons is needless,
and would be unhandsom too. Only consider, what has been the happy issue of
other Men's Charity may as well be the blessed event of yours; who knows, but
some poor Apprentice, trained up by the bounty of this day, and fed by your
Feast of Charity, may prove a man of those Parts, that signal Prudence, Estate
and Honor, as to become the Governor of this Great Metropolis? Who can tell,
but a Lord Mayor of London may for once be made even at Drapers-Hall? there by
your private Purses now, and elsewhere by Common Votes hereafter?

But notwithstanding all this, lest any Man's Charity should yet prove more
cold, than the very dish, that should receive it, give me leave to propound
some proper considerations, that may revive, warm, and make it fresh; and
that is the business of our third and last Particular:

3. Consider we what great Inducements man has to be Charitable; give we must,
and that considerably too, but what is our encouragement? surely, the greatest
that can be; see what it is in Four Particulars:

1. The Commands of God do oblige us; Commands, that are express, frequent and
urgent too; so the Evangelist, Be ye merciful as Luk 6. 36. 30.
your Heavenly Father is merciful; and so again, Give to him that asks; and
yet again, Charge 1 Timothy 6. 17.
them that are rich in this world, that they be rich in good works, etc. We
cannot be uncharitable to Man, but we must be disobedient to God too.

2. The Example of Christ does much oblige us: Learn of me, says our Blessed
Savior; Mat. 11. 29.
but what must we learn? Certainly, amongst other Lessons this of Charity is
one; so reasons great St. Paul, who presses the Corinthians to Acts of Mercy
by this very Motive, Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, though 2
Cor. 8. 9.
he were rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, etc. So charitable was the
Son of God, as for our sakes to give himself; and shall not we so far tread in
his steps, as for his sake to give a trifle? But,

3. The great uncertainty of all Humane Affairs, the mutability of this World,
and our own concerns therein, does much oblige us; so various are the
Providence of God, and so changeable is the condition of Man, that he, who is
now in a fair capacity to extend his Charity unto others, may, in some short
space, come to want and beg it for himself. It Is very possible, that a
dishonest or careless Servant, a Thief, or a Fire by night, a storm, a Rock, or
a Pirate by Sea, a crack and flaw in a Title, such or such a sad accident,
which easily and frequently happens, may utterly undo us. And if in such a
case we should think our selves fit objects of other Men's Charity, it is but
reasonable that we should now esteem that poor Neighbor, who is in a like
condition, to be a meet Object for our own: So argues the Great Apostle,
Remember them Heb. 13. 3.
which suffer adversity; but what is his Motive? as being your selves also in
the body. The Text imports, That so long as we are in this uncertain world, we
are exposed to the self same dangers, losses and calamities with other men; and
consequently we stand obliged to extend Mercy whilst we are able, as well as to
expect it, when we are ruined.

4. Those great Rewards, which do attend our Charity, do much oblige us. That
there is a Reward for the Charitable Person, our blessed Savior does thus
secure him, Thy Father himself Mat. 6. 4.
shall reward thee; the very lowest expressions of Charity God will not suffer
to be unrewarded, Whosoever shall give to one of these Mat. 10. 42.
little ones a cup of cold water only, he shall in no wise lose his reward:
It Is sure, a reward there is, but what an one is it? Is it such an one as will
reimburse, recompense, and make us amends for what we part with? Yea, the
Rewards of our Charity are of Two sorts, Temporal and Eternal: What are these
Temporal Rewards, we may see distinctly in Four Particulars;

1. The Rewards of our Charity are such as concern the safety and welfare of
our Persons: What is the Charitable Man's Privilege in this respect, the
Psalmist tells us, The Lord will deliver Psalm. 41. 1^ 2, 3.
him in time of trouble: The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive: The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, etc. The Text imports,
that the welfare of our Persons is much concerned in the right ordering of our
Purses; the way to secure our health, and sweeten our sickness, is to Fee, not
so much the Physician, as the Poor.

2. The Rewards of our Charity are such as concern our common credit and
reputation in the world: For although our Blessed Savior forbids us to make
our own honor and applause the design of our Charity, yet the issue and event
thereof it will be. Solomon tells us, The memory of the Just shall be blessed:
This Prove. 10. 7.
Just Man is the man of Mercy, the same man that David speaks of, He has
dispersed, he Psalm. 112. 9.
has given to the poor: What then? His Righteousness endures for ever, his
Horn shall be exalted Psalm. 37. 27.
with honor: The best way to eternize our memories is to be exemplary in doing
good; Do good, and dwell for evermore. It Is Charity that Embalms a Man's name,
and keeps it fresh and sweet for ever; there is no Tomb like an Almshouse, no
Monument like an Hospital, no Marble like the Poor Man's Box.

3. The Rewards of our Charity are such as concern our present Interest and
Estates even in this world: It Is one of Solomon's seeming Paradoxes, There is
that scatters, and yet increases: Prove. 11. 24.
But who is this lucky Man? the next Verse tells us, The liberal Soul shall be
made fat, and he that waters shall be watered again. A little water poured
into a Pump, fetches more; and a little money put into the poor Man's Purse,
does often bring much greater sums into our own. There is no man so good an
Husband even for this world, as the man of Mercy; nor does any person prove so
sure a gainer, as he that gives; see that Command and Promise of Christ; Give,
and it shall be given unto you; but how much, and in what quantity? Luke 6. 33.
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over. Money rightly
bestowed is not lost, but rather lent out to use; it is like Seed, scattered
indeed here and there, but yet it grows and multiplies even to admiration.
St. Paul tells us, He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully: Indeed, a
common sower may possibly over-seed his Ground, and by a lavish hand spoil his
Crop; but in our Case there is no danger; the more Seed we can spare and sow,
the richer Harvest shall we reap.

4. The Rewards of our Charity are such as concern our Posterity too: Thus the
Psalmist, He is ever merciful and lends; there is the property of a
Charitable Man; but what is his reward? Psalm. 37 36.
His Seed is blessed: And thus some expound that forenamed expression of
Solomon, The Memory of the Just shall be blessed: The Prove. 10. 7.
Memory! what is that? the Child, the Son that bears his Fathers Name, and keeps
it up and alive in the world; this Son shall be blessed, this Child shall be so
far from being injured by his Fathers Charity, that it shall rather tend to his
great advantage. And surely this consideration does totally remove that vain
pretense and scruple of men, who are afraid to do any considerable acts of
Charity, lest thereby they impoverish their Families, and leave their Children
beggars: But

2. There are such Rewards of our Charity, as concern another world; Our
Savior tells us, Blessed are the merciful: He does not mean in Mat. 1. 7.
this life only, but in the next. It Is in order to this, that he thus commands
us, Make to your Luke 16 9.
selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that they may receive you
into everlasting habitations: and upon the same score he tells us, He Mat. 10.
41.
that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward: but what is that? certainly, it is a Reward in Heaven.

And that we may not doubt the certainty of these great Rewards, and so our
Charity grow chill: Solomon tells us what security we have, and who it is that
stands engaged; He that has pity on the poor lends to the Lord, and that Prove.
19. 17.
which he has given will he repay: That we may be encouraged to supply the
poor Man's wants, God himself has drawn a Bond, and offers himself to be the
poor Man's Surety, and the rich Man's Debtor.

And can our Charity expect any greater encouragement than this? It Is true,
when such or such a Man would borrow, perhaps we suspect his Honesty, perhaps
we suspect his Ability, perhaps we are jealous of his Security, and that makes
us loath to lend; but does the Case stand so with God? When God would be our
Debtor, do we think, that he will not be our Paymaster too? Is not he to be
trusted, that is faithful, just and true? Is not he to be credited for a few
pence or shillings, who is Lord of all that Heaven and Earth are worth? It Is
for securitie's sake, that our blessed Savior does thus command us, Lay up for
your selves treasures in Heaven: the Text imports, that Money given Mat. 6. 20.
the poor is not idly spent, but secured in the Treasury of God, and
Exchequer of Heaven: And although the Most Just and best Natured Earthly Prince
may sometimes be constrained by a necessity of State, and against his own
inclinations, to shut up his Exchequer; yet can we imagine that the Great God
of Heaven will ever put a stop to his Treasury, and the Bankers and Creditors
there ruined too? etc. We think great Sums sure enough in the Chamber of
London, and dare we not venture some small matter in the Star Chamber of
Heaven? Doubtless our Principal will be safe, and our Interest both sure and
great; if there be a Reward for the most inconsiderable Alms, even a cup of
cold water, O what Reward will there be for higher Acts of Charity! Our Savior
tells us, I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, Mat. 25. 35.
thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. Well, and what then? what is the Reward of
this? a great one sure! Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc.
Dear Lord! here is Principal and Interest indeed! a little meat given, and a
Kingdom received! a little drink lent, and a Crown repaid! a little cloth
bestowed, and a Throne returned! Yea, here is the fruit of Charity; what the
poor borrows, God pays over and over; well may Tertullian tells us, Lucrum
Tert. Apol. cap. 39.
est Pietatis nomine facere sumptum; to give thus and thus to pious uses is to
gain; to give so and so to the Poor, is to become a Sacred Usurer; because
whatever man thus gives, God refunds, yea, God repayeth for every penny a
pound, and for every mite a talent: And if so, if our Feast this day shall
prove like the Feasts in my Text, a Feast of mutual Love amongst our selves,
and a Feast of Charity to such as deserve and want it; we shall find a friend
in Heaven, that will do more than pay our Reckoning.

(...).
THE END.

