AN ALARM To the False SHEPHERDS: Sounded forth before the Indignation of the
Lord be poured out upon Them. This is the Word which I received from the Lord,
the 24th. of the 12th. Month, 1659. in the night season, as I lay upon my Bed,
when deep sleep was upon me, saying, Write my Controversy with the false
Pastors, as I shall show thee, who have scattered the Sheep of my Pasture, for
I will gather them from their mouths, and they shall make a prey no longer of
Them, says the Lord. Here is also my TESTIMONY concerning the Word of God, in
the behalf of my self and Brethren, against both Teachers and People, who make
a noise in the Nation, and tell People the Quakers deny the Word of God. Here
also is declared, that the Word of God is our life, yea the same Word which the
Scriptures of truth testifies of, which Word abides and endures for ever.

From a lover of the Souls of all People, who am called, THOMAS GREEN.

Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my People as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord; There were they in great fear, for God
is in the generation of the righteous,

Psalm. 14. 4, 5. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the
Blackspread Eagle and Windmill in Martins, Le-grand, 1660.

AN ALARM TO THE False Shepherds, Sounded forth before the Indignation of the
Lord be poured out upon them.
WOE, Woe unto the Pastors that destroy the sheep of my Pasture, (says the Lord)
my controversy is with you; and I will pour our my fury upon you, and you
shall in no wise escape my Ier. 23. 1, 2
hand, because you have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not
visited them; behold I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, says the
Lord: yea this was the cry against the false Shepherds of Israel, and this is
the cry of the Servant of the Lord against the false Shepherds of England;
yea, woe be to the Shepherds that do feed Ezekiel 34. 2, 3, 4.
themselves, should not the Shepherds feed the flocks? ye eat the fat, and ye
cloth with the wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock;
the diseased have you not strengtbened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have you bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost,
but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them; and they were scattered because
there was no Shepherd, and they became meat to all the Beasts of the field,
when they were scattered: my sheep wandered through all the Mountains, and upon
every high hill, yea my flock was scattered upon all the face of the ver. 5, 6.
earth; and none did search nor seek after them: But have caused my people to
err, that bite with teeth, and cry peace, peace; and he that puts not into
their mouths they even prepare war against him, as did the false Prophets of
old: therefore night shall come upon you that ye shall not have a vision, and
it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the Sun Mich. 3. 5, 6.
shall go down over you, and the day shall be dark over you. Yea verily you are
such Prophets as they of old were, who built up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity; and tells my people they must commit sin so long as they live,
and tell them Mich. 3. 10.
they shall not be freed from sin on this side the grave, and so deny my Son
Christ Jesus, which is made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, and to
finish transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to present unto me a holy
people without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; for I have given him to be a
leader to my people, and to be my Salvation to the ends of the earth: says the
Lord. But as for you Oh Shepherds! you have run, and I have not sent you,
neither have you profited my people at all, neither have you caused them to
turn from the evil of their ways, but the hands of the wicked have been
strengthened by you, and have made spoil of my heritage, and have done as much
as in you lies, to lay them as a vineyard without a hedge; and have bid the
wicked go on and prosper, and have gloryed in the strength of an Army, and have
made flesh your arm; and you bear rule by your means, and exercise tyranny
over my people, yea the heads of you Judge for reward, and the Priests preach
for hire, and the Prophets Divine for money; yet you lean upon the Lord, and
say, is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come upon us; as the false
Prophets did, Mich. 3. 11. yea, are you not such Prophets as the Lord
complained of by Jeremiah the true Prophet, who said, A wonderful and a
horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and
the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to Ier. 5. 30. 31.
have it so; but what will you do in the end thereof? And are you not such
Shepherds that Isaiah declared of, as their fruits made them manifest? Isa.
56. 11. They are greedy, dumb dogs which can never have enough, and Shepherds
that cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain
from his quarter. Now have not many of you been such who have sought your gain
from your quarter, and if any who lived in your quarter, could not for
conscience sake pay you, have not you caused many to be put in prison, some
until death? and have took trible damage of their goods that fears my name, who
are obedient to what I command them; and so you bear rule by their means: So ye
eat up my people as ye eat bread, and tread the residue under your feet, and so
my heritage lies opressed, and none lays it to heart; thus says the Lord:
Behold I am against the Shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hands,
and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall the Shepherds
feed themselves any more, for I will deliver Ier. 33. 10. 11.
my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them, for thus says
the Lord; Behold I even I, will both search my sheep and seek them out, as a
Shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are
scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places
where they have been scattered in the Cloudy and dark day; and I will bring
them out from the people, and gather them from the Countries, and will bring
them into their own Land, and feed them upon the Mountains of Israel; yea I
will feed my flock and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord, and I
will set up a Shepherd which shall feed them, and they shall fear no more nor
be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking; but as for these Prophets who have
caused my people to err, behold I will feed them with wormwood* and make them
drink the water of gall; for from the Prophets is prophanness gone forth into
all the Land, for I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran, I have not
spoken to them, yet they Prophesied: therefore great is my controversy Ier.
33. 21.
with them, Ezekiel. 13. 22, 23. Because with lies ye have made the heart of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the
wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life.
Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations, for I will
deliver my people out of your hands, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; yea
in the covenant which I promised to the House of Israel will I gather my
people, and I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: and they shall
teach no more every man his Ier. ^^. 33, 34.
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall
all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord: And
I will be unto them a father, and they shall be my Sons and Daughters, and they
shall be all taught of me, and in my righteousness will I establish them; and
great shall be their peace, Revel. 7. 15, 16, 17. And they shall serve me night
and day in my Temple, and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them,
they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light
on them, or any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of water, and shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes. And I will bring my seed from all the Countries
where they have been driven, and bring them to my holy hill of Zion, with joy
and gladness upon their heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away; and they
shall walk in the light of the Lamb, and there shall be no night there, and
they need no candle, neither light of the Sun; for I the Lord gives them
light, and they shall reign for ever and ever: and the Nations of them that are
saved shall walk in the light, and the Kings of the earth shall bring their
glory and honor unto it, they shall dwell on high, their place of defense
shall be in the munition of rocks; bread shall be given them, their waters
shall be sure, yea I will Isa. 33 21.
be unto them a place of broad rivers, and the streams wherein no galley with
oars, neither gallant ships pass thereby. And my everlasting Covenant shall be
with them, and in them, even the sure mercies of David, and they shall never
more depart from me, for they are my portion and the lot of my inheritance, and
I am their portion; they are my sheep and I am their Shepherd, and the Sheep
of my Pasture are men.

And all my dear friends whom the Lord God has called in this day of his
mighty power, from amongst the false Shepherds and hirelings, who have had
your money for that which have not been bread, and you have labored for that
which satisfied not: Rejoice in the Lord for evermore, and be exceeding glad;
praise him for ever, who has chosen you above all the Families of the earth,
to place his Name in you* even the Name that is above every Name: Oh Friends,
let his loving kindness never be forgotten, who has made a way in the
Wilderness, and a path in the desert, and has raised his own seed up in you,
unto which partaineth the promise of life and peace: Oh dear Friends, who have
tasted of the Word of God, and of the power which has no end; praise ye the
Lord, durable praises and endless dominion be given unto him, of all my dear
Friends; Haljlujah be unto him for evermore, who is come to reign, whose right
it is, God blessed for ever; unto him be everlasting praises for evermore.

This is my Testimony concerning the Word of God.
Whereas there is a great Cry in this Nation of England, with Priests and
People, saying, the Quakers deny the Word of God; here I shall declare on the
contrary, that the same Word which the Scriptures of truth declares of, we
own, for it is our Life; yea the same Word which was glorified with the Father
before the World began, by which the world was made, as John 1. 1, 2, 3. says
he, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God the same was in the beginning with God; All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made; in him was life, and the life
was the light of men; Mark, in the Word was life, and this Word we own
according to Scriptures, and it is our life, yea Christ Jesus the Word of God,
as Revel. 19. 13. and who was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, his name
is called the Word of God; and this word we own, which Word was in the
beginning of the Creation of God, which was, which is* and is to come; This is
he who was the first and the last, which was dead and is alive, and lives for
evermore: and this Word is true from the beginning, as says David, Psalm. 119.
160. Thy Word is true from the beginning, and every one of thy righteouus
Judgments endures for ever: and David said, Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my paths: and by this Word was David's steps ordered, which
Word he hid in his heart, and in this Word he meditated; and says David in a
certain place, I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great spoil; and this
is the Word which we bear Testimony unto, in which is life, and he that has
this word has life, and he that has not this word has not life; so he that
has this word may speak it, as Jer. 23. 28 29. He that has my word let him
speak my word faithfully; What is the Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord? for
says the Lord, Is not my Word like a fire, and like an hammer that breaks
the rock in pieces? and we know the Word in us as the Scripture declares, that
cutteth down and burns up that which is contrary to God in us; and we know
him who sits as a Resiners fire, to burn up all that is contrary unto him; for
who amongst the sons of men can dwell with the devouring fire? or who can dwell
with everlasting burnings? Now this is he that can dwell with everlasting
burnings, he that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly; he that
despises the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands from holding of
Bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing of evil; he only can dwell with the Word of God* and this is the
Word of God which Judges the wicked man for his wickedness; and this is he
which was in the beginning with the Father, before the Heavens were framed, or
the foundations of the Earth were laid; and this Word we bear testimony unto,
which became flesh and dwell amongst the Apostles, as the Scripture of truth
declares; and by the same Word is the World kept to this day, standing in the
water and out of the water, and all things are upheld by him, Heb. 1. 3. Who
being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and
upholding all things by the Word of his power; and this Word we bear testimony
is nigh people, as the Scripture of truth declares; in the heart, and in the
mouth.

But it may be said, did not the Apostles preach Christ in the Scriptures? or
did they not bid people look for him?

Answ. Nay, the Apostles preached Christ the word, nigh in the heart and in the
mouth, and said, there is no need to say, who shall descend, or who shall
ascend, or go beyond the Seas, but what says it? the word is nigh in the heart
and in the mouth, that you may hear it and do it; and this is the more sure
word of Prophecy, which you will do well if you take heed unto, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place; and there was them who had the word of God
abiding in them, to whom John writ, 1 John 2. 14. I have written unto you young
men, because you are strong and the word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked one; and this word is to be known within the anointed of
God, as, 1 John 2. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie; and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him. And the word of God which Paul was a
Minister of, we bear testimony unto, which word he did not preach till he was
revealed in him, as Gal. 1. 15, 16. says he, When it pleased God who separated
me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me,
that I might preach him among the heathen: So now people may plainly see, that
Paul did not preach Christ, who is the word, till he was revealed in him, and
this was the end of his Ministry, and of his travail, who said, I travail in
birth again till Christ be formed in you; he did not say he traveled till they
professed Christ or Scriptures, or talking of him, but till he was formed in
them, for he was in them, as says Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves,
whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves, know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates: and when he
writ to the Colossians, Col. 3 16. said, Let the word dwell in you richly in
all wisdom; and this word we bear testimony unto, which we know St. Paul
declares, Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and Spirit,
and of the joints, and marrow; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents
of the heart: so this is the word of God which divides between the precious and
the vile in people, that which cuts down the unruly nature, that is the word of
God, yea the sword of the spirit is the word of God, and so that which cuts
down the wicked one in people, the same reconcileth to God, and this word was
committed unto the Apostles, for says Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 19. He has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation; so the same word which cutteth down the man
of sin in people, the same reconciles to God, as the Scriptures of truth
declares.

Yea, but it may be said, Christ said, search the Scriptures, then cannot we
find Christ if we search them?

Answ. The Jews searched the Scriptures, and thought in them to have eternal
life, for they are they which testify of me, (says Christ) but you will not
come to me, that you may have life: so friend whosoever thou art, I do not deny
but thou may search the Scriptures which testifies of Christ, but thou can
never have life till thou come to that which Scripture testifies of, which is
Christ Jesus the word of God.

Yea, but it may be said, we had thought the Scriptures had been the Word.

Answ. Nay Friend, by the Word the World was made, which was before Scriptures
was, which Word abides and endures for ever; the Scriptures did not make the
World, but the Word which the Scripture testifies of, which he that has it
has life, he that has not the Word, has not life; so it is the ingrafted
Word which is able to save the soul.

Then some may object and say, if thou says Christ is the Word, and the Word
is but one, then thou denies Scriptures.

Answ. Nay, the Scriptures of truth I own, which was spoken forth as the holy
Men of God was moved of the holy Ghost, which are good in their places; yea,
let my Pen fall out of my hand, and my arm from my shoulder, and my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, rather then I should deny the Scriptures of
truth, for they I truly own, which testifies of the Word; but the Scriptures
are Words, as Exodus ^0. 1. And God spoke all these Words, saying; etc. for the
Scriptures were called Words before Christ Jesus the Word of God was made
manifest in the flesh; and this Word came unto the Prophets, which came out
from the Father, as you may read in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other of the
Prophets, who said, The Word of the Lord came unto them, saying; they did not
say, the Scriptures came unto them, saying, but the Word, from which they spoke
forth Scriptures; and so the Scriptures declares and testifies of the Word,
from which Word the Scriptures were spoken forth by the Prophets, Christ, and
the Apostles; and they were given forth to be believed in, and to be fulfilled;
and so the Scriptures of truth we own, which was spoken forth from the Spirit
of God, as the holy men of God was moved of the holy Ghost: and this is writ to
stop the mouths of them, who say we deny the Word, and for the information of
the simple hearted, who desire to know what we believe, as conconcerning that
thing; I have by plain Scriptures, laid down that we own no other Word, but
that by which the World was made, and by which the Scriptures were spoken
forth; which Word abides and endures for ever.

Written the 5th. day of the first Month, near 1660. From one who waits to see
the Redemption of Mankind from under the bondage of Corruption; who is called,
Thomas Green.

THE END.

