THE GREGORIAN ACCOUNT, OR THE SPIRITVAL WATCH. A SERMON Preached to the
Society of the GREGORY'S dwelling in and about the City of London, and
assembled in the Church of St. Michael Cornhill, June 19. 1673.

By FRANCIS GREGORY, D. D. Rector of Hambleton in the County of Bucks, one of
his Sacred Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

(...).

Iguat. in Epist. ad Polycarp. LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for Richard
Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. MDCLXXIII.

To my esteemed Friends, Capt. Jeremie Gregory, Citizen and Gold smith of
London, and Mr. Philip Gregory, Citizen and Mercer, Stewards of the Gregory's
Feast the Nineteenth of June 1673. and to the rest of that Loving Society.
Worthy Sirs,
I Need not tell you that this Sermon, such as it is, was Penned upon your
motion, Preached at your solemn Assembly, and is now Printed for your sakes and
upon your frequent request. When you had designed your public Meeting, it was
well contrived to meet in God's House first, that you might begin your
discourse with Heaven, and testify to the world that you are One as well in
Religion as in Name.

When you moved me to provide the Sermon, I was somewhat surprised; it being
such a Request as I could not easily with Modesty grant, nor with Friendship
deny. For when I considered the great variety of most choice and excellent
Ministers within your City, and particularly that worthy Person, who, under
that Reverend, Pious and Learned Prelate, my Lord of London, is the Pastor of
your Church, how could I, the meanest of God's Servants, prevail with myself to
possess his Room, and undertake his Work, at St. Michael's Cornhill? But, I
confess, that one only Reason which could possibly move you to make such a
Choice, did at length, though with some reluctance, incline me to accept it
too, and to deny myself rather then you. And that was this; namely, that I am
one of your Number, and have the honor to wear your Arms, and bear your Name.
For the Hearers being Gregory's, methought it might be handsome if the Preacher
were so too; and there being a young Gregory to be Baptized, methought it would
not be unsuteable, since the Godfathers and Godmothers were Gregory's, that
some Gregory or other should wash the Infant's Face, and (though no Pope, nor
Papist,) sign its Forehead too. And for this end did I make what shift I could
to serve your Inclinations, though against my own; that the whole Work of the
day might be carried on by Persons of the Name; and that your Church might have
furniture of the same Denomination for its Pews, its Pulpit, and its Font.

What Entertainment this Discourse will find in the world, into which your
Importunity has now condemned it, as to any personal and civil concern of
mine, it matters not. If it be judged so slender and empty as to make its
Author the more meanly thought of, it is that I deserve, and therefore may
justly expect: but if, beyond its merit and my own apprehensions, it occasion
me with any candid Reader the least Reputation, I shall not value my self or it
one jot the more. But whatever Circumstances the Publication thereof shall be
attended with, sure I am, the Practice of it will infallibly be accompanied
with most happy Consequences, the Favor of God in this world, and the
Enjoyment of him in the next. That it may produce this blessed effect upon you
and every Gregory, is the present Design, and shall be the constant Prayer, of

Your Friend and Servant, FRANCIS GREGORY.

To the Society of the GREGORY'S, upon the Name and Meeting at St. Michael's
Cornhil the 19th of June 1673.
THE Virtues and Graces, common once to man,
Have long unchurch'd the Godless Earth, and ran
With last Astraea to another Sphere,
Making new Pleiades and Conjunctions there.
But some good Angel, kinder to this Age,
Has brought them once more to salute the Stage.
With Love, with complex arms, with dancing feet,
The Virtues Masquerade in the Temple meet
In chosen Clusters, a Complexion
Of men whose Humor, with their Name, is one.
Your Friendship (Sirs) is Sacred, and you do
Add honor to the Temple, that to you,
So vigilant, so pious, so devout.
(This is no Churching of the common Rout.)
No Sectist, Atheist, carved Innocence
Comes hither, or goes so away from hence.
He Is taught to live what he does own to be,
In nothing less then Name a Gregory.
It Is a Greek name and yet no Greek to them
That know to value and to use the Gem.
Watchful that bids them be, and so they are;
They grasp the Preacher, and become all Ear.
And He (Great Soul) speaks learned, holy things;
He almost rules the Heavens, and thence brings
A noble Hierarchy of Holy Fame,
Twice Sacred, in themselves and in their Name;
The Caesarean, Nicene, and his Son.
Enthroned Souls! blessed Constellation!
What Is scarce the Rubric's due cannot be denied
To such as have their Saintship sanctified.
Their Piety got the reverence below
Of Saints; their Name does well-nigh make them so.
O let it be no sin one Prayer to make,
May we gain all a Saintship for the name sake.
The Greek Church long eclipsed revives again:
Boast not thy self, Rome, Metropolitan.
She wears no Earthly Diadem, but her Love
Gives us the art of making Saints above.
The Saints influence and this good Companie's
Have made Chruch where this Sermon was preached.
St. Michael's a St. Gregorie's.
Aut Gregorius, aut nullus. JER. GREGORY.

THE GREGORIAN ACCOUNT, OR THE SPIRITUAL WATCH.
MARK 13.37. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.


WHat that Duty is which our Blessed Savior does here require, will be easily
guessed, if we consider that there is but a twofold Watch.

1. There is a Watch that is Civil or Military. So Pilate tells the Jews, Ye
have a watch: (Matt. 27.65.) what is that? (...), says Theophylact, a guard of
sixty soldiers. (...). Theophylactus in Matt. 14.25.

Vigilia una tres horas habet, ac per hoc nox quatuor vigilias habet, ternis
horis per singulas vigilias distributis. August. in Matthew. sermon. 14.

Judaei veteres, dum penes ipsos jus armorum fuit, noctem in ternas vigilias
diviserunt. Grot. in Matt. 14.25.


Thus the ancient Jews divided their Night into three several Watches; whereas
Euripides mentions (...), intimating that the Graecians, and from them the
Romans and later Jews, had four: accordingly the Evangelist mentions (...), the
fourth watch of the night (Matt. 14.25.) But this civil or military Watch we
shall pass by, as that which has little to do within the bounds and precincts
of the Text.

2. There is a Watch that is Religious and Sacred: and that is double too; it is
either literal and proper, or metaphorical.

Vigilando, orando, psallendo in nocte opera diei peregimus. Augustinus in
concione ad Catechumenos, tom. 6.

Plinius Secundus allegans, praeter obstinationem sacrificandi, nihil aliud se
de Sacramentis eorum (Christianorum) comperisse quam Coetus antelucanos ad
canendum Deo and Christo, etc. Tertullianus in Apolog. c. 2.

(...). Chrysoft. in Act. 12.12.

(...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 17.

Quis nocturnis Convocationibus, si ita oportuerit, a latere suo Conjugem adimi
libenter feret? Tertullian. l. 2. ad Uxorem, c. 4.


1. There is a Religious Watch that is proper: when the Night, or some
considerable part thereof, is redeemed from sleep, and spent in holy Duties.
This Watch I find observed sometimes by single persons. Thus Christ himself; he
continued all night in prayer. (Luke 6.12.) Thus St. Paul and Silas; they
prayed and sang praises at midnight. (Acts 16.25.) (...), says St.
Chrysostom; Tota nocte vigilarunt, says St. Hierom, they watched all night.
And as some single persons kept this Watch, so did whole Assemblies too: many
were gathered together praying. (Acts 12.12.) Tertullian mentions nocturnas
convocationes, their nightly Meetings: St. Bernard mentions vigilias sanctas,
their holy Vigils: and Nazianzen records (...), the candles and lamps whereby
they prayed and preached.

But these Religious Vigils, that were originally occasioned by the Tyranny of
persecuting Emperors, and afterward kept up only by the voluntary Devotion
and Zeal of Christians, though they were laudable in themselves, Patresnostri
vigilabant per noctem, and ad Ecclesiam ludendo and chorizando convenichant;
qoud detestabile erat and malum. De qua turpi consuetudine dolebat, etc. Aug.
ad Fratres in eremo, sermon. 25.

Institutum est a Patre nostro Sancto Ambrosio, ut vigiliae cessarent, ut
homicidia and fornicationes a fidelibus deponerentur. Aug. ibid.


frequented by Saints, and commended by several Fathers; yet notwithstanding,
to prevent Scandals and gross Abuses, that had crept in, they were much disused
and discountenanced, and particularly by the Council of Eliberis; and so fall
not under our present Disquisition.

2. There is a Religious Watch that is metaphorical; Vigilia mentis, the Watch,
not of man's eye, Cord vigila, fide vigila, spe vigila, charitate vigila,
operibus vigila; and quando corpore dormieris, veniet tempus ut surgas. August.
in Luc. sermon. 23.

(...). Theophyl. in Matt. 24.42.

(...). Chrysostom. in Matt. 24.42.


but of his soul; that Watch which St. Austine does mention and recommend too,
Cord vigila, Watch with thy heart. And this is the Watch which my Text
requires; namely, our diligent care, our greatest caution, our exactest
vigilance and circumspection about those high concerns which respect our God
and our selves. And this is the business of the Text, and that great thing
which our Blessed Savior requires in this expression, What I say unto you, I
say unto all, Watch.

The words contain two things considerable.

1. Our Savior's great Command, (...), Watch; Be careful, be wary, be
circumspect: That Is the nature and matter of this Command.

2. The Subjects of this Command, the Persons to whom it belongs; Who must
watch? The Text answers: 1. the Apostles, (...), I say unto you; 2. every
person whatsoever, (...), I say unto all, Watch.

The substance of the Text may be gathered up into this Conclusion, namely,
That every person stands obliged to watch.

But what must we watch? and why?

There Is no Watchman but has his Walk or Station. The Bishop, (...).
Nazianzen. Epist. ad Caesareenses.
who is the great Watchman of the Church, has his Diocese; the Minister, who
is the Bishop's Substitute, Trustee and Deputy, has his Parish; the Justice
has his County; the Mayor has his Corporation: Every Watchman has his
Charge, his Ward; and what then is ours? where must we watch? and what? I
answer.

(...). Chrysostom. 19 Homil. in Genesin.

Quanta inhumanitas and feritas est omnem fraterni amoris affectum exuisse and
abjecisse? an aequum non erat ut major natu frater minoris tutelam and
custodiam gereret? Pererius in Genesis 4.9.

In omnibus peccantibus-pecco, quando eos quos seio peccasse five peccare,
quadam crudelis animi malignitate, non increpo. Prosper de Vita contemplat.
3.23.

(...). Theophylact. in Ep. prior. ad Thessal. c. 5. v. 11.


1. There Is no man but stands obliged to watch over his Brother, his Friend, his
Neighbor. It was but an uncharitable and saucy reply which Cain made to God,
Am I my brother's keeper? (Genesis 4.9.) Yea, (...), says St. Chrysostom, Man
should be his Brother's keeper: but if not, it is like he may prove in one sense
what Cain was in another, his murderer too. It Is St. Paul's Command, Exhort
one another; (Heb. 3.13.) and again, Edify one another; (1 Thessalonians. 5.11.) and
yet again, Admonish one another; (Romans 15.14.) What mean all these Commands, if
we are not bound to watch over one another?

Quod non de se solo, verum de sua quoque familia, voti istius sponsionem facit
in eo exemplum vel maxim infigne nobis proponitor gubernandae familiae
nostrae. Equidem sic semper statui, conjunctionem eam quae famulis nostris
nobiscum est permagnam esse, and prope filiorum conjunctioni parem, etc. Masius
in Jos. 24.15.

(...) ((...)) (...). Chris. Hom. 42. in Genesis

Prisci Patres, qui Legem Mosis praegressi sunt, solebant viva voce and per
domesticam institutionem and disciplinam docere filios and posteros suos
quaecunque ad consequendam animae salutem, etc. Pererius in Genesis 18.19.


2. There Is no man but stands obliged to watch over his own House and Family.
Thus Josuah, As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. (Jos. 24.15.) This
good man concerns himself for his Family; and doubtless there is not a soul
within our walls but is our particular charge. Thus St. Austin, Vnusquisque in
domo sua Episcopus: Our Family is our proper Parish, our peculiar Diocese; and
the Governor of the house is the Bishop, and consequently the Watchman there.
But,

3. There is no man but stands obliged to watch over Himself. And methinks it is
our shame, (...). Basil. Magn. in Append. de Anima, concione 23.
and against the common principles of nature, that man should need to be thus
commanded over and over. Take heed unto your selves; so Moses: (Deuteronomy. 4.15.)
and thus St. Paul, Take heed unto your selves; (Act. 20.28.) (...), take all
care imaginable; and that, (...), about your selves. And the truth is, were
this Watchman in the Text another Argus, had man as many eyes as the Heavens
have stars; yet even then would he need no Charge, no Precinct, no other Ward
to oversee, guard and watch, but himself. See this in 2 particulars.

First, It Is our great concern, and must be our daily task, and an hard one
it is, to guard and set a watch upon our Senses, and Outward man. (...).
Athanas. Orat. contra Gentes.

(...), etc. Gregor. Nazianzen. Orat. 40.


If these be not carefully looked to, it is ten to one but they prove our eternal
ruin. Shall I instance in these 3 particulars only?

1. It Is the great concern, Quod in Coelo Sol and Luna, ipsum id sunt in homine
Oculi. Sol and Luna duo mundi lumina; Oculi certissima in carne sydera fulgent
e sublimi, perinde ac in statione speculatores, interdiu noctuque nobis
excubantes. Coel. Rhodig. l. 3. c. 28.

Oculi and Cor peccati proxenetae. Drusius in Eccles. 4.8.

(...), etc. Greg. Nyssen. de Hominis opificio, orat. 2.


and must be the daily care of man, to set a Watch upon his Eye. It Is true, the
Eye itself is Nature's Sentinel; it is purposely placed in man's upper Region,
as in a Tower, to be his Watchman. Yea, but how ready this very Watchman of
ours is to undo us, methinks the God of nature himself seems to inform us, by
providing and lending us a guard to secure it. It Is the observation of St.
Ambrose, Deus oculum munivit, God has set a fence about man's Eye, he has
clapped upon it a Lid, like a Trap-door; and that not only to prevent the
entrance of an Enemy, but to anticipate the dangerous excursions and sallies of
the Eye it self.

And that this little Sentinel of ours is apt enough most basely to betray us,
our Savior has given us this fair intimation, If thine eye offend thee --
(Matt. 5.29.) What Is that? Si ad delinquendum incitat, says Grotius, if it
provoke thee to sin; perhaps the sin of Envy. Is thine eye evil? (Matt. 20.15.)
Evil how? (...), says St. Chrysostom; is it an eye of envy and malice? Solomon
mentions (...), the proud and lofty eyes. (...). Nazianzen. Orat. 18.

(...), etc. Musaeus.

(...). Nazianzen. Orat. 34.

(...). Basil. Magnus de Institut. Monachorum.


(Prove. 6.17.) There is another Eye which Pineda styles animae lenonem, the
baud and pander of the soul: (...), says Saint Peter, an eye full of the
adulteress. (1 Pet. 2.14.) This eye David did not guard. He saw a woman: what
then? he took her, and lay with her. (2 Samuel 11.2, 4.) The Naturalists tell us,
that there are some Creatures that spawn and engender by the Eye. It Is thus
with man: his Eye engenders; his Heart, like the womb, conceives; and his
Hand, like the midwife, brings forth sin.

There is yet one Eye more, that must be glanced at too; the covetous Eye:
(...). Athanasius Orat. contra Gentes.
His eye is not satisfied with riches. (Eccles 8.4.) It Is not said, his heart,
but, his eye, is not satisfied. No; nummos contemplor, says that wretch in
Horace, I behold, I view my bags. And what then? Poor Achan tells us, When I
saw, then I coveted, and took. (Jos. 7.21.) Achan declares, as Masius observes,
progrediendi ordinem, the Order, Method and Progress of his sin* a visu ad
animum, ab animo ad opus. Sin moved from his Sight to his Soul: When I saw,
then I coveted. It moved again from his Soul to his Hand: I coveted, and took.
Thus did this daring sin of Sacrilege pass through this little member: Achan's
Eye, that diminutive light, that small candle of his body, had a great thief in
it. And sure we are, though the natural Camel, with a bunch and a load upon his
back, could not pass that narrow gate of Jerusalem which (as some say, Non est
quod hic fabulas aniles comminiscantur, Hierosolymis fuisse Portam cui nomen
fuerit Acus, etc. Erasmus in Matt. 19.24.
though Erasmus laugh at it) was called the Needle's eye; yet this moral Camel,
this huge and mighty sin, Covetousness, Theft, Sacrilege, though never so much
laden, does often pass the Eye of man.

And if so, if this Eye, which Nature has given us to be our Watchman, do thus
prove a Traitor, and let in our sorest Enemies, let us with Job indent and
article with it; and what a fair Covenant cannot do, a strong Guard must: lest
otherwise our own Eye prove to us what that of the Basilisk does to others;
lest with one unhappy glance it strike us dead for ever.

2. It Is the great concern, (...). Nazianzen. Orat. 53.

Nihilest quod sordidus dens, and fell non lita, sed macerata, vox non
concutiat. Coel. Rhod. l. 26. c. 25.

Nihil est tam volucre quam maledictum; nihil facilius emittitur, nihil citius
expicitur, latius dissipatur. Cicero pro Planc.

(...). Nazianzen. Orat. 40.

(...). Idem Epist. 191.

Quotidiana fornax nostra est humana lingua. August. Confession. l. 10. c. 37.

(...). Chrysostom. in Ps. 120.4.


and must be the daily care of man, to set a Watch upon his Tongue.

St. James styles the Tongue of man (...), a little member, (Jam. 3.5.) and
yet, as little as it is, O what great mischief does it work? The Apostle tells
us, that an ungoverned tongue defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the
course of nature. (Jam. 3.6.) Mark his expression, (...), it defiles and fires:
it blacks and sullies like the smoke; but withal, it scorcheth and burns
like the flame. I remember the Psalmist compares the language of an ill Tongue
to Coals of Juniper. (Psalm. 120.4.) But why to them? It Is observed, that
whilst the Juniper is preserved fresh and green, it affords the coolest
shade; but when it is cut down and burnt, it yields the hottest Coal. It Is thus
with the Tongue of man: If it be well used and rightly governed, it refreshes,
like some welcome shade; but if not, it strongly burns. And as it fires
whatever else is round about it, so will it scorch the mouth that holds it too.
Whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire. (Matt. 5.22.)
Vox convitii gravioris, says Drusius, One base reproach from a slanderous
Tongue, as it burns like Coals of Juniper, so does it kindle the flames of Hell
too.

And methinks, if the Tongue of man be thus like fire, we are concerned to
watch it. When an house is burnt, though the main flame be extinguished, yet if
there be some few coals left glowing within the rubbish, to prevent any farther
danger, it is duly watched, till all fear be over. Believe it, there is greater
hazard from a Tongue, if it be not the better looked to. Solomon tells us, Death
and life are in the power of the tongue. (Prove. 18.21.) Yea and a greater then
Solomon tells us too, By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shalL be condemned. (Matt. 12.37.) Here lies jus vitae and necis: as we
order our Tongue thus or thus, so shall we either live or die, and that for
ever.

And if so, let us resolve with David, I will take heed that I sin not with my
tongue. But how will he help it? thus, I will keep my mouth with a bridle.
(Psalm. 39.1.) So we: but the LXX thus, (...), I have set a guard upon my mouth.
But lest David's own guard should prove too weak for this unruly member, he
begs some auxiliaries from Heaven, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth. (Psalm.
141.3.) One would think that Nature had sufficiently done this already; for,
besides two Lips without the Mouth, she has placed within (...), as Homer
words it, ((...).) a double row of Teeth, like so many Palisadoes, or little
Pike-men, to keep in the Tongue: (...). Eustathius in Hom. (...).

Accepisti dentes ad macellum corrodendum: cur non potius ad omnem hiatum and
rictum tuum coronandum? cur non potius ad pulsus linguae temperandos?
Tertullian. de Resurrect. carnis.


and yet notwithstanding, David thinks all this guard too weak, and his Tongue
too strong; and therefore does thus petition his God yet once again, Keep thou
the door of my lips. (Ibid.) Man's Lips, like a Door, must be sometimes open,
sometimes shut. It Is a Door of such constant use, that it cannot possibly be
blocked, nailed, or quite walled up: but withal, it is a Door of so much
danger, that it need be constantly watched and strongly guarded.

3. It Is the great concern, and must be the daily care of man, to watch over
his Hand; I mean, his Works, all his works whatsoever. It Is excellent Counsel,
Take heed what thou do. (Acts 22.26.) Such counsel St. Paul gave Timothy,
Take heed to thy self, (1 Timothy 4.16.) that is, to thy Conversation. Thus David,
I will take heed to my ways, (Psalm. 39.1) that is, to the course, tenor and
actions of my life. And that we are obliged to watch against all wicked actions
I need not prove, since we are bid to watch over even good ones too. So Christ
commands, Take heed how ye hear. (Luke 8.18.) So again, Take ye heed, watch and
pray. (...). Macarius Hom. 31.
(Mark 13.33.) Yet once more, Take heed that ye do not your alms so and so.
(Matt. 6.1.) We must take heed, not only how we curse, but how we pray; not
only how we speak what is naught, but how we hear what is good; not only how we
rob the rich, but even how we relieve the poor too. Whatever our actions are,
natural, civil, or sacred, we are much concerned to watch them. But,

Secondly, It Is our great concern, and must be our daily task, and an hard one
it is, to watch over our Inward man.

It Is good Counsel which the Prophet gives us, Take heed to your spirit. (Mal.
2.15.) It Is true, man's flesh wants a Guard; (...), etc. Basil. Magn. in Apend.
concione 23. de Anima: and rursus, (...). Ibid.

Prae omnibus rebus quas oculatissime servare solemus, oportet cor and animam
servare, ne vel errore ullo inficiatur, vel ad vitia declinet. Baynus in Prove.
4.23.


the Eye was a Supervisor, the Foot wants a Guide, the Ear wants a Monitour,
the Tongue wants a Curb, the Hand wants a Restraint; but above all, here lies
our main care. Keep thy heart, says Solomon. (Prove. 4.23.) But how must that
be kept? The Text answers, Keep thy heart with all diligence: (...) says the
Hebrew, (...) says the Greek; Keep thy heart with all keeping: omni cautela
says the Arabic, with the utmost care and caution that can be used. But you will
say, What is there in the Heart of man that needs all this watching? I answer,

1. The Thoughts and Imaginations that are in man's Heart have too much need to
be watched. Cavaemus Cogitationes inutiles, ut animarum nostrarum facies decora
permaneat. Quod si tamen aliquando noxia aliqua Cogitatio mentem subierit, tota
solicitudine laboremus citius abluere sordem qua nos maculari conspicimus
Bernard. Flor. c. 41.

(...). Origenes in Matthaeum.




What swarms of Thoughts, and evil ones too, are found in the Heart of man, our
Blessed Savior has thus informed us, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, etc. (Matt. 15.19) Tell me, what
strange guests are these, that they should find the least harbor within the
noble Soul of man! Murders! Adulteries! Thefts! Methinks, wherever we catch
an Adulterer, a Robber, a Murderer, we should immediately clap strong guards
upon them. One great reason why the Officer does search suspected houses, and
keeps up his Watch and his ward, is to prevent the Adulterer, the Murderer,
the Thief, or else to apprehend him. And certainly, if every suspected place
deserves to be watched and searched, let us watch and search our Hearts too;
it is like enough there sneaks the Adulterer, there lurks the Thief, there is hid
the Murderer: and if we find this cursed crew lodged within us, Custodiendae
sunt vigiliae super cogitationum gregem, says St. Bernard, we must set a guard
upon these desperate Villains; such brutish and devilish Thoughts must be
shackled, chained, dislodged, condemned, and crucified. Such a caution has
Moses left us, Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying
thus or thus. (Deuteronomy. 15.9.) The expression imports, that although men make
light of wicked Thoughts, yet it is our great concern, not only to watch, but
with indignation and zeal to throw them out.

2. The Designs, Ends and Aims that are found in man's Heart have too much need
to be watched.

It Is usually said, Finis coronat opus, it is the End that crowns the work. The
Philosopher tells us, Actiones morales specificantur a fine; Moral actions are
good or bad according to that End toward which they are designed. How good
soever any work may be in its matter and substance, yet if the End be naught,
the whole work will prove so too. Doubtless the Pharisees did many excellent
things; they observed the Sabbaths, they prayed, they fasted, they gave Alms:
and yet their base unworthy Designs, their (...), their desire of a little
applause and vainglory, provoked God to disown their persons that were so
plausible, and to reject all that service that was so pompous.

And truly, it is but sad to consider that these Pharisees, who looked so much
like glorious Saints, should by the treachery of naughty Hearts, and the
proposal of sinister Ends, render themselves but gilded Hypocrites. It Is but
sad that such splendid shows of Devotion, such strict observations of Sabbaths,
such frequent Prayers, and such set and solemn Fastings, should rather, through
their low Designs, provoke our God then please him; that those very persons
should prove but Meteors, whom the world took not only for Stars, but
Constellations too.

And lest this should prove our own condition, lest all our services should
miscarry, and God should say unto us, as once he did to the Jews, When ye
fasted and mourned, did ye at all fast to me, even to me? (Zach. 7.5.) It Is a
dreadful demand: but that it concern us not, we are obliged most strictly to
examine what are the Designs and Projects of our Hearts; lest perhaps some mean
and wicked End should corrupt our holy Duties, lest some degenerous and ignoble
Aims should turn our Gold into dirt, our sacrifice into sin, and make our
sweetest incense go ^^t and stink with God, as if it were but so mu^^ snuff.

3. The several Passions that are found within the Heart of man have but too
much need to be watched too. (...). Nazianzen. ad Gregor. Nyss. orat. 6.


That there are, and ever were and will be, (...). Greg. Nyssen. de Virginit.
c. 12.

(...). Basil. Seleuc. orat. 35.


whatever the Stoics dream, whatever some Fathers think, such and such
Affections found within the Heart of man, it is sure enough. Plutarch tells us,
(...), To find a man without those common Passions of love, hatred, fear, hope,
desire, and the rest, it is impossible. That these Affections and strong and
impetuous, all experience shows. St. Bernard thus complains, Intellectus and
Affectus quandoque sibi adversantur, man's Passion contradicts his Reason:
Parere nescit, says Seneca, it will not obey: no, impar Ratio, says Seneca
again, man's Reason is too weak for his Passions, which rule that Soul whom
they should have served.

And methinks, if our Affections, instead of being loyal Subjects, are thus
like to invade and usurp our Reason's throne; if our Passions, which were
designed by God to be the servants of our Understandings, are like to become
domineering Lords and Tyrants; if these blind and boisterous Rebels endeavor
to seize the captive Soul, and then use it even at pleasure; methinks we are
concerned, and that in time, and guard and watch them.

I remember that expression of the Psalmist, quoted by St. Paul, Stand in awe,
and sin not. (Psalm. 4.4.) St. Hierom translates it, Irascimini, and the LXX
thus, (...), Be angry, and sin not. This Text does not command our anger, as a
Duty, but does rather suppose it, as a natural and lawful Passion. Si
irascimini; so Muis: Si contingat irasci; so Estius: If this Passion chance to
move and stir. What then? Cavete, beware, set a watch, lest perhaps it exceed
its bounds, and so become a sin. The same course must be taken with other
Passions too. It's-true, what Seneca says of our best Endeavors, non tollunt,
sed temperant: we cannot destroy these Affections and quite root them out; but
yet we are concerned to moderate, subdue and rule them; and in order to that,
we must be sure to guard and watch them. But why all this? upon what score is
it that man stands thus obliged to watch over Himself, his Eye, his Tongue, his
Hand, but above all his Heart and Spirit? I answer,

First, The Soul of man does sufficiently need the strictest Watch and the
strongest Guard that can be thought on: and that for these Reasons.

O si paulo diligentius considerare velimus quanta pericula, quanta mala nobis
imminent, and Animabus nostris insidiantur! Baynus in Prove. 4.23.
1. The Soul of man has many Enemies abroad, round about, and very near it too.

This is one great Consideration that does ordinarily quicken men to watch:
Hannibal ad portas; if an enemy be at the Gate, if Thieves and Robbers beset
the house, it is no time then to snort and sleep. This argument is not mine, but
St. Peter's; Be sober, be vigilant: but what needs that? because your adversary
the Devil, as a roaring lion, walks, etc. (1 Pet. 5.8.) The Devil walks his
rounds, and shall man lie secure? the Devil himself does roar, and is not man
concerned to look about him? It Is observable that the Devil is styled a Lion, a
beast nullius fere somni, says Coelius Rhodiginus, one that sleeps but little:
and if the Devil himself does watch, how dares the Sinner slumber?

But besides the Devil and his numerous legions, the World has in it great
store of Enemies too: its Pleasures, its Profits, its Honors, its Sons of
Belial, what are all these but so many Traps and Ginns to catch and ruin
Souls? Hosts sacrilegi, animi mei fures; so Socrates rightly called them.

And yet there is one Enemy more, that is nearer still; I mean our own Flesh
with its numerous train of Lusts. And certainly this Enemy does approach
somewhat near indeed. As St. John is styled by the Greek Father (...), Christ's
bosom friend: so may our Flesh be styled (...), man's bosom foe. Hence the
Apostle thus exhorts us, Abstain from fleshly lusts: why? (...) they war
against the Soul. (1 Pet. 2.11.) And methinks, if the Soul of man be thus
opposed by the Flesh, besieged by the World, assaulted by the Devil; if it be
surrounded with Enemies, that are strong, cruel, malicious, and strangely
politic; it must needs want the strictest Watch and the strongest Guards that
can be thought on.

2. The Soul of man is but infirm, (...). Basil. Magn. de Anima concione 23. in
Append.
impotent and weak. Indeed Nazianzene tells us that a religious Soul is (...),
a strong Soul; (...), like a wall of brass: and St. Paul says Abraham was
strong in faith. (Romans 4.20.) Perhaps there may be such a spiritual Sampson
here and there, whom these cursed Philistines cannot easily conquer: but, alas!
what is this to the generality of Christians? Tell me, Sirs, are we indeed grown
such Giants in Grace that we need no guard? are we grown such strong men in
Christ that we need not fear to be surprised by the Flesh, World, or Devil?
Sure I am, the Devil was too hard for Judas, though an Apostle; the World was
too hard for Demas, though a great Professor; and the Flesh was too hard for
David, though an eminent Saint; nay, a poor Maid servant was too hard for him
who is styled by St. Chrysostom (...), the prime and chief of all the Apostles.

And methinks, if such a man as Peter, that professed Champion of his dear Lord
and ours, was thus miserably foiled by a pitiful wench; we should not grow
secure, as if we were strong enough to deal with the Anakims of our Flesh, the
Zamzummins of the World, and the Devil himself, that greater and worse Goliath.
The truth is, we are generally such babes in Christ, such weaklings in Faith,
such pulings and dwarfs in Grace, that we may too justly complain in the words
of Baynus, Quam facile vincimur? quam nullo negotio huc illuc impellimur? How
easily is the heart of man conquered? how quickly is it taken? There Is scarce a
Temptation that is strong, but is prevalent too; there is scarce a Lust that
stirs, but beats us.

See how sadly St. Paul complains of this; I marvel that ye are so soon
removed, to be overthrown, and that so quickly too. (Gal. 1.6.) Surely it is but
a slender Garrison that holds not out one day; it is a weak Fort that holds not
out one hour. Such a Fort is the Heart of man; no sooner does the Devil demand
a surrender, but it sometimes yields in a moment. But what is the reason? The
Prophet tells us, The whole heart is faint: (Esa. 1.5.) and if so, where our
royal Fort is weak, there our Guard should be the stronger. Thus Cartwright,
Diurnas and nocturnas excubias hic collocemus; since man's Soul is thus infirm
and impotent, and yet must expect the strongest assaults imaginable, we must
watch by day, we must watch by night: nay more, Quaterniones augeamus, we are
concerned to double and treble those Guards which we set upon it.

3. The Soul of man is false and treacherous. Thus Nazianzene, (...), the Soul
of man is perfidious and faithless, and so must rather be watched then trusted.
It Is thus in the world; if a Servant or Soldier be but once suspected to be
false, he will be constantly eyed, and closely observed so much the more.

And thus must the Soul of man be dealt with; there is too much reason for it.
Thus the Prophet, The heart is deceitful: (Jer. 17.9.) aptum ad fallendum,
says Clarius; it is apt to cheat us. There Is nothing so treacherous as this; so
much does the Text assure us. The heart is deceitful: but how? and in what
measure? (...), above all things. It Is worse then Laban. Your father has
deceived me ten times, says Jacob: (Genesis 31.7.) but, alas! our hearts deceive
us more then ten times ten: they promise fair, but fail; they make covenants,
but basely break them; they vow allegiance to Heaven, and yet prove Traitors;
they pretend to succor us against our enemies, and yet how do they betray us
into their hands? and if so, O quam dolosum est cor hominis! says one, O how
perfidious and treacherous are these Hearts of ours! Man does little dream what
strange fallacies and tricks are in them. Is thy servant a dog, that he should
do this great thing? (2 Reg. 8.13.) Poor Hazael! he took himself to be a man,
but really proved that very dog which he thus disowned and scorned. And
methinks, if the Heart of man be so false and traitorous, if it has already
betrayed and cheated us over and over, we should never trust it more without
the strictest Watch and strongest Guard.

Secondly, The Soul of man, as it greatly needs, so does it highly deserve the
strictest Watch and strongest Guard that can be thought on. See why in 2
Particulars.

1. The Soul of man is the main and chiefest Interest which Christ has in all
the world. It Is not to be disputed but we stand obliged to tender the Concerns
of our Blessed Savior, who has already showed such a tender respect to us and
ours. One would think that mere Ingenuity, Gratitude and the Gentileness of a
Christian spirit should engage us, to our very utmost power, to secure all the
Interests of that Holy Jesus, who has already been at so much cost and pains
to secure all that which we call ours.

If it be demanded what Concerns Christ has in the world that are in danger,
and need securing; I answer, Whatever Interest Christ has throughout the
world, there is nothing so exposed to hazard, there is nothing that he does so
entirely love and so highly prize, as the Soul of man. This is the thing which
he does particularly challenge and claim to be his. Behold, all souls are mine.
(Ezekiel. 18.4.) They are his by Donation, by Covenant, by Conquest, yea and by
Purchase too. Thus the Apostle, Ye were bought with a price. (1 Cor. 6.20.) The
Soul of man is the Fruit of Christ's Sufferings, it is the Travail of his soul,
it is the Reward of his obedience, it is the Purchase of his tears, his groans,
his sweat, his agony, his Cross, yea and his blood too.

And methinks, since our Blessed Savior has paid such a vast price for the
Soul of man, we should not easily see it lost: since this is the thing which
Christ makes his grand concern, and yet we find it in the midst of enemies, we
should not think much to watch and guard it. I am confident there is not a man
amongst us so ill-natured, but he would gladly secure the Interest of his
Friend. I read that Abraham, with no greater army then his own house could
raise him, adventured to encounter four Kings to rescue Lot, that was his
Nephew. Tell me, Sirs, who amongst you would not save an ordinary neighbor's
beast from drowning? nay more, who amongst you would not gladly be instrumental
to save your very enemie's house from being robbed or burnt to ashes?

And certainly, if we have this respect for an Enemy, we should have much more
for our dearest Friends: if we are thus tender of an ordinary Neighbor, how
much more tender should we be of that Blessed Jesus, who deserves it better?
Remember, the Soul of man is the great interest of him that loves you; it is
that which he counts his Treasure, it is that which he calls his Jewel, it is
that which he owns for his Spouse, it is that which he esteems as one of his
Members: and if so, if the Treasure of Heaven does lie in danger, if the Jewels
of God are like to be lost, if the Spouse of Christ is like to be ravished, if
the Members of his body are like to be rent and torn in pieces, or, which is
all one, if the Soul of man be like to miscarry; we are obliged to be at least
so kind to our Blessed Savior as to watch and guard that Soul, which is the
Purchase of his blood, and the only thing on this side Heaven which he dearly
loves.

(...). Basil. Magn. de Abdicat. rerum.

(...). Chrysostom. in Matt. 16.26.


2. The Soul of man is in itself a thing of far greater value then any thing
else man has besides.

Experience tells us, that the more considerable things are, the more carefully
are they looked to. The poor Fisherman is not so solicitous to provide a Convoy
for his little Boat, as the wealthy Merchant is for his Ships that are richly
laden. The Beggar, that has nothing on his cupboard but an earthen dish,
nothing in his wardrobe but rags, nothing in his yard but a few sticks and
straws, what cares he for Watch and ward? but as for the moneyed Citizen, the
Banker, the Jeweller, the man that deals in things of value, his doors and
windows must be secured; his locks, bolts and bars must be strong; nor is this
enough without a considerable Watch in the streets too.

And, surely, if things of this nature deserve all this care, the Soul of man
does so much more. For, tell me, what is there to be named that is worth so much
as Souls? Alas! Gold and Silver are but so much dirt; Pearls, Diamonds and
Rubies are but so much rubbish. What if I tell you that those very Pearls,
which the world counts precious, are little better then the wens, the
excrescencies, nay the scabs of a poor fish? and if so, what pitiful things
are these compared with Souls?

What the Soul of man is Macarius tells us, (...), (...). Greg. Nyssen. de
Anima and Resurrect.
a creature that is wonderful, high and noble: it is (...), says Nazianzene,
it is somewhat near, somewhat of kin to God. Pluris valet quam coelum and terra
totusque mundus, says another: (...), etc. Cyril. Hierosol. de Anima.
Heaven, earth, the whole world is not of equal value to any one Soul that is in
it. Tell me then, shall we carefully secure a little contemptible dirt, and yet
expose our choicer Treasure? shall we set a guard upon an handful of earth,
and yet hazard our richest Jewel? It Is not thus in cases of common danger. If
an House be fired, whatever becomes of lumber, the best furniture shall be
secured: if an Enemy invade a Kingdom, every man will send his Treasure into
that Garrison that is best fortified and most strongly manned. That Is our case.
There is an enemy that will invade us; and our main Concern is an immortal
Soul. If we lose any other thing whatever, it is not considerable; if we lose
our Estates, our Reputation, nay, our very Lives, it is no great matter: but if
our Soul be lost, whatever else be kept, we are undone for ever: if we lose our
Souls, we lose our share in glory, we lose a Crown, we lose the society of
Saints and Angels, we lose the enjoyment of Christ, and the Vision of God; and
if so, where is our Guard? where is our Watch?

Thirdly, It Is very uncertain when our great Lord will come to Judgment. Thus
the very Judge himself has told us, Of that day and hour no man knows, no
not the Angels, neither the Son, but the Father. (Mark 13.32.) That there will
be such a day, it is sure enough. Thus the Evangelist, the Son of man comes,
(Matt. 24.44.) (...), he is coming: the expression sounds as if he were already
set out and upon his way; and how near he may be, no man can tell.

And methinks the uncertainty of this great Day should make us watch. It Is our
Savior's own Argument: Watch, there is his counsel; but what is his motive? for
ye know not what hour your Lord does come. (Matt. 24.42.) Should he come and
surprise us in our beds of security, O what would become of us then? It Is
recorded of a certain Commander, that finding one of his Sentinels fast asleep,
without more ado he ran him through; and for that severity said no more but
only this, Qualem inveni, talem reliqui, Asleep I found him, and fast asleep I
left him, and that for ever. Yea, that of Virgil, which is only unhappy in
other cases, is very just in this, Caeduntur vigiles -- If the man that is
obliged and undertakes to watch be found false to his trust, and careless of
himself and others, he deserves to die. So it is threatened, The Lord of that
servant shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with hypocrites.
(Matt. 24.50, 51.) If this once prove a man's case, we may say to him as
Tiberius once did to a prodigal Spend-thrift that had wasted a fair Estate, and
at last complained of his present wants and former follies; Sero experrectus
es; Sir, says he, you are awake too late.

Let us remember that expression of Pliny, Vita vigilia est; to be awake is to
be alive. There Is much of truth in that of Plato, (...), A man that is fast
asleep differs but very little from that man that is dead. And certain it is,
if we desire to live with God, we must not sleep in sin: if we desire to live
for ever in another world, we must for ever be awake in this. It Is a concerning
expression that of St. Paul, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead.
(Ephesians. 5.14.) (...), says St. Chrysostom: The man that lives in a course of sin
is one that is fast asleep, yea and dead too; dead at present, and, if he wake
not the sooner, like to continue dead for ever. For when once our Lord shall
come, if he find us rocked and lulled asleep in sin, what the event will be St.
Austine tells us, Dormitando casurus es, such a spiritual slumber and lethargy
will even quite undo us; it will only prepare our Bodies for a grave, and
render our Souls fit for nothing else but Hell. But, on the other hand, if we
will but once awake, if we will but up and be doing, if our Lord shall find us
at our work, upon our Guard and our Watch; what then? Blessed is that servant
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. But,

Fourthly, There is yet one Argument more that I must press upon myself and you
who are my Namesakes too, and that is this; We are obliged to watch by that very
Name which we bear: I do not mean only our general Christian Name, but our
particular Surname too.

I remember that person who has written the Life of our incomparable Bishop
Jewel observes out of St. Chrysostom, that there lies a great Treasury in
Names, and that the excellent worth of several persons has been conspicuous in
them; as, the Heavenly gifts of Theodosius, the Divine spirit of Ambrose, the
sweet vein of Lactantius, the shining style of Fulgentius, the golden mouth of
Chrysostom, etc.

And certainly, Names of excellence are bestowed but ill where they are not
answered well. To bear a good name is matter of credit; but to live contrary to
it, it is matter of shame. It Is but a sad expression, Thou have a name to live,
and art dead. (Apoc. 3.1.) Alas! what is the name without the thing? what^ s a
name to be rich, if a man be really poor? what is a name to be saved, and yet he
damned? So here, What Is the name of a Watchman, if we are found fast asleep?

Historians tell us, that Alexander the Great, that man of Courage, had a
soldier in his Army that was of his own name, but a pitiful Coward:
whereupon Alexander thus took him up; Either quit thy baseness, or quit thy
name. So say I to you, Either be what your present names import, or else get
new ones.

I can tell you, the great God answers his Name. O Lord, how excellent is thy
Name! (Psalm. 8.1.) But are his Works so too? yea, the Lord has done excellent
things. (Esa. 12.5.) As is his Name, so are his Works, and so is He; Thou art
more glorious and excellent, etc. (Psalm. 76.4.) Yea, God answers this and all
his other names to the very full; nay, God is infinitely better then any name
does speak him: and if so, let not us be worse.

Again, Christ answers his great Name too: Thou shall call his name Jesus,
(Matt. 1.21.) that is, Savior, says the Angel. But will Christ make good this
Name? Yea, he shall save; he shall do what his name imports.

Yet farther; I find there is not an Angel in Heaven but answers his Name too.
Dionysius tells us that Thrones is a name of Height, Dionys. Areop. ^e.
Coelesti Hier. c. 7.
Cherubim a name of Knowledge, Seraphim a name of Ardency, Dominations a name
of Power; and in general, (...), the names of the whole Hierarchy of Heaven are
(...), declarations of those choice Endowments that are certainly found in the
persons of those Angels to whom they belong.

Thus do God, Christ and Angels answer their Names; and why should not we
answer ours? My Text requires it: (...). What Is that? why only this, Act the
part of him who is a real Gregory, a Watchman indeed.

I could mention several Namesakes of ours that were no Sleepers. Gregory
Bishop of Neocaesarea is styled by Eusebius (...), Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6.
cap. 30.
of all the Bishops of that Age the most famous: (...), a Disciple of the
Gospel; so Nyssene: Nyssen. in vita Greg. Thaumat.

Basil. Magn. in l. de Spiritu Sancto c. 29.

Hieron. in Ep. 184.


(...), a glorius Light; so Great St. Basil: vir Apostolicorum signorum atque
Virtutum, a man somewhat like the Apostles in doing Miracles; so St. Hierom.
Insomuch that he is recommended to all posterity by this known Title, (...),
Gregory the great Worker of Wonders.

I could tell you of Gregory Nyssene too, a man styled (...), a great Example
of Virtue, Gregor. Nazianz. in Orat. 19.
(...), the Ornament of Mankind; nay more, (...), a man ranked with Angels:
concerning whom Nazianzene writes thus, as indeed became the Son of such a
Father; (...), Gregor. Nazianz. in Carm. iamb.

(...),
(...),
(...), etc.


And as for this Nazianzene himself, as he justly commends his Father, so do
others as deservedly commend him too. (...), says one; Gregorius Presbyter in
vita Nazianzeni.
This Gregory was a man every way accomplished: (...), He was surnamed Gregory
the great Theologue or Divine of those Times. So reverend and pious was he,
that the good Emperor Theodosius did (...), honor him even as if he had been
his father.

I might yet name one Gregory more in the Latin Church too, the first and the
best Bishop of Rome that ever bore that Name, and was styled Gregorius Magnus,
Gregory the Great; a man of the choicest Piety, Sympson's Church History.
and withal so Humble, that he opposed that proud Title of Universal Bishop,
which Boniface the Third procured, and the Pope still retains. So far from this
Ambition was this Namesake of ours, that he was the very first Roman Bishop
that ever styled himself Servus servorum Dei, the Servant of the servants of
God.

And now since we bear the same Name with these Holy men, let us lead the same
Lives, and manifest the same Graces too. Though we cannot be Bishops, yet we
may and must be Saints, as well as they: though we cannot be as Learned, yet
let us be as Holy: though we have not the same Knowledge in our Heads, yet let
us have the same Eyes, that so we may prove Vigilantii, Watchmen, that is,
Gregory's indeed. Let Us watch against our Lusts, to subdue and kill them: let us
watch over our Hearts and Lives, to reform and mend them. Let not the world
have occasion, through any of us, to report the Vices of some Gregory's, since
it finds cause to admire the Graces and Virtues of others.

Let Us but remember that our very Name does import and promise Vigilance. Let Us
remember also that there is in our Coat of Arms a Lion, who is not only the
most generous, but the most watchful Creature; and this Lion not Dormant, not
Couchant, but Passant and upon his Legs too. And methinks, since we bear the
Lion, that Emblem of Nobility and Vigilance, in our Arms, it would be
dishonorable for us to entertain any ignoble Dormouse, any dull, sottish and
lethargicall Humor in our Bosoms. What a discredit would it be to our whole
Race and Family, should any person who bears the Name of a Gregory be found a
mere Endymion, a sluggish Drone, a sleepy Sot?

No; let us up and be doing: let us be active for the Honor of our God and our
selves: let us live to the Credit of our Religion and our Name: let not so much
as one Hildebrand be found amongst us: let us hate Vice, and embrace Virtue;
that what was once said of Nazianzene, that Great Namesake of ours, may be said
of us too, (...), This Gregory was a real lover of every man and every thing
that is good. Yea, here is an Example fit for our Imitation indeed: and if we
will but tread in the steps of such pious and holy persons, we shall recover
the decayed Reputation of our Church; we shall maintain the Credit of our
Families and the just Honor of our Name; we shall approve ourselves God's
Watchmen now, and be crowned his Saints hereafer. Let us so order the whole
Course of our Conversation with that signal Piety toward our God, that ready
Obedience toward our Governors, that exemplary Charity toward our
Neighbors, and that strict Sobriety toward ourselves; that as we are this day
met together in the Church, to serve and worship our Holy God, so we may one
day meet again in Heaven, to enjoy him, his Angels, his Saints, and ourselves,
his faithful Gregory's, for ever and ever.

Dxa THe

