GOD IN THE CREATURE.

BEING A POEM in Three Parts: VIZ. A Song of Praise in Contemplation of the
Works of Creation and Providence in General: With a Debate touching Providence
in particular, by way of Dialogue.

VIZ. Cur male bonis, and been malis, cum sit Providentia. Why goes it ill with
the Good, and well with the Evil, seeing there is Providence?

With several other POEMS and ODES.

By HENRY GRENFIELD.

For the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead,

Romans 1. ver. 20. I will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live; I will sing
Praise unto my God, while I have my being,

Psalm. 134. v. 33. LONDON: Printed for George May, Bookseller in EXETER.
MDCLXXXVI.

To the Worshipful the Mayor, the Right Honorable the Recorder, with the
Honorable and Worshipful Justices, Aldermen, and all the rest of the Worthy
Capitol Burgesses of the Reformed and Loyal Corporation of the Borough of
TRURO, in the County of CORNWALL.
SIRS,
I Cannot but with a cheerful Humility, declare my self under a double
Obligation of all possible Respect and Service to your Honorable and most
Loyal Fraternity, and particularly of my present Address, tho with so minute
and homely an Offering, which has indeed in you a most encouraging Goodness to
promise, but in it self only the venerable Excellence of its Subject to
solicit a favorable Reception.

The first Obligation, is a Debt of Love and Honor; the Heathen could see this
by the obscure twilight of Nature, esteeming their highest Love and Honor to
be their Countries indispensible due, first, to the King or Supreme, by what
Name or Title soever dignified or distinguished; next, to them that are sent
by, or set in Authority under him; Lastly, to the whole Community of fellow
Subjects. And such as were their Affections at large to their Countries in
general, such also were their more particular Propensions and Devoirs to the
particular Places of their respective Nativities, which is my present behoof.

In this Ancient Corporation I drew my first Breath; and to this therefore
would gladly pay the first fruits of my Honest (howsoever unfortunate)
Endeavors. But to this natural Incitement of Love and Honor, we have in you
the happy Accession of a most generous and noble Loyalty: Loyalty! the grand
Comprehension, in one Word, of all Public and Political Virtue, so far forth
as refers to the Subjects; an abridgment, like Love, not only of the Principles
of both Tables of Positive Divine Law, but also of the Fundamental and
Unwritten Divine Law of Nature, those Common Notions and Transcripts of the
Eternal Law, which are none other but the immutable Idea's of Religion,
interwoven in the very Make and Original Contexture of our Beings; for what,
but the peaceful Hands of Loyalty, beautiful as the Rosy Fingers of the
Morning, preserves inviolate the Sacred Marriage of the Fear of the Lord with
that of the King; or (as it is equivalently phrased) of the Fear of the Lord
with the Honor of the King? It Is this prevents, with a Golden Chain of most
harmoniously conspiring Graces, the setting asunder of those whom God has
joined together: Nor can she indeed apprehend these two capable of a real
Existence in a state of Separation; for our Fear of the Deity, and our Honor
of Majesty, as like Jonathan and Saul, they are lovely and pleasant together in
their Lives, so can they not be other than undivided in their Deaths; like
Hippocrates's Twins, as they live, so must they dye, (which Heaven ever forbid)
dye together, and dye in each others Arms: So that Loyalty, wherever she
lights, tho on a Dunghill, carries a commanding Luster in her Face; but an
advantageous setting off the Jewel in Generous and Noble Metals (such as your
selves); as it mightily commends its Beauty, so ought proportionably to
heighten its Value: But wherewithal then can I evidence a commensurate Respect?
Commensurate! nay, in any Measure competent to so much, and such excellent
Worth? why in the present State of Truro, it is now (Thanks be to Heaven) easy
to see awful Authority, and a most Rational, Ingenuous Candor, going Hand in
Hand, and every where to the grief of Faction, but the Delight of God, and all
honest Men, embracing and greeting each other with a Holy Kiss; and certainly
such a temperate Body will not expect more from its Denizen Servants, than the
circumstances of their Habitation can dispose them to.

The thick and misty Air of a Marshy, and on every side most depressed Vale,
serves not for such Noble and Lofty Flights, as the benign Serenity that
blesses the flowery Banks of Isis and Cham, and those ever Springful Bowers of
most happy Thames, where the Muses have their perpetual Residence, and Imperial
Court. As for Silver and Gold, such as the more splendid and Heroical Pieces of
Poesy, I have none; but such as the Cornish Muse affords, once in the Name of
all that is Good, I humbly present you with, as the humble Specimens of an
unmodish, hearty Gratitude: And this is a second Obligation I would have all
Men to know I lie under to your Honorable and most Loyal Fraternity; a Debt of
Gratitude, the most comprehensive of all Debts, and deeply found in Nature: I
am (Sirs) undubitably secured of no Inferior Place in your Favor, by many
pregnant Instances, but more especially by your last most sensible
demonstration of Kindness, the Character whereof is indelibly wtitten in my
Heart (as with a Diamond). Nor shall the Recognition of the same on all
suitable occasions be only ingeminated in my Mouth, but also seconded by
agreeable Action, so far forth as the Sphere and Abilities, which the Divine
Goodness has allotted me to act in, and by, shall permit: For so abundant and
uncontroulably Gracious have been your Condescentions, that they are to me in
reality as Glorious and obliging as the so much celebrated Descent of the
Amorous God to his Danaes in a Golden Shower, could ever be to the most
credulous Admirers of Poetic Fables: So that ( Sirs) it is not at all to be
reckoned amongst Wonders, that I thus expose and hazard the little Reputation
of my Parts, to evidence and evince the greater Power and Prevalence of my
Gratitude: But to ease your Patience, I conclude with the humble Oreizons of
your Country Muse, Pardon a slender Vapor coming near,
In this Ascent, toward your Noble Sphere:
Ascent owed to no want of lowly Sense,
But to your strong attractive Influence.
Such Sacrifice from earth, Heaven don't disdain,
Witness their kind returns in gentle Rain.
And therefore cannot you, in whom are all
The Constellations we can Heavenly call:
So all Church Organs sing: Nor is there Room,
Since you're great James's choice, for doubt to come.
Take then this Mite amidst your Honoring Crowd,
Which only of your Crowning Name is proud:
A Pious Bird her humble Feathers brings,
To the The Temple of Diana at Ephesus.
Ephesian Glory; Asia's Kings
Accept her Zeal amongst their noblest things:
Nor was Goats Hair, and Badgers skins put back
From his blessed Seat The Sacred Tabernacle.
, who could no Purple lack:
It Is not Heavens Greatness to increase, but show
What to its Goodness we poor Mortals owe,
That all Religion means; therefore such Trees
As give no food, the chiefest Deities
Thought fit to ^^ choose. Great Jupiter for Oak;
Apollo, Laurel; Venus, Myrtle spoke;
Bacchus, the Ivy; Herc'les, Poplar took.
Then take you this, not meant to make you more,
But only show, that we your worth a door*
Your Worth, which stands storm-proof, as sacred Oaks,
And like the Laurel, smiles at lightning strokes
Of envious eyes, of whose fresh leaves is made,
As of a Myrtle Grove a pleasant shade,
All to delight and shroud, that sing your Name,
On Oaten Pipes, and teach the Woods the same;
The Woods the same! Woods once obedient were,
To Orpheus, and danced to's charmful Air.
Nor did Rocks to Amphion less perform,
His Music drew them mighty Thebes to form.
So may your gentle Airs rude Nature storm,
Storm to a Calm, till you bring on the stage,
The peaceful Worlds most Loyal Golden Age:


So Prays, Sirs, Your most Humbly Devoted, HENRY GRENFIELD.

TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
I Must satisfy my self in Advertising you, on what account my Littleness is so
daring, as first, to offer any thing of its own to public view; and secondly,
Why a work of this Nature? As for the first, I can solemnly affirm, I do it not
without much painful Reluctance, Resulting from the Conscious and most Mature
apprehensions of my Insufficiency to produce any thing of a Complexion strong
enough to endure an open and piercing Air, which I have good reason to expect:
But in this Dispute, the overruling consideration of Gratitude (as I before
hinted) remains Conqueror, and sways my Actions quite counter to my
inclinations. As for the second, granting I am obliged by some moral
inforcements to appear thus unwillingly public; why yet should I choose to do
it in a dress of this kind, which by how much the more it is of Divine
Materials, is by so much the more of weighty import, and hazardous attempt? For
who is sufficient for those things? It Is the good pleasure of Heaven, to which
we all owe the profoundest and chearfullest obedience, that hitherto I should
remain short of the prime and darling end of my Studies; Namely, of being
admitted to serve at the Holy Altar, or of going, not as the Scribes, but as
one having authority, before the multitude, into the House of the Lord, in the
Voice of Praise and Thanksgiving, amongst such as keep Holy Day; the Prime and
Darling end (I say) of my Studies; for the meanest Doorkeeper in the House of
God (as amongst us) Established by Law, in a decency and order, well becoming
the Beauty of Holiness, and most expressive of the Heroical Primitive Piety, I
ever Esteemed infinitely preferrable to the Proudest Prince in the Synnagogues
of Corah* For this reason, tho with my heart I abhor all Sacrilegious
Intrusions on the Altar, yet fain would I rival the little Sparrow and Swallow
in contending for a place to Set and Sing within an allowable propinquity.

In pursuance hereof, I cannot but endeavor, seeing Condemned (as the dumb
Jack in the Virginals) to a Regretful silence, yet by one motion or other to
contribute somewhat to the general Harmony, in which all Creatures, by the
Indispensible Laws of their Creation ought to bear a part; that is, in the
Resounding the praises of the most Glorious Creator, that great Harmostes, or
Master of Harmony, which has so Musically Composed the Universal Poem of both
the Intellectual and Sensible Worlds, in just Number, Weight and Measure, that
each part answers other, and all the Whole in most Tunable Proportions.

Nor could I accomplish this noble end in a more worthy Argument, than a
cheerful Contemplation of the Divine Perfection in the Works of Creation and
Providence; than which there is no part of Natural Theology more necessarily
behooveful, or more excellently comfortable.

As to my self, I am fully persuaded, there is no more efficacious preservative
of the Life and true Happiness, or a more Vigorous Antidote against the Stings
of Misery, than this one consideration of an All-wise, most Gracious
All-disposing Providence; a General over the General System of the World, a
special over man, and most special over good men; which consideration busies it
self not so much in conversing (as Democritus) altogether with Melancholic
Creatures, to search out the seat and nature of black choler; as in preventing
(if possible) so malignant a humor; or if not, then in sweetning the Waters
embittered by it, with infusions of heavenly Nectar: Which otherwise might
prove incomparably more unpotable than the bitterest of the Waters of Meribah.
And what is so sensibly evident to me, with immediate respect to my self, I am
also morally ascertained of with Relation to others; and more particularly, my
Brethren in Religion, Church and Country; that especially, in these distracted
and troublesome times, when all order has been wickedly designed and attempted
to be overwhelmed with Confusion: There is no more opportune consideration than
this, as well for necessity, as pleasure: Nay, more necessary for the support,
as well as of the being, as of the well-being of all natural, and consequently
all revealed Religion; that being a main prop and foundation of this.

It is true, the Holy Jesus, God blessed for ever incarnate, is the sole
fountain of our true comfort; especially, of that most sublimated comprehensive
comfort, the Peace of God, which passes all understanding. Yet without a
previous persuasion of this overruling Providence, this inexhaustible Fountain
(quo ad nos) would inevitably dry up, as to the Act of affording us any solid,
either present, or hoped Consolation. But let the good man which exercises
himself herein to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward
Man, carry about in his Bosom an applying consideration of Divine Providence:
And he is most truly the Philosophers (...), a foursquar'd man; cast him where
you will, he will be sure to fall as a Dye on a secure bottom. Which saving
consideration of Divine Providence, that you and I, and all our Fellow
Christians, may of the Divine Mercy obtain, and by the Divine Grace improve
from one degree to another, till it arrives to a perfect Plerophory, is the
hearty prayer of

Your truly Affectionate HENRY GRENFIELD.

GOD IN THE CREATURE. PART I.
JUST were the Eyelids of the Morn unstay'd,
And pleasant Light with nimble Wings displayed:
Guilding with silver Strakes each fitted Cloud,
Whilst early Larks their Mattens sung aloud
A grateful Hymn to welcome the glad sight
Of Heavens Firstborn Blessing, Earth's Delight,
The smile of Nature, and bright Paraphrase
On other Blessings, finer of the Cha's:
When he who never sleeps, lightened mine eyes,
Bad me to life from death-like sleep arise:
Whether some subtle Beam my clouded sense
Pierced, or Lights secret quickening influence;
I knew 'twas day, left Sleep and Bed, which have
Such lively Pictures of sad Death and Grave:
And having lift to him my Heart and Voice,
Who makes each Morn's out-going to rejoice;
I and my Friend pursued our wont delights,
With new fresh Air to recreate our Spirits;
Our Walk a River bounded on one side,
Whose Crystal Streams with lulling Murmurs glide
By goodly florid Banks: On the other hand
An Ancient Venerable Grove did stand;
A Grove, which Nature strove to beautify
With much and wonderful Variety:
Tho well-bough'd Trees gave a refreshing Shade,
Yet Phoebus gentle Beams of Flowers made,
Of Herbs and Fruits such stores as might content
The exigence of Use and Ornament:
O rural, sweetest pleasures! here a mind
Abstract from Earth, lost Paradise might find,
Enjoying Paradise's chiefest Grace,
Whilst she contemplates God in Natures Face:
The Birds among the Branches Anthems chant
To his great Wisdoms Excellence, which cannot
Forget to teach, how they all Art may shame,
In building Houses of exactest frame;
Higher and lower as by Prophecy:
What would the approachng Summers temper be,
To nurse their dear young in, till they them bring,
To trust in open Heaven to their VVing.
Here poor young Ravens by unnatural
Parents exposed; gaping to Heaven call,
Which hears their piteous Importunities,
And answers their dumb Prayers with quick supplies;
Filling their mouths with Flies, or fertile Dews,
Or somewhat else: But whatsoever we choose,
Of Divine Goodness here is a pregnant sense,
And signal wonder of its Providence:
This all the neighboring fields and valleys round,
In ecchoing responses still resound:
All Cattle using Morn, Noon, Evening-tide,
One Common Prayer to him that does provide
Their food in season, rewards liberally
Their Natural Religions Liturgy:
Immence Intelligence! which bruits do guide,
By rules above all Philosophic Pride:
Men call them natural instincts, impressed
On their wild Fancies, leading to the best
Preservatives of their dear natures good,
As if by reasons conduct understood.
How would the new-hatch'd Duck by innate Love,
Without example, to the Puddles move?
The untaught Cockatrice into the ground
An entry strive to make where none was found?
Whilst generous Eagles from a like delight,
Attempt with unfletcht wings, a nobler flight:
What other dictates prompt young Hares, or Deer,
Never yet made game, to flee with swift-foot, fear
The little Hound, who graze, yet never quake,
By fierce-lookt Bulls of a tremendous make.
Nor do the meanest Vegetables want
Their part in this; good God's on every Plant;
Each shows a signature unto the eye;
A fair plain impress of Divinity;
Which no malicious hand can ere deface,
But ruining the creatures native Grace:
No more than that famed Phidias.
Artizan's great name,
To whom Minerva's Target owed its Frame,
Would to be razed by time, or envy, yield,
Without the joint-defacing of the Shield:
Their cunning make contrived so curiously,
Of parts a useful multiplicity;
Their due observance of set-times for growth,
Some with more speed, and some with greater sloth,
That strange variety which may be found,
In one good natured little plot of Ground;
Their charming beauties, Perfumes natural,
And active Virtues most Medicinal:
Their occult sympathetick Qualities,
With their eternal strange Antipathies:
All which we here contemplate, sober sense,
In force to own, to proclaim Providence:
But, vanity of men! we disbelieve
What Is far remote, with disregard receive
What Is nigh, as if who nearest Temples lie,
Were re'lly farthest from the Deity.
Plant Animal, within our walk never moves,
Nor can we speak of the Palmetto's loves:
But here you will see Lillies on every hand,
Clothed all with Virgin-white in orders stand;
Which tho themselves do neither toil nor spin,
Yet far outgallant Israel's pompous King;
Yes, in the most serene and brightest day
Of his most flourishing and glorious May.
So that thy Faith, Reason, and Sense shall yield
A God to cloth the Lillies of the Field.
Nor is young Eglantine here without sense
Of his sweet, kind, benign Influence;
Which through its uncleft vail steals safely home,
With virile heat into its Virgin-womb;
When round it first a spinie fence he forms,
To shroud its tender tirements from the storms;
Replete with Heavens Dews, it spreads, and swells,
Grows fair, full-cheek'd, yet by its blushes tells,
And tacitly confesses, that it knows,
It Is not to be compared with Sharon's Rose.
Thus by these senseless beauties excellence,
We guess at Beauties Flowers quintessence.
No wonder was a Garden first designed
For man's most noble contemplating mind;
The Scene of the First Adam's Happiness,
And of the Second Adam's great Garden of Gethsemanes.
Converse:
Yet here our Veneration's much at odds,
With what Egypians paid their noble Gods:
Their Gardens are their Temples, whence arise
Thick sets of Leek, and Onion Deities.
Sordid Religion! true, we cannot neglect,
To visit our fair Grove with much respect;
A School of natural Theology,
Each Plant a Preacher of the Deity:
But to adore the work for Love or Fear,
Is to affront the Maker, not indear.
Yet I remind, I said, on the other hand,
An Ancient Venerable Grove did stand;
Yes, Venerable for the Companies
Of sacred Creatures, dazzling Mortal eyes:
Whether they were of real Flesh refined,
Or else in any shapes were all pure mind,
I cannot resolve; but where they trod, that ground,
Methinks, commands a Reverence profound;
'Twas here we heard a voice, as we passed by,
Which quickly moved our swift cur'osity:
We searched, and looking round, my friend espied,
Under a Beech whose Boughs were thick and wide,
Two Nymphs; whose form and Visage did bespeak
Something in them extraord'nary great,
But Dress and Gestures; some that sought relief,
Under a long and sore afflicting grief:
Alas! said he, two Angels from on high,
Come to Condole Caitiff Man's misery.
I through this bushy Covert see the Tears,
Which their bright Eyes shed in their Evening prayers;
By last nights cold (good God) they look so meek,
Congealed to pearl on their sad pallid Cheek:
Their Names we heard not, yet judge them to be,
What we found new engraven on the Tree;
Here lately sat forlorn Theophobe,
With her dear Sister, scorned Philarete,
Twins born of Eusebia, write the sage
In Time's Beginning, and the Worlds first Age:
As they have been Companions in their Birth,
So undivided will they be in Death:
The End of the First Part.
OF GOD IN THE CREATURE. PART II.
BUT as some Rivers in the salt sea drowned,
Are undebauch'd, with native sweetness found.
So these blessed minds untainted piety,
Amidst a flood of vicious misery:
From dunghill fumes there is no defilement done
To these imbodied beams of the Suns Son:
No, tho we see them fall on such base ground,
Yet pure with strong reflection they rebound:
They'midst their tears prelude in sweet accents,
Their morning Song to the Omnipotent's
Great Glory, Wisdom, Power, and rich Goodness,
Displayed in wonders through the Universe.
Tune up (our Spirits) your Holy Harmonies,
And let your full-fletch'd praises mount the Skies:
Bless your Almighty Parent's sacred name,
To whom you owe this your immortal Frame.
Eternal King! thy Royal Excellence
Transcends the world's whole vast circumference;
It Is Scepter rules the Heavens in its Hand,
It holds the ponderous Globe of Sea and Land,
Filling beyond the Empyreum high,
The boundless deserts of Immensity.
Glory and Beauty ever thee Infold,
As some incorruptible Cloth of Gold.
The Sun and Moon, great Luminaries, given
To Beautify the outward Courts of Heaven;
With all the Stars bespangling blackfac'd night,
Are brightish shades of thy primeval light,
No more to that, than what dark nights permit,
In putrid Sticks to play the Hypocrite;
Or in Glowworms; can come in splendour near
A Summer Solstice highest in its Sphere.
With this thy Royal Palace flows alone,
With this thou cloathest thy blessed self and Throne.
O! strong eyed Eagles dare not it behold,
Twould blind the Cherubim, were they too bold
Unvailed to gaze on, tho in proper place,
The brightness of the Beatifick Face.
What tongues of men, or Angels, can express
Thy Kingdom's unconceived Gloriousness;
Tho shadowed out, and glim'ringly descri'd
By Heaven's most magnificent outside!
It Is Glorious Host, all with great Letters Write
God in their Frontispiece by their own Light,
Their Light shows his, which never knew to rise,
Wax, Wane, Eclipse, and never setting dies;
Their Order his, each motion of them tend
To that, which none but he that made can mend,
Nor Solve the least Phenomena of it
By their Romantic Whirli-pools of Wit.
He Rules them all with Law, which by consent
Unanimous they all Obey, content
To move on their own Centers, as they were
First bad, like Fishes in a Sea of Air:
By no informing Life of Reason, Sense,
Nor outward assisting Intelligence.
Old Sages dreams, except that mind profound,
Which every where, and no where can be found,
Piercing unseen all things, which we may call
The only truly Universal Soul.
This first these mighty Machins did display,
Keeps still in well-tuned motion, since that day,
No clash, no jar; who this Contemplates, hears
The Pythagorean Music of the Spheres.
Which speaks (great God of Peace) the Harmony
Of thy most Wise Celestial Hierarchy;
And of thy Universal Monarchy.
Their vigorous Virtues show their Makers strength,
Which knows no height, or depth, no breadth or length.
How cheerful goes the Sun? Like some Bridegroom
Advancing forth of his attiring Room,
Adorned with Gold, and Gemms on every side,
Burning to meet the Lovely sloathful Bride,
Whom Bedded, Moon and Stars by his lent light
Revel, and Dance out the Ensuing night.
Nor knows their Cheer decay; but each days Sun
Does like a Wine-refreshed Giant run;
His Race no stop, his Labor loves no Rest,
That all may with his Life-full Heat be Blessed.
From their Harmonious Courses time begun,
And seasons with their various Tempers sprung;
Day into Night, Spring into Autumn dies,
With these; and after dead, with these arise:
Besides their common Influence, and light,
The Stars in Martial Mode his Battles Fight,
Who calls them all to Muster by their Names,
And of their force a dread Militia Frames;
Witness thou Ancient River Famed Kishon,
Thou Gibeon, and thou Vale of Aijalon.
They March in Order at his bare Command,
And at his word 'midst their Carreers they stand.
Beneath these Glorious Globes; next thou spread'st out
(What a rare Orb of Immixt Fire about,
Or in the Ample hollow of the Moon,
Which Astronomick Hawks would spy out soon,
Were not its Nature so Refin'dly good,
Not to be seen, felt, heard, or understood?
No; Thou (great Wisdom) which over all do reign
Created'st naught in Natures Frame in vain).
The Liquid Heaven of Expanded Air,
A spacious Tent Magnificently Fair;
Three noble Stories compassing Earth's Globe,
Stupendous Frame rooft with a Starry Robe.
The low'rmost Room, where Winged Creatures Fly,
Has hanging Waters for its Canopy,
In which the Architect has laid the Floor,
And Beams of his Etherial Chambers over:
Wondrous Geometry! these without fear
On Waters Lean, Waters on Fleeting Air.
There March the Clouds, which the great King of Kings
Rules as his Chariots, Wheeled with swift Winds
On which he Rides Triumphant, when Descends wings,
To work his Judgments, and his Mercies ends;
Hence roar (dread Might) thy great Artillery,
When thou speak Thunder from the Flaming Sky:
Tho mostly conduits, through which thy hands
Make glad with Streams of Fatness, Thirsty Lands,
O! the unseen, Divinest Majesty,
Vouchsafed in Shining Clouds to Humane Eye!
Like Doves, and Eagles, with their outspread wing,
They hover, light, and Glorious Angels bring,
Courtiers of Heaven, to represent the mind
Profound, which no quick Lynceus's Eye can find;
Who by his Ministers thus often appears,
Sometimes in Flames, sometimes white subtle Airs.
As Stars, Fire Air, by motion do his will,
So heavy Earth obeys by standing still:
Lo, how it stands on it self firmly bas't
The World's fixed center, by deep wisdom placed,
That poised with its own weight 'midst fluid Air
Can fall no way (O hand which placed it there!)
Unless quite cross to Nature it should soon
Fall upwards; Mountains tumbling to the Moon.
O thou, whose Throne's above the lofty Skies,
In Glory unapproacht by mortal Eyes!
If we descend beneath the silent Cells
Of all the Dead, thy boundless Self there dwells.
We find thee in vast Treasures without end,
Which naught but Avarice can comprehend.
Art thou not in the Mother Waters deep?
Near to the Region's confines, where no sleep
Allays the restless pains of Damned Souls
In blackest darkness, who with horrid Howls
Ring doleful Knells to their Eternal Death,
Which ever Lives, whose pangs are still in birth.
Or could we with the mornings wings take flight
To the utmost Sea, swift as a Dart of Light,
Thy right Hand in a thought us apprehends,
Which far beyond all tracts of Sea extends.
'Twas thy outstretched Arm, which clothed the Globe
Of Earth with Sea, first as a watered Robe,
Then a waved belt, wonder of wisdom made
For maintenance of Universal Trade
Betwixt all Lands: with Law it Ebbs and Flows,
Which all Eyes see; how, no grand Sophy knows:
It Is Towering Floods at thy rebuke are laid,
And fly, at thy loud Thunder's Voice afraid.
As in just Noah's days, when for men's sins,
To Clouds, dens'd Air, Sea, Treasure-house of Springs,
Thy fury let an uncontrouled way
To make the Universe one Shoreless Sea:
Waves 'bove the tops of Hills lift their proud head,
At thy Command, at thy Command they fled;
Awed all by thy rebuke's Majestic Grace,
With haste away to their appointed place;
And tho they now like Mountains rise, again
Fall down, like Valleys to a spacious Plain:
Their bounds are fixed by thine Almighty hand,
Which rein's their rage with naught but cords of Sand,
That they shall never return to drown the Land.
Through spungy bottoms they occultly creep
Into the Mother Waters silent deep,
Great Treasure-House, still teeming Womb of some
Clear, pleasant Fountains; whence sweet waters come
Through strange Meanders percolated from
The Native saltness of the Oceans Womb;
Or who knows in what Stills from Brine Refined,
Which as the Caput Mortuum, or dead head with Chemists.
liveless head resides behind.
Those condensed vapors in close Caverns Love
Much to Augment; so showers from above,
Which VVinter Springs exalt to haughty looks,
And Rapid Torrents send from little Brooks.
Some keep the tinctures, gusts, and qualities
Of Metal Veins, through which they run and rise;
Well-Springs of Health, O most medicinal
(Prepared by Chymick Nature) mineral!
Here others meet with subterraneous Flames,
Calcining kilns, hot Spirits, which know no names,
Whose angered heat with the frigidity,
Connate to Water, fights, gains Victory
With its exasper'd force; when won the day,
With fumes, and boiling rage they make their way
To bath rackt Mortal's limbs, whose welcome ease
Extoll's with an eternal Song their praise.
But what e're deep-reacht Engineer has found
Thy water-pipes (prime Nature) under ground?
Thou, that can to the low-plac'd By low placed Dairy, is meant
Consceptaculum Pecqueshanums the common receptacle placed at the Root of the
Mecentery, upon the Vertebrae of the Loins, into which the Kile reduced to a
Milkey substance is conveyed, and from whence a considerable part thereof
ascends through wonderful Ladiducts, or a Milky way into the Mothers Breast.
See Caroltons Oicono-animal. Exercit. the 3 d. Bartholin's Anato.
Dairy say,
Send up sweet Liquors through the Milky-way;
Flow up white Rivulets, nor stay with rest
Your course, till you distend the Mothers Breast;
Or to the Read-Sea boiling in man's heart,
Send constant streams to the superior part:
Thou know by what protrusion these ascend
Through winding Veins to Hills from whence they bend
Their course; with deaf'ning Cataracts, like loud
Shot-Thunder roaring from a thick-wall'd Cloud;
Others with pleasing murmurs, till they fall
Into the greedy Ocean, which drinks all,
More than ten thousand Rivers, drinks them up,
Still fills, yet never overflows its Cup.
No, thou do all (great Ruler of the Seas)
With circulating kindness save and please,
The Sea lends to be paid, the Fountains send
Due payment back of that the Sea does lend:
What man, and beast deduct, the Clouds again
With Interest pay, in frequent Floods of Rain;
These swell the Rivers running among the Hills,
Whereof the Field's whole Herd of Cattle fills
With grateful drink, their panting summer's lust,
And the wild Asses quench their Flaming Thirst:
At their descent the subject valleys ring,
With interchange of Eccho's, Laugh, and Sing;
Whilst Feathered Choristers make melody
In consort with the purling Harmony,
From their brancht banks, in Quires, which they then raise
To warble out their thankful strains of praise:
When swallows from old hollow Oaks awake,
And near thy Altars (Lord) their stations take:
When from the Baltic, Birds bring back the Spring
With swift-flight joy in their triumphing wing.
Nothing in Nature God-less can be found,
But in, through, over all God's going round.
The lofty Hills, which deprest Valleys fill
With streams, but on themselves can none distill;
His wisdom's goodness waters from above,
With Nectar draughts, which by his bounteous love
Sent from his clouded Chambers with fair crops
Of Grass, Herbs, Corn, enrich their arid tops:
These thankful soils exhale toward the Skies
In sumes, as morn and evening Sacrifice;
Which when the power of Clouds vouchsafes to choose,
As sacred Incense gives them back in dews
In token of acceptance, with access,
As of new duty, so new happiness.
Hence fruitful snows descend on gentle wing,
As if they would to Earth from Heaven bring
The Milkey-way: Fair Ermins blush to view
The lucid whiteness of their spotless hiew:
These with thy Frosts (great God of seasons) make
A winter-mantle, when thick-furr'd Bears do shake
In their close Dens, to arm the Earth from fear
Of Hostile Inrodes from a ridgid air:
Whilst they shut up her Spirits Vegetive,
Restore, and keep her Vital Flames alive.
How cruel kind is Cold? Vain Clowns complain
Of what they have, and what not, wish again*
They sweetly melt with willing Violence,
When by the fixed Laws of Providence
The Golden Chariot of the cheerful Sun
Does through the fair spring-gate begin to run,
And briskly drives with a victorious grace,
Like some great Prince toward his Summers race.
The Earth unbosomes to receive his kind
Heart-piercing Beams, which a like welcome find,
As in a long-betrothed Virgins Arms,
Her wished Lover's most indearing Charms.
Now all the Spirits, which long dormant lay,
Toward her Surface nimbly take their way;
Both to congratulate his blessed Advent,
And to renew their Amor's sweet content.
Her Divers-colour'd Easter-Cloaths appear,
Which in her Breast were Chested half the year;
And buried Grain, whilst with new Life they grow,
A Resurrection in Effigy show.
What youthful limbs appear on aged Stocks,
And on old storm-proof heads fresh curled Locks?
Fields, Gardens, Grottoes, Groves in every part
Exceed by far all Luxuries of Art,
And much more splendid braveries display,
Than walks about Kings Courts on a May Day.
O Immense Good! what corner's destitute
Of thy stupendous works abundant Fruit?
Before hard Winter drains out Summers store,
Thy Royal Bounty timely flows in more
Plenty of springing Grass for Cattels wealth,
And every Plant for Man's Grace, Hunger, Health.
No sad complaints are heard, no mournful tones
In Streets from pining folk; no hollow groans
From empty Bowels of clean Granaries
Prevent the shouts of a new Harvest's cries;
But he that Crowns the year does still Adorn
Each Loaf-mess with the Blessings of New Corn:
Nor have Men Bread alone (tho they't despise,
And rather Feast on Nature's spoils, their Eyes)
Their Hearts chief strength, which best recruits
Of Fuel to the Fire, that burns within; (can bring
Lest wanting of due Oil, still fresh supplies,
The Lamp of Life sinks down, goes out, and dies.
No, their good God provides them lib'rally,
As well for pleasure, as necessity.
The Fat of Olives makes their Face to shine,
Supples their Joints; whilst the most fruitful Vine
Cheers up their Hearts with generous Racie-Wine.
This Charms the Fiend of the great Benjamite,
Puts all Black Mists, and empty Clouds to flight,
And makes the mind a Heaven full of Light;
Lifts up the Dunghill Beggar from a Stone,
To make him sit with Princes on a Throne;
And tho dejected to the Gates of Death,
To Rival Angels in refined Mirth.
But ah! how Mortals change their Festivals
Into licentious brutish Bacchinals;
Transform their noble selves to sordid Swine,
By sparkling Bowls of high Falernian Wine:
Rivers of Fire their divine spark oppress,
And Drown, and Burn the little Universe;
Ambitious of the greater's ruins names
At once to perish, both by Flood and Flames.
Thus greatest goods prove greatest hurts; the first
For excellence, are in corruption worst:
Sin into Nature the old Chaos brings,
And quite untunes the Harmony of things.
'Twas only after its unhappy Birth,
That Trees of Life brought forth such Fruits of Death,
Olives and Vine; which show the prosperous state
Of the good man with his most happy fate:
His dearest spouse is like the Bearing Vine,
Whose tender arms round its supporters twine
With chaste Embraces, till from mutual Love
A noble Progeny begins to move
Of well Gemm'd Boughs, and with their clustred head
To deck the Tiles, at length to overspread
The Mansions Walls. Blessed man! which has her sight,
Comprising such rare Profit and delight.
His graceful sons appear as in the East,
Where Men for Pleasure in cool Arbours Feast;
Those Olive-Branches, which are Planted round
Their Summer Tables on a Florid ground.
So all thy Trees (good Lord) declare the same
Great Honor of-thy Celebrated Name.
Thy Name, which all were Graven on their barks,
And if we look within, they all are Arks
Carrying a wonder-working God: without
All art of man, repleat with sap they sprout,
They spread, and Flourish, till they grow so high
To threaten with their tops the starry sky.
What Cedars Crown (proud Lebanus) thy Land,
So Planted there, dread Lord, by thy Right Hand,
That from less than a shrub a numerous race
Of sweet-wood Turrets should adorn one place?
Nor are they all for Palaces, and thine
Own sacred Temples Majesty Divine;
But for less than half-farthing Birds to nest
Themselves, taught by thy Wisdom where is best
For their dear safety from ill Vermin's hurt;
So is the Fir the Stork's exalted fort.
The Wild Goats save themselves by speedy flight
To craggy Mountains, from the Hunters sight:
As timorous Conies by good Providence
Find clifted Rocks for Houses of defense.
Thus, all, whom no projecting reason arms,
Well Bulwark'd Nature guards, and saves from harms,
Nor are apt times forgot for getting Food,
The Hunter sleeps, they seek their Livelihood.
For as the pale Moon by her various Reign
Of seasons constitutes a constant Train,
Months, Feasts, so knows the Sun both time and place,
When, where to rise; when, where to hide his Face;
From East he rides still over the Western Seas
To give good Morrow to the Antipodees,
Deputing Moon and Stars by his lent Light,
To give the upper Hemisphere good Night.
The shades fall greater from the tops of Hills,
And smoke of Cottages the Country fills,
Whose painful Swains refreshed with honest meat
That day acquired by their foreheads sweat,
On strawy Pillows lie more truly blessed
With Jacob's Visions, and sweet-dreaming rest,
Than mighty Kings, who lay their busy heads
In Tyrian Curtains on rich Downy Beds.
And now is the time, when one black fleece of Night
Sometimes but stripped with strakes of twinkling Light,
To humane Eyes solicites grateful sleep,
And draws the Woods inhabitants to creep
Out from their secret places to appease
Their hunger's spurs, impatient of delays;
The Royal Lions Whelps roar on their way,
And seek of thee (great God of might) their prey,
As Infants with strong importunities
Implore their Mothers tender Ears, and Eyes:
Their robust Nerves their swift pursuit prevent,
And fiery temper their sagacious Sent;
But oh! wise Providence! how that supplies,
What their own natures exigence denies!
Are not observant Jackales still at hand
To Hunt what their fierce Appetites demand?
Nor dares the Prey when found, these Princes fly,
They Thunder-strike it dead with fear to die;
Whose stomachs satisfied, still some remains
Reward their Sedulous Purveyor's pains.
Thus all night long they Triumph in the Field;
And Civil States to Savage License yield:
But when the Morning's Herald with a cry
Proclaims, fair Phosphorus approaches nigh
To Usher in the Sun, which now draws near
To guild the Suburbs of the Hemisphere;
They haste away to hide their fearful heads,
And lay them down together in their Beds.
The shades all vanish at Aurora's blush;
And thankful Birds break off the profound hush
Of silent darkness, as they then begin
Their Morning Song to the Celestial King.
Man with new Vigor goes forth to his work,
Whilst the disturbers of his quiet lurk
In sleeping Dens, until the Evening Star
Proclaims cessation to his toil; so far,
No farther, is thy foreheads sweat decreed,
Let welcome rest, and kind sweet-sleep succeed,
Renew exhausted Spirits: thus day and night
To man and beast by turns bring fresh delight.
O Lord! how manifold are thy great acts?
What wisdom shines in all thy noble facts?
Thy matchless Riches in vast pomp possess
The utmost Limits of Earth's Universe:
So of thy restless Sea, whose spacious hands
With wide Embraces circle all the Lands;
There Various Kinds of swimming Creatures Live,
Both great and small, which mighty wonders give
Of something more Unfathomed than that deep,
Where some move swift, some with slow motion creep.
There dwells that proud Leviathan, which plays
With Fishes, Ships, Sands, Rocks, with winds, and Seas;
Sporting all other Empire to Disdain
But thine, and man's, as Subject to thy Reign,
Who made both it to Triumph over them,
And man Viceroy to Lord it over him;
In wooden Castles winged with suited winds
Out of thy Treasures, how he flies, and finds
A passage to all Lands through Seas? No rest,
Till he returns fraught with the East and West.
When thou (good God!) command'st the Storm to rise
On swelling Floods he mounts up to the Skies
Then (with what grisly horror who can tell)
Descends down quick into the Jaws of Hell,
He reels, and staggers like one drunk, now tossed
From post to stem, then back from stem to post;
No observation of glad Sun, or Stars,
Nor hears he ought, but winds, and waves in Wars;
Except contending thunder to outvie
The Dog-mad rage of their tempestuous cry.
What shall he do, distressed Soul? Because
His melting Heart like breaking waters flows?
He cries to God, who lays the storm to sleep,
And bids that Mountain Seas do humbly creep.
The Heaven is Unmant'led, looks serene,
And joyful head-lands come in ken again:
So from Deaths Gulf he in triumphing sort,
With Flags Displayed spins in the wished Port.
O that they would, dread God! thy wonders teach,
And through the world thy Immense goodness preach
To man! to man, whose nature seems to vye
With Glorious Angels for Nobility,
His Highborn Soul from Unborn God descent
(O his delight, and sweetest Ornament!)
Disdains the pettish frowns of Austere Fate,
And overlooks in Triumph Mortal State;
Soar's far above the Funeral pile on high
With Eagles wings up to Eternity
To live when Nature, and when Death shall die.
Nor did her house eclipse the happiness,
And Grandeur of its honorable Guess:
Its form spoke at first sight it did inshrine
Something at least by Parentage divine;
Above the force of a material vein,
Unapt but for a gross ignoble strain;
Whilst other creatures looked toward the ground,
Man only with an upright face was found:
Which his great Maker willed to lift intent
Up to the Stars, the place of his descent,
By a fifth Muscle; which in none we find,
But in man's eye, for upward looks designed.
But how that fair Soul in the Mire now lies,
Which clogs her Eagle-wings, and soils her eyes
With noisome steams that like an earth-bred mole,
Sadly degenerate^, tho not in whole;
She badly mounts, much less sustains the sight,
Without regret of any thing that is bright:
How is the mighty fallen (Noble Soul!)
Not by a fortuned, but a chosen fall;
First from thy being's fundamental Law,
A Transcript of the Eternal, without Flaw;
Then from the Stars down to the lowest rate
Of brutish life with thy corporeal Mate;
Changed from a Temple to a noisome Sty
Of languid sloth, and vile impurity:
The Divine Image lies entombed within
A living Carcass, walking Grave of Sin:
Reason dethrones its self; Sense without fear
Usurps the Throne; wild Passions domineer;
The Will yields freely her Imperial right
To the tyrannic Lusts of Appetite:
O Chaos of Confusion! whence such Pride?
Do Masters lacquey, whilst their servants ride?
And Kings make up their subjects humble Train
Of captive Vassals to confirm their Reign?
Awake the Earth's great Monarch! will he have
Ought but the Title of a Royal Slave?
Let him be King of, and in Man, to none
Subject, but his great Lords Eternal Throne,
Of whom he holds his Diadem in Fee;
By whom Kings reign, and Princes do decree:
Knock off his Chains, let him to purpose know,
Himself the rightful Lord of all below;
So shall the people of the Air, Sea, Field,
Pay humble Homage, and due Tribute yied:
For hold they not of thee their breath and lives,
From whom man's Throne its Origin derives?
Their eyes wait all on thee; thy copious hand
Fills all their mouths with good by sea and land:
Thou giv'st them meat in season, they rejoice
To gather it; when thou conceal'st thy voice
They mourn in silence; when thou hid'st thy Face,
Their beauty falls, and all their goodly Grace:
When thou withdraw'st thy breath, their spirits fly,
And they resolved into ashes, dye.
And should thy Power one moment but suspend
Its act, whole Nature makes a sudden end:
Heaven and distant Earth would soon come near;
Each Star drop down from its transparent sphere;
The Moon would cease to yield her various light,
And Sun himself be darkened into night;
The Fire for want of heat, would chill to death;
The Air breathe out its last in one groans breath;
Mountains would skip away like frighted Rams;
And all the little Hills like fearful Lambs;
Water and Earth would be again commixt,
As when no order was in Nature fixed;
The Elements confused in one rude Mass;
Yes, all would swift into prime Nothing pass:
Nor were it hard that then thou should renew
This ruined Theater to public view;
Whose Word could in a thought bring on the stage,
The peaceful worlds most happy Golden Age:
Thy Majesty in all thy works renowned,
Beyond all time, sends an amazing sound;
How when he frowns, the earth distracted shakes,
As with a strong Convulsion groans and quakes,
And rends with grief at what his fury can
To unrelenting Rocky-hearted man:
The smitten Mountains smoke, belch out and burn,
As if they would all into embers turn:
But what art thou, fierce Aetna! which do raise,
With flaming Rivers, the Cicilian Seas,
To them, which the consuming fire did rain
On Sodom's and Gomorrah's sinful Plain?
And they but puny sparks to that great lake
Of Flames prepared for the damned's sake:
There burn, yet never burnt, the godless spirits,
Of evil men and Angels, which the lights
Of Nature, Grace, and Glory would despise,
Beyond redress, with bold contemptuous eyes:
But we, whilst being lasts, Immortal King,
Will thy great Names exalted Praises sing:
We thy Delight, and thou our Joy shall be,
In us thy Glory, and our Bliss in thee.
Glory to God the Father, Son, and Sp'rit,
One boundless Fountain of Eternal Light:
As ever 'twas before all time begun,
So is, and ever shall, when time is done.
The End of the Second Part.
OF GOD IN THE CREATURE. PART III.
THus sung these Nymphs: but as the clearest day,
Is not without some passing Clouds; so may,
And often does the most Celestial Mind,
This side the Moon, molesting passions find;
Passions in bounds, moving to proper ends,
Commence not Rebels, but are Reasons Friends:
Friends to Devotion: what diviner proves,
Than holy raging, holy mourning loves?
Such mudless Floods filled, and all day oppressed
The holy God-mans unpolluted breast:
Stoics are stocks, or else 'twixt them and Gods,
It Is hard to find out any real odds:
No, They Are above by their grave Senate's voice;
God's calm by Nature, they by generous choice:
Egregious Pride! vaunt men an Apathy,
Not found in Angels Immortality!
They joy when we do well, then no doubt weep
To see us buried in Lethargick sleep:
So these dear Twins from joy to sorrow turn,
To think how Vice triumphs, and Virtues mourn.
Some whiles a profound silence occupies
Their lips and looks; then tears flow from their eyes.
PHILARETE speaks. At length Philarete, alas, our age,
Exiled from Converse to a Hermitage!
Good God! why might not virtue sometimes fear
An Inter-Regnum of thy Royal Care;
Seeing her vanquished self so trodden down,
And her proud Rival circl'd with a Crown?

THEOPHOBE. To say the world in a blind Atom-dance,
Stumbled into its beauteous form by chance,
More Phrenzy speaks, than that without a hand
Sweet David's Psalter should be writ in Sand:
Nor is it less to think, it is left to lie,
Without its Makers overruling eye:
Rich Sheba's Queen, without sight or report,
Of the wise Jew, might see him in his Court:
Such Beauty shows the Lord's Magnificence;
Its constancy his watchful Providence.
When Nature in a Sea floats there and here,
There needs some constant Pilot at the Steer.

PHILARETE. All this is plain; but that a special eye
Is fixed on men, dumbs all Philosophy:
'Twould rather speak a Goddess, Fortune blind,
To raise the base, depress the noble mind.

THEOPHOBE. Philosophy must grant, that active love,
Which on the dark Abyss did gently move,
To hatch the World, and now with tender wings,
Kindly protects the Universe of things;
Leaves not their Lord, Compendium of them all,
For making whom it did a Council call,
Of the most wise Three-One; a clear presage
Of some dear Offspring in its own Image:
This were to null the Laws of all wise Love,
And make it like the cruel Ostrich prove;
Whose Iron Bowels leave her harmless Egg,
To wait the crush of every chancing Leg;
And yet indeed Philosophy cannot sound
The depths of Providence, which know no ground.
Much more exceeding shallow humane brain,
Than shells fall short of the unfathomed Main:
Shall men explode a Being without end,
Because no finite can it comprehend?
Question the Ocean too, you may as well,
Because you cannot hold it in a Shell:
Question a real Sun, you may as soon,
Because not to be lanthorn'd at high-noon.
This knew the ancient Hero's, and the more,
For adverse fate, did meekly this adore;
Making their Reason, when they saw it fail,
In these great deeps to strike to Faith the sail:
By Fortunes looks 'twas never understood,
How to discern the vicious from the good:
For that bright Saint, the man of Gods own Heart,
Had both of smiles, and of her frowns his part,

PHILARETE. Yet they complained their Faith failed to behold,
Virtue in rags, and Vice in vests of Gold:
Yes, famous singers of the inspired Quire,
Not with a common but Seraphick Fire.

THEOPHOBE. Their Faith recoiled, yet trembling, till it whole
Returned like Magnet-needles to the Pole:
It shook, not fell, as by a strong surprise
The Fort of Life and Spirit, swoons, not dies.
Such conflicts (Sister) bring forth happy fruits,
As well-set Trees by storms get firmer Roots:
No Fight, no Palm, the Church Triumphant's found'd
Upon the Militant its Purple Ground;
Nor would blessed Vision bring such unthought joy,
Had not Faith here been mixed with some alloy.

PHILARETE. But emulation frequently possessed,
With envious Flames these holy Fathers Breast,
To see with dropping eyes, the impious ride
At Anchor in so high Pacifick tide Psa. 73. from verse 2. onward.

Of happiness, to sail when, where they please,
With Winds at will, in smooth obedient Seas:
No Sands, Rocks, Remora's the course impede,
Where their desires them uncontrouled lead;
Through right and wrong, devoid of fear and care,
Displaying their proud Streamers through the air.
No heavy bands, cried they, of griping pain,
From hasty Fate their pleasant race restrain?
But life runs freely in one even thread,
As in the Weaver's smooth, unknotted Web,
Drawn by kind constant Fortune out at length,
To extreme Age, crowned with vivacious strength.
And when they must unbound'd by pangs or fear,
They fleet and vanish like a puff of air.
A death like to their life; which free from stings
Of humming cares, which Virtue swarming brings
To her perplexed lovers, sweetly flows
In pleasure, which no Plagues, no sorrow knows.
The Clouds let fall more than their houses take;
Nor could their minds just hopes or wishes make,
Equal to their envied Felicity,
Which drops uncar'd, uncalled for from the Sky:
This swells their hearts with Insolence and Pride,
Blows up their breasts with airy thoughts so wide,
That self-adoring Zeal, rules and gives thence
The Reins to a Tyrannick Violence;
Their big words terrify the Minor sort,
Who throng in crowds at their great Names report;
Prone to adore a Glorious Rising Sun,
Although it burns as often as shines upon.
Nor stay their Tongues on Earth, but threat the Stars,
From their proud Babels, with Gigantick Wars.
No silent Murmurs, but defiance loud,
Tush, the most High sits careless in a Cloud:
Does God see this, and yet (who all sin blames)
Abstain from Thunder, from vindictive flames!
These are the men that prosper, these are blessed
With Riches, Honors, unmolested rest;
Leaving their Sons a great enobled Name,
And landed Mansions called by the same:
In vain do some, as living Temples, clean
Their broken-hearts, in vain their hands contain
In Innocence; in vain, for Virtues sake,
Reproaches, Taunts, (what not?) with Patience take;
Whilst prosperous Vice is Virtue; Fiends are made
The only Saints in modish Masquerade!
But I desist, lest seem to disapprove
Their select Lot, whom hoped Glories move.

THEOPHOBE. Thus holy Men indeed might greatly slide,
When they presumed to measure things so wide,
With their short Feet, and by Vertigo fall,
Weighing their God in the uncertain Scale
Of humane Brain, trusting to their own Wit,
They might, benighted still in darkness sit:
But when with groping tired, they recurr'd
To go with a pure heart, and humble Word
Into the Sacred Courts; there by address
To lively Oracles, the happiness
Of Virtues Foes was seen, and crowning ends,
Not to be greatly envied by her Friends;
The mighty Patience, whilst that long it spares
The Grandeur of its Glory, thus declares;
And writes fair Lines for Mortals to transcribe,
Which greedily (ah grief!) Revenge imbibe:
Should Heaven thus reward, we might think well,
The Earth long since must needs be made a Hell;
It spares, and offers Mercy; who refuse,
Are left without all shadow of excuse:
And whom no gentle Flames of Love can turn,
To melt, the all-consuming Fire will burn:
Burn up those Rods with which the King of kings
Does use to scourge his Subjects for their sins:
Lifted, like Eagles Cockles, up on high,
O how they fall! much, much more heavily
From lofty Turrets down to dismal Cells,
From fancied Heavens into real Hells;
Made fat, and decked, as Beasts by Votaries
Designed, and kept till fit for Sacrifice;
Their peccant fullness turns to a disease,
No poison's worse than that which loves to please:
In pleasant Philtrums, or in Candid Pills;
First it delights, then toxicates and kills;
No plenty heals, but much dilates the sore;
As drinking, Fevers are inflamed the more:
Give, give, like barren Wombs, the Miser cries,
New wants abound still with his New supplies:
What tho their Gayeties may long look brisk,
And whilst the Sun shines, kindly dance and frisk,
As all Fanatic shows; yet at the last
The black Day comes, with speed, tho not with have;
Vengeance falls on at once, nor brooks remands,
Although with leaden Feet, yet Iron Hands:
When Divine Furies, thus in storm arise,
Ill Treasure with its Lords, dispersed flies;
As Golden Images, which use to creep
In to illude the sanguine Dreamers sleep,
Leave naught but melancholic thoughts behind,
To the awakened, vain, deceived mind:
But grant a life, (which is too rare to see)
Were wholly spent in perfect Comedy;
Yet what is all Time to Ever? it appears
Less than a Moment to Ten Thousand Years:
For take each moment, Millions from the Score,
Still there remain Millions of Millions more:
Nor could all Requiems united, spell
The ingrate sounds of one eternal Knell,
Which pierce and grate not less, but much the more,
For too sweet Sirens Music heard before.
Sometimes the darling proves a discontent
To her own Lover; Crime is Punishment:
Alas! it is seen when men grow mostly sage,
They curse, not worship, in their cooled Age
Those Delilah's, to which as Deities,
Their Youth would Life and Fortune Sacrifice:
Now anxious Breasts echo in sighs and groans,
The mindful grating of their tortured bones;
Nor is the calm-look'd sinner less oppressed
With secret Furies, which will know no rest,
But intertwine their Scorpion Hairs with his
Most soft embraces of indeared bliss;
His Minion Snake, which no wise voice can charm,
The very bosom stings which keeps it warm:
So that his Life, as to the inward Scheme,
Transcribes Prometheus Vulture for its Theme.
His looks, like Aetna's, may wear Snow without,
Yet Bowels burn with Flames which never go out,
Till swallowed up in greater, they unite,
With the black Fires of an eternal night,
Which imbred Scenes of Judgment represent,
Anticipating long the dire Event.

PHILARETE. A sorry bliss, which soon as pressed, must
Like Sodom's Apples, crumble into dust:
Sad sweets, which when into the belly fall,
Like Saint John's Book, are turned into Gall.
Who would not fly such dear Felicities,
Which surely end in endless Precipice?

THEOPHOBE. But had true Virtue nothing to entice,
But her fair self; yet that sweet Paradise
Alone might be sufficient to engage
In vestal Flames a whole Platonic Age:
The great Kings Daughter, Brightness of his Face,
His reflex Image, and the first in place:
Of his dear Offsprings, decked all over with Gems,
Which outshine Stars, eclipse all Diadems
Which wealthy Ophir ever could supply,
Or force of seven Flames could purify:
Blessed man! whose Spouse she is, what heart but his
Can think the Raptures of their Nuptial Bliss?
She Is brought unto him most divinely dressed,
By curious hands, in an embroidered Vest:
Her Virgin Cousins bear her Company;
A band of Graces: Oh! what melody,
What august Pomp, when to consummate all,
They pass up to her Father's Royal Hall?
But whilst this side, what is his blessed Bosom less,
Than a calm Heaven full of Happiness?
At least an Angel standing Sentinel,
With charge to see that all may here go well.
No turbid Winds blow in this sedate Sky;
But lest its Air inclines to putrify,
Then Thunder too, which tho with dread consumes,
Or well dispels the pestilentious Fumes.

PHILARETE. But few, alas! court Virtue for great Names;
Fair Pictures take not, but in tempting Frames:
Were Man indeed a pure Intelligence,
His Love might rest in naked Excellence:
But whilst his Soul is clad with sluggish flesh,
It must with counter-tending Sense commerce;
She like the Hawk would soar; this as a weight
Ti'd to her feet, impedes her native flight
To speculate abstracted Purities,
And beauty in Celestial Ivories;
From whence she might with scorn look down and smile
On this poor Molehill, fordid Domicile;
Where Men as Ants, creeping in dirt appear;
Passing in toil, and death-like Sleep, the Year.
But where tends this? Since Sainting is a trade,
And Virtue dies, where sense sees no reward?

THEOPHOBE. Man truly is well like a Diamond,
Some parts of Earth, some taken from the Sun;
By them too dull he sees not; these are bright
Enough to show rewards in darkest night.

PHILARETE. The boundless Goodness said, he would adorn
Virtue with Riches, and exalt her Horn
With Honor, whilst all hostile Nations must
Fall down with shame, submit, and lick her dust.

THEOPHOBE. The Immense Good is changeless Verity,
Can cease to be, soon as begin to lie:
And were things duly vveigh'd, none could impeach
What never fails, his Promise of a breach:
I trow, that such performance might content,
Which is in manner much more eminent;
If Goods of Fortune sometimes do give place
To the more rich enoblements of Grace;
It Is man's own folly thvvarts the present end,
To which true Virtue's paths directly tend;
To whom it is one both to command, and bless,
Espousing duty to true Happiness.

PHILARETE. 'Twas Man indeed brought in the spiny Weeds
To Rosy Beds; with which himself now Bleeds.
And yet it is hard, they should as much, or more,
The Virtuous than the Vicious Prick and Gore.

THEOPHOBE. It Is true, did they respect no unseen gain,
Virtue above all others would be vain.
But in wise methods lesser Goods must bend
To serve the greater; all, the Sovereign end.
I Am not so much a Stoic, as to chase
All goods, called Fortunes Gifts, from Virtues Face;
That were to strip her of Appertinents,
Which greatly serve for use, and Ornaments.
But where their absence starves out Moral ills,
And penal Evil with huge Interest fills
Of virtue the good man, their want abounds,
And steril soils prove the most fertile grounds.
Depression shows the grace, of which is made
For Virtues Laurels a cool kindly shade,
To thrive, and Flourish in, maugre all hate,
Not to be Thunderstruck by frowning fate;
Which smites with barrenness the high-look'd hills,
Whilst humble Valleys graceful plenty fills.
The world's great Architect about to raise
A living Temple, Trophie of his praise;
Lay's deep its prime Foundations; as we know,
The highest Towers must be based low.

PHILARETE. Thou suck'st from Poisons, Cordials, dearest (Be)
By a Diviner sort of Chemistry.

THEOPHOBE. Where would appear Heroic Fortitude,
Did Virtue meet with no ungrateful feud,
In which the Enemy Augments its Bliss,
As't were by an Antiparistasis?

PHILARETE. This does indeed, in bearing more consist,
Than in a bold attempting of the List
In Blood, Sweat, Dust, with fierce and hardy Foes,
A little Fading Bays to win, or lose,

THEOPHOBE. And by Encounters still it grows more bright,
Its Armor by Attrition more Polite:
Whereas long peace contracts a sordid rust,
By lying out of Action in the dust.
Sometimes a light Attrition cannot suffice,
And then the seventh Flame it purifies,
Till fit for those, whose courage gains the Praise
Of Great Jehovah's Argyraspides:
Invincible in that blessed Kingdom's hope;
Which they prospect through faith's true Telescope.
This made the Noble Martyrs to defy
Their fretting Tyrants baffled Cruelty;
Which as the spite of Basilisks back flies,
Repelled with Death into their Darting Eyes:
Whilst with more Ardent Zeal and Love they pass
In Raptures through the Burning Sea of Glass;
Preluding in sweet strains, as they march on,
To sing Blessed Moses's Victorious Song.

PHILARETE. The happy end (no doubt) known, makes a way
Perplexed pleasant; that without delay,
The Pilgrim goes, in hopes his feet shall stand
In season on the Milk and Honey Land.

THEOPHOBE. Afflicting Means are good; tho ills of pains,
If well improved to generous honest gains.

PHILARETE. Yes, Socrates could Reason Worthily
In Prison, of Supreme Felicity:
And Possidonius under Rack run out
In Panegyricks on his grateful Gout:
Nay, and the Stoics wise man would be full
Of Bliss, tho mewed in Phaleris's Bull.

PHEOPHOBE. Such Apathies Christians adore, or mock,
Becoming well a Deity, or Stock.
Divine Philosophy in their belief
Forbids excess, not passion of their grief
When pressed with evils: for it is the sense
Of them, which makes for virtues excellence.
The Royal Shepherd, much before the day
Of his Affliction, went himself astray,
Like a lost Sheep; till his great Shepherds Love
Did gently with correction drive, and move
Him to remind the Virid Pastures, where
He used to Feed in a benign Air
By Lympid Streams, where he might turn to lay
The Raging Ardors of a Dog Star day.
Had Joseph not been into Prison cast,
He never had been in the Palace placed.
His Brethrens spite made theirs adore his Sheaf;
What they opposed, conduced to make him chief.

PHILARETE Thus much seems rough, till we in truth attend,
(And then it is Beauteous) the well-tim'd end:
Well-mixed White and Red do chiefly grace,
But when misplaced, ill-mixt, deform the face:
And so events, which men cannot thoroughly Rhyme,
Are Beauteous in their plenittude of time.

THEOPHOBE. Beauty does most consist in Symmetry,
Some parts viewed singly may unlovely be;
Yet corresponding with the whole, express
A goodly Masterpiece of Comeliness:
As Music Notes, which will harmonious be,
Consent in whole; yet simply disagree.
And thus the rugged parts of Providence,
Could men but view their general consents,
How would their perfect Beauty, with what ease
Convert dislikes to highest strains of praise.
But this cannot be (great Order!) till that they
In the high Countries of Eternal day
Read all things in thy Beatifick Face,
Which now in part they see, as in a Glass.
Then shall they see that Wheel within a Wheel;
And that great Spirit, whose mysterious skill
With Wisdom, Courage, Care, and Eagles Wings,
Begins, carr's on, perfects events of things:
That they may most Harmoniously consent
For Ver^ue's good, his Joy and Ornament.
That Plots, Shams, Counters, by a hand unseen,
As Clocks cross-motions may concenter in,
And work in order by a secret power
To bring about the happy destined hour.

PHILARETE. Then Virtues pressures shall be less than light,
When Counterpois'd with Glories matchless weight.

THEOPHOBE. And whilst a Pilgrim, look what pleasure brings
A various mixing good and evil things.
The Glory of a Picture still is made
By due Commixtures of the Light and Shade:
So Virtue's Father, by a frown a while,
Adds much indearing sweetness to his smile.
When too much freedom makes her to contemn,
Or less respect his Royal Diadem,
Nor would the Gemms wherewith her self is Crowned
Be much esteemed, were they as Pebbles found:
It Is Rarity, and hardness to obtain,
Which raise their worth, and amplify the gain.

PHILARETE. Experience tells, as Evils are best known
By presents, so are Goods by absence shown.
And tho full Stomachs Princely Tables slight,
Yet Hunger whets the dullest appetite.

THEOPHOBE. When he, whose Lips are Fair beyond all men,
Solicited his Spouse 'gen and again:
Stood at her door, till dews his head did fill,
And thence down on his Rosy Cheeks Distill;
Her love like to the Ignis-fatuus light,
When most pursued, then most does take its flight.
Alas! fair one, she has put off her Vest;
('It Is too much pain) how shall she now be dressed?
The more he wooes, the nearer is at hand,
The more does she at unkind distance stand;
But when disgusted he withdraws, O then!
He Is more then Fairest of Ten Thousand Men.
His absence brings him near, his anger proves
More lovely than his most obliging Loves.
With careful looks, with dropping languid Eyes,
She walks with pitious Importunities.
Did you (I pray) my best-beloved see?
O how I burn! O bring him unto me!
At length he turns, how welcome think you may,
As to the Polar Climes, the wished day
After a tedious night; to see, he is proud,
His fair-one looking through a Rorid Cloud:
Absence Revirginates their chaste Embrace,
And brings the Flower of their Love in place.
Thus the All-wise disposer, for Delight,
Makes sow'rs to serve to Virtues appetite.

PHILARETE. No bodied Virtue's pure, but by commerce
With Earth contracts much noxious Sordidness.
Which unpurg'd of corrupts, consumes her wealth,
Of Beauty, Vigor, and her Treasure, Health.

THEOPHOBE. Therefore her great Physician often designs
Her Potions of Cathartick Medicines:
Which cannot work without some great regret
Proceeding from relucting Natures let.
And if more stout, then stronger Revulsives
Must take the place of gentle Purgatives.

PHILARETE. Sometimes in Divine fullness she Exceeds:

THEOPHOBE. Yes, therefore often in vigorous health she Bleeds,
(O wise Physician! lest her high-flown tide
Of Blood should ferment to the worst of pride)
Which gently often repeated much restrains
The force of lapsed Nature's swelling Veins.

PHILARETE. Ah Moral Virtue! but a splendid sin!
Except the Deities true fear does bring
Thee in the way to rightly apprehend
Thy worthy Object, only worthy End:
Thou well becom'st thy name Theophobe,
Vain, vain without thee were Philarete.

THEOPHOBE. The Royal Singer Chaunts the Diverse States
Of, Just, and Unjust, with their Diverse Fates; Psalm 1st.

Which when together viewed, the good complain
Without Just Cause, the Impious boast in vain.

PHILARETE. I wish your plainest Sense of it to hear;
(The Sun walks high) then let us disappear.

THEOPHOBE. Thrice happy man, whose Divine Soul defies
Infernal Paths of wicked Policies;
Abhorring, when seduced, there to abide,
Where Worldlings in Triumphant Chariots Ride:
And dreads to rest in Atheists Sweet-sleep Chair,
Or herd himself to thick Assemblies, where
Hardy Blasphemers Scornfully Proclaim
Contempt to God, reproach to Heavens Reign.
But Heavens Law is Heaven to his mind,
Where he more than Hyblean Sweets does find.
This he Studies: witness all ye, which fly
Minutes on Down-Wings to Eternity.
All day it is his brightest Sun so far
As Sable Night, and then his Brightest Star.
Blessed Soul! when Fields and Woods Rejoice to see
Thy florid state, as of a Fruitful Tree;
Which some Experienced Planters skilful Hand
Has made near to the Watery Trenches stand;
Where Fertile Streams convey Sap to its Roots
With Vital Spirit; that of Numerous Fruits
Fair Offsprings in due time shall still be found
To Bless with plenteous falls, the bearing Ground;
Its leaf no Autumn knows; but vernal Pride
Adorn its Aged Limbs on every side.
Thus the Blessed Saint Planted in Holy Soil,
Grows by Celestial Dew, not Earthly Toil;
Watered with constant Showers from above,
Which Pregnant with Ethereal Spirit, love
To Gemm forth pleasant Fruits of Various kinds
Of Divine Grace enriching Heavenly minds.
His Leaves, external goods, which Beautify,
And shroud the fair Fruits of his Piety:
No unkind Sun shall Burn, no Winds so Shake,
Or roughest blustering Tempests from him take,
But that his Boughs hold what does best suffice
For noble Virtues fittest Exercise:
Till prosp'ring more and more, he grows so high,
To have his florid top above the Sky.
As for the vicious vip'rous brood of Hell,
A diverse direful fate has them befell.
The most high Thunderer of wrath shall blow
A furious Whirlwind on them below,
To pluck them from their Contumacious Roots,
And toss like Chaff, or lightest Husks of Fruits;
The Air's unstable sports, which every blast
Drives from their scarce known place, and at the last
By Heaven's mighty force of Justest Ire
From Earth to restless Flames of endless Fire.
Then, when the Judge comes in a shining Cloud
With Myriads of Angelick Troops aloud;
Sounding with mighty Trumps a general call,
Awake ye dead, arise, and stand forth all.
The Judge, the Judge! how will these Miscreants
The Radient Crown of his Imperial Head.
Their trembling Joints an horrid Palsy fills,
Whilst they beg shelter of the Rocks, and Hills:
Dying to see thick Legions of Saints bright
In Sunbeam Armor of Meridian Light;
Who with United Votes applaud, and hum
Those miserable Caitiffs final doom.
For now the All-wise Arbiter approves
The goings of his precious harmless Doves
In public presence; when black Belial's friend
Is Sentenced to an endless doleful end.
She said, and rose; then hand in hand they past
To darker Shades, no Star could shut so fast;
Their shapes flowed into Light, seeming to be
Like what clear Nights present, the Galaxie.
I and my Friend with Joy returning, gave
The Glory, whence poor men such Visions have.

Glory to God in the Highest, on Earth Peace, good will toward men.
Hymnus Matutinus. OR, A SONG to be Sung, or Said at the first Daybreak.
I.
O Living Sourse of Holy Heat!
Tho I am little, and thou great;
Tho thou between the Cherubims do sit,
And I among Pot-sheards; yet me admit
(And to this end my Breast inspire
With a most Chaste Serafick Fire)
To Sing thee with the Morning-Stars so Bright,
True God of God, Eternal Light of Light,
The Blessed Dayspring from on high,
Which to the world-brought'st a new Birth
Of Light, and Life; whilst it did lie
In darkness, and the shades of Death.
II.
Thou, that have healing in thy VVing,
Let thy Day Star of Grace now bring
A Joyful Morn to my benighted mind,
And let its course a happy Progress find,
Till thy (blessed Sun) more powerful Beams
Break forth in mighty Flowing Streams
Of clearest light, to make an open way
For Glories perfect (O Eternal) Day.
No VVaxings, VVanings, vary this,
Nor Clouds, or fear of Clouds draw near
To fully, or disturb its Bliss
So far above the Atmosphere.
III.
Father of Lights! then of thy Love
Send down thy Spirit, which may prove,
As Salve, to clear from Scales my Clouded Eyes,
That I may see thy Sun when he does rise;
And all my observations take
By thy most sacred Rules, which make
The simple wise, and with unerring hand
To steer their Course to the Eternal Land
In roughest Storms, through proudest Seas,
O make this day one advance more
(Most blessed Three-One) to the true ease
Of its most-to-be-wished Shore.
IV.
But Night's far spent, and day's at hand;
Am I in dark Oblivion's Land?
Shall my Soul lie worse than a stupid beast,
Not to Salute fair light from yonder East?
O mind me! how that sweet-lookt thing
Did first from thee (great Good-Word) spring:
When thou the obscure Chaos did refine
And Beauteous form in Nature 'gan to shine.
But say ('it is done) let there be light
In my dark Soul, which still lies in
The dismal shades of Ghostly Night,
And deep in the Abyss of sin.
V.
But Night's far spent, and day's at hand,
Am I in dark Oblivion's Land?
Shall my Soul lie worse than a stupid Beast,
Not to Salute fair light from yonder East?
O! let it mind me, what did shine,
(Great God-Man) when thy Stars Divine
To humble Shepherds did glad tidings Sing
Of thy amazing Birth, Immortal King!
Glory to God in highest, peace
On Earth, to sinful man good will;
Which never now again can cease,
Since God to Man's United still.
VI.
But Night's far spent, and Day's at hand,
Am I in dark Oblivion's Land?
Shall my Soul lie worse than a stupid Beast,
Not to salute fair light from yonder East?
O mind me of that dawning Day,
When thou thy rising did display
(Great God) in power and splendour from the dead
(As well became) after thy setting red.
Give Life, and Light, that I may leave
My Grave of sin, as Bed, to run
In thy blessed strength, which I receive
To worship thee, my Rising Sun!
VII.
But Night's far spent, and Day's at hand,
Am I in dark Oblivion's Land?
Shall my Soul lie worse than a stupid Beast,
Not to Salute fair Light from yonder East?
O let it mind me of that Light
To which (Good God!) our Noon is Night:
Blessed Shechinah, where thy great Clemency
Has carr'd in Triumph our Humanity.
Refine my Nature from dross Dregs,
That I may presently contend,
And (tho, alas, with heavy Legs)
Make, where first Fruits thou did ascend.
VIII.
But Night's far spent, and Day's at hand,
Am I in dark Oblivion's Land?
Shall my Soul lie worse than a stupid Beast?
Not to Salute fair Light from yonder East?
O let it mind me of what light,
When thou come Judge in Clouds most bright:
When at thy Trumpets New-Creating call,
The Dead from their Dust-beds shall start up all.
O may I live that sleep to take,
With which thou do thy dear ones bless;
That when thou call, I may wake
To see thy Face in Righteousness.
IX.
The Night's far spent, and day's at hand,
Am I in dark Oblivions Land?
Remains my body like a stupid Beast,
Not moved by nimble light from yonder East,
Which flows full through the Hemisphere,
And tells the busy Sun is near?
Up, up! thy foreheads sweat justly decreed,
Must now to pleasing ease and sleep succeed:
Then make thy face, God! on me shine,
That with new Spirits, and vigorous Joy,
I may pursue thy Work; and mine,
(O prosper Lord) in just employ.
Hymnus Vespertinus: OR, The EVENING SONG.
THrice Blessed my God and King,
The only Spring
Of every good and perfect Thing.
Thou have preserved my ways,
(Accept my Praise)
This, and all other my past days.
And now the Shades come on,
O Living Sun,
Go not out of my Horizon!
Stream forth thy glorious Light,
That I by Night
May count my past days sins aright,
But how shall I recall
These Errors all,
Which under numbers will not fall!
O hide them in that night,
Which from our sight,
Did take and hide the Worlds great Light.
To thy all-piercing sight,
My darkest Night
Is clearer than to us Noon-light.
O let this thought me bring,
To keep within,
My heart and hand from secret sin.
When I my Clay undress,
Do thou me bless
From rags of all Unrighteousness.
Who knows where I may have
My Bed for Grave!
O then receive my Soul, and save.
Great VVatch, on whom no sleep
Does ever creep:
In grateful rest (I pray) me keep
From all malignant things,
Which darkness brings,
Under the shadow of thy Wings.
Dart forth thy healthful beams,
Dispel these steams,
Which cause or cherish hurtful dreams.
Pitch round me Angels Tent;
And from thee sent,
Let them blessed Visions represent.
As in thy Jacob's Night,
A Ladder bright,
Thee on the Top, my Shield and Light.
Whilst they to thee ascend,
And from thee bend,
By turns, thy Jewels to defend.
So shall I in thy arms,
Circled from harms,
Be lulled to bliss with sweetest charms.
Whilst gently from above,
Thy favors prove
My safeguard, and my bed of love.
When I awake, move me
To sing of thee,
And meditate on thy Mercy.
And with the Mornings wings,
As Light begins,
To fly to thee great King of Kings.
TO THE Candid READER.
NOW because amongst all Moral and Christian Virtues, which indeed differ only
as the rude and the complete draught, (Christianity being but summum Morale,
Morality refined and sublimated to an heroical and diviner pitch); humility and
meekness are of all other most eminently exercised by an All-Wise, Holy, Just,
and good particular Providence; and by its exercitations rendered more
conspicuous and resplendent; I therefore thought it not impertinent to annex as
an Appendix to the foregoing debate, a Poetical Sermon on each of these most
Divine and Metropolitan Graces.

Nor may the name of Sermon here applied, offend any with a seeming
incongruity, that have but cursorily read (not to say any thing of the most
harmonious Sermons of the Royal and other sweet Singers of Israel) the
excellent composures of at least the Horace.
Prince, tho not the King of Latin Poets, exhibiting Instances of the like,
both Nature and Title.

And because these Mother Virtues, Humility and Meekness, never look more like
themselves, than in their genuine and most true begotten Daughters, Repentance
and Obedience; particularly that which has for her proper and immediate object
humane Power; Obedience to God, never evidencing it self more, than in a
reverent and facile subjection to those his most Wise and most Good Providence
has thought meet to set over us. I have therefore moreover added a Penitential
Song in Four Parts; and Three Anti-Phanatical Poems; Anti-Phanatical I call
thim, for Phanatical and disobedient to humane Powers, if deliberately
inspected, will appear to be in truth convertible Terms. Nor could I be
disanimated from these endeavors by supposing Poetry wholly unbecoming
Divinity; for the first Theology of the Heathen, (as Antiquity tells us) was
sung by Linus, Orpheus, and other succeeding Poets, who in a special manner
were esteemed their Priests and Prophets; but passing by these, rather cast an
eye at your pleasure on the true and select Worshippers of the One only true
God. Here it is easily observable, that in both the Jewish and Christian
Churches, the most ample and cheerfullest gratulations for the manifold and
innumerable Benefits daily poured on the whole Creation by his Eternal Majesty,
together with the most worthy Praises of both the Essential Infinite
Perfections and Excellencies of the Divine Nature, and also of its communicated
Virtues and Transplantations of Goodness to, and in all rational Beings,
particularly Humane nature, were ever esteemed an essential and most peculiar
part of Divine Worship; and the celebration thereof principally performed in
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs.

This in brief may be a competent Apology for at least the kind of my assays,
to dress Divinity in Poesy, tho not perhaps for the quality of my Attempts, to
wrap so noble and highborn a Creature in such swaddling Clouts, as are the
inventions and composures of an unfortunate and flagging Fancy. And yet those
homely productions may serve a little to display the admirable Beauty of
Providence in the most wise disposition of things, viz. one in order to the
advancement and commendation of the good and Glory of another, and all to the
good and Glory of man, Lord Deputy of the World; but still with most humble
Subordination to the Glory and good Pleasure of the supreme Lord of Lords, who
is both Alpha and Omega, the one only absolutely first Beginning and ultimate
End of all things visible and invisible; for the Beauty of this sensible World
consists chiefly in a well-proportioned variety gradually proceeding from
lesser to greater Perfections, from gross and heavy Earth, to the thinner and
more active body of Water, from water to more pellucid and spirit-like Air,
from Air to Fire, the subtillest and most vigorous of the Elements; from Fire
to Light, the most nimble and purest of sensible Beings. Were the World all
Sun, or Stars, 'twould not be the Ten Thousandth part so beauteous, as now a
parcel thereof is, Earth, the dullness and opacity of the one (as Opposites use
to do) setting forth and amplifying the beauty and splendour of the other.

And the Earth it self is never so beautiful, as when dedala Tellus, (as
Lucretius speaks almost in his first strains) arrayed in her Spring Coat of
diverse Colors; that which is sad and grave, mightily setting forth and
commending her gay and flowery parts. Nor is it the least Glory of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, that one Star differs from another Star in Glory. Even so in
the World of Spirits is there the like gradation in a most proportioned variety
of Perfection; from the spirit of Plants, which is educed out, lives with, and
dies with its subject, containing only the powers of vegetation; there is an
assent to the spirit of Animals, which is likewise educed out, lives and dies
with its subject; but besides the powers of vegetation, contains moreover the
faculties of sense: From the spirit of bruit Animals there is another assent to
the intelligence of man, unitable and actually united with matter, but in her
self and most genuine operations immaterial and immortal, a rational mind
vertually comprizing both the vegetive and sensitive souls: from the spirit of
Man at length the ascent is to Angels, noble intelligences abstracted from all
matter and material conditions; From Angels the last ascent is to the Father of
Spirits, an Infinite Intelligence absolutely abstracted as to all act and
possibility, not only from all matter and material, but from all finite
conditions, an eternal and immensible Sea of Perfection, of which all created
Perfections are essentially dependent derivations, and compared with which,
were they all sublimated into one quintessence, the same would be infinitely
less considerable, than the minutest drop of a Bucket in competition with the
whole material and visible Ocean. Amongst the Angels, as we are assured from
the sacred Oracles, there is a great variety as to superiority and inferiority
of Order and Office, so by all rational inference must there be a diversity of
degrees of Perfection answerable to their respective Orders and Offices: But in
that part of the intellectual World, which comprehends men and humane society,
he that runs may read the greatest variety both in body and mind, of natural
and acquired Perfections, and as vast a difference of happiness in the action
and exercise of either, as great (might I say) almost as of Faces: All which
variety abundantly declares the infinite fullness and fecundity of the supreme
Fountain: For every good giving, and every perfect gift, of what nature and
quality soever, how mean and contracted, or how large and noble soever it be,
comes down from above from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness,
nor shadow of turning.

And tho there are diversitits of Gifts, and diversities of Operations, yet
they all flow from one most Simple, Infinite Spirit of All-Wise Goodness; which
gives and manifests in the World, the lesser Wits, not only for an agreeable
ministration to the lower and more scanty apprehensions; but likewise as foils
to set forth and commend the luster of the more large and nobler capacities: So
that (Readers of both sorts) the sum of all is this; You which are of the
meaner and more contracted parts, may read these with gratitude to Heaven for
providing you such suitable food: And you which are of the more large and
nobler endowments, may read likewise, and bless Heaven in a more ample manner
for its amplier and more magnificent diffusions of goodness to you, than to
others; so both and all together may contemplate, admire, and adore the
Infinite Wisdom of the Divine Providence in its so excellent contrivance of the
whole system of the sensible and intellectual World; to be its own most
beautiful Picture by a wonderful commixture of Light and Shade in and
throughout all its parts; that each one should serve to the good and Glory of
each other, and all together reflect the Image of the immortal Glory: Which one
only Most worthy End, Heaven grant that, we may all eternally answer in our
respective capacities. Farewell.

SERMON I.
The Subjects Kingdom,
On Matthew. V.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.


BLESSED are the minds enriched with poverty,
For them a Kingdom waits above the Sky.
Laid here in grace: which as a pledge begins
That Glory which compleats them after Kings.
Their infant Stature in their own Conceit,
Makes them the men in Heavens measures great:
Which still delights to give the humble Grace,
But thunder-strikes with frowns the Mountain Face,
Making God rising Herod's openly
Egregious proofs of bragged Divinity;
The Voice of God, not man, they cry; for worms,
The God a prey then in a moment turns.
Colossus-like, strutting his Glorious Court,
What, have not I for my most mighty Port
This Palace built? boasts Nebo Nebuchadnezzar
of the East,
Then turned from men, he pastures with the beast.
His Palace to a Forest, singing Boys
And Maids are turned to Bats and Owls hoarse noise.
So greatly swelling minds Lycanthropise
Themselves to bruits from demi-deities;
To bruits? Nay fiends, whilst full of grins and groans,
They yet aspire still to unequal Thrones.
Nor is the humble Port less fair to men,
Whilst hate attends the haughty Diadem:
And (as Experience speaks) the man that is proud,
Goes closely cursed of his adoring crowd:
If Honor be the Honourer's esteem,
Then from dishonours who can him redeem?
Much feared, not loved; just as the Nations prize,
When they adore their evil Deities:
The Rising Sun Sejanus sees on high;
But Setting, sees him in a Dungeon lie:
But now the people worshipped him; he falls,
And then they cry, to the Gemonian Scales;
O humble Greatness, like the Mind profound,
Which stoops in gentle Dews to kiss the ground!
His lucid Globes, the Shadows of his Crown,
Tho placed high, yet still are looking down:
Nor take we measures of their Excellence,
But from their kind and lowly Influence:
Such Excellence spite of themselves all must
With bosom-worship, honoring the dust;
Whilst Pride big-lookt, as more than half-divine,
Is trod for dirt, when its supports decline:
For why do the infernal Lions lay
Themselves like lowly Lambs? To gain a Prey.
So grin with haughty Heart, yet couching Knee,
Thy painful Praise Divine Humility:
But shameful Grief! that Devils chiefly find
Apt place for this in humane shape and kind,
In humane shape and kind! How we unhinge
Our lofty Poles, caress and cant, and cringe,
To gain deluded Troops, when Policy
Would Pride inthrone by feigned Humility?
Yet foaming waves still toss the ambitious mind,
Which laboring like a troubled Sea can find
No rest. Now up she mounts to Heaven above,
Which if she cannot bend, then Hell she will move.
So that her inmost Chambers represent
A straight and current foul and violent;
Which in still Night the Bed made for repose,
With boisterous Perturbations overflows:
What threatening Rocks, Gulfs, Sholes, Quicksands, beside
Ten thousand dangers chiefly wait on Pride?
Nor does she rarely meet with Winds and Seas,
Both opposite, which sup her up with ease
In rapid Ruins (farewell Sun and Light)
Deep Vortex equal to her humors height.
Sometimes in prosperous Gales her lofty eye,
The head-lands of fair-haven boasts to spy:
Then all her waves of swelling Passions rise,
And scorn the limits of the starry skies:
When on a sudden, blows a cross-ful gust,
That back to sea her gallant bottom must;
Or hostile Rocks shall wrack her in distress,
Just on the shore of her thought happiness.
O most unsafe, when least of fears she knows!
When at the best, still up and down she flows;
Her Honor under-sail lives all on breath,
And when at Anchor, but an inch from death:
VVitness great Haman's bliss in all his Pride,
That ebbs when this is at the highest Tide:
Haman the great, Haman the only man,
In honoring whom the mighty Monarch can
Delight himself: Haman the Rising Sun,
To worship whom, lo all the Persians run:
Haman the great, Haman whose eyes contemn
As worms all others, or as Pigmy men,
Compared with his more than Gigantick Port,
When he looks from his Sinai at the Court;
Yet one poor Mordecai's (ah) stubborn knee,
The pleasures of his Glory makes to flee,
And yield to anguish their deserted seat:
Alas it is all too little to be great!
When on the highest peak of Honor there,
How slippery is his station? with what fear?
Not all from others, who salute his rise
With clouds of arrows from their envious eyes:
Some still impatient of a parallel,
And all of such as haughtily excel;
But from himself, whose head sometimes unsound,
Still unsecure stands in a place profound,
Fatal, when fumes from giddy passions fly,
And urge the dangers of a dazzling eye:
Sometimes disquiet in their proper sphere,
They to the Sun of Honor soar so near,
That these bright beams which cherish humble things,
Consume or melt their daring waxen wings:
Or tho like Comets for a while they blaze,
And terrors move in all that on them gaze;
Their own fierce motion urging to a Flame,
Whose glaring streams beget a dreadful name:
Their greatest splendour then predicts a fall;
They burn, and turn from whence they did exhale,
To fordid earth, and only leave behind
Such dire effects as men with curses mind.
But thou like the fair Lady of the Night,
(First of the eight blessed Of the eight Beatitudes.
Sisters) art most bright,
When most at humble distance from thy Sun,
Sweet Lowliness, then thou do nearest come:
Nor has thy fair-skinn'd Beauty least excess,
When sable Morpheus thou do most confess.
Let Great Ones faithless Fortune on a round,
Thou on a square sitt'st safest near the ground.
Up goes the scale with thee, fall low or high,
Tho Earth and Sea were mingled with the sky:
But what needs this? the lesser is the more
Fit to get into Heavens narrow Door;
Which will not yield to those whose heads attempt
With high Deserts to knock the Firmament.
The Firmament? poor Naught and Dirt! look down
And meditate the rise of thy proud Crown.
View gravely thy deformed feet; how shall
Thy Peacocks Crest, and brisling Plumes but fall?
For is thy soul to an eclipse so prone,
As when most full of what are not her own,
But borrowed beams of the Eternal Light?
Compared with whom a Summers noon is night,
And all the Morning Stars which sang and played
In consort, when the Worlds first stone was laid,
Therefore with Jesus, who for Scepters look,
Must stoop with Jesus, to the lowly Brook,
On whose fresh Banks the Flowers all are found,
Wherewith Celestial Princes must be Crowned.
Most lowly Jesu, make my heart a Plot
Most humbly seated: O the happy Lot,
To be a Valley, where thy soul may feed
'Midst Lillies, which to thy warm beams succeed,
And through thy Merits may sweet Odours breathe,
And garland me with an immortal wreath!
Did Pride throw Lucifer with his bright Train,
Of morning-stars from their affected Reign,
Man out of Paradise, whilst Might in Thrones,
The lowly in the seats of lofty ones?
Behold thy Handmaid, (Lord) my naked soul,
Thy spotless Robe can cover all that is foul.
Make her fair Daughrer of thee (King most high)
By being Mother to Humility.
By this was thine (to carnal sense tho odd)
Both Royal Wife and Mother of great God,
Of the Blessed Jesu, But what match thee can,
Whose sovereign God becam'st a Serving-man?
A Serving-man? as vile a slave did die,
Whilst Prince of Life and immortality.
What nobler Pride this side the Starry Sky,
Than to Transcribe such rare Humility,
Humility outwondring Miracle?
God stoops to man; and Heaven unto Hell.
Stoop my stout heart, thou that can all things bend:
That I with thee (great Godman) may descend:
Then from a Worm in Dust, as Eagle may
Mount the high Countries of Eternal Day
To take Possession of that Throne, whose first
Foundations are laid lowly in the Dust.
SERMON II.
The Meek Man's Inheritance.
On Matthew. V.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall Inherit the Earth.


BLESSED are the meek, whose sweet Sedateness can
With Gentle Charms indear both God and Man,
Calm in those passions, whose tempestuous Breath
To the most God-like Virtues, Threatens Death;
When in great deeps their modest Sounding fail,
Their yiedling reason unto Faith strikes Sail,
And still profoundly stoop'st to Mysteries,
When too sublime for its undaring Eyes.
Their pleasure cannot but ever Couchant lie
To the good pleasure of the Deity,
Avowing, human will ought to resign
It Is self and all to Sovereign will Divine.
The sacred Statute's are their Meat and Drink;
Nor will they ought Repugnant do, speak, think.
But their smooth passions all concenter in
That boundless point, from whence they had their Spring,
And in which they without deflecting, rest,
Esteeming all from Heaven to be best:
Worst evils best, as from a Providence
Alwise and Fathomless to Humane Sense.
O happy meekness! whom no Injuries
Can ever Flame, tho often may Surprise,
And sometimes move, much rather bent to dye,
Than once affront a Lawful Dignity.
She humbly Vows to all in higher Sphere,
And to her equals modestly draws near,
Like to the Heavenly Orbs imparts a sense
To all below of sweet kind Influence:
Obliging Friends with an Eternal Tie,
Whilst conquering kindness kills her Enemy.
Nor does she less rejoice to satisfy,
Than to remit an offered Injury.
Tender to violate the sacred Name
Of Friend with angry, tho deserved Flame.
All due Reproofs as Precious Balm she takes:
And still the like with gentle Gesture makes,
Making soft words well formed in place and time
The Lenitive's of both, all wrath and crime.
This is (what Tongues can tell how Excellent)
The quiet Spirit's Lovely Ornament,
Whose Charming Beauties are of greater Price
Than Gold in Men's, in Heavens Holy Eyes.
Nor dares the Enemy its Magic fly,
The Devils own its true Divinity,
And howl its praise, assuming to perform
Their Blackest Plots the meek-mans taking form,
Whose Glory is to be sole King of Man,
Whom equalize no Earthly Monarch can;
For having all, deny him this to have,
And he is at highest but a Royal Slave.
Whilst over others on a Throne he reigns;
His Tyrant Passions hold himself in Chains;
Whereas the meek man Conquering self, defies
The worst Assaults of proudest Enemies.
Their furious Shot find him as yielding Wool,
To dead their force, that treats of Kindness full;
Can mildly boast more Captives than the Sword
In Glorious Triumphs ever could afford.
No Winds disturb his mind: but like the Air's
Superior Region, free from Stormy Cares
It truly represents that Harmony,
Which some but Dreamed the Soul of man to be.
Not that his passions are expelled as things
All over evil, Subjects still make Kings.
And grant that this the meek man should enjoy,
Is Reasons noble Empire to Destroy.
No, but his passion yields to Regent Will
And Will to Reason to be guided still,
Reason conducting well, which rarely fails
To go, from whence it came, with meek appeals.
Thus 'bove the Earth he sets as in a Throne,
Like Heaven firm: yet Earth is all his own.
What tho Usurping Hectors of the Age
Triumph and Lord it in his Heritage,
Set by the Eternal Wisdom for a day
To Exercise the Meek-man, and Display
His God-like Virtue, which through too much ease
Might turn her Vigorous Health to a Disease
Unapt to show her self, unless some foes
With Noxious Fumes her gentle Air oppose;
Their Hearts Delights their Happiness destroy,
For having all, they nothing can enjoy:
And domineering cannot truly Live:
But restless furies daily Murders give
In jealous fears. And when by fate they must
Pass off the Stage, they go of all men cursed.
All but the Meek-man, who as Lawful Heir
Possesses all, possessing without fear
What Heaven metes, the breadth of one small Hand,
Yet Adequate to all the Promised Land.
The Blisful Visions of the Face Divine,
His Goshen makes all Egypt to outshine:
That tho a Shepherd, he outhappy's Kings
Under the shade of his Great Shepherds Wings.
Omnipotence it self is his Lifeguard:
And boundless goodness his complete reward.
What if the Earth be moved, or Mountains were
With Rapid winds swept through the Thundering Air
Into the Sea, whose Floods lift to the Stars
Strive to outdo the tumults of fierce Wars
From Clashing Arms, Guns, Drums, and Trumpets loud,
And Legions circling him as with a Cloud;
Yet now, when only Storms without are seen,
He still enjoys a peaceful calm within,
With which he lies down fol'd in Heavens Arms
Both out of reach, and out of fear of harms.
The World to him is all a Paradise,
And every Cottage of an Equal Price
With all the World: where his contented mind
The truest Empire can all Kingdoms find.
Thus does he all Inherit in a Mite:
Whilst the Morose Invaders of his Right
But rarely boast a Portion of good things
Equal to what the Meek-man's study brings.
By Natures ways, contention being prone
To Burn at once her Neighbors House and own;
Whilst peaceful meekness by her native Charms
Her self and Fortune guards from studious harms;
Few of the base delighting to annoy
Her, whose delight is quiet to enjoy.
But let the Lawyer and the Magistrate
From dreaming Suits determine this debate,
Whether the meek are Earth's Possessors more
Than they who Fury's for their Gods Adore.
Or stay till day arrives to perfect light,
And you shall see the Meeks undoubted Right,
When only they shall actual heirs be found
Of the New Canaan, and be richly Crowned;
No envious Rivals entering in so well,
But such, as can bring into Heaven, Hell.
Jesu, more Meek than Moses! make me mild,
To God and Man like to a weaned Child;
Contract my swelling Sails, and calm my mind,
That thou in me no haughty looks may find,
But which with meek assent may gently bend
To thy great truth's, when science they transcend.
Let VVonder then preside in Reasons seat
Most fit in things for Human reach too great:
That where is less of sight, the Head may more
Profoundy bow, and awfully Adore.
Subdue and smooth my rugged will, till thine
(Alas, tho rudely) be pourtra'd in mine:
That at thy beck her no regret may stay,
When thou command'st, demurring to obey.
But let her prize thy words more than the Gold
That ever was from wealthy Ophir sold,
Receiving all (too dear to be withstood)
Thy Royal Laws for Holy, Just, and Good.
So may my passions as a Loyal Train
Of loving Subjects constitute her Reign,
All voting it (when thou but say) no loss
To change a Crown for thine Enobled Cross.
Dumb let me be at thy rebukes, (no word,
But let him do his pleasure) it is the Lord,
Submitting Life to thee with all the rest,
Who only know, can, wilt'st effect the best.
Should thou thy Viceroys and deputed Gods,
The higher powers, make my scourging Rods;
O! let me kiss them, dreading to defy
The Image of Immortal Majesty,
Both in it self, and other placed near,
As serving Angels in a higher sphere.
Whilst I accost all with obliging Grace
In both an equal, an inferior place;
Compose my frame for pardon to be prone,
To give to others, and to crave my own.
I in the Jewel of the Christian Crown,
Not on my wrath to leave the Sun go down,
But rather heap thick blessings which may prove
Coals on their Heads to melt them into Love.
Their thoughtful Heads, with causeless wrath who burn,
And sulfurous Flames for Lambent Fire return;
So may I (God) enjoy the Promise Land.
That part is all, that is measured by thy hand.
Tho in the midst of Thorns should be my lot,
Thy favor makes it a most pleasant Plot,
Secure of which how should I ever cease
To rise refresh't, when I lie down in peace?
Lacrimae Penitentiales: OR, A Penitential SONG, in Four Parts, in Poetical
Meditations on the Principal of the Penitential Psalms.
ODE I. On Psalm VI.
I.
O Sea, and every Spring!
Your Floods and Rivers bring
To my Heads deep,
That I may weep
A Deluge for my Sin.
II.
My sins, whose heads above
All height (Blessed Jesu) move,
Except the Flood
Of thy dear Blood,
And Mountains of thy Love.
III.
(Then Lord) rebuke me not,
Whilst thy fierce Wrath is hot;
But first assuage
Thine Anger's rage:
O spare! have thou forgot.
IV.
Thou art the sick souls Friend;
Thy healthful hand, Oh! lend;
Tho my sick heart,
Be my desert,
E're life my languors end.
V.
The powers of Night combined,
That my afflicted mind,
Whilst Bones oppressed,
Obtain no rest,
No truce from Flames may find.
VI.
How long without relief,
Will thou leave me to grief?
O turn in Love,
And let me prove,
Thy Mercy still is chief:
VII.
My soul from Hell return;
Why should thy Fury burn,
Till cruel death,
Leaves me no breath
To praise thee in mine Urn?
VIII.
I tire each night with groans,
Which beat my breast like stones,
(Ah,) the other day,
More hard than they;
What tongues can tell my moans?
IX.
My bed made for repose,
No sleep, no quiet knows;
But from mine eyes,
Such Floods arise,
That it quite overflows.
X.
Behold my hollow eyes,
How strength and beauty dies,
Betwixt the storms,
And piercing thorns
Of my souls Enemies.
XI.
Away hence, far depart,
All ye which drew my heart
With vain delights,
And pleasant baits,
To this most bitter smart
XII.
But thou (my God) rejoice,
To hear my mournful voice:
For Jesus Tears,
Receive my Prayers,
A Penitent's thy choice.
XIII.
Let his great Merit's Name,
O're-whelm my foes with shame,
And put to flight
Their blustering might,
Whilst I extol the same.
ODE II. On Psalm XXIII.
THrice blessed man! whose sins are washed off in the flood
Of dearest blood,
(Most Blessed Jesu!) from thy launced side:
And all whose foul deformity,
From the strict eye
Of Purity,
Thy spotless Robe of Innocence does hide.
Blessed man! when the most Righteous Judge shall quit from guilt each part,
That no black guile,
Shall to defile,
Be found in Tongue or Heart.
II.
Blessed man! sing still my soul; for whilst that I in pride
My wounds did hide
From thee the sole Physician of my health;
Through Racks which would no measure find,
My Spirits pined,
Vigor declined,
And old age seized my bones by force, not stealth.
Both day and night thy hand pressed me, moisture to drought did turn:
My hopes were worn
Like stalks of Corn,
Which raging Summers burn.
III.
But when my putrid sores I nakedly addressed,
And all confessed
To thy (my great Physician's) tender eye;
Thou cool'st the ardors of my Sin,
Remov'dst its sting,
And ease did bring,
With precious balm, which strongest poisons fly:
A precious Balm ( Gilead could thine both guilt and filth remove?)
Which made my wound,
Both clean and sound,
A Balm of bleeding love.
IV.
For this the pious Troops will still frequent thy Court,
In joyful sort,
With Incense of their sacred Vows (great King),
Inflamed with Love of Grace the Prime;
In thy due time,
From every Clime:
Nor will they doubt, secure from fear, to sing;
But tho a universal flood should swiftly on them rise,
They should find place
To praise thy Grace,
'Midst their Calamities,
V.
Thou art my only Tower, where I can run to fly
The Enemy,
Whose shortened rage thy Mercies Power prolongs,
Whilst thou do glorious Trophies raise,
Each of my days,
To thy great Praise,
And circles me with glad victorious Songs.
I hear thee, I Will dispel these mists and foggs, which make thee blind,
That day seems night,
And Darkness Light,
To thy obscured Mind.
VI.
If thou prove not like to the stupid Horse and Mule,
Whom Curbs must rule,
I Will guide thee with mine own auspicious eyes,
Which well attended shall not cease,
Thy Lights to 'crease
In ways of Peace,
Till thou attain'st Celestial Palaces;
When thou shall see what Plagues expect concealed impieties,
What Saints shall reap,
Tho now they weep,
In hopeful Miseries.
VII.
Then lift up (O my soul) thy drooping Head and Heart,
And Joy in smart,
With all that love a pure Heart, and pure Hand;
See in your Tears your Sun most bright,
In Darkness Light,
Blessed Day in Night,
From boisterous Seas a firm Eternal Land:
Ye which have mourned like Doves, now in a sacred Quire rejoice:
Sing, it is our God,
That was our Rod,
With a triumphing Voice.
ODE III. On Psalm XXXVIII. A Pindarick ODE.
I.
WHat lapsed again,
(Poor Wretch) into thy former burning pain!
Alas! too daring Confidence,
Betrayed me sadly to improsp'rous negligents;
Which gave my Enemies,
Whose greedy Eyes,
Are full of sleepless Cruelties,
Both Strength and Time,
Of all the Flower and Prime,
For new Surprise.
II.
What shall I do? have thou but one,
(For thee I must now woo) (blessed Jesu!) King
of Mercies most imperial Throne,
One cordial drop with which thy life-full death,
Did once revive my dying breath:
Yes, yes, they in vast multitude excel,
As Heaven does Earth, and infinitely more;
So high, so deep, so large, so full is thy rich Mercies store,
All sins of sinful Earth and Hell:
Then (great All-love) whose tender Womb
Alone gives life and breath to every thing,
Before I go to my long silent home;
From thy soft breasts let one drop spring,
One drop (full Paps) to lay my parching heat,
Whose Paroxisms never were so strong, so great.
III.
My Maker, and the World's, as good as just,
O mind my Mould! I am but Dust;
Strike, lo, I meekly kiss the kind paternal Rod,
But strike not as my Lord, but God;
Not whilst thy Justice with a Flaming Sword,
Stands ready to avenge thy Royal Word;
But with thy Mercy close at hand,
Its fury to withstand:
For how do thy most mighty keenest Arrows stick
Fast in my Breast?
And yet by thy Right Hand still deeper pressed.
I feel them, tho before incomparably Sick,
Which venomed by my sin with deadly smart
Pierce through the inmost fibers of my heart,
IV.
All Salutary Juice thine angry breath consume,
That only fumes
Most pestilent remain more black and foul
Than blackest smoke, more hot than fire,
In glowing compact Iron.
Ire,
Almighty Sire!
O what a Tophet is a guilty soul!
My guilty soul, which robs her servant body of all rest;
As if each part,
With the most skilful torturing art,
Were Day and Night oppressed.
V.
Each Joint resolved with pains,
By sad, but justest Law lets, and sucks in;
(O had I forethought the sad gains),
And so does spread abroad the deadly poison of my sin,
That I throughout infernal dolours find,
From thy displeasure and my conscious mind,
Which apprehends, imprisons, hales to Judgment, tries, attests, arraigns,
Convicts, condemns to racking pains,
And tho not kills,
Yet every hour with crowds of long-lived deaths it fills.
VI.
What can ye more (my threatening sins)? whose mighty towering waves,
Alarm Heaven, depress me to the Graves
Of a dread deep; striving to rise, despair
Still keeps me down, whose weight what Sampson's back can bear?
Yet (darling Furies) will ye more,
To me already one great sore?
Alas! it is through mine own Surgery,
That thus in Stench I lie,
And float in mine own vile impurity:
Rash folly seeking a too hasty calm,
But slightly searched before, unskilfully it skinn'd the wound with balm;
That now my festered sores recrude, and I
Bowed down with languid eyes all day,
Go on my way,
And wash my steps with tears most mournfully.
VII.
How still my painful bowels burn,
With noisome flames of diverse kinds of brutish lust?
Which to drought all moisture turn,
And from my heart,
To every near and distant part,
Cause and communicate a raging thirst,
After these waters, whence thou (grief) had thy first spring,
Impoison'd with fair Paradice's sting;
Of which yet wretched man I sought
A greedy draught,
Which so diffused the Poison, that from Head
To Foot, a Plague is spread,
A Plague which scorns all the Cathartick Medicines,
Taken from rich Natures hand,
By Sea and Land,
And which the best of Art refines,
And only yields to what (blessed Jesu! great
Jehovah!) thou gav'st in thy bloody sweat;
One drop whereof applied as well designed,
Can antidote the Plagues of all mankind.
VIII.
Then (Lord!) what else remains,
But that I forthwith flee
To thee for remedy,
And show thee (Boundless Goodness!) all my Pains,
Tho brokenhearted, in strong cries,
Which may, tho from a horrid deep, yet pierce the lofty Skies.
Let them approach thy Mercy's Throne,
Who hear every lowly sigh, and hearty, heavy groan:
Thou know the whole of my desire:
Quench not, but fan with thy kind breath, the smoking Flax's fire;
Break not the bruised Reed;
Nor kill (All-love) the heart that does already bleed:
See how it pants, beats with fear,
Trembles with presaging care;
That I most like a feeble Reed appear,
To every breath, and fill with dismal tones all round the mournful Air.
IX.
Sight fails my clouded eyes which once were crowned
With glorious Sunbeams; now a night profound
Invelops all, that I can see
Naught but my woeful misery;
And how my dearest Lovers far, far, from me blushing fly.
Which in my bosom use to lie,
Blessed Angels, and thou boundless Source of Love,
Most chaste and undefiled Dove,
Who loath to lie
Near such a Sty,
As I, of vile Impurity!
Nor dare they join, with mine, their hands,
Whom Nature joined to me in strictest bands:
Nay, and the venerable name
Of Friend abhors my shame;
Friends look from far,
But dare not to draw near:
They fearful are,
To greet the wounded Deer.
X.
Dark Angels, and their numerous Race,
The wicked World, triumph in my disgrace;
My Soul's proud Foes with Glory lift their Horns,
And add to misery their scorns,
Which gore my wounded breast like Thorns:
Nor want they Stratagems to strive,
That I my grief might never more survive,
At least survive true Penitent:
So is their Malice bent:
For thus they me caress; Come live a while,
And turn those panick looks into a smile;
Turn Tears to Wine, thy watered Couch to Beds
Of sweetest Odours; come, let us crown our heads
With Rosy Chaplets, that it may be known
To others and our selves, we are still our own:
What means this phlegmatic, dull Penitence?
Need'st thou, more than thy fellows, a pretense?
What pleasure after grim Death's day?
Whilst blood rounds briskly in our veins,
Let Us use our time, and slight no cheering means,
Each Moment we decay,
With our last breath all fleets away;
And naught we have shall stay.
XI.
But I refrained my tongue in silent grief,
Although my breast did swell, as all together dumb and deaf;
For of Thee (Thrice best, greatest Parent!) I
Hope all defense against their monstrous Blasphemy;
Whose Oily Tongues are sharper than their Swords,
And Poison lurks within their Candid words:
Hear me with most benign ears,
And rescue me from all my fears;
Sustain me (Heaven!) with an Almighty hand,
That I upright may walk and stand;
For when (alas!) I step aside,
Or in most slippery ways but slide,
It Is joyful Triumph to their envious Pride:
As men infected with the Plague desire,
And joy to spread the flames of the pestiferous Fire.
XII.
Thy Acts, whatever they be,
Are all alike most highly Holy, Just, and good:
Lo, I Am content to bear, Great Clemency!
What Is by thee fit understood,
Tho Sacrifice of Blood,
And fix my eye
On the true cause of misery.
Yes (Judge most equal of the Eternal Throne),
The Spring of my sick Heart is all my own.
My sins, my sins, exact, of right,
A plague that is infinite:
These I own, and have in sight;
These more numerous than the Sand;
Those above the Mountains stand;
Those above the Stars ascend;
Those to Hells deep Center bend:
But as thy mighty Son has here gi'n all
Dark Powers a Second Fall;
So there he is gone Triumphant King,
To lead us on, and to secure us in,
By blessed Portcullises made of Immortal Diamond,
Whose brightness can benight the Sun:
Lift all quite up to let us, us men in,
In our first Fruits, our universal conquering King,
Whilst glorious Hierarchy's found all Contents,
To compose Quires on Heaven's Battlements;
The most victorious Godman to commend
Alternately with those, that him did in ascent attend;
Ascent to the Eternal Capitol,
Where all his faithful Soldiers shall
In Triumph follow --
XIII.
Then whilst ( dear Sire!) thy Love in angers reign,
Let thy strong hand fast Chain
The cruel Mercies of both Earth and Hell;
For why should they excel,
Excel in Malice, yet in mighty numbers 'crease,
That Sport and Triumph in a forlorn Peace;
That laugh when Heaven frowns,
And feast like Vultures on my Wounds;
That repay good with ill, grin at a Penitent,
And with his Tears would have his Blood, because he does present
Them all a hated, humble President;
But leave not God, then who there will come near?
Be thou my Guard, no Enemy I Will fear;
Remove sins Opace Globe hence speedily,
Which interposeth 'twixt my Sun and me;
That my poor Moon-like Soul, barred from his sight,
May see and feel again his wonted beams,
And shine with free Reflection of lent-light;
Whilst thou ( blessed Life!) do flow in liberal Streams.
ODE IV. On Psalm LI.
O Life and Light of all that live!
Which facile Ears and Eyes do give
To penitential sighs and tears,
Receive my humble fervent Prayers,
Whose tender Mercies Crowd exceeds
All numbers, blot out my misdeeds;
Which howsoever numerous prove,
Yet cannot parallel thy love:
Perfect ( great Power!) what tears begin,
And wash me thoroughly from my sin;
Those sins which in my misery,
Too justly claim supremacy:
Wash in the streams that strong Rock gave,
Which Mercy in the Deserts clave,
Dry Deserts which no water have:
Wash over and over, that I may be
A living Temple, 'gain for thee:
For (Lord!) in most prostrate address,
I my most crimson Crimes confess:
Nor does their Image day or night,
One Moment dye out of my sight;
Only to thy All-seeing Eye,
Their hideous Form did naked lie;
Who only do my secrets see,
The only Judge to punish me;
That 'twere most just to purge the same
With thy fierce Fury's hottest Flame;
Whilst thou do clearly vindicate
Thy sacred Sentence from debate,
And baffle their proud Blasphemy,
Who dare Arraign thy Equity,
Triumphing in a perdite sense,
Of no o're-ruling Providence;
Or charge All-love with cruelty;
O purge and heal my Malady;
For I (alas) diseased thing,
Derived from a contagious Spring,
Black Spots to my first light did bring!
And e're I into light was sent,
From the dark Womb, the rudiment
The fertile seeds of Vice did take,
Into my liquid Natures make;
But thou Great Faith! whose changeless might,
Cannot 'mids storms but stand upright,
Art simple Truth, whom never guile,
No not in shadow could defile:
This does thy sacred Love so prize,
That tho with vicious Fumes made blind,
Thou have inlighten'd my dark eyes,
With beams of Glorious Promises,
That I through hidden Wisdom find,
Tho all the powers of Night combined
Me to seduce, to thee a way
Blessed Father of Eternal Day!
Purge therefore my foul Leprosy,
Thy loathing, and my misery,
With Hyssop in the sacred Flood
Of thine own Son's dear VVater-Blood;
Whose side a willing Sluice did prove,
To let out that Red Sea of Love,
That I, I washed with it might be,
VVhiter than Snow's Virginity;
O could I hear thy peaceful voice!
My bones which have been broken long,
How would they in a dance rejoice,
As if by fracture made more strong!
O make my mourning soul rejoice,
To hear (good God!) that pleasant voice!
I Will not survey with rigorous eyes,
Thy numerous Impurities:
But rather will thy sins remove,
And drown them in my Sea of Love:
Great Parent of the World! by whom,
All sprang from nothing's teeming Womb,
Speak into me a heart that is sound,
Where no defiling loves are found:
And in that heart renew a mind,
From earthly faeculence refined;
Where thine own Image true and bright,
Thy Royal Presence may delight,
To feast all Day, to lodge all Night;
Here let Celestial Flames still burn,
That hence thy Spirit never may turn
To leave me 'gain as liveless Urn:
For what wish I? the healthful Grace,
And solid Joy of thy blessed Face;
And that restored, I may abide;
Let thy free Spirit ever guide,
With Kingly Conduct to suppress
All rebel motions of the flesh,
Then shall I preach the Glories of thy name,
And crowds of Converts shall adore the same;
Reduced by my example to obey
Thy sacred Laws from error's crooked way;
God of my Life! deliver from the Cries
Of loud-tongue blood, whose voice surmounts the Skies,
Our guilty Land; so shall be all day long,
Great! Good! and Just! the burden of our Song:
Rouse up my living Lire, my breast inspire,
With vigorous sparks of pure Seraphick Fire:
That Heart and Tongue enlarged, their strains may raise
To sing (Great Harmony!) thy noble Praise:
Mercy and Judgment sing, how they in thee,
By discord Notes, most lovingly agree:
Thou art not pleased with Thousands of Young Rams,
Nor with the Hollicosts of fat of Lambs,
Or fairest Bulls prepared with holy Flames;
The World is thine; but lo a Heart contrite,
A Spirit broken with sins heavy weight,
Abhorring Fraud, is thy blessed Heart's delight,
Lo such I offer, such to thee I lift,
My God accept and crown thine own free gift:
O may men see, so long as Night knows Moon,
And whilst the Sun makes Morning and the Noon,
Thy Face serene to guild fair Sion's Hill,
Thy Holy Church with Heavenly Splendour fill:
Behold the Rents, view well her battered VValls,
Mark how (alas!) she shakes, she totters, falls;
Cement her breaches with a lasting Peace;
And let her held-proof bulwarks still increase,
That hostile Nations may her Progress more
Admire, than at her back-ward course before:
Then shall the Righteous (great Sionian King!)
With free will Joy their live Oblations bring
Of hallowed Bodies, with pure Souls, to grace,
Like fruitful Palms, thine Owner's dewlling place.
Then shall thy Votaries come from all parts,
With whole Burnt Offerings of inflamed hearts,
With zealous love, which breathe up to the Skies,
Thick Clouds of Prayers a grateful Sacrifice,
With thy sweet Incense ( Jesu!) well perfumed,
And lofty Praises, tho but lowly tuned:
Then shall they still on thy blessed Altar's, place
Thy Royal Son, the Brightness of thy Face:
Where all our Delila's in bonds succeed,
And Victims to his Love, our hatred breed:
And this shall more thy pleasure, more thy love,
Than all the pomp of Heccatombs can move.
THE Comfortable MOURNER: A SERMON
On Matthew. V.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.


BLESSED, blessed are they, who for their follies mourn,
Their Sorrow shall to greatest Triumph turn
Ashes to Beauty, sad Sackcloth to white,
Out-boasting all the Glories of the Light:
Want of such Grief speaks a Lethargick State;
O deadly Symptom of a Reprobate!
Whilst active Grief is Comforts Excellence:
The brisk acuteness of the vital sense:
Quick feeling it is which, where it does most thrive,
Proclaims the Soul most vig'rously alive:
Mourn, then rejoice in it, your healthful wound,
When searched with wine, shall smoothest oil make sound;
That precious Oil which speaks to every part,
With Balmy Lips its great Composers Art;
Able to turn afflicted Joseph's cold
Hard Shackles of Iron into Chains of Gold:
And lend his Tears more Virtue to refine
His Mirth, than all the ungrateful Butler's wine.
The Dove-like Comforter wlll pardon sing,
More pleasant than the chantings of the Spring,
Into your peaceful, tho once thundered Ears:
Good Cheer these Eyes shall see, the fertile tears,
Make this your Bakah Pleasures to afford,
Like Paradise, the Garden of the Lord;
When Harvest shouts, shall drown all noise of toil,
In cultivating your well-watered soil:
And you go up fair Sion's Hill, which leaves,
All Pools behind, with loads of wealthy sheaves.
Then 'gins great Jubilee, whose welcome ease,
Gains from past pains an Emphasis of praise:
For think, to whom sweet rest so grateful can
Appear, as to the weary laboring man:
What Tears remain, shall be as Orient Gems,
To beautify your sacred Diadems;
And memory of grief not to alloy,
But sublimate the spirits of your Joy:
Thus blackish Moles prove Beauty-Spots to grace,
Not to deform true Virtues God-like Face:
But (ah!) true Virtue (Lord!) is far from me;
I know, but serve not thy blessed Deity:
What shall I do? I want due strength, not will,
Do thou ( Great Might!) my brutish Passions kill.
My sins grow daily stronger, and are more
Than all the Sands, by Seas washed on the Shore.
Fain would I mourn, Blessed Wisdom! teach me how,
But not how much, for I can never enough:
First give me pious tears, then ( Living Vine!)
Turn, turn, those tears into Immortal Wine:
Which nobled with thy Blood ( All-Righteousness!)
Who trod'st alone the overflowing Press;
May glad, not only my poor heart, but all
The mighty States of Heavens great White Hall:
The blessed Three One will take what sweet content,
When they behold their mourning Penitent;
My Great Creator, welcome new-made Son;
My Dear Redeemer, what my Blood has done;
My Holy Comforter, let me embrace
My Precious Convert, and augment his Grace,
Refreshing him with shades of Dovy wings:
And then each Pole with Peals of Anthems rings,
From good-will'd Angels who much more rejoice,
For one that mourns, than Ninety nine so choice,
As not to know they need a mournful voice.
O Joyful Grief! O mourning Festival,
Preparing Virgins for the Bridegrooms call;
Come panting hearts, come to consummate bliss,
I Will you caress with an Eternal Kiss:
Put off your sable Weeds, on Robes all white,
Becoming best the Lambs blessed Nuptial Light:
Whose Beauty you shall find much, much more bright,
When you compare it with your former Night:
A Night whose shades deceasing soon as born,
Give place to Joys most perfect Midday Morn:
Fresh still as Infancy, as Manhood Strong,
New as each Instant, yet as Ever, long.
THE Epiologue or Corollary from all the Premises, in opposition to the
principal Tenent of the Garden; that is, of Epicurus and his Followers, who
Phylosophized anciently in a Garden; viz. Their Opinion of no overruling
Providence, as being utterly destructive of the Happiness, and highly
derogatory to the Majesty of a God to stoop to, and interfere with the care of
any sub-Celestial, and especially Terrestrial Affairs; Which Doctrine their
Philosophical Poet sings in these Verses,
Omnis enim per se divum natura necesse'st,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota ab nostris rebus, sejunctaque long;
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri,
Nec been per meritus capitur, nec tangitur ira.
Lucret. lib. 1.

Which the Oxford Swan has thus excellently taught English. For whatsoe're's
divine, must live in Peace,
In undisturbed and everlasting ease;
Not care for us, from fears and dangers free,
Sufficient to its own felicity;
Naught here below, naught in our power it needs,
Never smiles at good, nor frowns at wicked deeds.
Mr. Creech in his Elevation of Lucretius.

THen sing live Lute, that whatsoe're's divine
Is not as fancied by the Garden Epicuri de grege Porcus: Horace.
Swine;
Men who to Fortunes chances all ascribe,
And think, the world no Masters hand does guide,
But Nature rolls the rounds of Day and Sunt qui fortunae jam casibus omnia
ponunt.
Year:
And so they touch all Altars without fear:
What Is God, of all below must careless be Et nullo credunt, mundum rectore
moveri:
,
Not Saints from Friends, not Fogs from Incense
Diseern not praising from blaspheming tongue;
Never shine on right, nor storm at impious wrongs.
As if it were abasing to a God Natura volvente vires and lucis and anni
,
To cast one glance on a terrene abode:
As if (good God!) Supreme felicity,
Did wholly in a lazy posture lie: Atque adeo intrepedi quecunque altaria
tangunt. Juvenal.

And to thy bliss it needs disturbance brings,
To intermeddle with the care of things,
Chiefly of that which from mean Seed begins.
O bruits! that shape a God out of the vain
Ideas of their own distempered brain,
And suited to their vicious natures strain:
Shall we supiness, and an idle state,
Make Gods chief bliss, which good men scorn and hate;
Esteeming it the Glory of great Kings,
With guardiant eyes to shield the shrubs of things?
Gods Bliss, to whose unlimitable quick eye,
All things are present, and all naked lie;
So that without discourse, which labor brings,
He comprehends the perfect rule of things.
Gods bliss, the beck of whose Almighty Hand,
Whole Natures force, nay, Nothing cannot withstand,
But into Something springs at his command.
To whom to make more Worlds is easier found,
Than to take up an Acorn from the Ground,
To all the Garden Swine --
Since then the 'ternal Power can live in Peace,
Yet foster all, and rule with perfect ease,
Nor in the least his Grandeur thus displease:
Why murmur ye, that ye his Goodness find:
To you more than you to your own selves kind?
Ungrateful Swine! Go herd your selves and run
With one fowl Mouth to grunt against the Sun,
For humbling his high Heavenly self so low,
As with warm Beams to make your Pastures flow.
And talk no more, that Heaven nothing needs,
To banish quite from Earth Religious deeds.
As if a Peasant should not Homage pay
Of Grateful Honors to his Prince; and say,
I humbly thank my Gracious Lord the King,
From whom to me such Bounties daily Spring;
Because the mighty Monarch needs no Clown,
To grace with thanks the Jewels of his Crown.
True, the Almighty Kings Imperial Bliss
Placed in his Self's high Contemplation is
The Mirror and great Architype of all
That solid reason Great and Good can call:
That not all Hymns from Men and Angels sent,
His Native Bliss and Glory can Augment,
As much as one poor spark bound upwards may
Augment the Brightness of an August day.
Why then should this most blisful One Create
Objection of the Epicurean
The World, and still with care ore rule its State?
Ask why Answer.
the Sun does flow in ampler Streams
Than Moon or Stars, why with more generous Beams?
Why do the Heavens so Bless the Womb of Earth
With Vital Heat and Seed for Fruitful Birth?
Why from the Brooks such puny purlings come,
Whilst Nile with Thundering Floods sets from his home,
And Yearly hugs blessed Egypt's wealthy Land,
With the orewhelming bounty of his Hand?
Why does the Sea with restless kindness too,
To all the unnumbred Springs supplies renew,
Whilst narrow Cisterns just begin to flow,
And straight they fail, dry up and empty grow?
Why are some Lands of such an hide-bound soil,
And so ungrateful to the Tillers toil,
When Rich returns from better natured ground
To fill his Mouth, and Deck his Head, are found,
And Plains with freewill Fruits and Flowers Crowned?
Why does most Beauty most compliant prove
With the sweet motions of all noble Love,
And why such Clemency, such goodness find
We from the Valiant and Heroic mind?
For still the largest Soul is the most kind.
It Is, it is, because things of themselves are free
According to their natural Goods degree.
So greatest Goods love most self to diffuse:
Therefore did God whole Nature's frame produce.
Therefore from one Point willing lines are found
To spring and pass all numbers and all bound:
Of which no cause can well-purg'd ears approve
But one, Self, and all moving Sea of Love.
And thou (my Soul) know he who knows no ends
Of Days, of Bliss, of Glory, condescends
Meek, Lowly vales to visit with kind Eyes,
Their Springs of Penitential Waters rise.
Not thinking therefore that this Ocean looks,
Or needs assistance from such puny Brooks,
Yet every Hour and Moment of each day,
Send grateful Rivers to the boundless Sea,
Not as Earth's Fountains to recruit, but show
That thou to it thy self and all do owe.
AN ADDRESS TO A LOYAL PENCIL; BEING A gentle Satyr against the Arch Fanaticism
of our days, and the Substance of some Antifanatical Poems Publicly
Communicated in Manuscript, when the Lopping or Excluding Faction was in its
Meridian and highest Impudence; the contraction of which into this one, tho
Composed before the Birth of the last most Holy Rebellion, may yet be less
Impertinent than wished to our present Circumstances, if we consider the
possibility of a remaining root of bitterness, and the secret throws of Santa
Pretenza, for her after-burden.
Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps-Cloathing, but inwardly
they are Ravening Wolves; ye shall know them by their Fruits,

Matthew. 7.15. Pictoribus atque Poetis.
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa Potestas
Seimus, and hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissem.
To Painters and to Poets still has been
An equal power of daring any thing
We know of old, and humbly crave such leave,
And such to all, with all our Heart we give.
Horat. de Art. Poet. ADDRESS TO A PAINTER.
DEAR Painter Draw a Sepulcher within,
Full fraught with dead men's Bones, a (...) some thing,
As Putrid stuff can make, without more white,
(If possible) than Virgins Snow or Light;
Or what is the same, draw Fiends as lately made
The only Saints, in Holy Masquerade.
No wonder Sir, these should themselves so fly
To Refuge in a Contrariety:
For from the first, the Devilish used this deceit,
And dearly loved to play the Counterfeit,
Shame and his Policy enforcing to it
To hide what might, all but his Cloven Foot;
For such is his Deformed Excellence,
'Twould scare both Scot-and-Lot-men out of sense,
Should he appear upon Election
In his own shape to move Affection.
No, no, he knows his Picture would not take,
But only for the Golden Frame's sweet sake.
Zelub left out, he doubts not to do well,
Looking as if his Name was only Bell.
Pray Draw him therefore with a curious Hand,
And let his Worship like an Image stand
Inricht all over with the Temple's spoils,
Which no presumptious spot or wrinkle foils.
Make his grim Blackmores Face and Hands, most bright
With glorious gilt of fresh Angelick light,
In all so feigning forms of Sanctity,
As if new-sent from the Empir'al Sky.
In these he may succesfully trepan,
At least the honest-hearted Christian,
Who often mistakes a Jezebel for Saint;
Adores, for Native Beauty, sordid Paint.
By her starched looks, and Oily Tongue, which talks
Naught but the Holy Land, bewitched he walks,
Admiring her, till by Syrenean Charms,
He Is Conjured in the Circle of her Arms;
Here Hugged, he lives in Blindness till he Dies
(Poor wretch) the Worst of all Captivities.
Then (prithee Pencil) be most Exquisite,
To draw this Devilish, when Factious, bolt-upright;
Let him not in the least peep out his Nose
Of Door, but in Religious Sundays Clothes,
Grave, Black, on Maiden White, to keep fast in
His supple wits, which are prone forth to spring
When great pains taking, opes the little Doors
Through fervency, which natural men call Pores.
Add hallowed Frontlets of the largest size;
A Cloak more than the half Phylacteries,
His Chariot must be Flaming Zeal, whereon
With Jehu's Tongue he acts a Phaeton.
Saints all like Angels for his numerous Train,
And Kings made wicked, to make good his Reign;
Kings with their fettered Nobles on each side,
To Grace his Chariot with triumphant pride.
Paint Lively on his Lips the sacred word,
And in his Hand a double-edged Sword,
Motto'd (for and against) to separate,
'Twixt Godlike Caesar's Person and his State,
To fight the Lairds own Battles, Mauger Laws,
The Lairds own Battles in the Devils Cause!
O Prince of sins! what Heaven mod defies,
Dares that of Heaven borrow a disguise?
Rebellion which with Witchcrafts cursed Hands
Profanes and violates all Holy Bands;
By Covenant with Hell and the Black Prince,
Quite to Renounce Heavens highest Excellence,
VVhilest (horrid thing!) it spitefully agrees
To scorn on Earth his sacred Deputies;
And that in all the likeness may hold good,
The Solemn Covenant is signed with Blood,
Their own malignant Blood, which Rebels must
Give to appease the Infernal Dragons thirst.
Not only theirs, but Blood of Innocents,
And from Bazillick Veins; astonishments
Confound me here, and horror sense prevents!
But draw an Altar, under which still cry,
Thick Purple Bands of Martyred Loyalty;
Incircling round a bleeding Royal Love,
Like a meek Lamb, crowned with a gall-less Dove.
How long (just Powers) shall our dear Blood be found,
Yet unappeas'd to die the British ground?
And yet near by, paint Adders, which appear
Stopping against charms their unrelenting ear.
And Chairman Pilat, with washed hands, lift eyes,
Still mingling Blood with holy Sacrifice,
The Blood of the most holy Votaries.
Nor does vain humor bring unto my mind
Strange forms, unheard of shapes to make or find;
For never yet did Rebel-Devil ride,
But with both men and arms all sanctified.
Consult a while your reverend Monuments,
And draw what their sage Story represents,
That this besotted Age may see it is old,
To hilt seditious Swords with Temple-Gold.
Give one for all, proud Korahs company;
In formal ranks, and let their Banners fly,
Inscribed, The Lords own People, all Holy
Assertors of a Holy Liberty.
Lift up their Snow-white hands toward the Skies,
VVhilest poys'ned Arrows pelt their Dignities.
What Is Moses or Saint Aaron, that they thus
(Are they more holy?) Lord it over us?
Then whilst with mouths full of a godly word,
They hand the Censor, squinting on the Sword,
Let them approach the Altar, whence alone
They hope to Scale successfully the Throne;
Princes of Priests! Oh Holy Violence,
Not in a Mystic, but a lit'ral Sense,
At once to take, (what dares it not perform?)
The Earths and Heavens Kingdoms both by storm.
But Paint (can thou) true fire, or what is the same,
Give Painted Fire a quick Vivacious Flame,
To which their Sacrilegious Zealots all,
(Strange Fire!) (strange Sacrifice!) Just Victims fall,
Now for Jacks Parentage. Paint him begot
On discontent, kind Cats most happy lot;
On discontent, by some Male Incubus;
Paint Faction, Midwife; Paint Sedition, Nurse;
Paint black Rebellion, bringing him at last
To proper Man, bad weed! that grows so fast
Up to an Elder, soon as come to light,
A Mushroom Offspring of but to'ther night.
Paint him close joined to any sect or thing,
To make Extinct the hated Name of King.
What if their Eyes to adverse points are bent?
Their Tails, like Sampsons Foxes, may consent
To carry Hells Firebrarnds of Zeal, to Burn
The Lords and his Anointed's sacred Corn.
Paint all his Associations near to be;
The League of France in Holy Amity,
Both meeting kind to Rob the Diadem,
With cursed Hands, of its most Orient Gem,
Supremacy over sacred men and things,
The right of Jewish and all Christian Kings.
But show the Thieves all up in arms to be,
Where this their stolen Treasure placed should be;
Jack big with pride, (alas enraged Fool!)
Commanding Thrones to his Repenting-stool,
And the Impereal Robe by Holy Trump,
To kiss the Hem of his Synodick Jump.
Show how derived Gods he Violates,
And with Brute Thunder Excommunicates;
Thunder, which in another he defies,
And as the Triform Cerb'rus howls decries;
Yet Heavens Viceroys presumes he to displace,
Piping all Kingdom to be found in Grace;
And lest no sequel from such premises
Let them be Saints, he will make them Tyranize.
Paint now our bands assunder, and give thence
All Law to Eagle-sighted Impudence,
Which must outstare the Sun, amazed to Eye
Religion-Murd'ring Divinity,
That peaceful Gospel which came from the Stars;
Proclaiming naught but dire Intestine Wars.
Loud Mouthed Bo'nerges, belching Flames like Guns,
And Thundering Pulpits, like to Major Drums.
Conducting silly Souls with Devilish Spells,
From Purgatories feigned to Real Hells.
Bound with cross Chains of Contradicting Oaths,
Which Turks and Pagans never could Impose.
Paint now Egyptian Taxers, which may rate,
Poll Decimate, Plunder and Sequestrate,
Selling Lives, Liberties all to support
Hells high Tribunal, Heaven^ Judging Court.
But lest that Mealmouth Jack complains that here
He has no part, pray draw a Butcher fair,
Binding a Lamb, the Meekest of the Flock,
Then Boy dispatch him first, thus ti'd to Block;
And Pencil, this depending strife decide,
Which of the two may best be justified.
Then show how this (what heart could other think)
This Vip'rous Brood expires with curse and stink;
Whilst Vengeance halls its Arch-conductors all
To the due Glories of their Godly call.
Yet by, so draw the Stars, that all appear
In form to hasten a Plantonick Year.
Men's Heads Vertigo'd with male Influence,
Distracting so their very common Sense,
That they all over Act in public view
The frantic Scenes of Forty one and two.
Show how the Martyred Rumpers now awake,
And in the Senate their old Stations take,
With Reverend shades ascending from black Dis,
Into our Saints (blessed Metempsycoses),
To Club for one The four Club Divines.
Smectimnean Monster more,
And make again Geneva's Bull to Roar,
That only could out-bellow Greeks Stantore.
Show how old Pan the Mobile Inspires
Both with his Pipe and with his wandering Fires,
Which look like Fiends to Malanchollick sights,
Tho naught in truth, but Jack with Lanthorn-Light.
Raised by and to Distempered fancies pains,
Out of the heated Bogs of Factious Brains,
As poison full as the Plot-Masters Reins.
Let Black-mouthed Calumny with filthy steams,
Now strive again to dark the Suns bright beams,
Which being stout, thousand to one at last,
But some however unjust, may yet stick fast.
Here let bold Clippers of the Crown, and there
The parers of the Royal Robe appear,
Such as for Cowardice, Damned David's Breast,
When with Regret for Saul's cropped Garment pressed
And would both Saul and David to Divest
Divest their Kings, till them should nakedness,
The peoples Creatures, (tho their Gods) confess.
All this cannot do, pray change the Pencil, and
Call Aiding Genij to your Royal Hand.
Call him that drew the Vine so cur'ously,
That Birds with eager Wings toward it fly,
And set upon plump lively clusters, loath
To own the Cheat, tho they go blushing off.
Call him that drew the shade so Dexterously,
That as a Curtain men would put it by,
That of the Vine they might have fuller sight,
One Sense befooled, the other Reasons light.
Call Angelo, and all for Paint Renowned
In and about the famed Italian Ground.
Then draw a Saint for Glorious Zeal more gay
Than ever was Saint Barnaba's bright day.
* Santa Pretenza is her Name, a Saint Holy Pretense.
That of all others Merits most of Paint.
Her habit must be all of Heavenly Loom;
A Present from some Sister-Angel come,
But chiefly let her upper Robe white be,
As if di'd newly in the Gallaxie;
That it be long enough (pray) have great care,
That there below no Cloven Foot appear.
Her Face, Neck, Hands and Breasts, and all to sight
That comes, must be washed with Fresh Virgin Light,
Such as that Noon, which by The Almighty Word,
Nothing did in the worlds daybreak afford;
For here no Mot no Spot may Critics spy,
Nor shade, except Religious Gravity.
When e're her Saintship daigns to take process
To solemn Acts of full-blown holiness,
Her let Nymph Echo follow, and the rest,
With which Narcissus in the VVoods was blessed.
Paint more than Atropus one of the three Destinies, whose office was to cut
the Thread of human periods, as of the other two, one to hold the distaff, the
other to spin the Thread out.
Atrops knife in her right hand,
VVhilest in the Left a Sage black Box must stand
With Knife, she as a new fourth Destiny,
Rescinds the Acts of the old Sacred three,
Cuts off those Lines which Heavens high Council makes
To mete and fix the Bounds of Regal states,
Dread thing! dares often break Heavens Eternal Line,
To make way for her own, as more Divine!
But this cannot do, firm Thread which Heaven has spun,
And only has end, whence it first begun,
Nor needs Religion fair Pretenza skill;
For prop obedience to the Heavenly will,
Is pure and only true Religion still.
They Gods dread Self Exclude in very deed,
That Vote not his Vicegerents to succeed.
As liquid Floods in one continued stream,
Where they in fee hold the bright Diadem,
In see of the blessed Deity alone,
And scorn Election to Eclipse the Throne;
To make good therefore true successions Line,
And show how Pretenza next with Hands Divine
Presents (O rarely skilled in all state-locks)
A Reverend black thing like Pandora's Box,
Looking as if she knew no mighty odds,
But that her self was gifted by the gods,
As well as she when sent to men's abodes.
First let her the Prometheans tempt with it,
Boasting it brings an Heir of Royal Wit,
As well as of a Royal true Descent,
Gods chief Delight, Isra'ls chief Ornament.
But let these weigh the Present's Excellence
In Golden Scales of Godlike Providence.
So scorn her offer as a damned pretense,
The boasted Eagle scorn, whose spurious Eye
Dares not behold the Suns bright Majesty.
But rather would the joy of all Eyes fly.
Then let the Saint with all her care and art,
Make Present to the Epimethean part.
Who more consulting change, than solid peace;
Muchless Religions then their prides increase;
Accept and open this Mysterious Box,
Out flies a swarm of worse than Plague or Pox;
A swarm of Hell-bred mischiefs rushes out,
And buzzing flies three brainsick Realms about.
Paint lively this, show how the people run,
As if all with Tarantula's were stung.
Some their mad selves dance almost out of breath;
And some more eager Dance themselves to death.
Their Masters Music still more poison brings
Than cure, till they crack their Enchanting strings*
This some beholding with consid'ring Eyes,
Leave off their Dancing, to be timely wise;
Wise when they see the Reverend Box so open,
That there remains in, not so much as hope;
Less than in Pandors taking Air it is Dead.
Else on the Eagles hanging pinions fled.
Paint Saint now like Medea, muttering Charms,
Or Chafing like an Amazon in Arms;
The great Penthisile, when mad with Grief,
She foamed amidst thick Troops for Troys Relief.
For nothing against succession can succeed,
No, neither Knife nor Box will do the deed.
Therefore in place of these, flung off with Curse,
Paint (what may both supply) a Blunderbus
Inscribed, Since I supernal Gods cannot bend,
I Will roar to make the Infernal Gods ascend.
But whilst the Saint a Lyoness in Heart,
Yet gently acts the lowly Lambs meek part,
And Couching waits the dismal day, to tear
Three mighty Kingdoms in a Royal Pair.
(O sacred Pair) in whom did mighti'st love
Most mystic powers and powerful myst'ries prove,
New Market Fire.
Show fire from Heaven, a fire whose wondrous light
Brings both Saint and her pious frauds to sight;
Display how at this Fires Puissant heat,
(Bad friend to paint) the Saint dessolves in sweat;
How her fine Clothes drop off, hands melt, and face,
And leave a Naked Devil in their place.
For Pencil now, and Colors, send to Hell,
Else can thou never draw this Fury well;
Describe her squallid hairs thick traced with knots
In which grim Serpents hatch and hiss out Plots.
Some on her blistred shoulders dangling down,
Some brisling up, and clustered to a Crown;
Still threatening Heaven with endeavored Wars,
Heaven, whence she dropped amongst the rebel stars*
From both her Eyes let flaming Rivers flow,
Such as Vesavius and fierce Aetna know.
Out of her Mouth black smoke must never rest,
To speak a Phlegathon within her breast,
Nor let her meager Cheeks desist to tell,
That Envy is her most Compendious Hell.
Throughout her Negro frame, let Pictrine Brass,
With Cuts of various shapes, her honor grace*
Old Britains gallantry, as sage Bards sang,
E're French Diseases, with French Modes began.
Here let fierce Harpies, ravenous Vulturs there,
The numerous race of Tiphons blood appear.
Here Minotaurs, there Centaurs 'bove the rest,
A Monster of six Heads upon one Breast.
Circled with all the Monsters Libia finds,
Sprung from Conjunction of far distant kinds.
Then let a Viper have next signal part,
A Viper preying on its Parents Heart.
But by a Pigmi Proteus taught too well,
Who Faces Heaven, whilst he looks to Hell.
Thy Mystic Signet of this mighty thing,
A Crafty Monster called a Sphinx must bring.
Posie (unridled!) I am Dead. --
To make good this at length in streams most foul,
Let slimy Tap piss out his Plotful Soul.
Himself first seeing Heaven, Anatomise
Pandemonian of the General Court or Council-House of all the Devils.
His Pandemonian Heart to all men's Eyes;
Stay here no more, but give at last this Fiend
A Cloven Foot (inscribed) Divide and Reign,
And show how she in pleasure does prevail,
Scourging her self with her own Snaky Tail.
But (Painter) next a mighty Troop bring in,
That now hedge in no Cuckows but their sin!
O! Holy One! Prince Disinheriting,
Show how they stamp with zealous spite at will
On poor black Boxes, an Exclusion Bill.
Yet giving (gentle Pencil!) each man leave
To have a Weather-Glass within his sleeve,
Whose Motto peeping out, minds what their will is,
(Tempora Mutantur nos and Mutamur in illis.
Still yielding to, with most observant care,
The changeling temper of the Ambient Air.
As free and facil, to fall low or rise,
As the prophetic Liquor Weather-wise.
But let them on and curse Pretenza more
Than ever they Hosann'd her before
Heaven most Triumphs, when Devils forced be
To grin confession of the Deity.
Yet draw the Roman Crow prepared to cry,
All Hail Great Caesar, or Mark Anthony,
According to the chance of Victory.
And lest late Janus's now cheat the Eyes
Of honest Hearts with Rainbow Loyalties,
Paint Lively out, how Earth-bred Clouds can soon
As often in par'lels Ape the Sun or Moon;
Show how warm Suns make Butterflyes to frisk,
And out Carvet Brave Barbs not half so brisk;
Show how the seven Sleepers all Retreat
And hide, when Sunbeams seem to lose their heat
And wail their Fountains power as not great.
Which when Favonius whispers in their Ear,
With his warm Breath, and tells that Sol is near,
And full of kindly power, all forth run
Like Persians, adore the Rising Sun.
This is enough to deck a Palace round
Where Prester Jack with pleasures might be Crowned
Seeing great Cesars mighty Chariot Grace
With Saint Pretenza to its wheels made fast;
Whilst true-bred Royalists fly cheerful by,
As free as Eagles through the yielding sky.
True Hearts that Cherished in sad VVinter-time,
Poor Loyalty damned for a first-rate Crime;
Tho now the very Brambles Garlands bear
Of Amaranth to Crown her Golden Hair,
Thus that great Word which Chaos did Refine,
Still out of darkness, makes fair light to shine.
FINIS.

