THE Religious Villain. A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Sr.
ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight. LORD MAYOR OF LONDON AND THE Court of Aldermen. Upon the
Fifth day of November, 1679. being the Anniversary day of Thanksgiving for the
Deliverance of our Church and Nation from the Hellish Powder Treason, At St.
Mary le Bow Church, in London.

By FRANCIS GREGORY, D. D. And Rector of Hambleton in the County of Bucks, and
late one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Lee and Dan. Major, in Lumbard-street against the
Post House, and at the Hand and Scepter in Fleet Street* 1679.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. ROBERT CLAYTON Knight. And Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
My Lord,
THis discourse, which was first designed for the only use of that little
Village, wherein the Providence of God has placed me, as Rector; and your
Lordship, as Patron; has lately had the Privilege, through your Honors
favor and Order, to be delivered in a City-Church, though with some
disadvantageous Circumstances.

For that Church being spacious, the occasion Solemn, and the Assembly not only
very numerous, but much disturbed too, the inarticulate noise of many, through
Catarrhes and Coughs, drowning the Voice of one; the Preacher had the fate
rather to be seen than heard; and it so fell out, that the greater the
Congregation was, the Auditory proved so much the less.

Such, as had the luck to hear some part of this Sermon from the Pulpit, have
importuned me to let them see the whole of it from the Press; whose requests I
should never have gratified, had I not some hopes, that a subject, so
seasonable for this Iuncture of time, may do some good.

And the more good will this Paper do, if your Lordship please to Shelter it
under your Wing. For, such a signal, just, and deserved Veneration has this
whole Royal City for your Honor, that every man, who is wise and good, will
easily entertain whatever shall be recommended to them by your Lordships
Counsel, Example, or Approbation.

And since, not only the Citizens of London, but the whole Nation is highly
satisfied, that in the Government of this great Metropolis, your Lordship does
as little design, as need, the Advancement of your private Interest; but, the
security of our Religion, the Honor and safety of our Sovereign, the
Establishment of our Church, the restitution of Peace and Unity, and the
prevention of Popish superstitions and Tyranny, I can with the greater
confidence recommended this discourse to your Lordships Patronage, as having in
it a direct Tendency toward all those blessed Ends, which your Honor aims at.

May our good God so bless your Lordships Person with Health, and your
Government with those happy events, which your Honor designs, that Vice and
Error may be suppressed, that Religion and Virtue may be advanced, that all
our unhappy differences may be reconciled, that the Citizens of London may be
preserved from Sword and Pestilence, and the City it self from future Flames!

That it may so be is the design of this discourse, and shall for ever be both
the endeavor and daily Petition of.

Your Lordships most oblidged Friend and humble Servant. F. G.

THE RELIGIOUS VILLAIN. A SERMON PREACHED Upon the 5 th. of November.
Joh. 16. 2. They shall put you out of their Synagogues; yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God Service.
THEY shall put you out of their Synagogues, That would be the work of the
Jews, both by there Niddui, and their Cheem, their lesser Excommunication and
their greater; even that whereby the offender was not only (...), excluded both
from the Sacred and Civil assemblies of men, but (...) solemnly devoted to the
Wrath and Curse of God.

But that is not all* such an Excommunication, Tert. in Apol*
as Tertullian styles, summum judicii futuri Praejudicium, the greatest Essay,
Emblem, and representation of the last Judgment, was thought a punishment too
gentle for the Primitive Saints; for thus the Text goes on, every one that
kills you, this every one takes in the Gentiles too; and why both Jew and
Gentile would thus conspire against the Servants of Christ, their Lord gives
them this account, They will think that they do God service, and that it so
fell out indeed according to this Prediction, and what were the grounds of
these gross misapprehensions about our Saviors innocent Servants, give me
leave to show you, by way of History, in these four distinct particulars.

First, The Servants of Christ, though men of exemplary Piety, were yet accused
and and thought guilty of the highest Irreligion and Atheism; and upon that
score, were judged worthy to die.

The Jews esteemed them Enemies to their Law, Temple, and Worship; with this
they charged St. Stephen. This man cease Act. 6. 1^.
not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the Law. This was
St. Act. 21. 28.
Paul's Indictment too, This is the man, that teaches all men every where
against the People, the Law, and this Place.

And as the Jews did count them Enemies to their Religion, so did the Gentiles
think them to have either none or that which is worse then none. Some indeed
accused them, Minuc. F. in Oct. p. 2^.
as Minucius Felix tells us, quod monstra colerent, that they worshipped
Monsters, Onochel^n, says Tertullian, a certain Mongrel with Ears Cael. Rh. l.
2^. cap. 24.
like an Ass, so Caelius Rhodiginus.

But as to those many Deities, which the Pagan World did then acknowledge and
adore, the Heathens in Tertullian do charge Tert. in Apol. c. 10.
the Christians thus, Deos non colitis, ye worship not our Gods* So he in
Minucius Felix, nullas aras habent Christiani, Templa nulla, These Christians
have no Altars, no Temples. And as they had none of their own, so neither would
they worship in any of theirs; for the main thing, which Plin. in Ep. ad*
Trajanum.
Pliny wrote to Trajane against them, was this, obstinatio non Sacrificandi,
their obstinate refusal to offer Sacrifice.

But yet there were exhibited against them by other men far greater Complaints
then this bare denial of Worship, Grassantur in Deos, so the Pagans in Minucius
Felix; these Christians do not only neglect our Gods, but they affront them
too; what they did, that Author tells us, Templa despiciunt, Sacrarident, they
despise our Temples; they laugh at our Socr. Hist. l. 1. c. 16.
Sacrifices, (...), says Socrates, they Scoff at our holy Mysteries; nay more
(...) says Sozomen; they have demolished our Temples, and pulled down the
Images of our Gods; but what did they with them? the Images of Brass, (...), so
Socrates, They turned them into Pots and Kettles for common uses; and such as
were of Silver, (...), they melted and turned them into money, as Sozomen does
inform us.

And since the Christians did thus highly affront all those Deities, whom the
Pagan Arnob. l. 1. p. 8.
World did own and worship, well might Arnobius say of himself and others, Athei
Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. cap. 15.
nuncupamur, we are called Atheists; and what then? (...) so the Pagans in
Eusebius, away with these Atheists, for, it was no new thing even with Heathens
to execute an Atheist; Plato in Apol. Socr.
for, Plato tells, that this was the Crime of Socrates, (...), he thinks, that
there are no Gods, and for that he died. And upon the same supposition of
Atheism, how false soever it was, did the Heathens think it a very pious work
to kill the Christians too.

Secondly, The Servants of Christ were thought to be public Enemies to the
civil Government of the World; and, upon that score, were judged unfit to live
any longer in it.

Aug. in Psalm. 118.
S. Austine indeed might well demand, quid Christiani laeserant Regna terrena?
What were the Kingdoms of the World the worse for the Christian faith, that
they should prove such enemies to it? certainly, they fared much the better for
it; So Nazianzene observed (...), Nazianz. Orat. 3. p. 64.
as the Christian Religion thrived, so did the Roman Empire too.

Sure we are the great Author of this Reliligion did lay no claim to earthly
Crowns, my Kingdom is not of this World. But, as he Joh. 18. 36.
gave us his own Example of obedience unto other Magistrates, so has he left us
Rules and Precepts for it. What the practice of his ancient Servants was,
Tertullian tells us, Oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribus, etc. We pray for all our
Governors, and if at any time they oppress us, our only recourse is to our
Prayers and Tears, not that we want all other weapons, or hands to use them,
but that our Religion gives us no leave to do so.

But notwithstanding all their peaceable deportment and submissive obedience to
that Tert. in Apol. cap. 10.
Government, or rather Tyranny, under which they lived and groaned too.
Tertullian thus complains, Mastajetis rei Convenimur, we poor Christians are
convented and indicted as Traitors and Rebels; but why so? The Pagans pretenses
were these, pro Imperatoribus Sacrificia non impenditis, ye offer no Sacrifices
for the Emperors prosperity; again, non celebrando solennia Caesarum, ye do
not observe Caesar's birth day with such solemnities, as other Subjects do; yet
again, the Christians did refuse Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. cap. 15.
to swear, as other Romans commonly did Per Genios Caesarum, or as Polycarp was
commanded by the Roman Proconsul in Eusebius, "(...), swear by the Fortune of
Caesar, this the Christians would not do; and Tertullian gives this reason for
it, non dicam Imperatorem Deum, we dare not swear by Caesar because we dare not
own him God.

Now, their peremptory refusal to flatter the Roman Emperors, in matters of
this kind was looked upon as an Argument of their disaffection and disloyalty,
which, being improved by the malice of their accusers, and believed by their
Judges, did expose them to the severest censures of the Imperial Laws, as if
they had been really guilty of Rebellion and Treasons indeed.

Thirdly, The Servants of Christ were accused and thought guilty of such vile
Immoralities and foul debaucheries, as, being committed, would indeed render
any man unfit to live. Aug. de Civ. dei l. 19. cap. 23.


St. Austine tells us, that Porphyry, a great enemy to the Primitive Saints,
pretended that he had received from an Oracle this Information* Christum
piissimum, Christianos pollutos that Christ himself was a most pious person,
but that his pretended followers were polluted Villains. Thus Tertullian tells
his Pagan, Hominem Tert. in Apol. c. 2.
Christianum omnium Scelerum reum existimas, the man, that is a Christian, you
think to be guilty of all wickednesses whatsoever.

What particular Crimes were laid to the Charge of these innocent Christians,
we learn from several Authors Dicimur Sceleratissimi de Sacramento
Infanticidii, and Pabulo inde, etc. Terl. in Apol. c* 7.
says Tertullian; we Christians are counted the vilest of men for Murdering
our own Infants, yea, and like old Satan, for eating them too. To this Eusebius
adds another Calumny, that was spread abroad, and believed amongst the Nations,
and that was this (...), etc. We Christians are charged with Incestuous
copulations, with our own Sisters and Mothers too.

That, which gave occasion to this foul, but undeserved reproach, was this; in
those days the Servants of Christ, being sorely persecuted in all places, could
not meet to serve their God in public, and by day, without manifest hazard of
their lives, and so were constrained, as Pliny informed the Emperor, to hold
Caetus Antelucanos, their holy Assemblies exceeding early, and in the dark.
These obscure and private meetings, though held not of their own choice, but of
mere necessity; and though designed for no other end, but the safety of their
persons, whilst they worshipped God, did expose them to the censure of their
Enemies; who, willing enough to believe all evil of them, did easily suspect
them to be guilty of those horrid Crimes, which other wicked men, and perhaps
they themselves, did often act in private and in the dark,

And since the men of the Pagan World did, though very unjustly, believe the
Primitive Christians to be guilty of Adultery, Incest and Murder, even that of
their own little ones; we cannot much wonder, that they should think their
utmost Severity toward them to be an Act of Justice, yea, and Religion too;
because even amongst them, such enormous Crimes were commonly punished with
Death, and do indeed deserve it by the known Laws both of God and Men.

4. The Servants of Christ were thought to be the Causes of all those Public
Calamities which befell the World, and so might well be judged unfit to live
any longer in it.

And doubtless had those former Charges been well proved against them, this
last had been but a very rational Inference from them. For, whosoever is an
Atheist in point of Religion, a Rebel in point of Government, and a Debauchee
in point of Manners, does contribute a great deal toward the Ruin of that
place where he resides.

That the Primitive Christians were, and Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 1. c. 1.
did so, was a thing believed among the Heathens. St Austin says of Rome, Mala
quae Civitas illa pertulit, Christo imputant: Whatever Evils happened to that
City, they impuputed unto Christ. Nay, Postquam esse in mundo Gens Christiana
coepit, terrarum Orbem periisse, Arnob. l. 1. p. 4.
etc. So the Pagans in Arnobius; the whole World is almost ruined since
Christianity came into it.

What particular Calamities were imputed by the men of the Heathen World to the
Servants of Christ, we learn from several Aug. in Psalm. 80.
Authors. Non pluit Deus, non seminamus; so speak the Heathens in St. Austin;
there is no Rain, we cannot sow. What then? Die ad Christianos: Go and thank
the Christians for Tert. in Apol. cap. 4.
it. To this we may add that of Tertullian; Si Tiberis ascendit ad Moenia, si
Nilus non ascendit in arva, etc. If there happened either too much Rain, or too
little; if there were any Famines, Pestilences, or Earthquakes, what then?
Christianos ad Leones. Away with these Christians to the Lions. But why were
they Arnob. l. 2. p. 20.
to blame? the Pagans in Arnobius give this Reason, Christus ex Orb Religiones
expulit; their Master had driven all Religions out of the World.

So that the main Quarrel, which both Jew and Pagan had against Christ and his
Servants, did arise from the different Interests of their Religions; the Jew
adhering to Moses, the Pagan standing up for his plurality of Gods, and the
Christian opposing them both.

Upon which account, Jew and Pagan thinking their own Religions right, and the
Christians wrong, did vigorously pursue them, the one with Excommunications,
and both with Death. And this was judged, as the Text styles it, (...), a
Service done, by the Jew to his God, and by the Pagan to his Idols. But what is
all this to us, and the Occasion of this Day?

1. Consider we of what Concern it is, that we be not mistaken in Points of
Faith, and Matters of Religion, lest perhaps we do defend an Error, and oppose
the Truths of God.

Among those many kinds of Worship, which are in the World; amongst those too
numerous Sects which are in the Church, there is but One that is right. And as
this great Variety of Religions, each of which will pretend to be the true One,
does make it an easy matter to mistake; so does the Grand Import of the true
Religion render such Mistakes very dangerous too. For whosoever he be that
takes up with a False Religion, supposing it to be a True one, does run the
hazard, if God be not the more merciful to his Ignorance, not only of losing
that Reward which he looks for; but of committing those Crimes which may expose
him to those Punishments which he little thinks of.

The true Religion of God is that which every man is bound not only to adhere
unto, but to be zealous for; and accordingly we find with what affection the
Devout Turk promotes the Doctrine of his Mahomet: we read with what vehemence
the Religious Pagan has contended for the service of his Idols; we are not
ignorant with what warmth of Zeal the pious Jew has stickled for the
Institutions of his Moses; and we of the Christian Church do still lie under
the Jude 3.
Obligation of this Command, Contend earnestly for the Faith. We must do
whatever lawfully we may, for the Establishment and Propagation of our
Religion, even with our very utmost vigor.

But if we shall be mistaken in the choice of our Religion, what horrible
Actions will that Zeal of ours, which is required from us, put us upon? St.
Paul tells us, It Is Gal. 4. 18.
good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. But Oh how mischievous is
it to be zealous in a matter, especially a Religion that is bad.

We have great Instances of this in the Text: They shall put you out of the
Synagogues? What You does our Savior mean? His Apostles, their immediate
Successors, and other Primitive Saints, who proved his Martyrs and Confessors,
and undoubtedly were the best of men* And what an injurious Action must it
needs be to pass that dreadful Sentence of Excommunication upon such Innocent
and Holy Persons, as if they had been the very worst of Villains? to treat the
choicest Servants of God, as if they had been so many incorrigible Rogues, fit
for nothing else but to be delivered up to the Devils power? to turn those very
persons out of the Church, who were the most eminent Members of it; to shut
them out of the Service of God who were the fittest to perform it?

Certainly, such Usage as this, being no way deserved, was bad enough; but yet
there is something worse that is still behind; for it is added, Every one that
kills you; To treat men of spotless Lives (...), says Theophylact, as if they
had been the most Pestilent Bigots, Varlets, and Incendiaries imaginable! To
send such Persons out of that World, which had none better, nor perhaps so
good, within it!

Doubtless, there could be no Action more unjust then this; but whence did it
rise? What was it, that did persuade both Jew and Pagan to use the very utmost
extremity toward such Persons, as really were the Supporters of the true
Church, and the Ornaments of the World? The Text gives us this Account, Every
one that kills you, will think that he does God Service. Yea, behold here the
dismal Consequences of a mistaken Religion. We have here the main Pillars of
the Church excluded from it; here are Murders Committed upon the Persons of
such Men, Heb. 11.
of whom the World was not worthy, and all the Reason does lie in this: Every
one that kills you, (...) will think, that he does God Service, when Truth
shall be esteemed Error, when the soundest Doctrine shall be counted Heresy,
when the neglect or contempt of an Idol shall be styled Atheism, when the right
Religion shall be thought a wrong one, O what unwarrantable actions will blind
Zeal put men upon! when the slaughter of Men, falsely supposed to be little
better than Brutes, shall be judged an acceptable Sacrifice unto God, what
religious Zealot will restrain his hands from Blood?

There is no Example of this in all our Bibles more eminent then that of our
great St. Paul; of Act. 9. 1.
whom the Text says. He Breathed out Threatenings and Slaughters against the
Disciples of the Lord, and so again. He made havoc of the Church. We Act. 8. 3.
have his own Confession. I punished them often in every Synagogue, and compelled
them to Blaspheme. But how came this Man, who proved so great a Saint, so
miserably to Persecute the Poor, Unarmed, and Innocent Servants of Christ? He
tells us, I did it ignorantly, he did all this mischief 1 Timothy 1. 13.
through a bare mistake; he was yet of an opinion, that the Jewish Religion was
right, and the Christian wrong; and, upon that score, he Judged himself bound
to defend the former, and oppose the later; for, so he Testified; I verily
thought with Act. 26. 9.
my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus. This
eminent person being zealous for his then Religion, but yet mistaken in it, did
oppose that Faith, which, upon better Informations, he did afterward own,
preach, and defend. Such warm Affections had he yet for the Antiquated Worship
of the Jewish Church, that he now shed other Men's Blood for the sake of the
same Religion, for which at length he as readily lost his own.

And since we have such great and sad examples before us, let us take heed,
lest we also do first take up any false Opinions, and then think our selves
bound to promote them too. There are some amongst us, who, upon frivolous
Pretenses, quarelling with the Discipline and Service of our Church, have
departed from it; and as they have withdrawn themselves, so have they thought
it their Obligation to seduce and take off others, even all they could: it is
the unhappiness of such Men, that a blind zeal, which is their own Sin, should
likewise prove their Neighbors Ruin; that they, who intend a kindness to
other persons, should even by their mistaken Charity destroy them.

For it is very like, that many Promoters of Schism and Faction may intend well;
but we must not trust to the Goodness of our Meanings, but look to the
Soundness of our Understandings. It Is not hard to believe, that when the Jew and
the Gentle Crucified the Son of God, and Murdered his Servants, they meant well
in both; nor can we doubt with any Charity, but when Zealous Papists and
Religious Pagans burnt the Martyrs, they intended Good; the Text says, that it
should be so. Every one that kills you, will think that he does God Service. If
so, then take we heed of all gross mistakes in the matters of our Religion; let
us beware, lest we be corrupted in our Judgments, either by the Papist on the
one hand, or the Sectary on the other; let us not satisfy our selves, that our
Intentions are right; but look we that our Informations be not wrong; for, if
they be, what we do, as Duty* may prove our Crime; and, upon that Supposition,
the more of Zeal, the more of Sin.

2. Consider we what it is, that we must expect from those Men, were we in
their Power, who pursue us upon the Interest of Religion, or at least pretend
to do so.

It Is certain that they of the Roman Church have as great Reason, upon
Religious accounts, and probably far greater, upon Wordly Considerations, to be
as Zealous for their Doctrine and Worship, as ever the Jew or Pagan were for
theirs. Nor is it to be disputed, but we of the Reformed Churches do differ
from them of the Roman in some of the same Points, wherein the Primitive
Christians did both differ from the Pagan and the Jew.

It Is not hard to demonstrate, that we of the Church of England now are, in all
the Fundamental Points of our Religion, what the Apostles and their Followers
ever were. Nor is it difficult to prove, that they of the Roman Communion now
are, in several matters, what the Jews and Pagans were. For, the great respect
which they bear to their written Traditions, equalling their (...), their Law
in the Mouth to that in the Book: Even this, together with the vast multitude
of their Ceremonies, and such Ceremonies as do render the service of God rather
vain than venerable, does prove them somewhat like the Jews: only whereas the
Jewish Rites, being appointed by God, did adorn his Worship, and were Parts of
it; these men's follies, invented by themselves, do corrupt and spoil it.

Again, their public allowance of Fornication, and taking Money for it, as if
it were no sin; their adoration of Images, their invocation of Saints, their
doctrine of Purgatory, which was the Invention of Plato: All this does
testify, that both in their Religion, and in their Manners, they are too like
the Pagans. The truth is, the present Religion of the Roman Church is a mere
Miscellany, too like that of the Turkish Alcharon, as having in it something of
the Pagan, something of the Jew, and something of the Christian too.

And as our Adversaries do thus resemble both Jew and Pagan in some matters of
their Religion, so do they match them both, in their zealous persecution of all
such as do oppose them. What kind of usage the Primitive Christians found from
Jews and Pagans, we learn from the Text; and what kind of Treatments the
Protestant Churches have found from the Roman, our own Chronicles do inform us;
and that men of the same Principles would fain be at the same sport again, we
do not need a Spirit of Prophecy to assure us. Let Us view the Text once more,
and see the Parallel.

1. The Text says of the Jew, (...), They will put you out of the Synagogues,
they will turn you out of their Churches; and that being done, they will count
you, as Publicans and Heathens, even the worst of men.

And thus have the Roman Jews dealt with us and our Progenitors; they have
morally driven us from them, by imposing upon us such Conditions of Union, as
did oblige us to break either with God or Them. And when the Governors of our
Church saw themselves necessitated to withdraw from their Communion, they have,
by their Ecclesiastical Censures, condemned us for being Separatists, though
they themselves have unavoidably made us so.

It Is well known, what Bulls and Interdicts they have sent us, what Anathema's
and Curses they have written against us in their Councils, what solemn
Excommunications they denounce against us year by year, they proclaim us
Schismatics, Heretics, and vile Apostates from the Faith of Christ, and as
such do they treat us; and, by so doing, they fully teach the Example in the
Text -- They will put you out of the Synagogues. -- This they have done over
and over; and it is well for us of this Age and Nation, that they can yet do no
more; it is well, that all this Thunder of so many Excommunications, which has
made such a mighty noise, does yet want a killing Bolt. We are obliged to the
good Providence of God, that they have not yet found, in our days, and in our
Church, what they strangely long for, a fair opportunity to melt down their
leaden Seals, and turn them into Bullets.

2. The Text says of the Jew and Pagan both -- (...) -- Every one that kills
you -- The Jews excluded them out of their Synagogues, and both Jews and Pagans
turned them out of the world too.

And have not the Roman Jews and Pagans dealt thus with thousands of our
Religion, and fain would deal so with us too? Have they not seconded their
Excommunications with the Sword, and their Anathema's with devouring Flames? Is
it not the constant Doctrine of their Church, that Heretics must be burnt, and
who those Heretics are, they themselves must be the only Judges? If we shall
but read over the Histories of England, Ireland, France, Germany, and other
places, we shall find that they have made such miserable slaughters in the
reformed Churches, that it may be justly doubted, whether Rome-Pagan or
Rome-Papal have shed the greater quantity of Christian - blood. But why would
they do it?

3ly. The Text gives us this reason: Every one that kills you, (...), will
think that he does God good service. It was from a religious mistake that all
this Bloodshed did proceed.

The Pagans had not right apprehensions of God, the Jew was deceived in his
opinion of Christ; so blind was the Pagan, that he thought his false Gods to
be true ones; so prejudiced was the Jew, that he judged the true Messiah to be
a false one: which gross Mistake of theirs, did expose them to the commission
of that horrid Crime, wherewith the Text does charge them -- Every one that
kills you -- To kill a man, that affronted his supposed God, the Pagan did not
think it sin; to kill a man, that opposed the legal Worship of their Church,
the Jews did not think it Murder; no, they judged it, (...), a religious Work,
and pleasing unto God. -- So Theophylact.

And such Apprehensions concerning us have they of the Roman Church, in which
men bred up in the ignorance of our Religion, yea, and much of their own too,
are taught to believe, that we of the Protestant Religion are mere Apostates
from the Faith of Christ, that we are such Heretics, as deny the great
Doctrines of the Catholic Church: And yet sure we are, that they can never
overthrow our Faith, nor defend their own, by more Arguments than one; I mean,
that one which hangs by their sides; that one which they fetch, not from the
Library, but the Cutlers Shop: they can never confute us any other way, than
that in the Text -- Every one that kills you. -- We have so much solid Reason
on our sides, that they can never be too hard for us, till either we our selves
shall lose our brains, or they dash them out.

And that they may so do, O what Endeavors do they use! what Plots do they
lay? what Expenses are they at? They can fetch Armadoes from Spain, false
Witnesses from St. Omers, and a Powder Treason even from Hell it self. What
pains do they take to corrupt such great persons, as are either vicious or
ignorant? Nay, what hazards do they run? for, as things yet stand, they cannot
attempt our Lives, without some danger of their own, and yet they will venture;
but why all this? The Text gives us the best account: They will think that they
do God service, etc.

Certainly, they who, through the just Judgment of God, are given up to such
strong delusions, as to think that Murder is rather their Merit than their
Crime, must needs be dangerous men. Of all Villains in the world, the Religious
Villain is far the worst: for, whilst every common Villain's Conscience, who
knows what he does to be sin, may justly check him; the Religious Villain's
Conscience, who commits a sin, but thinks it duty, does not only invite him to
it, but applauds and chears him in it.

It Is the great unhappiness of the Christian Church, that there should be any
such mistaken Zelots in it, who think the killing of men to be a serving of
God. But since the Divine Providence, for the correction of our Vices, or the
trial of our Graces, does permit it so to be; since we have such devout and
pious Bloud-hounds amongst us, as count it a religious act to destroy our
Persons, and ruin our Nation, which they know to be both the defense and glory
of the Reformed Churches, We may do well to consider these three things.

First, That we have very little Reason to Believe the present Religion of the
Roman Church to be indeed the Religion of Christ.

Never did our Blessed Savior Teach his Servants to Propagate his Religion by
Shedding Blood; Never did his Apostles Teach their Successors, either by
Doctrine or Example, to Promote the Gospel by any Sword, but that of the Spirit
only: I find indeed, that Christianity is called by some Ancient Authors,
(...), The Prevailing Doctrine; and the Promoters of it were accordingly styled
(...), the Conquerours; But by what Weapons did they overcome? St. Paul
Answers, The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal. They 2 Cor. 10. 4.
did not Convert the Heathen World with Swords and Daggers; They did not
Enlighten the Understandings of Men with Fire and Faggots; such Pagan Princes
as would not turn to their Religion, they did not Assassinate, nor move their
Subjects to Rebel.

No, the Religion of Christ has in it such Properties as forbids all this: St.
James 3. 17.
James tells us, What it is, it is first Pure, and then Peaceable. The Designs
of Christianity is to make Men as more Holy toward their God, so more Gentle,
Kind, and Tenderhearted toward their Neighbors, then all Mankind besides:
It Is one great work of the Gospel so to Mollify and Soften the Hearts of Men,
that the Vulture may become a Dove, and the VVoolf a Lamb.

But so far is the Roman Religion from doing this, that it makes Men more
Merciless then it found them: For we cannot doubt, but they, who have the Great
unhappiness to be Born within that Church, do bring with them into the World
the same Natural Bowels with other Men: but such is their Education, that they
Learn more Cruelty from a Corrupted Religion, then from a Corrupted Nature.
Even so much Cruelty, that when once they Act like Zealous Papists, they do
even cease to be Men. And if so that Religion can be no Kin to the Religion of
Christ, which instead of making better, does make him none. But

Secondly, That we have abundant Reason to prepare our selves for the very
worst of Sufferings.

The Scriptures tells us, That the Servants of God must expect wrongs and
Injuries, not from Profane Persons only, but, which is worse, even from
Devout Ones too. Wicked Men may pursue us from a Principle of Irreligion; And
Devout Men may do as much from a Blind and Ill-grounded Zeal. Of this latter
sort are they in the Text; such Persons, as through Mistakes and
Mis-informations, are of an Opinion, that it were a Pious work to Destroy us,
and so thinks themselves Obliged to do it. This being our Case, we should fit
our selves to endure whatever God may permit Men of rash and Fiery Spirits,
Enflamed with Zeal, and Edged with Religion, to inflict upon us.

Now, that we may suffer, if need be, with that Christian Courage, that becomes
us, besides our Begging the Assistances of that God, for whom we suffer: we are
Concerned to do these Two Things more.

First. It Is our Concern to Acquaint our selves thoroughly with the Principles
of that Religion which we Oppose: and of that we Adhere unto.

It Is a great thing to Suffer, so harsh to Flesh and Blood, that no Wise Man
will do it, unless he see Good reason for it. And in our present Case, the
only reason must be, the Badness of the Religion which we Renounce, and the
Goodness of that which we Defend. That the Roman Religion is stark Naught; That
the Reformed Religion is the only Right one, we must not barely Believe by an
Implicit Faith, but be able to prove by such sollid Reasons, as cannot fail us.
It Is 1 These. 5. 21.
St. Paul's rule, Prove all things. All Matters both of Faith and Worship: but
why? and in Order to what must we Prove them? The next Words tells us: Hold
fast that which is Good. It Is an Intimation, that in times of Persecution, we
shall never hold fast the best Religion in the World, if we do not prove it
first, but take it up merely upon trust: So Treacherous is the Soul of Man, and
so averse from Suffering any thing for God, that when we are brought into any
Extremity, our own Hearts may be apt to Discourage us from enduring it, by
raising in us suspicions and Jealousies about the Truth of that Religion, which
as yet we never strictly Examined, but Embraced and owned barely through Custom
and Education.

Search we then with the severest scrutiny into the Principles and Practices
both of the Roman Religion and our Own: call we our selves to a strict Account,
Why we are Protestants rather than Papists: Let us Impartially try both
Religions by the Written Word of God, by the Judgment of the first and Best
general Councels, by the Testimony of the most Early Fathers, and by the known
Practices of the Primitive-Church.

And when we shall find that all these are certainly on our side, we must be
satisfied that we cannot do our GOD a greater service, then by Opposing the
superstitious Innovations of the Roman Church, by a Resolute Defending of our
own Religion, and if need be, a Cheerful suffering for it.

Sure I am, the stricter scrutiny we make, the Better shall we understand the
Excellency of our own Faith, and the Vanity of theirs, in all Points, wherein
they differ from us. We shall find upon just enquiry, that there is a strange
difference betwixt that Religion, which makes us sufferers, and that which
deserves, that we should so be. As there is a vast Disproportion betwixt him,
that does basely Commit a Murder; and him that does Gloriously suffer
Martyrdom, so is there an equal Distinction betwixt the Roman Religion, which
bids them Kill; and Ours, which bids us dye. And this is that which we must
satisfy our selves about in order to our Courageous and Cheerful enduring
those Sufferings, which Men, Conscientiously Cruel, are preparing for us.

Secondly. It Is our Great Concern to Live with that Innocence, Holiness, and
Virtue, which well becomes the Servants of Christ and that Religion, which is
both Ours and His.

It will be a Difficult task for any of us to Dye for our Religion, except in
the mean time we shall Live according to it; for although the Excellency of our
Faith may Invite us to suffer for it, yet the Guilt of a Wicked Life will
Deterr us from it. Indeed, Aquinas tells us, that Martyrdom is a thing so
Meritorious, that it procures a Pardon for all Crimes whatsoever; and yet
methinks it should be hard for any Man, even upon a Religious score, cheerfully
to leave this world, so long as he knows himself Unfit for a Better.

Upon which Consideration, let us Live like the Best of Men, that we may Dye
like the best of Saints; let us so order our whole Conversation, that the world
may see, that our Enemies Malice is Levelled not against our Faults, but our
Duties: not against our Evil Manners, but our Good Religion; let our Virtuous
Actions as much Condemn their Allowed Debaucheries, as the Purity of our Church
does Condemn the Gross Superstitions of theirs.

This is the way to make our Sufferings easy; For, would We but Frame our
Manners, as our Church already has done her Worship, according to those
Rules, which our Savior has left for Both; if whilst our Adversaries do
whatever they can to Destroy our Lives, we would make it Our work to reform and
mend them; as we do not fear the Strongest Arguments invented by their most
Subtle Heads, so neither need we Dread the Keenest Weapons managed by their
Stoutest Hands; For, should it be the pleasure of Divine Providence to give us
up to the will of these Religious Butchers, they would do us no great Injury by
sending us from this Bad world to a Better so much the sooner.

Wherefore since we are designed for the slaughter, let us so prepare our
selves, by an holy life, that we may die, not like Swine in the Shambles, but
as Lambs before the Altar, that the pouring out of our blood, which will be
murder on their sides, who shed it, may prove a Martyrdom on our part, who lose
it; let us so frame both our hearts, and our lives, that our persons may be
offered up to God, as indeed the Choicest Sacrifices should and must be,
unspotted without, and sound within. And when once we have secured our selves
of this, we may say of our Enemies, what Socrates did of his (...) they may
turn us out of their Synagogues; they may throw us into our graves, but they
cannot hurt us.

3. Let us endeavor, as to prepare for those sufferings, which our Enemies
would fain bring upon us, so to prevent them too.

The way to do so, is to reconcile our selves, first to our God, by quitting
our vices, and then to our selves, by quitting our Divisions. May we not say,
For the Divisions of England t^^r^ are great thoughts of heart? For, next to
those debaucheries, whereby we provoke that holy God, who would otherwise
protect us; there is nothing that can do us so much injury as those Differences
in Matters of Religion, whereby we gratify those wicked men, who would, but
could not otherwise destroy us. Our mutual Animosities have a double tendency
toward our Ruin, as being both our Crimes, which make us the more sinful; and
our Calamities, which make us the more impotent and weak. For,

Were we one entire Body, we should be a burden too big for our Enemies to
throw us into the flames; and upon that score, their business is to untie us
first, that they may undo us next. To accomplish this, they teach poor silly
souls to quarrel with the Discipline of our Church, the use of our excellent
Liturgy, and those other Rites, which, in their number, are but few, and in
their nature innocent.

But since, in order to our Eternal Salvation, we do agree in the substantials
of our Faith: Why should we, in order to our Temporal destruction disagree
about its Circumstances?

Tell me, shall we at such a time as this, stand and quarrel whether the
Governor of our Church shall be called a Presbyter or a Bishop? Whether the
Communion-board shall be called a Table, or an Altar? Shall we dispute about
bare Names, when, by so doing, we may lose the most sacred things? Shall we
stand debating, even at the Daggers point, whether a Black Gown, or a White
Surplice does better become the Worship of God, when our Adversaries are
endeavoring to change the color of both into a Scarlet Red, and that with the
blood of those that wear them?

Methinks we should never divide upon such slender grounds, when our Enemies,
for dismal ends, do so closely unite against us. Do we not yet understand, that
the Jesuits are the men, who, under the notion of Quakers and Anabaptists, have
broken our Public Congregations into Private Conventicles? They are the men
who would fain crumble us yet into smaller fractions, that so we might become
the fitter morsels for their Teeth, and be devoured with the greater case.

True it is, in all they do they pretend the services of God, by restoring that
which they falsely call the Old Religion. This is in their Tongue, but something
else is in their Eye: They well remember what rich Revenues they formerly had
amongst us, and would fain recover yet once again. To make us once more their
Prey, they separate us from one another: They act like the Huntsman, who severs
from the Flock that fat Deer which he fain would kill: And since we are so
pursued, let us consult our safety, as the wounded Deer does his; and that is
by uniting our selves unto, and keeping close within the common herd; I mean,
our Public Congregations.

It Is the great honor of this Royal City, that you have built so many, and so
stately Temples. We that knew the Old Churches of London, may now justly look
upon them as so many Ancienn, but worn and battered pieces of Plate, me^ted
down indeed through the pe^mismission of Heaven, but by the Malice of Hell: But
now by the care and piety of good men' so Artificially made up again, and so
curiously burnished, that through the flames they have lost nothing but the
dross, and do only shine so much the brighter.

But withal, to what end are these glorious Temples built and beautified, if
our God may be worshipped with as much solemnity in a Country-Barn, or a Cuy
Coffee-house, as in this and other Churches; which are set apart from common
uses, and for the service of that great God, for whom nothing can be too
splendid and venerable.

But since these sacred structures are not only restored, but bettered too, let
us unanimously meet to serve our God within them: Let not the same men, who are
justly suspected to have fired us out of our Old Churches, be ever able to
tempt and flatter us from our New Ones.

And as to matters of mere Decency and Order, which are a ground of our
Divisions, it will become our Modesty to think our Governors wiser than our
selves: It Is easy to believe, that they who stand on the highest ground,
should see the farthest: It Is easy to think, that the discerning Eye, and the
judicious Brain, should rather be found in them, who are the Heads of our
Church, than in other men, who are as the Hand, the Foot, or some of those
inferior members, which God and Nature have designed for other uses.

Sure I am, it is our great Concern to put an end to our Divisions, remembering
that we are but as Glass in the Casement, exposed to storms, and brittle at
best; but if once unsode^ed, the more easily shook and broken: Let remember
that the same Peace and Amity, which the Commands of a good God have made our
Duty, the designs of ill men have made our Interest too.

We use to count it a great security to this Island, that the kind Seas do
interpose themselves as a Bulwark between us and other Nations, who might
otherwise more easily annoy us. But alas! what safety will it be, that we are
so happily divided from the whole world besides, if we are not as happily
united within our selves?

But, were there once a blessed Closure; were all names of Distinction forgot
amongst us; were the Dissenter as ready to own the Bishop for his Father, as we
are to own the Presbyter for our Brother: Would but our Conventiclers once
empty themselves into our Churches, and honestly restore what they have
unadvisedly withdrawn; would we as firmly unite in order to our preservation,
as our Enemies do in order to our destruction; then might we yet hope to see
our Crown flourish, our Church settled, our Religion established, this great
City prosper, our Persons, and our Concerns, secured from all the Attempts of
those inhumane Villainies, who their Powder failing, they are still contriving
New Engines to lay us in our Graves, our Cities in Ashes, and the whole Kingdom
in Blood.

Nor may we hope that they, whose very Religion does make them wicked, will
ever cease from these cursed Designs, so long as they are acted by the Commands
and Counsels of that Roman Jugler, who, how vicious soever, being once seated
in an honest man's Chair; I mean, St. Peter's, does immediately pretend to an
Infallibility, as if that Triple Crown, when it first adorns his Head, must
needs Inspire it too.

Upon which Considerations, give me leave to renew my request, which is only
this -- That we would join our Hearts and our Hands; and let those Hearts be
upright with God, and those Hands clean in the sight of men. For if our lives
prove corrupt and vicious, when these Romish Bloodhounds do pursue us, we
shall surely give them the greater advantage by leaving any Ill Scent behind us.

FINIS.

