IMPRIMATUR.

GUIL. SILL, R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.
Feb. 23. 1676/7.
A SERMON PREACHED At Alderly in the County of Gloucester, January IV. 1676/7:
AT THE FUNERAL OF Sir MATTHEW HALE Knight. Late Chief Justice of His Majesty's
Court of the KING'S BENCH.

By E. G. A. M. Minister of Alderly.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for William Shrowsbury at the Sign of the Bible in
Duke-lane. 1677.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Sir MATTHEW HALE Knight. At Alderly, Jan. 4.
1676/7.
Isa. 57.1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men are taken away, none considering, that the Righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.


IN the ninth Verse of the former Chapter the Holy Prophet threatens a fearful
Judgment that was like to fall on the Jews, he calls for the wild Beasts of the
Field and the Forest to come and devour, meaning the Gentiles, which should be
Executioners of the Lord's Judgments; and because the Lord is Righteous in all
his Ways, and Holy in all his Works, he shows what Causes would provoke the
Lord to inflict such a heavy Judgment upon his People, as to give them up to be
devoured by the Beasts of the Field and the Forest, such savage Enemies.

The First Cause is set down at large in the rest of the Verse to the end of
the Chapter: Even the Blindness, Idleness, Covetousness, and Security of their
Watchmen, who should have taught the Fear of the Lord; the neglect of their
Duty being a special Occasion of the Peoples Sin, is alleged as the First
Cause of God's Judgments threatened.

The Second Cause was in the Common People, set down in the first Verse of this
Chapter: Even their careless neglect, in not regarding nor considering the
Death of the Righteous, when many of them were taken away to warn them of some
strange Judgment to come; yet they laid it not to Heart nor considered, but
continued and proceeded in their Sins, drinking, and filling themselves with
Wine and strong Drink, and Merriment, promising themselves happy Days, as it is
the manner of the Wicked to be most secure when Judgment is nearest unto them,
as we have Example in Belshazzar, Dan. 5. he was among his Concubines and his
Cups, when the Hand wrote his Doom over against the Candlestick, Mean mean
tekel upharsin.

The Righteous perishes. These are the Words of the Holy and Evangelical
Prophet, lamenting the Spiritual Security of the Jews, chiding and reproving
them for their great Stupidity and Spiritual Lethargy.

Wherein we have, First, The Persons that dyed, who are described by two
excellent Properties: 1. Righteous before God; 2. Merciful toward Men.
Secondly, The Manner of their Death, set forth by two Terms; perishes, are
taken away. The Sin of careless People, by two Phrases; not laying to heart,
nor considering the death of the Righteous. Fourthly, the final Cause or
special End for which they dye and are taken away, and that is, to prevent
future Evils.

Concerning the Persons, here are two great Problems to be resolved, hard
Questions.

Quest. I. How can any Man be Righteous? The Scripture says, There is none
Righteous, no not one.

II. How do the Righteous perish? The Lord knows the way of the Righteous,
the way of the Ungodly shall perish.

Answ. I. There is a Legal Righteousness, so Adam was righteous in the state of
Innocence, being created after God's Image: This Righteousness is forfeited and
lost, so by nature all are corrupt and unrighteous: There is none Righteous.

II. There is an Evangelical Righteousness, and this is twofold.

1. The Righteousness of Imputation, when the Righteousness of Christ is
imputed to the Believer, and received of him by Faith: Christ is made of God to
be unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. Jehova tsidkenu, Jer. 23.6. He was made Sin
for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
As Christ was made Sin for us, not by the infusion of Sin into his Person, but
by imputation of our Sins unto him: So we are made righteous before God, not by
any Righteousness inherent in us, but by the Righteousness of Christ imputed
unto us.

2. Believers are righteous by Sanctification, when by the Spirit of Christ the
Mind is enlightened, the Heart is mollified, the Will is rectified, the
Affections sanctified, and the whole course of their Life is reformed, the
habits of Grace planted in them, they are partakers of the Divine Nature; so
that as before they liked, loved, and lived in Sin, now they abhor and avoid
Sin and all the occasions of it: He that does righteousness is righteous, 1 John 3.7. This does not make us perfectly Righteous, but imperfectly; not
before God, but before Men. Jam. 2.24.

3. They that are Righteous thus by Justification and Sanctification, are also
merciful, passively and actively: Passively, that is, first in nature and
order, such as Gad received into Mercy and Favor; hence they are called
Vessels of Mercy prepared unto Glory, Romans 9.23. they are truly Righteous
before God, whom he has received into Mercy in forgiving their Sins. Romans 4.6,
7. Actively, for such as show mercy unto others; these two are always found
together in the same Persons, as our Savior, Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall receive mercy. They have obtained pardoning Mercy, and
shall obtain crowning mercy: He which receives mercy of the Lord will show
mercy unto Men.

Quest. II. How does the Righteous perish?

Answ. Not in Soul, for that is immortal, and cannot perish by any means, but
does live out of the Body as well, or more truly than in the Body: This Solomon
taught, Ecclesiast. 12.7. The spirit returns to God that gave it; this St. Paul
desires, To be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Phil. 1.23. and Lazarus
enjoyed at his Death, being carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom: Luke
16. and this John saw in a Vision, Revelat. 6.9. performed to the Saints, he
saw the Souls under the Altar. Neither does he perish in Body, for the Body of
a Righteous Man has still a Being in the sight of God, and remains a Member of
Christ's Mystical Body: This Union betwixt Christ and the Faithful is not of
Souls only, but also of Bodies; the Bodies of Saints do not finally and totally
perish, their Dust in the Grave is precious in God's sight, they only sleep in
Jesus, and by the power of Jesus shall be raised again glorious Bodies. Phil.
3. ult.

Nothing perishes of a Righteous Man in Death finally and totally, but Sin.
They perish in appearance, according to the Opinion of the World and the
Judgment of Flesh and Blood. The proper meaning of this Expression is, They
dye, depart hence, and are no more seen, their place knows them no more; or,
as the other Word is added exegetically, they are taken away or gathered to God
and his Christ, to Angels and Saints.

Observation. The Righteous and Godly Man must dye as well as others, but the
Death of the Righteous is not hurtful but beneficial, no loss, but great gain
and advantage.

Of this Lesson we see two Branches.

1. That the Righteous Man who is Evangelically Righteous, as being justified
by the Righteousness of Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit, must dye, and go
down into the Chambers of Death and Darkness, and the House of Rottenness, as
well as others.

2. That the Death of the Righteous is not hurtful, but beneficial; no loss,
but gain.

Of the First; Death is the way of all the world Josh. 23.14. The way of all
the earth, says David, 1 King. 2.2. It is the end of all Men, as Solomon,
Eccles. 7.2. and the Righteous must walk and pass this way, and come to this
end before they come to their everlasting Home, as well as others: The wise man
dies as well as the fool, Eccles. 2.16. yea in this respect the condition of
the Children of Men and the condition of Beasts are alike, As the one dies, so
dies the other. Eccles. 3.19. No marvel if the condition of all Men be alike,
High and Low, Rich and Poor, Wise and Unwise, Learned and Ignorant, Righteous
Unrighteous, Godly and Profane, (...), Mors impudens, it fears no colors,
spares neither great nor good: Abel dyed, whose Person and Sacrifice God
accepted, as well as Cain whose Person and Sacrifice God rejected. Abraham the
Father of all the Faithful, and the Friend of God, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, all
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and Holy Men of God paid this
Tribute, and all must pay: Heb. 9.27. Statutum est, there is the necessity;
Omnibus, there is the Universality of dying; there is a Statute Law for both,
Enacted in the Court of Heaven, which no Mortal can Repeal. As sure as we are
born to live, so sure are we born to dye; Nasci and denasci ordo rerum est. I
need not travel far for many more Examples or Proofs of this, only turn your
Eyes to that doleful Object and sad Spectacle of Mortality under that black
Vail, then conclude of this necessity: For if Art, and Learned Skill and
Industry of Physic could have continued him, if Strength of Body could have
preserved him, if Wisdom and rare Gifts of Mind, if Temperance in Diet, if
Chastness of Life, if a concurrence of all excellent Virtues, if Piety and the
Power of Godliness, the Life of Holiness, if the Wishes of Men, yea of a whole
Nation, if the Prayers and Tears of the Godly, if any thing could have
prevailed for him to give him any Privilege against Deaths Arrest; blackness
and darkness had not at this time covered that Earthly Tabernacle wherein
lately lodged so Heavenly a Mind.

Quest. Why should this be so, has not Christ died for the Righteous, why then
should they dye? Death is the Wages of Sin, has not Christ suffered for all
their Sins, wherefore should they dye?

Answ. Christ by his Death and Satisfaction has freed them from the second
Death, and all the degrees of it; as,

1. Spiritual Death in Sin.

2. The Damnation of the Soul at her sepaparation from the Body.

3. From the Condemnation of the whole ^lan at the Resurrection; Go ye cursed
into everl^sting fire.

This Death Christ by his Death has abolished, and freed the Righteous from;
but not from the first Death, which is the separation of Soul and Body: He has
only changed the nature and use of the first Death, he has taken away the
sting and venom of it, all the evil and hurt of it: Of a Punishment for Sin, he
has made it a Passage into Heaven; of a Curse, he has turned it into a
Blessing; it did at first deprive Men of good, but now it puts the Righteous
into the possession of all good. The Righteous must dye.

Ratio 1. To accomplish the Decree, and to prove the truth of God, who said, In
the day thou eatest thereof, morte morieris, thou shall surely dye. Genesis 2.17.
As they who are adjudged and condemned to dye are dead in Law, albeit they be
kept in Prison, and not presently Executed; so our first Parents, though they
did not immediately dye, were subject to Death by the desert of Sin, and so in
them all their Posterity. By one man sin entered into the world and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Romans 5.12.

Now that the Decree of God might be accomplished, and his Truth kept inviolate
and stand with his Mercy, Man, yea the Righteous Man must dye the first Death.

If Man should dye no manner of Death, how could the Truth of God appear? and
if that Death due to Sin had been inflicted on Man, how should the Mercy of God
have been manifested?

This Controversy God in his wonderful Wisdom has reconciled thus, Piat mors
bona, and habet utraque quod petit; in changing the cursed nature of Death, and
making that Temporal which was Eternal, does his Mercy appear; and in the
dissolution of Man's Body into Dust for a time, does his Truth appear.

Ra. 2. Because all are Dust; Our Bodies are Earthly Tabernacles, Houses of
clay, the foundation of them in the dust: Job 4.19. All flesh is grass, and the
glory of man as the flower of the field: Isa. 40. Great as well as mean ones,
their Glory fades, they wither as the Grass, and meet all in the Dust: Our life
is a vapor. Ja. 4.14.

The Sea never rests; but is always ebbing or flowing, so is it with the Life
of Man, it never stands at one stay, every Day cutteth off one part of our
Life, no power can make my Life so long to day as it was yesterday, we are
nearer our end in the Evening than in the Morning. Job 4.20. We are destroyed
from morning to evening. Even as Rivers run into the Sea, so our Life runs into
Death. This is the Reason which the Lord uses, Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and
into dust shall thou return.

Ra. 3. Because here is no continuing City for any; We are Strangers and
Pilgrims, and are placed in the World for a season, as Men upon a Stage to act
our parts, and then must be gone, to give room for others. One generation
passes away, and another generation comes. Eccles. 1.4.

Ra. 4. The Righteous are taken away because the World is not worthy of them,
Heb. 11* 38. They are the means of Blessings to the World, 1. By their
presence: 2. By their Prayers; they stand in the gap, they stave off Judgments
from the World; the Angel could do nothing to filthy Sodom, until Lot was gone
out of it into Zoar: Genesis 19.22. 3. By their Examples: and 4. By their Counsel:
But the wicked World will neither follow their Example, nor take their Counsel:
Therefore the Lord does take away the Righteous in Mercy to Them, but in
Judgment to the World.

Branch 2. The Death of the Righteous is not hurtful but beneficial, no loss,
but great gain and advantage.

This will appear, 1. By the Phrases which the Holy Ghost uses to describe the
Death of the Righteous: It is a sleeping in Jesus, 1 Thessalon. 4. A resting in
hope, Psalm 16. A putting off an earthly tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.14. A falling of
a corn of Wheat into the ground, that it may spring up more glorious; a sowing
in God's Acre. Joh. 12.24.

It is a gathering of them to their Fathers:

1. Of their Bodies from a place of care and labor, o^ trouble and pain, to a
place of easerest, and security; They shall enter into peace, rest in their
beds. Verse. 2.

2. Of their Souls, from the Body to God, to Abraham's Bosom; from an Earthly
Tabernacle and House of Clay, to an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the
Heavens: from Men to Angels; from Sinners to Saints perfectly righteous; from
Enemies to their best Friends; from the Vale of the shadow of Death to the Land
of the Living; from the Church Militant to the Church Triumphant; from Earth to
Heaven, whither they are gathered, as the Apostle teaches at large, Heb.
12.22, 23, 24. to Mount Sion the City of the Living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem; to an innumerable company of Angels, to God the Judge of all, and
the Spirits of just Men made perfect, to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant.

2. This will yet evidently appear, if we consider two things.

1. The Evils from which the Righteous are freed by Death.

2. The Good which comes unto them in Death, the Blessed Estate they shall then
enter into, and so continue to all Eternity.

For the first, they shall be freed, 1. From all Evils, corporal and temporal,
Sicknesses Diseases, Aches, Pains, Griefs, Toil, Labor Crosses and Losses,
Troubles and Persecutions which God's Children, as long as they live here are
subject unto. The Disciple of Christ must take up his Cross; Through much
tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Act* 14.22.

We must look for Afflictions so long as Life lasts, but Death makes an end
of them all: Life and Trouble are Twins which were born together: Job 5.7. Man
is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward; and must dye together, as John
heard it by a Voice from Heaven, Revelat. 14. Blessed are the dead which dye in
the Lord for they rest from their labors: All labor in their Actions, and
dolor in their Passions are ended; then shall God wipe away all tears from
their eyes. Revelat. 21.4.

Again, they are often taken away to prevent some extraordinary Evils to come,
as in the Text: So Josiah, 2 King. 22. was put in his Grave in peace, that he
might not see the evil that God did bring upon his Land: So Luther was taken
away not long before that miserable Calamity which the Lord brought upon
Germany, for their contempt of the Gospel. Augustine died before the taking of
Hippo; Paraeus before ^he taking of Heydelberg: happy is he who dies before
his Country, i. e. before the ruin and desolation of his Country. Virgil.

Faelix Nepotianus qui haec non videt, says Jerome of his Friend Nepotianus:
Jerome lived in a calamitous time, and he counted his Friend happy, that he died
before he saw those Calamities.

2. The Righteous, by death are freed from Spiritual Evils; as,

1. From the Assaults of the Devil; our Life here is a continual Warfare, the
Church is Militant, and we must fight as the Lord's Soldiers, and that not
against Flesh and Blood, for then one Man's Sword would be as long as another,
and one Man's Skin as thick as another; but against Principalities, Powers,
Rulers of the darkness of this World, Spiritual Wickednesses, Lambs against
roaring Lions, Men against Devils, and not for a Natural or Temporal, but for a
Spiritual and Eternal Life; not for an Earthly, but for a Heavenly Crown and
Kingdom: And in this War there is no time of Truce, if the Devil be overcome
one time, he will suddenly, and none knows how soon, give a fresh Assault, but
Death ends the Battle; not as among Earthly Warriors, when the one dies in
the Fight the other gets the upper hand; but in this Fight the Devil has
not the Victory by the death of the Faithful, but the Faithful at the end get a
full and final Conquest, and ascend into Heaven, there to triumph; the Devil
cannot assault them there, he may compass the Earth, but he cannot enter within
the Lists of Heaven, he never came thither to assault any since he was cast
out; though he tempted Adam in the Earthly Paradise, and got him to be thrust
out, yet can he not tempt any in the Heavenly Paradise.

2. It is no small evil to the Righteous to live and converse among the Wicked,
to see the Land dishonor God; as just Lot was vexed with the filthy
conversation of the Wicked, Dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, he
vexed his righteous soul from day to day at their unlawful deeds: 2 Pet. 2.7,
8. He which is truly grieved for Sin in himself, will be also grieved for Sin
in others; so David, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,
because men keep not thy law: and Psalm. 120.5. Woe is m^ that I am constrained
to dwell in Mesech, and in the tents of Kedar; barbarous and profane People*
that did neither know God, nor fear, nor love* nor serve him. Now this World is
full of scandalous Sinners, that if a Man would not keep any converse with
such, he must go out ^f the World, as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 5.10. But Death
frees the Righteous from this evil, for it takes them out of the World, that
they shall not behold either the Sins which Men commit against God, or the
evils which God does bring upon them; yea Death does carry them into Heaven, to
the Society of the Holy Angels and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, which
sin not at all, but do the Will of God in all perfection.

3. Another Evil from which the Righteous are freed in Death is the practice of
Sin here, as Solomon says, There is not a just man upon earth, that does good
and sins not: Eccles. 7.20. In many things we sin all. Jam. 3.2. As the
Wicked sin in all things, so the Righteous, yea all the Righteous sin in many
things, and nothing is so grievous to the true Christian as Sin, it is as the
Thorn, 2 Cor. 12. or barbed head of an Arrow in the tender Flesh, a Splinter
under the Nail, it wounds in the piercing in, and wounds in the taking out;
he will cry with St. Paul, O wretched man that I am, etc. Romans 7. But Death
destroys Sin, this is a Mystery of Grace, Sin brought in Death, and Death
drives out Sin: After Death the Righteous shall be perfectly sanctified, and
made like the Angels to do the Will of the Lord readily, willingly, cheerfully,
delightfully, and constantly. At first Death was inflicted as a punishment for
Sin, but now it is used as (...) means to stop the course of Sin: Tunc dictum
est homini, morieris si peccaveris, nunc dicitur, morer^ ne pecces; Then it was
said to Man, If thou sin thou shall dye; now it is said to the Righteous Man,
Dye that thou may not sin. Sin is the Mother, and Death is the Daughter, and
the Daughter shall become the destroyer of her own Mother: Unto the Christian
Death is a perfect mortification of all his earthly members, and the
destruction of the whole Body of Sin.

2. The Good which Death brings to the Righteous Man is manifold; 1. It brings
him into the presence of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; our Father,
Redeemer, and Comforter, an immediate communion and fellowship with the Sacred
Trinity. 2. The Beatifical Vision of God, To see his face, Rev. 22.4. To see
him as he is, 1 John 3.2. 3. Union with God. 4. Fruition of God, and that for
the manner, immediately, all means ceasing; for the measure, fully, enjoy God
in all, and all in God; for time, eternally, for ever with the Lord, and reign
for ever and ever; Revelat. 22.5. for the place, in the third Heaven, the
Heaven of Heavens, the Paradise of God, where the Throne of God and of the Lamb
is; for the company joined with us, the innumerable company of glorious Angels
and blessed Saints: from this Fruition will arise endless and unspeakable Joy,
and Pleasure, and Glory; That far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. 2
Cor. 4.17.

Usus 1. In that Death cannot be avoided, we should learn to prepare and wait
for it, to have our Loins girded, as the Israelites, and our Staves in our
Hands, ready to take our Journey from Egypt to Canaan: as Fowls desirous to
fly, stretch out their Wings, so should we, being desirous to be with the Lord,
stretch out our Affections toward Heaven. As Abraham was in the Door of his
Tent when the Angel appeared unto him, and Elijah in the mouth of the Cave when
the Lord appeared unto him; so we should be ready to come out of the Cave and
Tabernacle of our Body when the Lord appears unto us by his Messenger, Death.

Let our Lamps be trimmed, our Lights burning, and always watching, as our Lord
commands, Matthew. 24.42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord
does come: And holy Job practiced, Job 14. All the days of my appointed time
will I wait, till my change come.

Look to your Faith that it be unfeigned, the Faith of God's Elect; to
Conscience, that it be pure, undefiled, void of offense toward God and Man; to
Conversation, that it be such as becomes the Gospel, that is, holy, and in
Heaven: a good Life will sit us for a comfortable Death, and a comfortable
Death will assure us of a joyful Resurrection.

Usus 2. Death to the Righteous is not hurtful, therefore not to be feared; but
is beneficial, therefore to be desired: Unto the gracious Christian, whose
Conscience is purged from dead Works, Death shall neither be fearful nor
bitter; Acerbitas non mortis sed culpae, The bitterness is not in Death, but in
Sin: as a Serpent wanting a Sting may hiss, but cannot hurt, a Man may take it
in Hand and put it in his Bosom; so the Righteous Man may welcome and embrace
Death, and be sure it will never hurt him: it is not the death of the Man, but
of Sin in the Man, it is not the destruction but the absolution of the
Christian; the dissolution of the Body is the absolution of the Soul. So then
not Death it self, but the Opinion of Death is terrible; for since it
translates us from this present evil Wo^^d, and Va^e of Misery and the shadow
of Death, into everlasting Life into the Land of the Living, How can it be
called Death, said one of the Ancients, being nomine magis quam re
formidabilis, formidable rather in name than indeed?

The separation of the Soul from God, that is Death; but the separation of the
Soul from the Body is only the shadow of Death: Therefore such as are dead, not
in Soul, but in the Flesh, are not said to be properly dead, but to be covered
with the shadow of Death. The Righteous Man who is Evangelically Righteous has
no cause to fear Death, but with St. Paul, desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ: Let him only fear Death who is unwilling to go to Christ. It is
true which Solomon says, that The day of a man's death (that is, a Righteous
Man's death) is better than the day of his birth: Eccles. 7.3. The day of a
Godly Man's Birth is the beginning of his Misery, but the day of his Death is
the end of his Misery, and an entrance into endless Glory and Bliss.

Usus 3. Consolation as to the Death of our Righteous Friends. It cannot be
denied, but that we ought in a special manner to consider and lay to Heart the
Death of our Righteous Friends that are near and dear unto us, of whom we have
good grounds to be persuaded that they sleep in Jesus, and dye in the Lord; for
it may be they were taken from us because we were not worthy of them, and the
Mercies we received from God in and by them, and were not thankful unto God for
them; or that we gloried, were proud of them, and trusted too much in them,
made Flesh our Arm. We must consider whether God has deprived us of them as a
punishment of our Sins and Unthankfulness, as the Widow of Sarepta said unto
the Prophet, O man of God! art thou come to call my sins to remembrance? 1
King. 17.18. In this respect we have cause to mourn, and lay to Heart the Death
of our Righteous Friends.

We of this Place have cause indeed to mourn, droop, hang down our Heads like
Bulrushes, to weep, yea to weep if it were possible Rivers of Tears, till we
can weep no more, with David, because our Honorable dearest Lord and best
Friend to all of us is not: But that this may be guided with Wisdom, and that
we be not swallowed up of Sorrow, let us rightly understand where he is not: He
is not in a Prison, but in a Palace of freedom and enlargement; he is not in
the Sea tossed with Waves, exposed to Storms, but arrived safely in the Haven;
he is not in Bondage of Corruption, but in the glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God; he is not in the Way and upon his Journey, traveling and toyling, but in
his Country, and at home in his own Mansion, in his Father's House; he is not
in the hope of Heaven, but in the actual possession of it: And look how far
Heaven does excel the Earth; eternal Good things, momentary and perishing
Vanities; the true Joys of the Saints of God, the false Delights of the Sons of
Men: So much is his Condition better than ours is, or his was, when with us. Oh
then! Pereat contristatio ubi est tanta consolatio; Forget we our Sadness in
the midst of such Joys, and let these Consolations allay the bitterness of our
Grief, and dry up in part the Fountain of our Tears.

Farther consider:

1. His Gain: Balance that (whereof you you have heard before) with our Loss;
and then our Loss (though exceeding great) will hold no weight.

2. Let that Argument which prevailed with the Ephesians in the like Case sway
with us, The will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.13. Let us not make such Idols
of our selves, or our Friends, as for their Death, so comfortable and
advantageous to them, to be discontented with God's appointment.

3. If the Heathen could say, Non amittimus, sed praemittimus, why should not
Christians much more be so persuaded, and say, We do not lose our Godly
Friends, but send them before us?

Usus 4. Yet take this Caution, Beware of the Sin of this People reproved in
the Text, in not laying to Heart the Death of this our Honorable, Dear,
Religious, and Right Christian Lord; but make we some Use of this sad
dispensation of Divine Providence.

1. Consider it as a plain Prognostication and Warning of some Evil to come, as
in the Text, The Righteous is taken away from the evil to come: a Trumpet
sounded, or a Beacon set on fire to alarm and awaken us out of the sleep of
Sin, to fright and fire Sinners out of their carnal security.

We may be assured he is freed from all Evils and Miseries present, and it may
be he prevented some extraordinary Judgments which remain for it. Sin is rise
and ripe, has all the Symptoms of Ripeness: 1. It is great, knows not how to
be more sinful, strikes immediately at the Glorious Face of God. 2. Common,
from the highest to the lowest. 3. It is impudent; Sinners of this Generation
cannot blush, they declare their Sin as Sodom, they hide it not. 4.
Incorrigible; we have been stricken, but we have not grieved; we have been
consumed, but refused to receive Correction, we have made our Faces harder than
a Rock, we have refused to return. Jer. 5.3.

We may therefore justly fear some strange future Evils, when the Harvest is
ripe the sharp Sickle will be thrust in, and the Earth will be reaped; and when
the Grapes are fully ripe, the Vine of the Earth shall be gathered and cast
into the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God. Rev. 14.14.

Now God grant, that as he has prevented such Evils by his blessed Death, so
we may prevent them by our unfeigned and seasonable Repentance, and by
receiving that Exhortation, Zeph. 2.1, 2, 3. The decree i^ big and travelleth,
and will undoubtedly brin^ forth, therefore gather your selves, O Nation, see*
ye the Lord, it may be ye shall be hid in the day (...) the Lord's anger.

2. Remember we his eminent Virtues and holy Graces for our imitation, he has
no need of our Prayers or our Praises, his Praise is not of Men but of God:
Though his God had honored him highly in the sight of all wise, learned, good,
godly, and great Men, as unto his Servant David, Made him a great name among
the great men that are in the earth: 2 Samuel 7. so that he will be eminently
Famous to all Posterity, as one of his Honorable Brethren, a Learned Judge of
the Land faith: And let me add, His Remembrance will be as The Remembrance of
Josiah, like the composition of the perfume made by the art of the Apothecary,
sweet as honey in all mouths, and Melodious in all Ears, as music at a
banquet of wine. Ecclus. 49.1.

This is for our Comfort and Instruction, but adds nothing to his Happiness,
which is in the highest perfection, now in the clear sight and full fruition of
the chiefest good.

If he desires any thing, it is our Imitation; that I am inclined to believe,
that the Saints in Glory desire the Salvation of their Brethren on Earth; and
consequently, that they should be followers of them in the way of Salvation.
Rev. 6.10.

Then remember we,

1. His Humility, Meekness, and Gentleness, and Self-denial; in this Grace,
which indeed is the grace of every Grace, he was another Moses.

2. His Patience under all his Crosses and Trials, whereof he had no small
portion, and his long continued Affliction in this Excellent Virtue, that he
was another Mirror, after holy Job.

3. His Temperance and Sobriety, in the midst of a sottish and swinish
Generation.

4. His Righteousness and Justice, he was another Aristides; to hinder him from
administering of Justice impartially, to high, low, Rich, Poor, without Fear or
Favor, was to stop the Sun in the Firmament, and to divert its Course.

5. His Piety and holy Devotion, in public, in private, in secret, he kept
close and constant communion with God.

6. His Charity and Mercifulness to the Poor, his bowels of Compassion were
largely drawn out to them.

7. His indefatigable Industry in all the Duties of his Calling, general and
particular; it may be Engraven upon his Tomb, Hic mortuus requiescit semel,
Qui vivus, requievit nunquam.
Here, being dead, he rests once;
Who being alive, rested never.


These rare Virtues and precious Graces were deeply planted and habituated in
his Gracious Soul, even from his Youth, for his God looked early upon him,
which was his own Expression to my self with great Humility, and thankful
Resignation of himself, and all that he was, and had, to his good God, from
whom he acknowledged he received all. These, I say, were acted, and shined in
the whole course of his Life: Let us remember them carefully, and conscionably
follow him in these Holy Steps; so shall we come to the Place and Estate
wherein he is, and meet again at the Right Hand of Jesus Christ at the
Resurrection of the Just, to our mutual Joy, and rejoicing both his and ours,
and hear and have that joyful and blessed Doom, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom. -- Which God of his infinite Mercy and rich Grace grant,
for Jesus Christ his dear Son's sake, to whom be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion
and Power, and Blessing, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

