Essays AND CHARACTERS.

Written by L. G.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1661.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Suppose thou art now come into the Stationers Shop, and inquirest of him if
he have any thing that is new; were Solomon at thy elbow he would tell thee
there is nothing new under the Sun; But it is common with Men, as well as
children, to long for a new nothing; And therefore to satisfy thy humor, he
will show thee this Book, perhaps (for his own advantage) he will say it is a
pretty piece, if he does, I will assure thee he is not of my opinion: for
whether it will be for his profit and thy pleasure or not, I cannot tell, I am
sure it will not be for my credit.

It has been the usual Apology of those who appear in print, that it was
against their own wills, and through the importunate desire of friends,
(forsooth because the World should think them modest) but our fault admits of
no such lying excuse, for it was merely my own folly and rashness that has
thus thrust me upon the Stage of the World, where (I fear) I shall be hissed
rather then deserve a plaudite.

I confess I would willingly have called in my Book when it were but half
printed, for it appeared unto me to savor more of Drollery then Divinity,
which my second thoughts or reflections did clearly apprehend, I saw that there
were but few pages, and yet in those few more Errata's both of the Author and
Printer, then in some great Volumes, a true Looking-glass to represent my life
and actions, for my years have not much exceeded six and twenty; and yet
perhaps in this small span, or little Epitome of age you may read more errors,
and miscarriages, then in his, whose years are written in folio; and has
outlived fourscore; but I hope Gods mercy will forgive the one, and thy
ingenuity pardon the other.

However I have now ventured to send it forth into the World, and where it
shall find entertainment I know not, perhaps it may light into some Ladies lap
and have so much honor as to possess the place of her little Dog; but let her
beware how she handles it for if she be not virtuous It will bite her.

Yet I have not in any of these following discourses reflected upon any
particular Person, save only in the Character of a Scandalous Minister, where I
took for my Copy one whom I had some cause to know in the Country, and who (I
think) having an intent that I should draw his picture) came to me at London to
give me a second view of his Drunkenness and swearing; I had (indeed) limned
him a little more to the life, but that I thought it a sin to foul too much
paper with so base a subject. I have been too guilty of that already; for alas!
whilst I was writing my mind was like a troubled Sea; and therefore wonder not
if my pen cast up mire and dirt.

To be too tart and satirical has been always my infirmity, I was once
complained of to the Justices, for going about to pistol a blind Priest with
an Ink-horn, nor was it strange for might I have had the benefit of the Press
no pistol could have more wounded his body then my Inkhorn would have done his
reputation.

Printing and Guns are two modern inventions, and the one as well as the other
has made the leaden Mine as distructive to mankind as the golden; Men may be
said to shoot from the Press as well as from the Artillery, some (like Jehu) to
wound, others (like Jonathan) to warn; that is either by writing of railing
invectives, or sober exhortations; Polemicall discourses are like shooting at a
mark, which mark ought to be truth, schismatical Pamphlets are Granado's,
Plays, and Romances are squibs and crackers which though they wound not with
their bullets, yet they blind with their powder.

Reader, amongst which of these fire-men thou will rank me, I know not; only I
beseech thee put on charity, (for thy spectacles) and read on.

VALE.
A Table of the several Subjects of this Book.
VIZ. of
Man in general. A religious Prince. A reverend Divine. A virtuous Woman. A
rigid Presbyterian. A debauched Courtier. An University Bedle. A Phanatick. A
Whore. A happy Rustic. A beastly Drunkard. An ignorant old Man. A Player. A
mechanic Magistrate. A scandalous Minister. A loyal Subject. A Malcontent. A
noble Spirit. A bad Wife. The Rump-Parliament.
Essays and Characters.
Of man in general.
THis visible world is a great Book written by the hand of God for his own
glory and man's use; Every Creature is a leaf or page of this Volume; but man is
the picture of the Author set in the Frontispice; He that abuses the Creature,
makes a base Comment upon a glorious Text; but he that abuses himself, goes
about to deface and blot out the effigies of his Creator.

Man consists of a soul and a body, which are never separated until death, and
meet not again till the resurrection.

It was the morning salutation of the page to King Philip, Remember that you
are a man; that is, that you have soul and body; let the sloathfull man
remember that he has a soul that must be saved; and let the proud man
remember, he has a body that must die; and then the one will not live like a
beast, neither will the other think himself to be an Angel.

The body is but the tent or cottage of the soul, or rather that mantle which,
when the spirit, (like Elias) ascends into heaven, is cast down and left behind
upon the earth; and (as it is said concerning celestial and terrestrial
bodies,) so of these two; The glory of the body is one, and the glory of the
souls is, another; What is it in which the body or flesh can glory? it is not
strength, beauty, or age; for in strength the beasts and fishes, in beauty the
plants and flowers, in age the very Rocks and Stones do far excel men. In
breife, the body of man is but a brittle earthen vessel, the center of
diseases, a daughter to corruption, a sister to the worms, a tenant to the
grave, a little dust carried by the wind of his vital breath, which when the
wind ceases, falls to the ground, and rests in the bosom of the earth from
whence it was Taken.

Thus the outward or carnal man is not an object of admiration but pity; He
lies like Lazarus upon the dunghill of the earth; his sins are his sores, his
righteousness his rags; his friends that flatter him, and his enemies that
reproach him, are all but dogs; some bark, some bite, some fawn, some lick his
sores. He came naked into the world; and whatsoever he has he begged it of Got,
and borrowed it of his fellow creatures; His Pilgrimage is from Jerusalem to
Jericho, from the womb to the tomb; his constant companions are vanity and
vexation, the one attends him in health and Wealth, the other in sickness and
poverty; the one would draw him to presumption, the other would drive him to
despair; in short, there is nothing does more resemble his life then the taking
a pipe of tobacco; for his gains and proffits are that which he sucks in, his
expenses and disburstments that which he puffes out his actions like the
smoke, are offensive to many, and pleasing to few or none, at length he knocks
out the ashes and so Concludes.

But the soul is man's more noble part which is capable of having communion with
God, and therefore ought not to be subject to the body. The body is Hagar the
Bondwoman, But the soul is Sarah the free Woman; Sarah must not be a slave to
Hagar; if the flesh deny subjection to the spirit, she must like Hagar (by
mortification,) be put away that so the free born soul may enjoy her liberty
which is to serve God. The Philosopher gives this definition of the soul; Anima
Rationalis est perfectio Corporis Organici, The Perfection of the body; Now as
the soul is the perfection of the body, so is Christ the perfection of the soul.

For as the body without the soul is but a loathsome lump of rotteness and
putrefaction; so the soul without Christ, is a thing dead in sin as odious in
the sight of God as that in the eyes of men; As salt that has lost its savor
such is the soul that has lost its Savior.

There are two faculties of a Rational soul; the will and the understanding
which mutually help and assist one the other; I have heard of two men which
traveled together; the one blind and the other lame; the blind carried the
lame; and the lame directed the blind. The will of man is blind and therefore
must be directed by the understanding; The understanding is lame, and therefore
must be carried by the will; When truth it self treated of self denial, he
commanded us to cut off Right hands and to pull out right eyes; Where note that
he means not the members of the body, but the faculties of the soul, the
understanding is the souls eye, by which she sees, The will is her hand by which
she acts and these or said to offend when they offend God; but when the one is
joined with faith, and the other with obedience, they are both instrumental to
bring us to the enjoyment of our Savior; for by the understanding we know
Christ and by the will we lay hold of him.

Every man is either spiritual, or carnal: like Solomon's two Harlots, The one
carries a living child in her bosom that is the spirit, the other a dead one
that is the flesh; The living child is that which breaths in holy desires,
cries in devout prayers, sucks in hearing the word, grows in grace and is made
perfect in glory; but the dead neither grows, cries, feeds, nor breaths, but
is a piece of formal deceit a religious carcass, a whited sepulcher, which is
beautiful without, but within full of corruption.

The first thing which he that was miraculously restored to his sight beheld,
was men, like trees, walking; there is nothing in all the creation so fit an
emblem of man as a tree; for as in trees there are three things to be observed;
leaves, blossoms, and fruit; so also in men there are three things to be
considered; words thoughts and deeds; He that is only verbally good, is like
the Barren fig tree which brought forth nothing but leaves; The words of men
are like the leaves of the trees, yet oftentimes we know by the leaves what
Fruit the tree bears; the words of the malicious are like the leaves of
Holly, very offensive and full of prickles, the words of the unconstant are
like the leaves of Aspine, continualy wavering, and not to be credited; the
words of the deceitful are like the fig leaves which they sew together, and
make both coverings for their nakedness and cloakes for their iniquity; as for
thoughts they are but blossoms, for he that only thinks to do good and puts
it not into excecution (like K. Agrippa or the young man in the Gospel) is a
false fair promising tree that is full of blossoms but the fruit is nipt in
the bud, blasted and never comes to perfection; but men's actions are their
fruits; some are like sower grapes which set on edge the teeth of all with whom
they have to do; others like the apples of Sodom, appear fair without, but at
the first touch turn to ashes; but a godly man like a good tree brings forth
pleasant fruit, which like the sweetness of the Vine, both pleases God, and
refreshes men. To conclude, all men are trees; they which are good, shall be
removed from hence to Paradise; but they which are evil, shall be cut down and
cast into the fire.

A Religious Prince.
IS a representative of God, in a threefold respect; as a Man, as a King, and
as a Christian; He is composed of Greatness and Goodness, the Conjunction of
which Stars portends happiness to his People; In his breast is the Throne of
Honor, and the Parliament of Virtue; where Power and and Piety meet together,
and Majesty and Mercy kiss each oother. The Rod of Moses brought not so many
miseries upon Egypt, as his Scepter brings blessings upon England; His very
presence makes his Land become a Canaan for his innocence and sweetness, like
milk and honey refresh the hearts of all his Loyal Subjects.

To make him a Man after Gods own heart, he has been educated in afflictions;
he has carried the Cross before he wore the Crown, and is religious by his
second birth, as well as royal by his first; so that he is a King not only by
descent but merit; for there is none fit to be the Viceroy of Christ, as he who
has been twelve years his Standard Bearer.

If you look into the Court, wonder not to see fantastic Gentlemen and proud
Ladies; for even Solomon had his Apes and Peacocks; but take notice that he
has besides these a more Heavenly retinue, which obtain, not their places by
bribes or interests. The Cardinal Virtues are his Domestic Servants, and the
Graces are his Maids of Honor: His best Harbingers are fervent Prayers, His
Cup Bearer is Temperance, and Divine thoughts attend him in his Bedchamber;
when he would be instructed, the Holy spirit is of his privy Counsel; and when
he is in danger, the Angels are his Lifeguard.

He is byas'd in his actions and Ballasted in his passions by the fear of God;
Augustus Caesar could not so easily allay his anger by repeating the letters of
the Greek Alphabet, as he by thinking of him who is A and O. In a word, we may
observe that England in those late bloody times was like the Son of Cis
Tormented with an evil spirit, which could not be driven away, till we had sent
for David the anointed of the Lord, our lawful King; How excellently he has
turned his instrument, let all the world (that sees our Reformation) Judge; For
he has made Prudence his Tenor, Justice his Base, and Mercy his Trebble,
strining which he has skrewed up higher then the rest (as Gods mercy is above
all his works:) And therefore, those turbulent Spirits which are not pacified
with the Music of his Government, but are still ready to cast their Javelins
even at Majesty it self, are surely possessed with a worse Devil then that of
Saul.

A reverend Divine.
WE read of Venerable Bede, that being blind he was led by an unhappie boy to
preach to a heap of stones. It is the complaint of many people that their
preachers are like Bid, blind Guides; It is the grief of more Ministers, that
their hearers are like that senseless Congregation, Men of stony hearts; It
shall be my prayer, that he who is the Sun of Righteousness, would enlighten
the eyes of the one, and mollify the hearts of the other.

The Prophets in ancient times were called Seers; a name very incongruous for
those of our age; Few of them can see any thing, unless it be moats in the eyes
of others, when there are beams in their own.

Where then shall we find a true Divine? Diogenes (they say) sought an honest
man, and the Place where he sought was Athens the most Famous Universitie of
Greece: It often times falls out, that where there is the most Learning, there
is the least honesty.

But that must not be our Rule; Humane Learning is necessary for a Minister;
for without that he may interpret the Gospel, as those Infidels did the words
of our dying Lord, when they said, He calls upon Elias to come and save him; or
like that bundle of Nonsense tied up in a Cassock that would blot out Eli, and
write Trumpington; or like the Bishop of Dunkelden, who knew neither the Old
Testament nor the New.

Yet this Knowledge must be sanctified; He that is Mediocriter Doctous, let him
be Egregie pius: Profane Gown-men are like Psapho's Birds; that being let out
of their Cage, the Achademy, Fly into the Country Villages, and chirp in the
Pulpits their half conn'd (...), saluting their Creator as the Crows did Caesar
with a Complemental (...): But Latin and Greek Phrases (especially if they
flow from unhallowed lips) are but a stronger charm to sleepie Consciences, and
dawb an Illiterate Auditorie with the untemperate Mortar of the old Babel.

Two things therefore qualify a Divine for his Function (...) and (...), Grace
and Eloquence; He is in one sense lawfully the Husband of two Wives:
Philosophy and Divinity; for the one he did with Jacob, serve seven years at
Oxford or Cambride, but alas, she proved a blear eyed Leah, and not so amiable
as he expected: But he has at length gained Rashel, that is, Divinity which is
more beautiful and quiker-sighted.

He looks upon the sacred scriptures as a dial and the Holy Ghost as the Sun,
whose assistance must needs be necessary for them that read for a dial without
the sun is useless; yet haying this help we know the truth by the one as well
as the time of the day by the other; and therefore he sets the watch of his
judgment by this dial; not like the foolish Sectaries whose erroneous opinions
are like lying clocks; their brains are full of wheels, which the lusts and
passions of their hearts hurry about too fast, and make the hammers of their
tongues give many false allarum's; For that bold phanatick that lays aside the
holy writ, and walks by a pretended light within, is like the Sextons wife who
scorned the advice of the dial and believed that her husbands clock went truer
then the Sun. His doctrine is plain and powerful, and if he use notes, it is
only for method and memory; for he delivers nothing but the fruits of his own
labor and study.

As for his prayers, they are more mental then oral; his words and his
meditations hasten toward God as Peter and John toward the sepulcher; but his
heart like the beloved disciple out runs his tongue, and his devotion like a
bullet peirces the gates of heaven before you can hear the report of the Gun.

His preaching may well be called lightening, for it has the same wonderful
operation, it effects broken hearts in sound breasts and melts the soul in the
Scabberd of the body.

And as he is in regard of doctrine a light of the world so in regard of his
Conversation he is the salt of the earth; indeed all good men are salt, for
they season others and keep the body politic from stinking. Salt, Sulphur and
Mercury, are the three principles of the Chemists. It was the sin and misery of
Sodom and Gomorah that they had too little salt, and too much sulphur. Thus all
his actions are savory and well rellished without gross scandal that might be
nauseous and offensive to the squeamish stomach of a weak brother; for his
words and works are the same thing, and his life is a true repetition of his
sermon.

He well understands what our Savor means by a Prophets reward, and therefore
he hates covetousness, and scorns to listen to a Presbyterian Call; He is well
contented with a competent allowance, and accounts the love of his neighbors
and the successful fruits of his ministry his best preferment.

Neither is he only actively but also passively Good; and as his innocence
shows that he is a sheep, so his sufferings argue that he has been amongst
wolves. He has always honored the King as his master, and owned the Bishops
as his fathers, and for their sake has been silenced, not imprisoned; Yet he
has chosen to be ejected rather then to take an Oath against his Prince, when
he was brought to that hard Dilemma that he could not keep his Benefice and the
fifth Commandment.

But now this harmless dove that was by the Hand of Providence put out of the
Ark of his Parsonage, is returned again with the olive branch of peace in his
mouth, to signify that our deluge of blood is well abated; wheresoever
therefore he is sent, let him be joyfully received; for (as David said of the
Son of Zadock) he is a good man, and he brings good tidings.

A Virtuous Woman.
IS a true copy of our mother Eve, with a perfect correction of all her
Errata's; The second Edition of a piece of Female divinity polished with
beauty, and bound up in Chastity, to convince the world that piety and goodness
are of the feminine Gender.

He that beholds her thinks he sees the prophesy of a new heaven, and a new
earth, fullfilled; for her very countenance looks like the shame faced blushes
of the first light that peeped out of the ill-shapen Chaos, and all her actions
are Symptoms of a new Creature.

Her face is like the face of a Cherubin, which she vailes in the presence of
God, because it is impossible for her to behold his majesty, and covers in the
presence of men because it is dangerous for them to look upon her beauty.

Yet she has an eye, not like an ignis fatuus, or false light which leads
poor wandering men astray, but like that Star which appeared in the East,
brings you to the knowledge of God; for in her looks you may read lectures of
modesty which invite not, but check lascivious attempts; and (as the beams of
the Sun put out lesser fires) extinguishes the flames of lust in the hearts of
incontinent persons.

As for her cheeks they are the history of nature, wherein she has elegantly
recorded the wars of York and Lancaster in a fair description of the combat
between the white rose and the red. Her body is like a goodly Cedar of Lebanon
tall and strait, or rather like the Royal Oak of England, the happy mansion
of a most princely Tenant.

She is like Apelles his picture, Venus to the Waste; but as for her other
parts they are Terra incognita, for in her chamber* is the shrine of chastity,
and her bed is like the Sepulcher of our Savior, a place where never man lay.

I brief, she is the most admired and the most desired thing here below; as
great and strange a wonder upon earth, as she that was clothed with the sun
was in heaven; and next to Abraham's Bosom you would choose to lie in hers.

To conclude, he that would have such a wife, must resolve to live always
unmarried; for she is an imaginary and not a real being, rare as a Phoenix or a
Philosophers stone; and he that would woe her, must travel to Vtopia.

A Rigid Presbyterian.
TO describe him right, is a task like that of the Tailor who took measure of
the Devil; for there is nothing more like him upon earth then he; He is lined
with Covetousness, and covered with Hypocrisy the root and the cloak of all
evil. Although at this time he carries a Bible, at Worcester fight he wore a
sword, so that it is hard to say whether he be of the Tribe of Simeon or Levi.
He swallows contrary Oaths faster then the Eagles in the Tower do gobbets of
flesh; For The way to Hell, and then Consciene of a Presbyterian, are two broad
things. He condemns the lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the Church; and is more
ravished with the squeaking of a Tithe Pig, then with the Music of Organs.

He appears in the Pulpit (like Aesops Crow) in a dress of borrowed Feathers;
for he preaches the works of other men, which are so much the worse for coming
out of his mouth, as wares for being of the second hand.

But it would grieve your heart to see how he racks the Ancient Fathers, when
he makes his own Confession; and mangles the Modern Divines more barbarously
then the Hangman did the body of Hugh Peter's; I am sure poor Priscian, gets
many a broken head.

His Eloquence consists altogether in railing, as though he had got his
Education at Billinsgate; In his Discourse he runs on like a mad Dog foaming
and open-mouthed, yelping at the Reverend Bishops, and biting his brethren the
Sectaries, whom he makes as mad as himself.

Yet sometimes he perceives that his stuff is too short for the hower-Glass,
and then the wheels of his Rhetoric move very heavily; he then spends much
time in humming and spetting, and with the wiping of his nose makes many a
filthy Parenthesis.

As for his Text, he handles that as Moses did his rod when it was turned into
a Serpent, he lays it down and runs away from it. Yet his Sermon lies all
written before him; for the poor Copy holder in divinity can do nothing
without his notes; This his weakness he would have you think is his worth, for
he charges men of able parts with presumtion; Yet when he prays, he shuts his
eyes preferring nonsense and Tautologies before the divine Liturgy. Vain
Wretch! that dares not speak to men without papers, and yet presumes to talk
to God extempore. As for his parishioners, he saints or reprobates them
according as they pay their Tithes, and like a Gypsy, tells good Fortune to
none but those that Cross his hand with a piece of Silver; and by him as well
as by the Pope, you may be Canonized for Money: Thus he is a mere Balaam that
blesses and curses for reward; He that opposes him acts the part of an Angel,
but he that submits to him is worse then an Ass.

If you consider his Constancy, he is a kind of religious Proteus, that is now
ready to fawn upon that power against which he has so long barked; If
therefore there be a Church in England which consists of men, Surely, The
Orthodox Faithful Constant Ministers, are the Doors, Windows, Pillars, Bells
and Candlesticks, and Sir John serves only for a Weathercock.

It is confessed, that at the beginning of this Happy Reformation he was a
little stubborn, perhaps expecting a second war; but now poor Heart!) He has
learned to pray for his Majesty, but (if you could hear the Language of his
soul) it is so as impatient Heirs pray for their rich Fathers. There are two
sorts of men, who having escaped a deserved pair of Gallows, pray for the King
very strangely, that is a Felon, whilst the Executioner burns his hand, and a
Traitor, whilst the Devil sears his Conscience.

If you would know his name, you way find it subscribed to an ugly Petition,
for where Bradshaw was the Pilate that condemned; he was one of those Jews that
cried Crucify; He professes sorrow for the Martyrdom of our late Sovereign
Lord: But believe him not, for his hand helped to hale him to the block: In a
word, he is (at best) but a State-Crocodile, and one that is Maudlin drunk with
the Kings blood.

No more, but if you chance to meet with Cleveland's Hue and Cry, you may tell
them he was lately in a sequestered Parsonage.

A debaucht Courtier.
IS an unworthy fellow that obtained his office, not for formal Loyalty, but
present money; He paid dear for his place; and he that preferred him is like to
pay dearer for his corruption. He is a Traitor to God; and therefore can be no
good Subject to the King; He acts a double part upon the Theater of the world,
Peter and Judas; Peter to his Maker, and Judas to his Master: for by his
drunkenness, swearing and debauchery, he both denies his Redeemer, and betrays
his Sovereign.

Nor is it strange; for oftentimes the transgressions of servants bring
Judgments upon their Lords; A holy Prince confesses and complains of the sins
of his heels, that is, of his wicked followers. King Charles the First, who was
as little subject to vice, as Achilles to wounds, suffered through the iniquity
of his people: Thus it pleased God to smite the Head, for the sins of the
Heels.

If you cast your eyes upon his outside he seems a kinsman to the man in the
Moon, for every month he is in a new fashion; and (instead of true gallantry
which once dwelt in the breasts of Englishmen) he is made up of complements,
Cringes, and French Apish tricks, Perfumes, Perriwig, Fancies, Knots, Muffe
and Feather, which make him more fit to be set upon a Farmers Hovel to scare
Crows, then to serve the King in his Royal palace, they are blots in a Princes
Train who have nothing to set them forth but gay clothes and impudent
behavior; For they carry the stalls of pedlers about their knees, and of
Tinkers in their foreheads. Indeed rich Garments are fit for honorable
persons; but servants ought to imitate the virtues of their Masters and not the
fashion of their clothes; That which becomes a King or Noble Man, is not decent
for a Peasant or base fellow; the Lions skin would not fit the Ass.

In wearing Apparel we must observe three Concords; the first is when a man's
apparel agrees with his birth; the second when it agrees with his purse; the
third when it agrees with his parts or breeding: He that wears apparel above
his birth forgets his parents, he that wears apparel above his purse undoes his
children, he that wears apparel above his breeding, is guilty of a false
concordance in the rules of morality, and is a very incongruous gentleman. It
is a vulgar report, (perhaps a vulgar error) concerning his excellency the Duk
of Albermarle, that he once wore a wooden sword in a velvet scabbard; It would
be a safer point of faith for the Countrymen to believe that in -- there are
wooden Courtiers in velvet Coats.

It was ingeniously observed by the Fabulist of the fly, that though she
boasts of her nobility, yet she lives only in summer, a true Hieroglyphick of
a Courtier that flourishes only in the summer of prosperity and in the
Sunshine of his Princes favor.

We read that flies were a plague to King Pharaoh; and so have Parasitical
Courtiers been to other Princes; If Domitian had rightly understood this, he
would have purged his Court from the one as well as his chamber from the other.

In brief, a profane Sycophant in a royal Court is a fly; He was at first
but a maggot generated in the Carcass of some decayed family; But now friends
and intrest have given him wings; that which he most desires is a silver hook,
and that which he best deserves is a hempen line; and having these two he is a
fit bait to fish for the Devil.

An University Bedle.
CAnnot be defined like Qui Church for the word Est, comprehends both his genus
and difference. He has got just so much Latin as to call a congregation; in
which work his mouth is often opened to very little purpose, and never stopped
without great cost. There is nothing so much staggers his faith as our Saviors
miracle of feeding the multitude with five loaves and two fishes, and nothing
so much stumbles his obedience as a day of public fasting and humiliation (had
he been of the Kings counsel, we should not have observed Lent.) He accounts no
plague so terrible as famine, no virtue so difficult as temperance, and no
Treason comparable to the conspiracy of the members against the belly.

He sits down at a feast as a moderator in that great dispute betwixt Os Ossis,
and Os Oris, but he never says to the Respondent Abunde satisfecisti: The
hungry Sizers wish their knives as deep in his panch as his in the beef; for he
is like to leave them poor reversions; his guts and Gown sleeves, are like
Scylla and Charybdis, for that which misses the one, falls into the other.

In the temples of the Heathens, there were two Idols; Bell, and the Dragon; In
the Churches of the Christians there are two Hieroglyphics, Time and Death;
Amongst the Heathens the Bedle might have served for Bell, because he is a
great devourer; and amongst the Christians he may be an emblem of time, for he
is Edax Rerum.

Yet in the University he is not Idolized but made a laughing-stocke; He is a
Jack a Lent to the merry Sophisters; and a mark at which the Tripos and his
brethren shoot their fools bolts; The cock is not so much thrown at on
Shrove-Tuesday, as he on Ash Wednesday.

Yet he is a man whose conversation is void of offense; for he never does wrong
to any but his Breeches. His practice is contrary to that of the Pharisees for
he makes clean the inside of cups and platters. He is a great example of
patience in suffering all those Iokes, Ieeres, Quirks, tricks, and abuses, that
are put upon him; He makes use of them as sower sauce to make his sweet gains
have the better relish.

In a word, though he bear the outside of an Achademian he is a man better fed
then taught, having a fat paunch and a lean pate, a full purse and an empty
brain; he employes his tongue to find his teeth work, and his life is like that
of a Swine, he is always either crying or eating.

A Phanatick.
IS a new name for an old Heresy; one of the Dragons Angels, who being cast
out of Heaven, is now come to make war upon earth; He would have you believe,
that he fights for the Gospel, although the Gospel forbids fighting; he calls
his Captain Jesus a Savior, when in truth he is Apollyon a Destroyer: When he
pretends to worship God, he intends to Massacre his neighbors, and like Pilate
mingles blood with his sacrifices: Thus he abuses our Gracious Kings Mercy, by
committing murder in the Streets; for when Justice is dormant in the Court,
cruelty is rampant in the City.

Peace and Truth are the Jachim and Boaz, both of Church and State; The
Phanaticke does really pull down the one, whilst he professes to build up the
other.

He scatters his blasphemous Libels in the Streets, and high ways, as they
that are infected with the Pestilence do their Caps, Gloves and
Hand-kerchiefs; but amongst all the plagues of Egypt, there is none like his.

When Oliver Cromwell tolerated liberty of erroneous Opinions, it was as when
Epimetheus opened Pandoras box; for the one let out as many Diseases upon the
soul, as the other upon the body.

The Opinions and judgments of men, are like their faces; Amongst all those
Millions and multitudes in the world, there is not any two so like, but they
may be known one from the other. Yet a thousand several faces, though by some
small token they may be known asunder, may every one of them have the Image of
man; and a thousand several souls, though they differ in some slight notions
and circumstantial points of judgment, may all of them have the Image of God.

But the Phanaticks, and all that prodigious offspring of the Rumps
Reformation, are Monsters in Religion, having not the right make and shape of
Christians, but either adding to or diminishing from the holy Scriptures;
Though they are Giants in Rebellion, yet they are but Pigmies in Piety,
Antipodes in Faith, Deficients in what they ought to do and believe, and
Redundants in what they ought not, and mere Heteroclites in Divinity.

Religion, that should be a matter of practice, they have made a business of
Controversy; the Itch of disputing is grown to such a scab in the Church, that
it will hardly be cured without some such Brimstone as fell upon Sodom and
Gomarrah. Thus the childeren if this Generation are like presumptuous servants,
that seek rather to know their Masters secret Counsels, then to obey their
known Wills; studying strange Arguments to defend their Heterodox tenants, as
though the spring of Living Water were Ezekiel, a Fountain of Contention, or
Sitnah, a Well of Hatred.

Neither do they only inveigh against the Orthodox Clergy, but (as though the
kingdom of Beelzebub were divided against it self) fall out one with another;
when instead of the still voice of the Spirit, and the Language of Canaan, you
may hear Deceiver, Antichrist, Lier, Dog, Devil, and such like Rhetorical
expressions fall from their mouths, filling the place of their Conventicle with
such a noise as was in the Streets of Sodom, when the rude Infidels beset Lots
house; Surely the Sabbath of the Lord has been much profaned both by us, and
our Fathers; for they maintained the baitings of Bears and Bulls; and we the
fighting of these beasts of Ephesus.

It is reported of Gregory the great Bishop of Rome, that seeing some English
Children in the Market to be sold, he said, they might well be called Angli,
for they seemed unto him Angels; but had he seen the Men of this Age, he would
rather have named them Diaboli, Devils; He did not then see so much of the
beauty of England in Rome, as he might now see of the abominations of Rome in
England. For there is a great mystery of Iniquity, the grief of Wise men, and
the wonder of ignorant, that some rebellious Zelots under a pretense of keeping
out Popery should endeavor to bring it in for to rise up in arms against our
lawful King, is a thing which Jesus never taught, and none but the Pope ever
tolerated. It is not the harmless and decent ceremony of Organs that can be
looked upon as a sign of Popery, but those seditious Priests, that cry against
them are themselves the Popes organs and the Devils instruments; the one blows
the bellows of their discontented spirits, and the other plays upon the keys
of their railing tongues, and thus they make an unpleasant music, which
consists altogether of discords.

But as when God first brought man into the world, he was naked, to signify
that his Creator was not ashamed of his work, so when the Devil first brought
sin into the world it was clothed with an excuse, least its odious nature
should too soon be seen; and amongst the rest these of theft, murder, treason
and sacrilege, have been covered with a mantle of tenderness of conscience;
but (believe it Reader,) if the skins of these men were as tough as their
consciences, and their flesh, as hard as their hearts, they would be both ax
and Halter proof; they might laugh at the block and defy the gallows.

Thus has England for some years been Tomos an Island of Sects; Religion (like
Joseph's coat a thing of many colors dyed in difference, and dipped in blood:
Truth like Sybils leaves by strange Winds of doctrine blown into confusion;
and Bold Phanaticks running from the shop-board to the pulpit, and from the
pulpit to the gibbet, where we leave them to take their swing; for he that will
not have Charles to be his King, must accept of Dun to be his Priest.

A Whore.
THe young Persian (who for his wisdom was called Darius his Cozen) treated of
2 things, the prevalency of Truths, and the strength of women; Indeed the
strength of women has been sufficiently manifested in the fall of the first
man, the ruin of the strongest man, and the backsliding of the wisest man; yet
Job (through patience) was able to stand, maugre the Devil and his wife; so
that it is neither age, strength, nor wisdom, but patience that can overcome
a Woman; Patience must be a shield for him that is married, and continence for
him that is not: for lust is the Devils bonefire wherein poor man is burned
with his own rib.

The royal preacher speaking concerning a Harlot, calls her a strange Woman,
but we usually term her a common-woman; and no wonder, for those sins which
were strange in Solomon's days, are common in ours.

Now this strange common-woman is a kind of Land Siren, far more dangerous then
they in the Sea; for he that falls into her hands, runs a threefold hazard, of
destroying soul, body and estate.

In her face there hangs some rags of ore-worn beauty like old clothes in a
Broakers window to make you believe that there are better wares within; and the
Language of her eyes is, What do you lack Sir? Yet he that trades with her, is
like to have a sad purchase, for she can sell him nothing but repentance and a
foul disease.

If she be a great person, she has two necessary implements to help and to
hide her infirmities, a Black-a-moore, and a little Dog; for without these, she
would be neither fair nor sweet.

For her cheeks, she has an artificial dye, and (contrary to the rules of
Heraldry,) she lays mettle upon mettle, and color upon color. Argent upon
Or, and Gules upon Sables.

It is reported of an ingenious Limner, that he pictured a Boy carrying Grapes;
The Grapes were so lively painted, that the Birds of the Air catched at them,
thinking they had been really what they seemed: whereupon the Painter did as
much dislike one part of his work, as he had reason to commend the other;
saying, That had he painted the Boy as lively as the Grapes, the Birds would
have been afraid to come so near: Even so a Female Paintresse excells in one
part of her work, and fails in the other. Beauty which is half the outside of a
complete Lady, she can so handsomely pourtray, that wanton Youngsters like silly
Birds, are ready to catch at the Grapes of her Lips; but could she paint
Modesty as well as Beauty, Lascivious men would keep further off. But she that
prostitutes her own flesh, and lets out her Hackney body for hire, will make
use of all advantages to draw in Custom, and to advance Trading, as rude
behavior, unclean talk; and if she have a skin clearer then her Conscience,
bare breast and shoulders like the nakedness of Bathsheba, who did at the same
instant pollute David's soul, whilst she washed her own body.

Thus she makes sinful Merchandise of her self, and converts that which
should be a Temple of the Holy Ghost, into a stall of beastly lusts, much like
the zeal of our late times, who made a stable of Paul's Church. As for her upper
parts, they are the shop of Cupid, and her lower parts are his Warehouse; at
length old age makes her turn Bankrupt, spoils her game, and in graves
wrinckles, where she once painted Roses, and then with all her black spots and
patches, she looks but like an old resty Gammon of Bacon stuck with Cloves,
scarce so beautiful, but I am sure not half so savoury; and then she is like a
rotten stick, which serves only to kindle green ones: The place where she is
most a stranger, is the Church, and the place which she best deserves is a pair
of stocks; but where she most desires to be, is a Tavern or a Playhouse;
Sometimes like Dinah she walks the streets, sometimes like Jael she stands at
the Door, and sometimes like Jezabel she looks out at the window.

In brief, she is a loathsome stinking Carrion, too unclean to enter into
Heaven, too diseased to continue long upon earth, the shame and stain of her
Sex, the scorn of wise men, and the destruction of fools; too foul a subject to
be touched with any thing but a pen or a pair of Tongues, and therefore I have
done with her. Foh how she stinks.

A happy Rustic.
IS one whose Conversation is in Heaven, and his Habitation in the Country;
Where he injoyes two things (which are very rare in the City) a sweet Air,
and a good Conscience. He is such to God, as he would have the Earth to be to
himself fruitful, according to that talent which is lent him, and as in his
labor he tastes the fruit of his sin, so in his enjoyments he eats the fruit
of his labor. He is good out of a double principle, partly out of ignorance of
the evil he knows not, but chiefly out of detestation of that he knows: He has
studied Piety, more then Court-ship, and knows better how to pray then
Complement.

Emanuel Thesaurus makes a kind of jest at our Father Adams fall, and says,
quia Deum non coluit, Terram coluit, but the honest Plowman does both; for
though his employment be like the employment of Cain, yet his sacrifice is like
the sacrifice of Abel; in this he differs from the silken Apes of London; he
has durty hands, and a clean heart.

He is early up both at his Devotion and Labor, the watchful Cock is his
Chaplain, whose crowing puts him in mind not only of his work, but of his
sins, as it once did Peter: The greatest part of the Day he spends in honest
pains; and when he takes his recreation, it is harmless, wholesome and manful.

Although he abounds not in wealth, he is master of one precious Jewel, a
contented mind, which (like the Philosophers stone) turns all it touches into
Gold, and makes every condition pleasant. In short, he is one, at whose door
the weary Cynick may set down his Lanthorn, and say, (...).

A Beastly-Drunkard.
I, Who these 26. years have been a Pilgrim in the wilderness of this world,
have observed therein two sorts of Beasts; There are Quadrupedes, or
fourefooted Beasts, and these did God make in the great world; and there are
Bipedes, or two-footed Beasts, and these did man make in the little world of
himself: Unto the Beasts which God made, did Adam give names; but unto the
Beasts which Man made, did the Devil give names: Amongst the rest, a Drunkard,
which is in truth no other then a Swine, does our Grand Impostor call a good
fellow.

But away with this vizzord, such good fellows are not fit to have fellowship
with God, nor society with good men, but rather to go in the company of that
bristled Herd, which is turned out before the Swine-ard.

A Drunkard is inwardly (and some times outwardly) a beast; he was once a man,
but his His Hostess Circe or Morphandra, with the powerful charm of her Pots
and Flaggons, has quite changed his shape: He was once a free man, but now he
is a slave to his own lust; For he that makes Indentures with his feet, does
bind himself Apprentice to Sensuality; he is condemned to the Prodigals
drudgerie, that is, To feed swine, to foster and foment an insatiable brutish
appetite which has learned the Language of the Horsleaches daughter, Give,
Give. Lastly, he was once a living man; but now he is dead in sin and (like the
French Ambassadors child) has his heart buried in a cup.

In the curse of Jeroboam God threatens to cut off him that pisseth against the
wall; the Drunkards may well have a share in this curse; for they live only to
piss against the wall, even the lavish expense of that which should relieve
and succor their poor wives and children: But surely the stones of those walls
shall cry out against these men at the day of judgment.

But to conclude, let him that is an immoderate drinker, remember the Story of
Dives; there is no tippling in Hell; Let him remember the Story of Judas, the
sop made way for the Devil; Let him consider the words of the young Prophets to
Elisha, There is death in the Pot.

An ignorant old man.
IS one who dishonours his Age by his folly; a man in years, but a child in
understanding; he has lived so long, till the world and himself are mutually
weary one of another. And he cares not how soon he leaves this, if he were but
prepared for a better; he is grown very near his grave, but far enough from
Heaven; in his crookedness his soul and body observe an equal proportion; for
neither of them walk, uprightly: He will tell you many stories of things that
were done in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and yet you may pose him, if you
ask him what he remembers of the last Sermon he heard; Thus like a Crab-fish,
he is cravvling toward his long home, and yet he looks backwards at his
former follies, not considering his latter end, spending most of his days in
conning his Preterperfect tense, but not at all regarding the Future.

Old men when they are vexed and discontented, are very apt to invite death;
but (in cold blood) wondrous unwilling to give him entertainment. Aesop tells
us of an aged Man, who being grievously laden with a bundle of sticks, cast
them down; and as though his Life had been a burden unto him as well as his
wood, he began very passionately to call for Death: Death, (who seldom stays
till he is called or sent for) on the sudden appears Vouz Avez, Master Mors,
What would my Grandsire have? The old man that was willing to live another
winter, and to warm his fingers with the Fuel which he had provided; entreated
the grim Skelleton, that he would only help him up with his load. Thus carnal
spirits in some formal Confession, may throw down the burden of their sins, and
desire to be dissolved; but when the pale Messenger, who must work his
Dissolution, once knocks at the door and cries, Adsum, Oh how loath they are to
die? they had rather still live in their former slaverie, although it is to be
porters to sin, and packhorses to Satan.

Have you never been entertaind in a Noble Man's buttery, and observed the
policy of the servants how you must first drink with one, then with another,
after him with another, until every one has had a single course at you, and at
last run you quite off your legs; thus abusing their Lords Hospitality, by
making men drunk.

Just such is the world, where several temptations strive to intoxicate the
poor stranger, man; there is a thing called Cupid, which drinks the Sack of
Eyes, and the Claret of Lips; There is a thing called Mammon, who like
Cleopatra, or Sir Thomas Gresham, does swallow Pearls and Jewels: There is
another called Revenge, which drinks nothing but blood.

In this Company, has our old man tippled away the Morn of his Youth, the Noon
of his Strength, and the Evening of his Age, and is now laid down to take a nap
in the Grave, where we leave him till the Resurrection.

A Player.
IS an Artificial fool, that gets his living by making himself ridiculous; he
has lickt up the Vomit of some drunken Poet and (like a jugler) casts it up
again before a thousand Spectators. He is the ignorant man's Wonder, the rich
man's Jester, and the Devils Factor, that by a strange delusion sends men
laughing to hell.

Yet I confess that Comedies, (if not profane nor lascivious) may be sometimes
lawful recreations for great Persons, whose melancholy heads are daily
troubled with weighty Affairs: But unto incontinent Youth, (those Martyrs of
Lust, and uncleanness) they are but as Oil to their flames, and as bags of
gunpowder tied under their Arms.

Hence it was that Heroic Sidney upon his Deathbed condemned that rare
Monument of his matchless wit, his Arcadia to be burned, fearing perhaps least
it should burn others; Romances and Plays, are dangerous Edge-Tooles, which
unwarie Readers must not meddle with: They are hot burning Irons, which Chaste
Ladies like the Empress Kunnigund may safely handle without hurt, whilst
other go away with burned -- and seared Consciences.

The effeminate Citizens of Sybaris, were so much given to mirth and jollitie,
that they taught their very Horses to dance, but when the Martial Trumpet
called forth these Carpet Knights into the Field, the merry Palfreyes
(according to their former Education) danced deaths dance before their Enemies.
How many of the more effeminate English are trained up in wantonness, dancing
and playing? But I wonder how they will dance at the sound of the last Trumpet,
or what new Mask they will have at the day of Judgment.

But not to regard these Shadows, let us look a little at the Substan^e; our
Life is but an Interlude; Happy is he that acts his part well.

There are some who turn a Comedy into a Tragedy, and as the first Psalm,
begin with Blessedness, and end with perishing; But he is the most excellent
Actor, who imitates Christ, and the best Comoedie is a Holy Conversation.

A Mechanic Magistrate.
WHen God first created Man, he did miraculously form him out of the Dust of
the Earth, without the Medium of Natural Generation; and when Christ first
Ordained Ministers, he did extraordinarily call poor Fishermen from their Nets,
who had not the help of Humane Learning; So likewise, there was a time when God
raised up Magistrates from mean employments, Saul from seeking Asses, David
from keeping Sheep, Sanga^ and Gideon from Husbandry to be Kings and Judges
over his people. But now miracles are ceased; and although all men are Created
by God, yet they are begotten by men their Fathers. And though all lawful
Ministers are sent by God, yet they are outwardly called by Bishops, the
Fathers of the Church; though all true Magistrates are appointed by God, yet
they must have their Commissions from the King, who is the Supreme Earthly
Magistrate, and the Father of the Country. We must not now look to see men
immediately created, or Magistrates and Ministers miraculously inspired and
called; It is folly and presumption to seek after either; for there is as much
unwarrantableness in the one, as impossibility in the other.

Yet our Jereboam, Cromwell, did not only make Priests of the meanest of the
people, but Justices of the basest of Tradesmen. We read that Julius Caesar
was stabbed to death with bodkins; I confidently believe that it were the
bodkins of Tailors, the Aules of Cobblers, and the tools of other Mechannicks,
not the Swords of any true Nobility, or Gentry, that murdered our late Caesar
of Glorious memory. And these blew-aprond Benchers were called, The Keepers of
the Liberty of England, and yet enemies to Truth, disturbers of Peace,
perverters of Judgment, and blots in the Magna Charta, both of Humane and
Divine Laws.

Such a one was he who knew no other Law but that of the Sword, and desired to
act by an illegal arbitrarie power. He was a great Enemy to Fiddlers, Wakes, and
May-Poles; but poor beggars he persecuted without mercy: For observe, There
was none so cruel against beggars, as those that made them so; When they came
to his door, he would show them the Courtesy of the Town, a pair of Stocks or
Whiping-post, and sometimes his Charity would prefer them to a Prison: He
lived frugally upon his ill-purchased Lands, foreseeing perhaps the Change that
was to follow: For his Counsel he made use of his Clerk, and some neighboring
Priest who came into the Pulpit, by the same sword that brought him upon the
Bench; And for his Almoner, he kept a great Mastiff Dog, who would open at a
stranger as loud as a Son of the Kirk of Scotland, when he railes against the
Prelates, and Common-Prayer-Booke. The baseness of his spirit was seen in his
insulting over Noble and Honorable Persons; for he made his betters to buckle,
and comply, and taught even Lords themselves to say Shibboleth; As for those
that stood out, he robbed them both of their profits and pleasures, and allowed
them neither wealth nor recreation, but made their Houses become their Prisons,
and confined them to their own thresholds. Thus were the poor Gentlemen
enclosed in a Magic Circle, where they continued until this Devil was conjured
down; For they durst not so much as ride a hunting for fear of him, who (like
Nimrod) was himself the greatest Hunter.

But now (blessed be God) that Game is over, and some of those Dogs, who (like
Acteons Hounds,) worried their Master, are already hanged, and the rest have
Clogs, and Collars; and as for his Worship, he is out of Commission, abused,
contemned, reviled and trampled upon by those people, amongst whom he lately
acted his part, and played Justice Nimis to some, and Nihil to others.

The Case is altered, and Heaven has now restored our Judges as at the first,
and our Counselors as at the beginning, and the Mechanical Magistrate is now
made an Example, and not a Minister of Justice.

A scandalous Minister.
TRue it is that we have all failings, and every soul may read that word in
Belshazzars Handwriting, and apply it to himself; TEKEL, Thou art weighed in
the balance and found wanting; Yet there is an allowance for light Gold, and
Charity will abate us of some of our infirmities: There are degrees of
wickedness, as well as goodness; and as one Star differs from another in
Glory, so one sin differs from another in Malignitie; Men's transgressions are
like their Talents, some have more, and some less; Chorazin and Bethsaida*
out-sinned Tire and Sidon; There are scandals in Grain, and sins of a deep
Die, which not only cry, but roar for vengeance. There is no man lives
without offense, and yet there are some offenses which make men unfit to live,
as Treason, Murder, and others; There is no Minister without sin, and yet there
are some sins which may make a minister unworthy to follow his Function. If a
Lawyer be once proved to be faced like Janus, and to receive a Fee from the
Plaintiff, and a Bribe from the Defendant, he is presently thrown over the
Bar, and suffered no longer to Plead; and why may not a Priest, that pleads for
God in his words, and yet sollicits for the Devil in his actions, be cast out
of the Pulpit, and suffered no longer to preach? If thy right eye offend thee,
pull it out, and cast it from thee; If the Parson who is, (or at leastwise
should be) the right eye of the Parish, be scandalous, let him be pulled out
and ejected, for better it is that one man should suffer in temporal things,
then that a whole Congregation of souls should perish for want of knowledge.

Now there are diverse scandals, which brings stains to the Black-Coats of the
Clergy; There is idleness, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and drunkenness, the
old-fashioned sins of the Cassock, which caused our late Eclipse of Episcopacy;
And there is Pride, Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Envy, Malice, and others the new
fashioned sins of the Jump, who have, (or I hope will cause) the downfall of
that Dagon, Presbytery; And all these are abominations in the sight of God
burdens to the people, Black-patches in the face of Divinity, and blots in the
Scutcheon of Levi.

A scandalous Minister is a profane ignorant dunce, whom his Parents (looking
more at the durty lucre of Tithes, then the weightiness of the Calling)
designed for the Priesthood, although he were as unfit for that work, as blind
Tobit to be a Sentinel, or Mephisbosheth to be a Foot-post. In order to his
preferment, they sent him to the University, where he ate, drank, and slept,
played a match or two at Football, stole a Pig, ran away from the Proctor, and
staid seven years to as much purpose, as the King of France with twenty
thousand men, went up the Hill, and so came down again. At length, making a
Friend of Mammon he obtaines a Benefice, where, by his weak discharging of
Cure, and his evil ordering of his Conversation, he made the Clergy begin to
grow odious, and many Conscientious people for want of bread at home, to run to
other Churches, and if it were not to be had there, to turn Separatists, keep
private Conventicles, listen to Lay-Preachers, and at length come to be
preachers themselves; for his weakness made them too much presume upon their
own strength; For because many (through bribery and corruption) have obtained
an outward Call to the Ministry without Qualifications, it has made others
exercise their Qualifications without a Call; Were it not for slothful
Shepherds, the Wolves would be kept out; and were it not for such pitiful Sir
John's, we should not have so many Sectaries.

He is in his Pulpit A Cloud without water, a black thing hanging over the
heads of the people, but there is no Doctrine drops from him like the Rain, nor
Speech like the Dew upon the tender herbs; but a strange hodgepodge discourse,
stuffed with the husks and shells of Divinity, which in stead of Explaining the
Scripture makes it more dark, like a thick Curtain drawn before a window, which
keeps out the light, and makes those that are in a Lethargy of ignorance to
sleep more securely.

Many years had he not followed this trade, but (as though providence had had a
mind to wean him from the dugs of the Bel-ropes) he was by Cromwells
Commissioners unlawfully, had hanged him up, I think they had neither committed
Murder, nor he suffered Martyrdom.

But now thrusting himself in amongst those learned and pious Divines, who
suffered for Conscience, Truth, and Loyalty, he is returned with a prodigious
Omen to his poor neighbors; who figh to see the Ravens come back as well as
Doves; he has now possession of his Pulpit, although it would be fitter for
him to be amongst the Bears in Paris-Garden: And blind Balaam is once more got
into the saddle, but I beshrow that hand, which held him the stirrup.

And now (instead of promises of Reformation) he begins to Court his
Parishioners with Rehoboams Complement, telling them that now his finger shall
be thicker then his loins were before, and that now he may tipple, Cum
Privilegio; and as for swearing, the Crime is Venial. And (lastly) that nothing
which can be charged against, him can make him incapable of enjoying his
Benefice, save only if he speak against the Persons or power of Prelates.

Truly (Reader) If it were so, the Bishops would stand as long as the Pageants
in London streets, and no longer; If they be zealous in punishing their own
enemies, and slack in punishing the Enemies of God; If he that speaks against
an earthly Prelate, must taste of a Pillory, and have his ears pay for the
boldness of his Tongue; and yet profane swearers, who blaspheme the name of
Christ (who is the Bishop of our souls) be mildly checked with a Not so my sons,
and still permitted to serve at the Holy Altar, we shall then see Lawn sleeves
once again whipped out of the Temple; if they will not maintain the Honor and
Glory of God, then God will not maintain theirs; but suffer their Glory to be
taken from their heads, and their Honor to be laid in the dust. It was a great
Error in old Eli to condemn Devotion for Drunkenness; It would be a greater
in his Successors, to tolerate Drunkenness in stead of Devotion.

But let the Country have more honorable thoughts of the Reverend Hierarchy,
and expect a sudden winnowing and sifting of the Ministry: For both God in his
Word, and the King in his Declaration, have promised us able Preachers; and the
Overseers must take care that their will be done.

A Loyal Subject.
FEar God, and Honor the King, are two duties which the Apostle has joined
together; and therefore no man can separate them. He that is not a good
Subject, cannot be a good Christian. He that loves not his brother whom he
has seen, can not love God whom he has not seen; and as in love, so in fear,
honor, and obedience we may observe, that he that honors not the King, who
is his visible God, can not serve God who is his invisible King.

It was a sad complaint of Cardinal Woolsey, that he had been very diligent and
careful to serve the King, but too unmindful and negligent to serve God; (I
wish that his words be not fit for the mouths of some of our age) Yet the
Modern Rebels made a shift to avoid that Rock, but lost themselves in the
Quicksands of Disloyalty; And pretended to serve God, whilst they denied
obedience to his Vicegerent. And therefore if Woolsey served the King, it was
for his own base ends; And if our Covenanting Zelots served God, it was only
to make him a Patron of their Rebellion.

A loyal Subject is a good Christian who carefully and conscienciously observes
both the first and the fifth Commandment, and carries a fair Correspondence
both to Heaven and Earth, not robbing God to pay Caesar, but rendering honor,
fear, tribute, homage, and service to whom they are due.

It follows then, He is no swearer, for therein he would dishonor the Majesty
of Heaven, and pull down a judgment upon the Kingdom; Because of Oaths the
Land mourns, And where the Land mourns, I know not how the King should be
merry; He who speaks treasonable words deserves death, then what will become of
swearers and blasphemers, who daily speak treasonable words against the King
above.

Neither is he one of those Pot-Champions, who have nothing to manifest their
faithfulness, but that they talked of his Majesty in the Tavern, he remembers
the King in his Prayers, oftener then in his Cups; and is very sensile of that
Cup, which his Savior and his Sovereign both drank of, and has chosen rather
to pledge them in a bitter draught of Affliction spiced with sequestration and
imprisonment, and having a block or Gallows at the bottom; then to tipple in
those base Elements of Wine and Beer; for to drink bowls and glasses of Sack,
will sooner increase the wealth of the King of Spain, then the health of the
King of England.

In a word, (although it may be more easy to show you what he is not, then
what he is) he is a prudent Counselor, a faithful Informer, and a valiant
Soldier, like Joseph to King Pharaoh, like Mordeca to King Ahashuerus, and
like Monk to King Charles.

A Male content.
IS a thing quite* contrary to a Temporizer, for he swimmes always against the
Tide: His chief end is that he may be taken notice of in the World; and (like
Theudas) he boasts himself to be some body; he is an Enemy both to Civil and
Religious Ordinances, and is offended at that which even God himself has set
up: He was not pleased in the days of the Old King, nor contented in the time
of Tyranny, neither is he satisfied now, but having seen two days, and a night
he has still continued in an unquiet condition, for in the day time the heat
of the Sun has molested him; and in the night he has barked at the moon;

He is not altogether void of learning; but has Philosophy enough to make him
an Atheist; And Divinity to serve him to take Gods Name in vain; Yet he is a
mere child in Knowledge, continually crying and whining, and knows not what he
would have. His ignorance is joined with willfulness, which makes it beyond
the cure of a Pestel Mortar.

He has been used to Cant very Highly, which has endangered (if not effected)
the cropping his lugs; but such a poor punishment does but harden him in his
folly, for they cannot circumcise his heart with his ears.

In short, he is a mere Lilburn, or King-Fisher, Who, though you should hang
him up, would turn his breast against the wind.

A noble Spirit.
IS one that has really attained to that which King Agrippa was almost
persuaded unto, that is Christianity, which is a kind of Nobility that comes
by the second birth much more excellent then that of blood; yet if he be of an
honorable Family, it adds luster to his Religion, and makes his virtues more
conspicuous; However he has a more then ordinary birthright, not only above
all other Creatures as a Man, but above other men as a Christian; and is
possessed of not only the one Talent that is Natural, Reason, and the two, that
is the Law of Moses; but also of the five, that is the Gospel of Christ; Thus
by Adoption he is the eldest brother and his Portion is more then double the
Jews and the Heathens.

And by the improvement of these Talents, he is grown very rich in grace,
having found out and purchased that Treasure which is hid in a Field, redeemed
his time, renewed his Covenant, and bought the Truth, which is better then
Riches; better then Riches indeed, for it is a sure stock, not subject to the
corruption of Moth and Rust, or the violence of Thieves and Robbers, but beyond
the Reach of Rumps, Devils, or Sequestrators.

He Trafficks by his bounty to the poor, as Merchants by Bills of Exchange,
freely disbursing part of his Estate here, well knowing he shall receive it a
thousand fold hereafter; Nay more, he has learned the highest point of
Religion, that is, To do good to them who do evil to him; and this is
Christians Vnguentum Armentarium, which heals the Patient by being applied unto
the instrument wherewith he is wounded.

To conclude, he is compounded of an Ounce of Serpent, and a Pound of Dove,
Martha, and Mary, a Protestant Faith, and a Roman Catholic Charitle.

A bad Wife.
WHen the common enemy of Mankind, Satan had obtained a commission from the
high Court of Heaven to afflict poor Job; he took away his Sheep, Camels,
Asses, Oxen, Servants, and Children, but it is observed he left him that (cursed
thing) they call his wife; Oh the subtilty of the old Fox! Who in every
particular affliction slew all his servants save only one whom he left to
grieve him wiah the news of his losses, and so likewise in his general calamity
slew all his near relations but only his Wife, whom he left to vex and torment
him, for he thought he did him as much injury in leaving her as in taking his
children.

When our first Parents made themselves Garments of Fig leaves to cover their
nakedness, in what fashion they were, I cannot tell; but one translation calls
them Aprons, and an other Breeches; and no marvel, for in London it is common
for Men to wear Aprons, but more common for Women to wear Breeches.

When Apprentices have served out their time, and are made free, they usually
say they have buried their Wives; It seems then they account their apprentiship
a marriage, if so let the words be termini convertibiles, for (without
question) marriage is an apprentiship.

In a word, if you would know what an evil Woman is, ask the Citizens of
London, they can best inform you; she is a great burden, and a grievous cross,
which none knows but he that has her.

The R -- Parliament.
WAs the dregs and dross of a Senate, a small number met together in the name
of the -- and doubtless he was in the midst of them; At Westminster they kept
Shop, and hired some wide-mouthed Presbyters to Cry in the City and Country
Pulpits what Wares they had to sell, viz Religion and Reformation; and two
things were carried before the Speaker, The Mace, and the good Old Cause: The
one he had to show his Authority, and the other to cover his --. The Mace was
like a golden or silver Dream, which commonly Ushers in ill Luck, and The good
Old Cause, like the Curtain in the Frontispiece of Argalus and Parthenia, which
hides the Argument and Contents of the book.

But at length The Mystery of Iniquity appeared in its colors, and all their
promises proved like the Heathenish Oracles capable of a double signification,
for they did according to their pretense make the King glorious, but after an
inglorious manner; wickedly accomplishing that, which Caligula sinfully desired
a general Destruction at one blow, a Decollation both of Prince and People.

Thus England, that had for many hundred years enjoyed the blessings of God, in
the happy constitution and lawful name of Kingdom was (according to the
Principles of Dippers) rebaptized in blood, Christened Commonwealth, signed
with the sign of the Red-Cross, that she might not be ashamed to fight under
the Banners of disloyal Regicides. Then was we like Hugh Peter's his strange
Beast, Monstrum Horrendum, a thing like a Kingdom, and yet no Kingdom; there
was more legs in one side then the other, and the tail stood where the head
should stand; then had not the Tower so many savage Creatures as the Parliament
House, and the Serpents skin was not so monstrous a sight, as the Scottish
Covenant.

A long time they sat; but to what purpose? To weave Spiders webs, and to
hatch Cockatrice-egs; They made fine Cobweb-lawes, that would catch little
Felons, but would not hold Grand-Traitors? Petty thieves did sometimes stand
at the Bar, whilst great ones sat upon the Bench; and blind Justice
prepared a pair of Stocks for one sort of Drunkards, and a Throne for another;
as though it were a greater sin to be drunk with Wine, then Blood.

But herein was the height of their malice and cruelty, that as they had
destroyed Gods Image in their own souls and Man's Image in the KINGS Body, so
they thought it necessary to leave our Caesar's Image upon the pieces of money,
and for their Coin, devised a new stamp, a new Inscription, Deus nobiscum: no
wonder, It was a right Motto, for the Silver was their Emanuel, and of the
Moneys they might truly say, God with us.

But Heaven was just; and for all these things God called them to an account.
They who for a long time had used tedious Prayers, as so many Graces before
their meals, of Widows houses; They which had swallowed up such sweet morsels
of unjustly sequestered lands, they who were intoxicated with the Wine of the
Grapes of Naboths Vineyard, began now to surfeit, fell extreme sick, and were
necessitated to one of these Remedies, either the Halter, or the Act of
Indempnitie.

As for those who died in their beds, and had their Trials adjourned till the
Day of Judgment; although their Deaths were not Answerable to their deserts,
yet they were suitable to their lives, and their latter end, were like their
beginning, and the rest of their actions. They lived and died notorious
thieves, for as in their lifetime they plundered the Church, so at their death
they robbed the Gallows.

FINIS.

