Chorographia, OR A SURVEY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TINE.

The Estate of this Country under the Romans.

The Building of the famous Wall of the Picts, by the Romans.

The Ancient Town of Pandon.

A brief Description of the Town, Walls, Wards, Churches, Religious Houses,
Streets, Markets, Fairs, River and Commodities; with the Suburbs.

The ancient and present Government of the Town.

AS ALSO, A relation of the County of Northumberland, which was the bulwark for
England, against the inrodes of the Scots. Their many Castles and Towers. Their
ancient Families and Names. Of the Tenure in Cornage. Of Cheviot-Hills. Of
Tinedale, and Reedsdale, with the Inhabitants.

Potestas omnium ad Caesrem pertinet, proprietas ad singulos.

NEWCASTLE, PRINTED BY S. B. 1649.

S. P. D. DILECTIS BURGENSIBUS, ET PROBIS HOMINIBUS NOVICASTRI SUPER TINAM.

W. G.

Fortiter Defendit Triumphans.
blazon of Newcastle-upon-Tyne Portus, Castrum, Carbo, Salmo, Salina, Molaris,
Murus, ^o^s, Templum, Schola sunt Novi gloria Castri.


TO THE CANDID READER.
EVERY Country has had his Chronologer, or Writer, to portrait unto their
countrymen their antiquities, and noble acts. Greece had his Homer. Rome his
Virgil. Our Britains had their Gildas. Saxons had their Beda. England had of
late his learned Camden, and painful Speed, to delineate and portrait unto
their countrymen the antiquities and scituations of all shires in England. Yet
it is impossible, that any one man, being never so inquisitive, and laborious,
should attain unto the perfect knowledge of all passages, in all places. I have
adventured to write of the Antiquity of this Town and Country, which by reading
and experience, I have gathered out of the ruin of Antiquity; that those
Monuments which these late wars have obliterated and ruined, may be left to
posterity, for tempus edax rerum. I find a great difficulty in my undertakings,
because the Records of this Country are but few, and confused, being so often
infested by the Scots and Danes, who consumed and fired all before them,
wheresoever they came. Questionless many brave men have lived in this Town and
Country, many memorable acts of Chivalry have been achieved; but they are all
buried in oblivion. I hope the courteous Reader will pardon the faults
committed herein, Nam in priscis rebus veritas, non ad unguem quaerenda est.
Many errors, many suppositions upon probabilities, may be found in it. Humanum
est errare and decipi. I have begun the work, I hope some of my Fellow
Burgesses will finish what I have begun; to the everlasting memory of this
famous town.

Some cretiques have presumed to correct and blame me (with their indigested
zeal, and unknown enthusiastique knowledge, of Chimoera's, in their giddy
pericraniums) for fables and errors; as the Priest, that found it written of
St. Paul, Demissus est per sportam, mended his book, and made it demissus est
per portam; because Sporta was an hard word, and out of his reading. But ne
suitor ultra crepidam, let no man profess that he knows not. Its true, He that
writes, resembles a man acting his part upon a Theator or Stage, where the
spectators have their eyes sixing upon him, all observing his gesture and
words; if he fail in either, presently he is censured and condemned. Lastly, we
live in an age, that Mechanics will presume to step into Moses chair, and
become politians to contradict and control whatsoever is acted and done
according to the laws divine and humane. One thing I desire of these
phantastiques, Carpere vel noli mea, vel ede tun. Vale.

W. G.

THE CONTENTS.
Fol. THE first Natives of this Island. 1 Romans first in Britain. 2 The first
Roman Conquest in the North. ibid. The North brought into a Roman Province. 4
The coming in of the Saxons. 6 The first Denominations of Newcastle. 7 The
Walls and Gates of Newcastle, and who built them. 8 The Bridges of Newcastle
upon Tine. 12 The Churches in Newcastle. 13 The Streets and Buildings of the
ancient Town of Pampden. 17 The Grants and Charters to the Town. 19 The
highest and North Parts of the Town. 22 The Sandhill. 23

The middle Parts of the Town. 25 Pilgrim Street. 27 West-Gate Street. ibid.
The Government of the Town. 29 The 24 Wards of the Town. 31 Of the River Tine,
and the Commodities. 32 Divine Providence over all Nations and Countries. 37
The Suburbs of Newcastle. 39 Of the Noble and Ancient Families of the North,
and their Castles. 41

Chorographia; OR, A SURVEY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE.
THE FIRST NATIVES OF THIS ISLAND.
THE Britains were Autochthenes, natives of this Island, for more ancient
inhabitants we find none. The People of this Nation is thought to have been
descended from the neighboring Gauls, in regard of the same Religion,
Language, and Manners. Their original from the Trojans, by Brute, is
altogether fabulous; there being no Greek or Latin Authors, or any Monument in
this Island, which makes mention hereof. Their Descent from the Gauls is more
probable, being the next parts of the Continent unto Britain, or their way
from Asia or the East, from whence all Countries was first peopled.

ROMANS FIRST IN BRITAIN.
THE Romans were first certain and know Forreiners in this Island. C. J.
Caesar was the first of Romans that invaded Britain; he having subdued the
Nation of the Gauls, made his journey into Britain, Cassivellanus reigning
King. Some Victories he achieved, some Hostages he took; imposed a Tribute
upon the Nation, and so returned into the Continent; he made no Conquest of
them, but discovered them to Posterity.

A long time after, the Roman Emperor Claudius, sent Aulus Plantius hither,
accompanied by two Brethren. Sabinus Vespasian, who made war against the
Britains, vanquished them in several Fights, took Camalodunum, the chief seat
of their Kings, and their King took prisoner, planted a Colony at Camalodunum,
(now Maldon in Essex) and reduced the higher or South parts of Britain into
the form of a Roman Province.

THE FIRST ROMAN CONQUEST IN THE NORTH.
IN the Year of Vespasian, the great and populous Nation of the Brigantes are
warred upon, and in part overcome. These Brigantes contains all the Country
North of Humber to the river of Tine and Picts Wall, called lower Britain.

Julius Agricola in the Reign of Domitian, set limits here to the Roman
greatness, and extended it Northward into the Seas and Friths of Dunbriton and
Edenbrough in Scotland.

The Emperor Adrian, not long after, removed the Pale more Southward, and the
better to keep out the Enemy, drew a Trench and Wall of Turfes cross the Land,
betwixt the two Seas.

The Roman Britains being continually molested by often incursions of the
barbarous People called Caledonii, or Picts, who brake down the Sodd Wall,
harrying and spoiling this Country. Which moved the Emperor Severus to build a
Wall of Stone, with great wisdom and industry, to strengthen this Northern
Parts of Britain, against the many inrodes of the barbarous Picts: At every
miles end of this wall was a Tower, and in the wall a Pipe of Metal betwixt
the Tower or Sentinel Houses, that so soon as a man had set his mouth to this
Pipe they might hear through all the Sentinells, where the Enemy were, and so,
in a short time, giving warning from one end of the wall to the other. One of
these Towers remains whole in the Town wall of Newcastle in Pampden, older
then the rest of the Towers, and after another fashion, standing out of the
wall.

THE NORTH BROUGHT INTO A ROMAN PROVINCE.
AT this same time began this Country to flourish, (being reduced into a Roman
Province) to be civilized to learn Roman Letters, habits and manners; for
before this time, the inhabitants went naked, had no houses to live in, neither
did they till the ground, (as one writes) De praeda and venatione frondibusque
arborum vivunt; degunt in tentoriis nudi and sine calceis. Xiphilin.

This Country had the presence of the Emperors of Rome; York a Municipium of
the Romans, and the seat of their Emperors during the time of their abode in
this Island, attending the wars of the Picts and Caleedonians, famous for the
death and funeral exequies of the Emperor Severus and Constantius, and the
happy Inauguration of Constantine the Great, son to Constantius, here
beginning his Reign over the Roman and Christian world.

I find in the time of the Romans, many places in Northumberland that was
their stations about this famous wall, called sometimes, Vallum, a Rampire;
sometimes, Murus Pictious, or Murus Severi.

The most remarkable is upon the Tine-West-Hexam, called of old Axelodunum,
the station of the first Cohort of Spaniards, a Bishops Sea under the Saxons.
Corebridge Curia of Ptolemy, a city of the Otadeni. Prudo Castle, the station
of the first Cohort of the Batavi. Sighhill, of old called Segedunum, the
station of the fourth Cohort, named of the Lergi. Pons Aelii, the station of a
Cohort of Cornavii, now Ponteland. Gabrosentum, the station of the second
Cohort of the Thracians, probably (says my Author Camden.
Newcastle upon Tine. Pampden, a part of Newcastle, probably a station of the
Romans, having an ancient Roman Tower, and another ancient building called the
Wall-Knowle, a part of the Picts Wall. This Town of Pampden is very ancient:
probable some building was erected here in this place to their great god
Pantheon; this Wall being the outmost confines of the Roman Empire, called now
Pandon. I find of the Kings of Northumberland, that had a house in Pampden,
which we call now Pandon-Hall; an ancient old building and Seat of the Kings of
Northumberland.

Tunnocellum the station of the first Cohort, named Aelia Classica, now
Tinemouth, at the mouth of Tine. There is a Village near Newcastle called
Hetton, where there is an old Roman Tower, probably named from the Proconsull
Aetius, who was sent from Rome into these Parts; whom the Britains petitioned
for help in these words, Aetio ter Consuli gemitus Britannorum, etc. Repellunt
nos barbari ad Mare, repellit Mare ad barbaros, inter hac oriuntur duo genera
funerum, aut jugulamur, aut mergimur. Beda. When the Romans had their Empire
much weakened by their own discords, and by the irruptions of the Goths and
Vandals, Proconsull Aetius was forced to retire their Legions from the
Northern parts; so leaving the Country naked, the Picts did break in, who
most miserably wasted and spoiled the Country.

THE COMING IN OF THE SAXONS.
THUS Britain became a prey again to the Picts; when the Britains had
despaired of Roman help, they sent into Germany to crave help of a People
called Saxons, who entered and inhabited Britain to their aid against the
Picts.

The Picts being vanquished and overthrown, through their valor; possessed
themselves of this North Kingdom upon the driving out of the Native Britains.
The victorious Sexons erected their Heptarchy, or seven several Kingdoms.

The Kingdom of Northumbers was the most spacious, populous, and victorious
Kingdom against the Picts or Scots, until the Danes invaded these Northern
parts, and broke out like a violent thunderclap on the Northumbers, and put
the English Saxons to much slavery and bondage many years, until they were
expelled by the English.

The Kingdom of Northumbers being in Peace, began to build and erect many
strong Castles for defense, against the Scots and Picts, as Dunstonbrough
Castle, Bambrough, Alnewicke, Morpeth and Tinemouth, which was the Seats of the
Kings of Northumbers.

In time of this Heptarchy, many famous Monasteries were erected, viz. Hexam
made a Bishops Sea under the Saxons; many erected in this Town of Newcastle
and Pandon. Some of their Kings were interred in Saint Augustines Friars, now
called the Manors. The upper Part and West was called Monk Chester before the
Conquest; a place wholly dedicated to Devotion and Religion. Chester signifies
a bulwark, or place of defense; which shows that in ancient time, under the
Saxons, it had been a place of Fortification for Religious men that lived in
Monasteries.

THE FIRST DENOMINATIONS OF NEWCASTLE.
AFTER the Conquest it got the name of Newcastle, by the New Castle, which
Robert de Curtois son of William the Conqueror built there out of the ground
against the neighboring Scots.

This Town of Newcastle, and Town of Pampden made one Town, by the Grants of
the Kings of England, being in old time belonging to the County of
Northumberland.

This Town of Newcastle is seated upon the Picts wall and side of a steep
hill, upon the North side of the River Tine; The Picts wall came through the
West-Gate, Saint Nicholas Church through Pampden; then to the Town East,
called Wallsend.

The bounds of the Town upon the West the Lands belonging to the Priour of
Tinemouth; On the North, the Town Moore, as some say, the gift of Adam de
Athell of Gesmond; Upon the East, the Land of Biker; Upon the South, the River
of Tine. Gateside in the County Palatine of Durham.

THE WALLS AND GATES OF NEWCASTLE, AND WHO BUILT THEM.
THE Town of Newcastle is environed about with a strong thick stone wall,
having seven Gates or Ports, with many round Towers and square Turrets. These
Walls began to be built in King John's Reign, the North part of the Wall at
Newgate. The West part of the Town in King Henry the third's reign. Pandon
Gate and the East and South of the Towns Wall, builded in Edward the first his
Reign, and so continued building, until it was finished. The Town is two
miles in circuit, with trenches in the outside of the Wall, rampered within
with earth.

The cause that moved them in those days to build this great Wall, was the
often invasions of the Scot; into this place and Country; they were continually
infesting and sorraigning this Country, and rich Monasteries in these Northern
parts; the Religious Houses of this Town, and adjacent, being above forty
houses, which has been dedicated to pious uses.

There was a rich man (in Edward the first's Reign) of Newcastle, that was
taken prisoner out of his house, and carried into Scotland, ransomed and
brought home; which act moved the Townes-men and Burgesses, and the religious
men therein, to contribute toward the building of these Walls.

The question is, who builded these walls? Some are of opinion that King John
builded it; others Roger de Thornton. King John gave many privileges to this
Town, and probably, the Newgate and Walls thereabout, was built in his time:
that North part of the Wall being the ouldest, and of another fashion then the
the other Walls.

As for Thornton, who lived in Henry the 6 days, all the Walls of the Town
was finished: it is probable that Thornton builded the West-Gate, which is a
strong and saire Gate, in memory that he came from the West Country, according
to the old saying, In at the West-Gate came Thornton in,
With a hap and a halfe-penny, and a Lamb skin.


The Walls and Gates was builded by several Persons, as by the names of the
round Towers does appear. Some of them was builded by the Friars and
Monasteries that did dwell in the Town, as the White, Black, Gray, and
Austine Friars. Others, named Durham and Carlisle Towers. Others by Noblemen and
Gentry of the Country, as Nevils Tower, adjoining to his house in West-Gate.

There is seven Ports or Gates in Newcastle, beside Posterne Gates, which
belonged to the religious Houses. In the lower part of the Town upon the River
is many little Gates to that famous long Key.

1. West is Close-Gate, called so from a street called the Close, which goes
up the water, to a place of recreation, called the Forth, given to the Town
for good services performed by the Burgesses of the same.

In Edward the S. Reign, three hundred valiant Men issued out of the Town,
through a Posterne Gate, came suddenly in the night upon a great Army of the
Scots, which lay in that part West of the Town; raised the Army of the Scots,
put them to flight, and took Earl Morray prisoner in his tent, and others,

2. The next West is West-Gate, a stately and fair Gate, builded by Roger de
Thorneton, a rich man that lived in Hen. the 6. days, the high way West into
Northumberland and Cumberland.

3. Is Newgate, the ancient and strongest of all the Ports, having a causey
that leads to the Towne-Moore, and toward the north parts of Northumberland
and Scotland. Now a Prison for Debtors and Felons.

4. Pilgrim-Street Gate; so called because of Pilgrims lodging in that Street;
and went out of that Gate to the Shrine of the Virgin Mary in Gesmond; to which
place, with great confluence and devotion, people came from all parts of this
land, in that time of Superstition.

5. Pandon-Gate, so called from the ancient Town of Pampeden, where was the
Picts Wall, and a Roman Tower, lately decayed; out of which Wall is a Causey
that goes into a place of recreation and perambulation, called the
Shields-Field; and a way to a Village, called the Walls-End; by Beda, Villa ad
Murum, and so into Tinemouthshire.

6. East of the Town is Sand-Gate, built upon the river side. Without this
Gate is many Houses, and populous, all along the water side; where Shipwrights,
Seamen, and Keel-men most live, that are employed about Ships and Keels.

THE BRIDGES OF NEWCASTLE UPON TINE.
7. THE Bridge of this Tower, over the River Tine, consists of Arches, high
and broad, having many Houses and Shops upon the Bridge, and three Towers upon
it: the first on the South side, the second in the middle, and the third in
Newcastle side, lately built upon an Arch in the Bridge, used for a Magazine
for the Town, and an old Chapel.

There is a blew Stone about the middle of the Bridge, which is the bounds of
Newcastle Southward, from Gateside in the County Palatine of Durham.

There was a strange accident upon the Bridge, happened to an Alderman of
Newcastle, looking over the Bridge into the River, with his hands over; his
gould ring fell off his finger into the water; which was given for lost. It
chanced that one of his servants bought a Salmon in the Market, opening the
belly of the Fish, found his Masters ring in the guts.

The other Bridge within the Town is the upper and nether Deane Bridge; under
the last Bridge came Boats up from the River, and the Picts Wall came over that
Bridge, and so along into Pandon.

The Stock Bridge in Pampeden, where is thought to be the ancient Market for
Fish; where Boats came up from the River.

THE CHURCHES IN NEWCASTLE.
THERE is four Churches and Parishes in this Town. The first is Saint
Nicholas, in the midst of the Town; a long fair, and high Church, having a
stately high stone Steeple, with many pinakles; a stately stone Lantherne,
standing upon four stone Arches, builded by Robert de Rhodes, Lord Priour of
Tinemouth, in Henry 6. days: It lifts up a head of Majesty, as high above
the rest, as the Cypress Tree above the low Shrubs.

BEN. JOHNSON.
My Altitude high, my Body four square,
My Foot in the Grave, my Head in the Air,
My Eyes in my sides, five Tongues in my Womb,
Thirteen Heads upon my Body, four Images alone;
I can direct you where the Wind does stay,
And I tune Gods Precepts thrice a Day.
I am seen where I am not, I am heard where I is not,
Tell me now what I am, and see that you miss not.
In this Church is many porches, especially Saint Georges, or the Kings porch;
built by some of the Kings of this land.

In it are many sumptuous windows; that in the East surpasses all the rest in
height, largeness, and beauty, where the twelve Apostles, seven deeds of
Charity, etc. built by Roger de Thornton, (a great benefactor of this Town)
with this inscription, Orate pro anima Rogeri de Thornton, and pro animabus
Filiorum and Filiarum

In the North part of the same is a Shrine of Henry the fourth, Perey Earl of
Northumberland, who was killed by the hands of Rebels in Yorkshire, gathering
up a Subsidy; he was buried at Beverley, and this made in memory of him in his
own country, he having a house in this Town and Parish; and other noblemen,
and gentry had in those days in this Town. Orate pro anima Henrici Perey 4.
Northumbriae, qui per Rebellium manus occubuit, etc.

In the South part of the middle of this Church, under a Window, is an ancient
Tomb of a warre-like Gentleman, lying with his legs a cross his Escutcheon
of Arms, and Sword; after the fashion in those days were they only interred,
who took upon them the cross, and were marked with the badge of the cross,
for sacred warre-fare, to recover the Holy Land from the Turks.

In the Quire and walks about it is many fair Monuments, Tombs, and
Marble-Stones of Majors of this Town, their names and arms engraven in stone,
with their titles of (sometime Major of Newcastle) honors; not one word of
their good deeds; their generations and names are worn out. Only that thriee
noble Major, Master Robert Anderson, whose memory will continue until there be
no more time; Aere vel marmore perennius, viz. His gift of twenty pound per
annum for ever, to the four Churches in Newcastle. Dignum laud Virum, Musa
vetat Mori.

There is a Tomb (as is reported) belonging to the Fitz-Williams not placed,
who going Ambassador into Scotland, dyed, and was interred in Saint Nicholas.

2. Is Allhallowes, omnium animarum, Panton theon, from the ancient name of
that part of the Town Pampeden; having a broad and square Church, and more
populous then all the three other Parishes, and able to contain more people
then the rest, having three Galleries.

There is few Monuments or Tombs in it. Only one stately Tomb of that worthy
benefactor, Roger de Thornton, having a large jet stone, curiously engraven
with his Arms, and the Arms of that noble Family of the Lord Lumley, who
married a daughter of Thorntons. He dyed in the Reign of Henry the seventh.

There was one Thomas Smith, Shipwright, of this Parish, that gave four pound
eighteen shillings ten pence, yearly, for ever, to the distressed poor of that
Parish.

3. Church is Saint John's, a pretty little Church, commended by an Arch-Prelate
of this Kingdom; because it resembles much a Cross. In this Parish the
Earls of Westmorland had his house, as others; good benefactors to this Town.

4. Saint Andrews, the ancientest of all the four, as appears by the old
building and fashion of the Church. In it is to be seen a pardon of a Pope for
nine thousand years to come.

Likewise there is an ancient large Stone of one Adam de Athell of Gesmund,
with this inscription, Hie jacot Dominus Adamaus de Athel, Miles qui obiit,
Anno, 1887.

The Parson of the Town is the Bishop of Carlisle, who has his Vicar or
Substitute, and a fair old house belonging to the Vicar.

THE STREETS AND BUILDINGS OF THE ANCIENT TOWN OF PAMPDEN.
I COME, in the next place, to describe every part of this Town, what it was
in the times of the Heptarchy of this Kingdom, and in after succeeding ages.

First of Pampeden, alias Pantheon, It has retained his name, without much
alteration, since the Romans recided in it. After the departure of the Romans,
the Kings of Northumberland kept their recidence in it, and had their house,
now called Pandon-Hall. It was a safe bulwark, having the Picts Wall on the
North side, and the River of Tine on the South. This place of Pandon is of such
antiquity, that if a man would express any ancient thing, it is a common
proverb, As old as Pandon. In it is many ancient buildings, houses and streets;
Some Gentlemen of Northumberland had their houses in it. There is an ancient
place called the Wall-Knowle, called since, Saint Michael upon the Wall-Knowle,
having a high and strong Tower, now called the Carpenters-Tower, adjoining to
that place upon the Town-Wall. There is below, toward the River of Tine, an
ancient Religious House, called Trinity-House, (not many houses in England
named by that name) now converted to another use, for the Masters of
Trinity-House, which have many privileges and immunities granted unto them for
services done by sea.

In this part of the Town of Pandon, below, is many narrow Streets or Chaires,
and ancient buildings; through the midst of it the River of Tine flows and
ebbs, and a Burn runs, called Pandon-burne. This place, called the
Burne-Banek, stands very low; It is recorded, that in Edward the thirds time an
hundred and forty houses was drowned by overflowing of water; ^ince the houses
toward the Key side are heightened with ballist, and a high stone Wall, without
which Wall is a long and broad Whars or Key, which hinders the like
inundation.

In the upper part of this Pandon is an ancient Religious House, founded by the
Kings of Northumberland, now called the Mannours, (formerly Saint Augustine
Friars) where the Kings of Northumberland was enterred; since, in succeeding
ages, enlarged and beautified with stately buildings, Cloisters, and a fair
Church. The kings of England, since the Conquest, kept house in it, when they
came with an Army Royal against Scotland; and since the suppression of
Monasteries, made a Magazine and Storehouse for the North parts. Now of late
that princely fabric demolished and laid level with the ground. The pride,
covetousness, luxury, and idolatry of these houses brought a sudden ruin upon
themselves and houses.

In this place of Pandon is a Bridge called Stock-Bridge, where Fishers come up
with their fish, and sold them here.

THE GRANTS AND CHARTERS TO THE TOWN.
THE antiquity of this Town is known to be from that time, that the Romans had
command in the Northern parts, who built the Picts Wall. After their departure
the Saxons became masters of this country; then the Danes. The Danes being
vanquished and expelled this land, the English enjoyed it, until William the
Conqueror made all England vassals, and obey his Norman laws, as far as the
River of Tine. King William overthrew the Northern forces in Gateside-Foil,
near Newcastle. Since which time, great is the privileges that Kings and
Princes has endowed this Town with.

Robert son of William the Conqueror built the Castle, called New Castle,
against the often inrodes of our neighboring Scots.

King John gave the first Grant to Newcastle, and endowed it with many
privileges and immunities to the good men of the same.

King Henry the third made it a Corporation, whereas formerly it belonged to
the County of Northumberland, as by Henry the thirds Charter does appear, --
Noveritis nos concessisse and demisisse, and hae Charta nostra confirmasse pro
nobis and haredibus nostris, probis hominibus nostris, de Novo-Castello super
Tinam, and haeredibus little villam nostram cum Novo-Castello, cum omnibus
pertinentibus suis ad seod firmum, etc.

The Town of Pampden was granted to the beloved Burgesses, and good men of
Newcastle, in King Edward the firsts reign, as by his Charter appears, --
Sciatis quod dedimus and concessimus, and haee Charta nostra confirmavimus, pro
nobis, and haeredibus nostris, dileetis Burgensibus, and probis hominibus
nostris ville Novieastri super Tinam, onmes terras and tenementa cum
pertinentibus in Pampeden in Biker, juxta predictam Villam Novicastri, etc. Et
quod predicta Villa Novicastri, and terrae, and tenementa predicta in Pampeden,
unica Villa de cetero sint, and unus Burgus, ad uniendum and concludendum
dictae Villae Novicastri in angmendationem, emendationem, and securitatem,
ejusdem Villae, etc.

All the Kings and Queens of England successively granted unto the Town some
honor or privilege, and enlarged their Charters.

Edward the third gave them the Forth, for the good services of the Townes-men.

Edward the fourth gave them power to choose yearly Mayor and Aldermen, in
lieu of Baylisses.

After Kings granted to the Mayor and Communalty, all the Royalties of the
River of Tine, from Sparrow-Hawke, unto Heddon-Streames; and that no ship load
and unload any manner of goods, wares, and marchandizes, in, or any place of
the River, but only at the Key of Newcastle. Also granted Commissioners to
measure Keeles.

King Edward the sixth grants the Town of Gateside to be united to the Town of
Newcastle. Repealed by Queen Mary.

Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London, gave one hundred pound yearly to the
chief Cities and Towns of England, for ever, to be lent to four Clothiers
Merchants for ten years without interest. The Town of Newcastle enjoys her
hundred pound in her turn; The first hundred pound which came to Newcastle was
in 1599. The noblest gift that ever was given in England by any subject. Some
think, in time, it will ingrosse the most of the money in this land.

THE HIGHEST AND NORTH PARTS OF THE TOWN.
THE ancient parts of the Town of Newcastle was in the upper parts of it, about
Newgate, where are many old houses and cottages, which served these religious
houses with provisions: This part of the Town is called to this day, the
Hucksters Booths. These people, in those days, had their livelihood from those
Friars and Nuns that lived in that part of the Town.

In after ages the Burgesses and good men of the Town began to trade, and
venture beyond the seas, into sorraigne places; they builded many ships;
procured a Charter from the Kings of England to carry Fels beyond seas, and
bring in sorraign commodities. The Staple was then at Antwerp in Brabant,
called Commune totius Europa Emporium. This Charter of the Merchant
Adventurers, was the first Charter that was granted by any King to any Town.
After which Grant, this town flourished in trading: builded many fair houses
in the Flesh Market. (then called the Cloth Market.) The Merchants had their
shops and warehouses there, in the back parts of their houses, the River of
Tine slowed and ebbed. where boats came up with commodities; which trade of
merchandises continued many years. In that street the Mayors, Aldermen, and
richest men of the Town lived. In after times, the Merchants removed lower down
toward the River, to the street called the Side, and Sandhill, where it
continues unto this day.

THE SANDHILL.
Now let us describe unto you the other Streets and Markets in this Town: First
of the Sandhill, a Market for fish, and other commodities; very convenient for
Merchant Adventurers, Merchants of Coals, and all those that have their living
by shipping. There is a navigable River, and a long Key or Wharfe, where ships
may lie safe from danger of storms, and may unlode their commodities and wares
upon the Key. In it is two Cranes for heavy commodities, very convenient for
carrying of corn, wine, deals, etc. from the Key into the Water-Gates, which
is along the Key side, or into any quarter of the Town.

In this Market place is many shops and stately houses for Merchants, with
great conveniences of water, bridge, garners, losts, cellars and houses of both
sides of them. Westward they have a street called the Close. East, the benefit
of the houses of the Key side.

In this Sandhill stands the Town-Court, or Guild Hall, where is held the
Guilds every year by the Major and Burgesses, to offer up their grievances;
where the Major keeps his Court every Monday, and the Sheriff has his
County Court upon Wednesday and Friday.

In it is kept a Court of Admiralty, or River Court, every Monday in the
afternoon. This is a Court of Record for inroling of deeds and evidences.

There is a Court of Pye-powder, during the said two Faires, Lammas and Saint
Luke; All the privileges and power that a Court Leet can have, is granted to
this Court.

Under the Town-Court is a common Weigh-house for all sorts of commodities.
King Henry the sixth sent to this Town, as to other Cities and Towns, brass
weights according to the standard.

Near this is the Townhouse, where the Clarke of the Chamber and Chamberlains
are to receive the revenues of the Town for coal, ballist, salt, grindstones,
etc.

Next adjoining is an Almes-house, called the Mason de Dien, builded by that
noble benefactor Roger de Thorneton.

Above which is the stately Court of the Merchant Adventurers, of the old
Staple, resident at that flourishing City of Antwarpe in Brabant; since removed
to the more Northern Provinees under the States. Their Charters are ancient,
their privileges and immunities great; they have no dependence upon London,
having a Governor, twelve Assistants, two Wardens, and a Secretary.

There is an old Chapel upon the Brid.

Next West is a street called the Close, where are many stately houses of
Merchants and others. The Earl of Northumberland had his house in this street.

Near the Sandhill East, is Allliallows Banck, or Butehers Banck, (where most
Butchers dwell) the way to Allhallows Church: the South side of which is many
Chaires or Lanes that goes down to the Key side.

THE MIDDLE PARTS OF THE TOWN.
NEXT up street is the street called the Side. In the lower part of it stands
a fair Cross with columns of stones hewn, covered with lead, where is sold
milk, eggs, butter, etc.

In the Side is shops for Merchants, Drapers, and other trades. In the middle
of the Side is an ancient stone house, an appendix to the Castle, which in
former times belonged to the Lord Lumleys, before the Castle was built, or at
least coetany with the Castle.

Next up the Town North, is Middle-street, where all sorts of Artificers have
shops and houses.

The West side of this street is the Oatemeale Market.

On the East side of it is the Flesh Market, I think the greatest Market in
England, for all sorts of Flesh and Poultry that is sold there every Saturday;
the reason is not the populousness of the Town that makes it, it is the people
in the Country, (within ten miles of the Town) who makes their provision there,
as likewise all that lives by Coale-trade, for working and conveying Coals to
the water; as also the shipping which comes into this River for Coals, there
being sometimes three hundred sails of ships. In this Market is kept two
Faires in the year, for nine days together; one of them at that remarkable
time of the year, the first of August; the other is held the eighteenth of
October, upon Saint Lukes day.

Next above North, is the Bigg and Oate Market every Tuesday and Saturday in
the week.

In which street is an ancient house, with a large gate, called the Scots Inn,
where the Kings, Nobility, and Lards of Scots lodged in time of truee or league
with England.

PILGRIM STREET.
EAST again is Pilgrim Street, the longest and fairest street in the Town. In
it is a Market for Wheat and Rye every Tuesday and Saturday.

Likewise an house called the Pilgrims Inn, where Pilgrims lodged that came to
visit the Shrine in Gesmond, or Jesu de Munde, which occasioned to call this
street Pilgrim-street.

In the upper part of this street is a Princely house, built out of the ruins
of the Black Friars.

Both East and West of this street is many passages into other parts of the
Town; as the neither and higher Deane-Bridge into the West; the Manor Chair
upon the East, having a way to that sumptuous building of the Minorites, of old
called Saint Augustine Friars; also a street called Silver Street, having a
passage down to Pandon.

WEST-GATE STREET.
UPON the West of the Town is Denton Chair, which goes into West-Gate Street,
which is a broad street, and private; for men that lives there has employment
for Town and Country. The Earl of Westmerland had his house in this street, and
other Gentlemen.

In this street is an Hospital, called the Spittle; In the East of that
Chapel is the place for electing of Majors, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and other
Officers in the Town, next Monday after Michaelmas Day. In which place is made
of late, a famous Grammer-School, Writing-School, and houses within the Spittle
for the Masters. Protos Archididascalos, or the first head Schoolmaster, was
that Reverend Master Robart Fowberry, a learned and painful man to
indoctrinate youth in Greek and Latin.

In the North side of the street toward West-Gate, is an ancient building,
called now, Bennet Chessie Friars, where now the nine Crafts of this Town have
their meeting houses. It was called in old time, the Grey-Fryers.

In the South West of the Town is the White-Fryers, and near that a street
called Baylisse-Gate, which in former times belonged unto the Castle and County
of Northumberland: there is a Postern Gate, where prisouers taken in time of
hostility with Scotland, (and selous of the County of Northumberland) were
brought in privately into the Castle in Newcastle, where the common Gaile for
the County is.

Near this street is two ways which goes down into the Close; the Long Stairs
and Tudhill Stairs.

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TOWN.
Now let us speak concerning the Government of this Town. The first Grant was,
Burgensibus and probis hominibus Novieastri super Tinam, To the Burgesses and
good men of the Town of Newcastle: Out of whom yearly was chosen Baylisses,
which is the ancient Officers of Cities and Towns in England.

King Edward the fourth out of his abundant grace and favor to the aforesaid
Town, Burgesses, their heirs and successors, grants yearly to choose a Major
and six Aldermen; and that the aforesaid Major and Aldermen, for the time
being, or any four, three, or two of them, have full power and authority to
enquire, hear, and determine all manner of complaints and causes, appertaining
to the office of a Justice of the Peace.

Instead of Baylisses is chosen a Sheriff yearly.

King Richard the second gave the Sword to be carried before the Major, which
represents royal power and authority, delegated by Charters to them, their
heirs and successors, from their Sovereign.

The power of a Major is great, the highest dignity or honor that can be
bestowed upon a City or Town; according to that office amongst the Romans, of
Propraetors, and Proconsuls; who had in all Countries and Kingdoms under their
command their Viceroyes or Representatives.

In after times upon a division among the Aldermen, there were four Aldermen
more added; so now it is governed by a Major, Recorder, ten Aldermen, and one
Sheriff. Their Officers are two Clarks, one for the Town Court, the other for
the Town Chamber.

The Officers that attends upon his person, is a Sword Bearer, with a Cap of
Maintenance, a Water-Baylisse, seven Sergeants, in their Gowns and Maces. All
these nine Officers goes before the Major and Aldermen in their gowns to
Church, and at any solemnity.

In former times the Aldermen of the Town had their Searlet Gowns, but the
proud Scot got them by Conquest, as they did other Ornaments of the Town,
thinking no English in authority, worthy to wear Seerlet but themselves, and
so they continued lording over us for two years, until they were hired out as
they were brought in, being a mercenary Nation, for any Nation for money.

There are twelve Trades or Crafts, which are chief in electing of Major, and
other Officers, viz. Drapers, Mereers, Glovers, Tailors, Boothmen, Shoomakers,
Bakers. Tanners, Sadlers, Butchers, Smiths, and Dyers.

There is the By-crafts, which are fifteen in number, every one of them has
their Meeting Houses in the Towers of the Wall, and are called at this day by
the name of the By-crafts; their ancient names is after the name of the founder.

THE TWENTY-FOUR WARDS OE THE TOWN.
THERE is four and twenty Wards in the Town, every Ward has his Tower or Gate
in the Walls, which they were to keep in times of hostility with the Scots,
whereof these are some.

White Friars Tower Ward. Nevils Tower Ward. West-Spittle Tower. Stanke Tower.
Pink Tower. Gunners Tower. West-Gate Tower Durham Tower. Thickets Tower.
Carlisle Tower. Barthram Mumbugget Tower. Evers Tower. Saint Austines Tower.
Walke-Knowle Ward, etc.
OF THE RIVER TINE, AND THE COMMODITIES.
THE Port or Haven of this River is able to receive Ships of four hundred
tuns, having Rocks on the North side of the Haven, and Sands upon the South,
dangerous in a North-East Wind. Incidit in Seyllam, qui vult vitare Charibdim.

Upon the North side of the Haven, is an ancient strong Castle, the Seat of the
Priour of Tinemouth. King Henry the eighth coverted the Castle from a Priory,
to be a defense for the River and Country, against Foreign Invasions.

1. The Southside of the River is Warwickshire, in the County of Durham, where
is many Salt-Pans, which makes white Salt out of Salt Water, boiled with Coal.

2. An other Commodity that this River brings forth, is Coal in great
abundance; most of the people that lives in these parts, lives by the benefit
of Coals, and are carried out of this River into most parts of England
Southward, into Germany, and other transmarine Countries.

John Johnston out of the Poems of the Cities of Britain,
NEW CASTLE.
Seated upon high rock she sees Dame Natures wonders strange,
Or else to others, wittily, does vent them for exchange;
In vain why seek you Fire, from Heaven, to serve your turn,
The ground here either keeps it close, or quickly makes it burn.
Nor that which folk with stony flash, or whirlwind grim affrights,
But gives life to earthly things, and minds to living wights;
This melts Iron, Brass, and Gould, so pliable and soft,
What mind the allective shade of Gould, stirs not, nor sets aloft.
Nay more then so, men say it does, dull Metals change to Gold,
To say therefore it is a God, our Alchymists are bold.
If God he be as thou glv'st out (great Master) of thy word,
How many Gods than does this place, and our Scotland afford?
Many thousand people are employed in this trade of Coals; many live by
working of them in the Pits; many live by conveying them in Wagons and Waines
to the River Tine; many men are employed in conveying the Coals in Keels from
the Stathes aboard the Ships: one Coal Merchant imployeth five hundred or a
thousand in his Works of Coal; yet for all his labor, care, and cost, can
scarce live of his Trade; nay, many of them has consumed and spent great
estates, and dyed beggars. I can remember one, of many, that raised his estate
by Coale-trade; many I remember that has wasted great estates. I shall
illustrate this by a story of two Spaniards brothers, which traveled into the
West Indies, with that estate and means which they had acquired; One of the
brothers was a Miner, to employ many slaves in silver Mines; the other brother
was to be an Husbandman, to provide Corn, Sheep, and other provisions for the
Miner and his men; much silver was got out of the ground by those Miners; the
Husbandman got moneys out of his stock for his commodities. After many years
delving and laboring in these silver mines, at last, the Mines was exhausted
and decayed, and all the money which he had got for many years labor and
cost, was run into his brothers the husbandmans hands, and all his stock
upstanding, he living all that time of the profit that his ground yielded.

So it is with our Coale-Miners, they labor and are at a great charge to
maintain men to work their Collieries, they wast their own bodies with care,
and their Collieries with working, the kernel being eaten out of the nut,
there remains nothing but the shell, their Collieries is wasted, and their
moneys is consumed: this is the uncertainty of Mines, a great charge, the
profit uncertain.

Some South Gentlemen, has upon great hope of benefit, come into this Country
to hazard their moneys in Coale-Pits. Master Beamont, a Gentleman of great
ingenuity, and rare parts, adventured into our Mines with his thirty thousand
pounds; who brought with him many rare engines, not known then in these parts;
As the art to boore with, iron rodds to try the deepnesse and thickness of the
Coal; rare engines to draw water out of the Pits: Wagons with one horse to
carry down Coals, from the Pits, to the Stathes, to the River, etc. Within few
years, he consumed all his money, and rode home upon his light horse.

Some Londoners of late, has disbursed their moneys for the reversion of a
lease of Colliery, about thirty years to come of the lease; When they come to
crack their nuts, they find nothing but the shells; Nuts will not keep thirty
years; there is a swarm of worms under ground, that will eat up all before
their time, they may find some Meteors, ignis fatuus, in stead of a Mine.

3. Commodity that this River brings forth is Grindstones, which is conveyed
into most parts of the World; according to the Proverb, A Scot, a Rat, and a
New Castle Grindstone, you may find all the world over.

4. Commodity of this River, Is the great plenty of Salmond, taken in this
water; which serves this Town, and other parts.

Upon the South side of this River stands a Town, called Jarro, where lived
that Venerable Bede, admired for his learning, in those times of darkness.
Camden entituleth him, The singular Glory, and Ornament of England. Malmesbury,
Vir erat quem mirari facilius, quam dignum praedicari possis, qui extremo natus
orbis Angulo Doctrinae, corusco terras omnes perstrinxerat.

Beda lived in the time of the Saxons Heptarchy in England, in the Kingdom of
Northumbers, seven hundred years after Christ.

This River has two heads, or maine streams, South Tine, which runs through
Allendale; North Tine, which runs through Tinedale; they meet West of Hexam,
and salute one another.

DIVINE PROVIDENCE OVER ALL NATIONS AND COUNTRIES.
OUR most provident and glorious Creator has so furnished all Countries with
several Commodities, that amongst all nations there might be a sociable
conversation and mutual commerce, one people standing in need of another, all
might be combined in a common league, and exhibit mutual succors, Non omnia
sert anima tellus. From the Indies, gould, silver, gems, drugs, etc. From
Italy, silks. From Spain, fruits, saffron, sacks. From Denmark, amber,
cordage, firs, and flax. From France, wines, and linuen. From England, wool,
tinn. From these Northern parts, coal, salt, grindstones, etc. Which trade of
coal began not past fourscore years since. Coals in former times was only
used by Smiths, and for burning of lime; Woods in the South parts of England
decaying, and the City of London, and other Cities and Towns growing populous,
made the trade for Coal increase yearly, and many great ships of burden
built, so that there was more Coals vented in one year, then was in seven
years, forty years bypast; this great trade has made this part to flourish
in all trades.

Camden calls Newcastle, Ocellus, the Eye of the North, the Harth that warmeth
the South parts of this Kingdom with sire; An Egypt to all the Shires in the
North, (in time of famine) for bread. All quarters of the country comes with
money in their purses to buy Corn to seed their families this summer.

This Town has been famous in sour ages of the world.

1. In the time of the Romans, being in these parts, being the utmost limits of
the Roman Empire.

2. Famous for the Monasteries in old times.

3. This Town famous, being a bulwark against the Scots; all the power of
Scotland could never win it, since the walls were built; but of late being
assisted by the English, was stormed, our churches and houses defaced, the
ornaments of both plundered, and carried away, the crown of our heads is
fallen, woe now unto us, for we have sinned.

4. Famous for the great trade of Coal, White-Salt, Grindstones, etc. which
they furnish other countries with.

Newcastle likewise excells in four things before spoken.

1. The Town, Walls, Gates, Towers and Turrets.

2. Saint Nieholas Church Steeple, caput inter nubila condit.

3. The Tine-Bridge, consisting of eight stately Arches, Towers and Houses.

4. The long and fair Key, for ships to unload their commodities.

The Revenues of the Town is not great, considering the disbursements for
repairing of Streets, Highways, Bridges, maintenance of Ministers,
Schoolmasters, Poor, etc.

The Arms of the Town is the three Castles Argent in a Field Geules.

Camden. New. 22. grad. 30. min. Long. 54. gr. 57. M. Lat.

Hues. Newcast. 23. grad. 10. min. Long. 55. gr. 20. M. Lat.

THE SUBURBS OF NEWCASTLE.
GATESIDE, a Burrow upon the South side of the river Tine, an ancient inhabited
place, a parish of it self, in the Bishopprieke of Durham. King Edward the
sixth, united it to the town of Newcastle; since, Queen Mary gave it again to
the Bishops Sea of Durham.

The suburbs out of Newgate and Pilgrim-Street, are ruinated in these late
wars; near unto the Barras-Bridge is an Hospital dedicated to Mary
Magdelane. There is many closes in that part, and large fields of meddowes,
called the Castle Leases, belonging to the Town; the gift of King John (as some
say) to the good men of Newcastle.

There is a Postern between Newgate and West-Gate, which goes into a Close,
called the Warden-Close, where the Warden of the Priour of Tine-mouth had his
house, garden, fishponds, etc.

The suburbs of Sand-Gate escaped the fury of these Wars, except some near
the walls of the Town, which was fired.

One remarkable thing is recorded of two Carpenters, hewing of a tree, blood
issued out of the timber in what part of the wood they cut.

Below East, is the Ballist Hill, where women upon their heads carried Ballist,
which was taken forth of small ships which came empty for Coals; Which place
was the first Ballist shore out of the town: since which time, the trade of
Coals increasing, there is many Ballist shoares made below the water, on both
sides of the River.

Upon the North side of the River is the Ewes Burn, over which is a wood
Bridge, which goes down to a place called the Glasse-Houses, where plain
Glass for windows are made, which serves most parts of the Kingdom. Below
East is many shores built for casting of Ballist out of ships, which brings
profit to the town, and the occupiers of the same.

OF THE NOBLE AND ANCIENT FAMILIES OF THE NORTH, AND THEIR CASTLES.
THE North parts of England has been in the Romans time, and in after ages,
the Bulwarks and Fortresses of England, against the inrodes of the Scots;
Newcastle for the East parts of this land, and Carlisle for the West.

The two great Princes of the North, were the Earls of Northumberland at
Alnwick, and Westmerland at Raby Castle in the Bishopprick of Durham. The first
famous for the great overthrow he gave Malcolme, King of the Scots, and his
Son Edward, slain at his Castle of Alnewick. The second Earl made famous for
taking David King of Scots prisoner, and the overthrow of his Army at
Nevils-Crosse, near Durham.

The Lord Dacres, and Lord Lumleyes were famous in their generations; the first
lived in Cumberland, in his many Castles, the other in the Bishopprick of
Durham, in Lumley Castle; both of them having lands in Northumberland, who held
their land of the King in Knight service, for his wars against the Scots.

The Bishops of Durham had their Castles in the frontiers, in Norhamshire and
Elandshire.

The Nobility and Gentry of the North, are of great antiquity, and can produce
more ancient Families, then any other part of England; many of them Gentry
before the Conquest; the rest came in with William the Conqueror. The Noblemen
and Gentry of the North, has been always employed in their native country,
in the wars of the Kings of England, against the Scots; all of them holding
their lands in Knights service, to attend the wars in their own persons, with
horse and spear, as the manner of fighting was in those days.

Some Gentlemen held their lands in Cornage, by blowing a Horn, to give notice
that the Scots, their enemies, had invaded the land. The Scots their
neighboring enemies, has made the inhabitants of Northumberland fierce and
hardy, whiles sometimes they kept themselves exercised in the wars; being a
most warre-like Nation, and excellent good Light-Horsemen, wholly addicting
themselves to Mars and Arms, not a Gentleman amongst them, that has not his
Castle or Tower; and so it was divided into a number of Baronies: the Lords
whereof, in times past, before King Edward the first's days, went commonly
under the name of Barons, although some of them were of no great living. It was
the policy of the Kings of England, to cherish and maintain Martial Prowess
among them, in the Marches of the Kingdom, if it were nothing else, but with
an honorable bare title. Some Gentlemen of the North are called to this day
Barons.

The Ancient Families and Names of the Gentry are many, which has continued
from William the Conqueror, unto these late days.

The Grayes of Chillingham, and Horton, Barons of Warke-castle. Ogles of
Ogle-castle. Fenwickes of Wallington. Widdrington of Widdrington-castle.
Delavale of Seaton-Delavale. Ridleyes of Williams-Weeke. Muschampes of
Barsmore, the chief Baron of Northumberland in Edward the first's reign.
Mitfords of Midford. Fosters of Edderston. Claverings of Callalie. Swinburnes
of Swinburne, now of Capheaton Radliffes of Delston. Harbottle of
Harbottle-castle, extinct. Haggerston of Haggerton. Hebburne of Heburne.
Blankenship of Blankenship. Fetherstonhaugh of Fetherstonhaugh. Herons of
Chepehase. Horsley of Horsley. Craster of Craster. Laraines of Kirkharle.
Collingwoods of Eslington. Whitfield of Whitfield. Carnaby of Halton. Lisles of
Felton. Strudders of Kirknewton. Selbyes of Twisel. Eringtons of Bewfrom.
Weldon of Weldon. Bradforth of Bradforth. Rodom of Little Haughton. Carres of
Ford-castle. Creswell of Creswell. Halls of Otterburne. Thirlwall of
Thirlwall-castle. Killingworth of Killingworth.
These ancient Noble Families continued many years valiant and faithful unto
the Kingdom of England, and flourished all in their times; until the two
powerful Earls of the North rose in rebellion in Queen Elizabeth's reign, who
drew along with them many Gentry of the North, who overthrew themselves and
confederates, and many ancient families of the North. Since many ancient names
have been extinct, for want of Heirs Male, and have been devolved upon other
names and families.

Since the union of both Kingdoms, the Gentry of this Country has given
themselves to idleness, luxury and covetousness, living not in their own
houses, as their ancestors has done, profusely spending their revenues in
other Countries, and has consumed of late their ancient houses.

The Castles in the North are many and strong. Morpith-Castle, so called, from
the death of the Picts in that place.

Alnewick-Castle, where the Earls of Northumberland kept their Court; famous
for two battles fought against the Scots, who received a shameful overthrow,
by the valor of the Earls of Northumberland.

Upon Tweed and Borders, are Wark-castle, a Barony of the Grays. Norham-castle
belonging to the Bishops of Durham. Barwick upon the left banck and river, a
strong Town of War, opposite sometimes against the Scots; the farthest bounds
of the English Empire. Upon Till (a River falling into Tweed, above Norham) is
Ford-castle. To the West beyond the River, rises Floddon-Hill, made famous by
the death of James the fourth, King of Scotland, slain in a memorable battle
by Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, General of the English, in the reign of
Henry the Eighth.

Upon the East Sea is Bambrough-castle, and Dunstonbrough-castle, builded by
the Saxons, and sometimes the Royal Seats of the Kings of Northumbers.

Bambrough-castle afterward converted into a Priory, and did homage and
vassalage to their Lord Priour.

Many battles and skirmishes has been in this North, and always has been
victorious against the Scots. Besides the forenamed battles of Alnewick-castle,
and Floddon; at Solommosse fifteen thousand Scots were put to flight, eight
hundred slain, and one and twenty of their Nobles taken prisoners, by the
English.

There was Lord Wardens of the East, West, and middle Marches appointed, who
had power by Martial Law to repress all enormities and outrages committed in
the Borders. They had their Laws, called Border Laws.

In the North toward the Borders, is many Hills; one of them most eminent,
called Cheviot Hill, upon the top of it is Snow to be seen at Midsummer; and a
Land mark for Seamen that comes out of the East parts from Danzieke, through
the Baltic Seas, and from the King of Denmarks country; it being the first
land that Mariners make for the Coast of England. These Chiviot Hills is made
famous for the hunting of the Earl of Northumberland: at the hunting the Earl
Duglas of Scotland who met him with his forces, and engaged one the other,
where was great bickerings and skirmishes, to the loss of many men; where both
Earls fought valiantly, called to this day Cheviot Chase.

There is many Dales, the chief are Tinedale and Reedsdale, a country that
William the Conqueror did not subdue, retaining to this day the ancient Laws
and Customs, (according to the County of Kent) whereby the lands of the father
is equally divided at his death amongst all his sons. These Highlanders are
famous for theeving, they are all bred up and live by theft. They come down
from these Dales into the low Countries, and carry away horses and cattle, so
cunningly, that it will be hard for any to get them, or their cattle, except
they be acquainted with some Master Thief; who for some money (which they call
Saufey money) may help they to their stolen goods, or deceive them.

There is many every year brought in of them into the Goal of Newcastle, and
at the Assizes are condemned and hanged, sometimes twenty or thirty. They
forfeit not their lands (according to the tenure in Gavelkind) the Father to
Bough, the Son to the Plough.

The people of this Country has had one barbarous Custom amongst them; if any
two be displeased, they expect no law, but bang it out bravely, one and his
kindred against the other, and his; they will subject themselves to no Justice,
but in an unhumane and barbarous manner, fight and kill one another; they run
together clangs (as they term it) or names.

This fighting they call their Feides, or deadly Feides, a word so barbarous,
that I cannot express it in any other tongue. Of late, since the union of both
Kingdoms, this heathenish bloody custom is repressed, and good laws made
against such barbarous and unchristian misdemeanors and fightings.

In this North Country grows plenty of hadder or ling, good for Cattle to
feed upon, and for Moor-Fowle, and Bees; this herb yields a flower in June,
as sweet as Honey, whereof the Picts in time past did make a pleasant drink,
wholesome for the body of Man.

Upon the West parts of Northumberland, the Picts Wall is, out of the ruins of
which is built many Towers and Houses in that part where the Picts Wall stood;
in some of the wast ground the Wall is to be seen of a great height, and almost
whole, many stones have been found with Roma upon it, and all the names of the
Roman Emperors, Consuls, and Proconsuls, both in Stone and in Coin of Silver
and Brass, with their Emperors Image upon them; So the Picts Wall goes
through Northumberland into Cumberland, where I end my Peregrination and
Travel, keeping my self within the limits and bounds of Northumberland.

FINIS.

